(...)



CARTERS CHRISTIAN Common Wealth; OR, Domestical Duties deciphered.



Printed at London by Tho: Purfoot. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE Master, Wardens, and the Assistants of the
worthy and famous Company of Gouldsmithes, of this Honorable City of London.
Worshipful Sirs,
INgratitude, was a sin even unto the Heathens so odious, that Periander among
the Corinthians made this law, that if any in a Common weal prove^
unthankful having received a benefit, he was to be put to death, and as the
relics of Gods Image in them: so nature in the sensible creatures has
ingrafted thankfulness, to pass by those presidents produced by Historians,
which may seem incredible; the Naturalists observation of the Merlyon not to
prey on the Lark which has given warmth to her cold feet, is remarkable: And
the spirit of God in Scripture has plentifully enjoined it. That I may prove
my self therefore instructed in this duty, not by nature only, but by grace,
in this glorious light of the Gospel; I present unto your view and patronage,
these poor endeavors, the fruit of a thankful heart, expect you cannot a
lofty style or curious phrase, for I take not upon me to instruct, but only
to remember: your courteous acceptance I doubt not of, from the former
experience of your worthiness. Surely if the poor Persians water in a
potsheard was exceptable to the Emperor; and an Apple from a poor Pessant was
received by Artaxerzes a great Prince; if Alexander took courteously water from
a common Soldiers helmet; and our Savior crowned the poor widow with
everlasting praise for two Mites to the Treasury: your generous dispositions
will sparingly censure and courteously accept these my poor labors; which
howsoever, they be your worships, and so is the Author.

Yours in all humbleness to continue, THOMAS CARTER.

To the Reader.
AMongst all the blessings that God has bestowed upon us (courteous Reader) the
word of God next to our Savior, challenges the most eminent place, as being
the guide and direction unto him, and the instrument to preserve us unblameable
in a froward and crooked generation: The Prophet Zachary speaks of Zach. 9.
last ver.
the wine that Christ does offer to drink, whereof virgins are gendred and
begotten, other kind of wines are wont to kindle evil lusts, but this wine the
Gospel, restrains those lusts, and makes the heart pure: hence is the
instruction of our Lord to search the Scripture, as being able to instruct the
ignorant to reform the virtuous, and so to make perfect the man of God in all
good works. This excellent virtue having drawn me to a diligent study of
sacred Writ, and considering in the last and worst days the great neglect of
family duties, from whence springes so many corruptions in children and
servants, being daily spectators of the heads corruptions, I have thought it my
duty not to let my Talent rest, but by that small portion of knowledge God has
given unto me, to set up some way-marke to direct others to the waters of
Shiloh, which run pleasantly to cool the heat of corruption and frowardness,
and to teach us obedience privately and publicly. If it be objected, that
many eminent men have already sufficiently performed this work, I answer, that
another performing his duty, excuses not me; Secondly, none ever so fully and
amply has put to the press duties in this nature, as I can hereof; Thirdly,
they came not to my hands till I had finished this work: It seemed the^
necessary, not to let it suffer obortion, but to bring it to a charitacle view
and censure of the understanding reader; May it please you then to accept of
these unpolished, yea, vnsquared documents, neither it may be methodicall in
respect of order, nor curious in respect of phrase, only the token of a
willing heart, and affording some good general motions if thou please to
afford a little diligence in the reading, and care in the prctising. This
performed, I have the end I aim at, and thus remain thine ever in the Lord,

Thomas Carter.

The Introduction to the work.
He that said the Job. 7. 1.
whole life of man was nothing else but a time of temptations, spoke most
fearfully, and yet most truly* for we are tempted in our old age; and in our
cradle we are not free; if any evil be set before us we are provoked unto it;
If we abound with Adam in Paradise, there may be death in that; And if we want
with our Savior in the wilderness, there are temptations in that; So subtle is
Satan, and so envious is our enemy to serve himself upon all occasions. In
the former age of the world he wrought and prevailed with men by bringing
errors of mind, and doctrine of Devils to seduce the Church, but now the clear
light of the Gospel is come in, and knowledge does abound, he laboreth to
bring in error of life, and depravitie of conversation, for that,
notwithstanding men know their masters will, yet they perform it not, that all
means possible (both the spiritual sword of the Minister, and temporal sword
of the Magistrate) ought to be used for the reformation of these known evils,
yea, every man to set a hand to this work, amongst which number I have brought
forth my poor abortiue talent to farther the same, laboring by reproves to
beat down vice, and by instructions to inform the Husband to love his wife,
and the wife to obey her Husband, the Father to bring up his Children in the
fear of God, not provoking them to wrath, and the Childrens obedience to
their, Parents; the Master to guide the servant, and the servant to obey his
Master in all things in the Lord: what if I be no Minister, nor the son of a
Minister? Shepherds and clownes have been Divines sometimes and why not I?
and therefore not doubting the entertaynement, I set forward to the work; and
first for the duty of Husbands.

The duty of Husbands.
The first Chapter.
ANd the cause why I have first begun with this duty of Husbands, is for that I
find it to be the first degree which God gave unto Man after his Creation: and
therein, that when God gave unto man the rule of the whole earth, and the
domination of all Genesis 2.
the creatures therein contained, yet, until he gave unto him a Wife, he had
no true content in all the rest besides, for every creature had solace in their
kind except Man: but so was it not with Man till God gave unto Man had no true
content till God gave unto him a Wife.
him a Wife: Then finding her a companion fit to associate him self withal,
with her he settled his content. And this did God for Man in the time of his
innocence, give unto him this wife, thereby leaving unto us this instruction,
that we also ought to live so uprightly, so holily, and so purely in the state
of wedlock, that we sin not against God, nor against one another: And here
is one especial thing to be noted, that God gave unto Man but one Wife, and
not two or three, or many, and yet he could have given him more as well as
one, if he had known it meet so to be: But the Prophet Malachie does tell us
why he gave him but one: because says Malachie. 2.
he, he sought a godly seed.

See here my brethren, God rejects your seed of bastardie, begotten in your
filthy fornication and abomninable adultery, he chooses none of these, it is
the seed of lawful wedlock whereof he makes his choice to inherit his
Kingdom, and reign in glory with his beloved Son.

And whence proceeded this breach of Gods Commandment at first? came it not
from that wicked blood of Caine, was not Lamech that murderer like The first
breach of wedlock from Lamech.
his Father the first author thereof? yea he was so: for you plainly see that
God at the first ordained it not so to be, and what he Genesis 4.
first ordained, he still confirms: for when he drowned Genesis 7.
the whole world, yet he preserved unto Noah but one woman, and that his own
Wife, thereby teaching unto man that he ought to keep himself unto his own
wife only, and when he gave his laws unto his own chosen people with his
own hand writing, Exodus. 20.
he then says, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, speaking in the
singular number, so that by him we find no nomination of any plural.

Abraham, Jacob, David and others, have not observed this rule, but have had
diverse wives, and therefore being the beloved and chosen of God, they could not
err in these things. Abraham to say Sarah his wife was Genesis 11.
his sister, and Joseph to swear by Genesis 44.
the life of Pharaoh, and David to 2. Sam. 11.
commit adultery and murder, and many other the like, and yet we know that all
these things were directly against the will of 1. King. 11.
God, Solomon had many wives indeed, but they drew him to Idolatry.

We read that Moses suffered the people of Israel to give their wives a bill
of diuorcement, Deu. 24.
and so to put them away, but our blessed Savior tells Math. 10.
the Jews that it was for the hardness of their hearts, and to prevent further
evils that Moses permitted it so to be, and that from the beginning it was not
so.

But to return to our former matter again, let us see from whence this wife
came that God If a man will respect the gift of his friend, for his friends
sake, how much more ought he to esteem of his wife which God gives unto him?
has given unto man, that so of him she may accordingly be regarded, as indeed
she should: we find it to be most true that of man's own self, God made him
this compannion and wife, and that not from the head of man neither, least she
should claim to rule where her power consists not, nor of the foot, least she
should be disdayned and despised of her Husband, but from the very body is she
taken, nay it is not enough for thee to spare of thine own flesh for to make
thee a wife of, but thou must spare a bone too, if thou will have a fit
companion for thee.

And now (oh man) having received so rich a Jewel, rich and dear indeed being
so near unto thee, and that from the only hand of the great and Almighty God,
she being the work of his own hands, sure it must needs be exceeding good
which he makes, and of an exceeding value which he vouchsafes to give, and
consider it well and you shall find it so to be: we have an old proverb,
that it is a sweet collop that is cut out of the own flesh, but I am sure it
must needs be sweet and dear, for that is both of thine own flesh and bone:
Oh man, be wise in using this thy Jewel as thou ought, least thou be found
unworthy of her by him that gave her unto thee, and so he take her again, and
then too late thou lament thy loss.

Will you have my advice herein? I see no better way then to be How to keep a
good wi^e when a man has her.
wise and discreet in the using of her, nor any fitter place to keep her in,
then that from whence she came, near thy heart man, I mean, I know she came
from thence, lay her there again, lay her there again, let her not stray from
thence, nay, lock her in there with the key of good discretion, and so shall
thou be sure to find a comfortable treasure of her at thy need, a comfortable
treasure indeed as thou may use her.

You will happily say unto me, Solomon, Eccle. 16.
A virtuous woman shall be given unto him that fears the Lord, and therefore
he that will have Good counsel for a man to get a good wife by.
such a one, let him seek to be virtuous himself first, that so he may
obtain such a blessing of the Lord, for sure happy is the man that has such a
one, her price is far above the pearls, his treasure is invaluable, if I
should explain her virtues as much as Solomon, yet I should not at full
express her worth, but leave her as he has done, that her own works may
give her her due praise.

The Second Chapter.
ANd now we see that God has given unto man so dear and precious a Companion
to live with him, let us see what duties he would have these to perform one
toward the other, and first to begin with the man, because he is the head,
Genesis 3.
for so we find him to be: And if in this case we seek the whole book of
God through, yet we shall find the effect and end thereof to be wholly and only
love, for Saint Paul teaches Ephe. 5.
that men ought to love their wives as their own bodies, and he shows the
reason of it, for says he, no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ does the Church, for thus the Genesis
23.
Saints and servants of God governed their wives in times past, Abraham loved
Sarah his Wife, Isaac loved Rebecka his Wife, Genesis 26.
yea, the story records that they sported together.

This has that great Prophet It is not enough for a man to live quietly with
his wife, but he must live lovingly with her also.
and servant of God Moses expressed thereby, to show unto men, that it is not
enough for them to live peacably and quietly with their wives, but they must
live lovingly with them also: thus did Jacob love his wife, yielding Genesis 28.
service to his uncle and master Fourteen years, to the end he might enjoy
her after: Elkana 1. Sam. 1.
loved Hanna his wife, and Sampson Judge. 1. Tob. ^
his wife, and Tobias and others their wives: And you see it must be no
ordinary love neither, but it must be like that extraordinary great love which
Christ showed unto his Church, Ephe. 5.
who gave himself for it, that Man is to love his wife as Christ his Church.
he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be wholly and without blame. I
will say with the blessed Apostle, this is a great secret, yea such a one which
man is not commanded in all points to imitate, for the man is not commanded to
give his life for his wife, as Christ did for his Church, and yet he is to In
what points to Imitate Christ.
protect her in all perils and dangers, even as he does his Church: he must
govern her in his wisdom by the word of God, both by continual instructions
from thence, and by his own loving and gentle behavior toward her and all
others, yea, he must be laborious in his calling, that so he may provide all
things necessary for her, for so does Christ for his Church, he is always
protecting it and providing for it, For this cause shall a man leave his Father
and Mat. 19. 5.
his Mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they twain shall be one
flesh.

Saint Peter being himself a married man, does give many notable instructions
like these, who speaking by the spirit of God, and in the knowledge he had of
marriage, yet imposes this duty unto men, ye Husbands dwell with your Wives as
men of 1. Pet. 3.
knowledge, giving honor unto the woman as unto the weaker vessel, even ^
they which are heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
interrupted: and the wise man gives thee this counsel, not to depart from a
discreet and Eccle. 7.
good woman which is fallen unto thee for thy portion in the fear of the Lord,
(for says he) the gift of her honesty is far above gold: If thou have a
wife after thine own mind, forsake her not, and commit not thy self to the
hateful, use thy self to live joyfully with thy wife whom thou love, all
the days of thy life, which is but vain that God has given thee under the
Sun, all the days of thy vanity, for that is thy portion in this life of all
thy labor and trauile that thou take under the sun.

And our Savior Christ himself confirming on earth what his Father had done
in paradise, vouchsafed to grace a nuptial feast with his blessed presence:
and to express his love the more which he bare to the holy union then there
knitte betwixt the John. 2.
Man and his wife, he expresses his glory in showing his first miracle which
he wrought on earth at this marriage, and that of joy, by turning there water
into wine, to comfort and glad their hearts withal.

And now that we have found that the most principal duty of The principal
duty of the Husband toward his wife is love.
the Husband toward his Wife is love, and that the word of God teaches us in
what nature to express it, let us look into the glass of our times and see
how this duty of love is performed, but I fear that among a hundred we shall
scarce find one that strives to perform this duty of love as he ought, and
too many that know not of any duty at all Few to be found which love their
wives as they should.
to be observed, or at least wise will know of none, and even of those that do
know all, and yet make no conscience to perform any: for who, or where is he
that loves his wife as himself, and nourishes and cherishes her even as
Christ does his Church, nay, see we not rather the contrary, do we not see
daily many which consume great estates which their wives do bring them,
through their own vicious lives, some by Four chief causes of the ruinating
of man's estate.
idleness, some by gaming, some by drunkenness, some by whoring, but of this
I shall speak hereafter, some by one thing and some by another, who can deny
but if there were love in the man to his wife, he would be more careful in
preserving his and her estate then thus? and yet we see daily a good woman
brought to beggary by such lewd Husbands: where is any duty or love in such?

And are there not others which to show their authority, Churlish husbands void
of the knowledge of the law of God.
will hold their wives (in stead of fellowship) in such subjection and
servitude, that no servant will perform the like unto them, being even a very
Nabal unto them in churlishnes of speech and crabbed conditions, that the poor
wife is even at her wits end in seeking to give him content^ where is wisdom
in such Husbands, that should govern their wives according to knowledge? alas
it appears that these men forgetting their duty to God, know not how to
perform any duty at all toward their Wives: Others there are that will follow
no vocation or labor at all, but live idely and lewdly and put the poor woman
to shift for all: she must provide for her self, her Children; and her idle
Husband too, or if he hap sometimes to get something abroad, yet she shall be
sure to be never the better for it, he will bring none home to comfort her, nay,
not so much as to put clothes to his own back, but that his poor Wife must
provide them, yea and discharge the Landlord too, or else she shall want a
house to put her head in: nay, having a profession to do all this sufficiently
of himself, yet will he no way benefit his wife or himself, but will impose
all still upon her: what shall we say of such men? and yet such there be, I
protest upon mine own knowledge I know some of them. Saint Paul says, he is
worse then an Infidel that does No fear of God, nor love in them which do
not provide for their families.
not provide for his family: but to cast pearls among such swine is not meet,
for they will stop their ears at the voice of the charmer, charm he never
so wisely: I will leave them to the just judgment of God, who will assuredly
give them their due, what love do these men show? nay, is there any love at
all in them, or any fear of God either?

It is a hearts grief to any good Christian, or well minded man to see and
hear the daily contentions, vproares, quarrelles, and disagreements betwixt
husbands and wives in these days, and yet who can deny but the world is too
full of such, what shall we say to these things? excuse it who will by laying
the Faults in the Husband, proving him the cause of the disagreeing betwixt his
wife and himself.
fault on the Wives, I say still the greatest part is in the Husband, he by
his unkind and churlish speeches not fitting a husband to give unto his wife,
his unthriftiness in wasting abroad, what all do labor for at home, his
drunkenesse, his rash furiousnes, these with the rest aforesaid and a number
more not here expressed, he (I say) by these occasions is daily the cause of
all these evils.

The third Chapter.
ANd there be some of this number, that will know no other way to govern
their wives but by extremity: why brother, No way for a man to bring his with
to love him by compulsion.
do thou think to make thy Wife love thee by beating of her, alas silly man,
how art thou deceived? love is of another nature, she will run freely of her
self where she likes, but will not be drawn or compelled by any force how
great soener.

And how can thou think to have her to show any kindness or love unto thee,
when thou seek to rule by force? would thou have her to stand in awe of
thee, it is thy servants duty and thy child's, not thy Wifes: I confess she is
to be obedient unto thee? but her obedience must The wifes obedience must
proceed from love.
proceed through love, and a man may draw more from a woman by loving and kind
using of her, More may be done by love with a woman then by force.
then any way by force, nay, more then he will or can expect of her, for she
is of that free nature where she loves, and is beloved, I speak not of
supposition, but of knowledge.

But for a man to beat her whom both by the laws of God and nature he is
bound to love, nourish, and cherish as his own flesh, it does show great want
of The man that beats and does misuse his wife, is void of the knowledge of
God and of his laws.
knowledge both of God and of his laws in such a man, for were the fear of
God or wisdom in them, they would rather strive to govern them in another
nature, I mean by love and clementcie, and not by force: besides, what a
scandal and reproach does such men raise upon themselves What scandals do
arise by varience between man and wife.
amongst their neighbors, kindred and acquaintance who live thus
discentiously, making themselves a byword or common talk among them, which
many times are not only affrighted with them in their own houses with the
outcries of the^ and their children, but are forced to spend their time and
their money to make the man and his wife friends: oh foolish madness in men that
cannot keep their own follies private to themselves, but they must make
others acquainted with it!

I do remember that a reverend divine writing upon this matter says, that he
that cannot govern his Wife without beating her, deserves to be beaten
himself, because he did choose no better but such a one whom he could not
rule without beating: of all ways I assuer thee this is the worst to rule her
by, for by this thou not only withdrawest her love from thee, which otherwais
to thy great comfort thou migh^estionioy, and for the great good, but also
hardnest her heart against thee, and make her careless even of thy good and
her own, yea many times such Dangerous evils arising by a man's unkind dealing
with his wife.
hard and unkind dealing of the husband unto the wife, causes her to fall into
such inconvenience as brings the ruin both of her and of her husband and
children, and is not this folly in men to wrong themselves thus by their
misgouernement, respecting more their own will, then their good and quiet? yea
all must be ^^t afside to give place unto will, so it is not enough for such a
one to be Lord and ruler over his wife as it is reason he should, but he will
show it, and that not in private neither, but openly, taking a glory in doing
it, thereby explaining the follies of her whose weakness he should hide, and
opening his own, whom wisdom would he should keep secret: besides what
evil examples Evil examples in masters corrupting their families.
give such men by these things unto their families? yea, what have such men to
answer for unto God which thus corrupt their families by these evil examples?
amongst whom as a vine, it will extend it self into many branches: such a sin
is not easily put away, he has more need of Mary Magdalens tears, and with
Peter to weep bitterly, that is corrupt with such a sin, and yet when he
has all done, he may win (as I said) more by love, then he shall get by
force.

But I have not yet done with this branch of Love, for I must tell you, that
that man that does not love and live lovingly with his Wife, the spirit of God
is not in such a one, and I prove it by his words, who was directed by the
spirit of truth in that he spoke, I mean the blessed Apostle Saint John, for
he says, that 1. John. 4.
he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him: so then it must
needs appear that he that dwells not in love, dwells not in God, nor God
in him: yea, he proves his words by these following, he that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love: yea, he goes so far, that he teaches us
to know whether this love be in us, or no, for says he, if we love one
another, we will love God, and keep his Commandments: also I know he speaks
there of the children of God: but as it ought so to be in them one toward
another, so it ought also more especially to be in every man particularly
toward his own Wife, and here is a toutchstone will tell every man truly
whether he live with his wife as he ought to do, or no, namely, if he live
in love with her and according to the Commandments of God: S* John says, that
if any man says he loves God and hates his brother, he is a liar, and if a
man say he loves God, and yet loves not his wife, I say he is a liar also.

But what shall I say? when I have all done, I must leave men to the
consideration of what I have witten, and wish and entreat them to be wise and
submit themselves unto the government of the word of God, that so they may
live: quietly and lovingly with their wives, and not only so, but joyfully (as
the wise man says) for surely he has obtained a good portion that has a
wife that he can live joyfully with, for if that a man do abound with wealth,
so that he is able to give unto himself as much pleasure as Solomon possessed
as his Where peace and love do want, all other things do seem unpleasing.
heart can desire, yet if he live not peaceably at home and in love with his
wife, even all the rest are but a burden unto him: but the poor man (having
little and yet living friendly, lovingly and joyfully with his wife) has his
heart more full of content then the rich man has of all his wealth. Indeed as
the old proverb says, in love is no lack, Where man wife agree, all things
prosper well. 1. Sam. 6.
for where love is united in the fear of God in the hearts of man and wife,
they will (like yoke fellows) draw together the right way, like the two Milch
Kine which brought the Ark of God in the new cart from the land of the
Philistims, yea, they will plow together, and sow together, and there is no
doubt, but through the blessing of him which governs them, they shall (so
doing) receive a plentiful harvest together. Thus we have found that the
principal duty of the Husband unto the Wife is love, and do also find that
this duty is much neglected, contemned, and even despised of many, as appears
by the evils daily arising betwixt man and wife here before expressed, which I
confess to be to many, yet there is one main defect in husbands which I may
not ouer-passe, because it is the greatest breach of love that may be, which I
will speak of in the Chapter following.

The Fourth Chapter.
THis duty of the Husband unto the Wife being wholly included in the bonds of
love, it stretches it self farther into many branches: for we find also by
the word of God, that the Husband must dwell with his wife according to
knowledge: so we see here that is not lawful for the Husband to forsake his
Wife, but howseuer, whether it be in weal or woe, in riches or in poverty, yet
he must abide and dwell with her still, only Adultry No cause whatsoever
should separate man and wife, except Adultry.
separateth man and wife: for this cause a man may forsake his wife and she
her husband, but if the wife be not an Adultresse, thou must not forsake her,
no, not for any other cause, I confess the wise man says, give me any plague,
but the plague of the tongue: and it may be thy wife has this fault, yet this
is not a sufficient cause for to forsake her, for our Savior Christ tells
Mat. 19.
us, it is not lawful for a man to put away his wife, except it be for
whoredom: yea he does utterly forbid to separate whom God has joined
together: and says further, that whosoever shall put away his wife, except it
be for fornication, causes her to commit Adultery, and whosoever Whosoever
marries her that is divorced, does commit Adultry.
shall marry her that is divorced, commits Adultry.

But the firebrands of hell, I mean the wicked and abominable Adulterers of
our time, (neither respecting the word of God, nor yielding any obedience to
his Commandments, or fearing the justice of his vengeance to come for their
disobedience) will notwithstanding (like the swine possessed by the Devil)
run violently to their destructions: But Saint Paull 1. Cor. 6.
tells them plainly, that neither Fornicators, Adulterers, wantons, An item
for whoremongers and Adulterers.
nor such like, shall inherit the kingdom of God: whither they shall go then
I tremble to think of: for these men not regarding these things, will have a
wife here, and another there, one in this Country, and another in another
country: or if thy cannot range abroad to do thus, but must abide at home,
they will keep a whore even there, and yet the poor wife must not know of it,
or if she do, she must not seem to know it or dare to speak of it, though
she be never so much wronged by it: nay, this will not serve the beastly
minds of some, but they will have a whore in this corner, and another in
another corner, and be continually seeking of whores and whorish places, for
all bread is sweet to a whoremonger, says the wise man, he will not leave off
till he perish: Eccle. 23.
a man that breaks wedlock, and thinks thus in his heart, who sees me, I
am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, no body sees me,
whom need I to fear? the most high will not remember my sins: the same man
says, he shall be punished in the streets of the city, and shall be chased
like a young horse foale, and when he thinks not upon it, he shall be taken:
thus shall he be put to shame of every man, because he would not understand the
fear of the Lord.

But what speak I of the wise man's words, when God himself says Thou shall
not commit Adultry, Exodus. 20.
and that thou shall not couit thy neighbors Wife, nor his maid, nor his
Daughter, and yet his wife, his maid, nor daughter, will serve to satisfy the
beastly minds of many men in this wicked age, but wives, maids, and all that
they may any way allure to their wicked purposes they will thus abuse: The Lord
commanded there Deu. 23.
should be no whore-keepers among his people the Israelites, but if all such
should be swept out of this kingdom, I think a great part of our land would
be unpeopled, for never was this sin of whoredom and adultry at such a haight
as at this day it is amongst, us amongst young men it is now counted but a
trick of youth, and among others of more years which should have more grace,
it is called the sweet pleasing sin of Letchery.

Oh England, England! Sodom and Gomorah committed not more sin then thou
daily do, and these have felt the heavy hand of God long since, consuming
them with fire and brimstone from heaven, and think thou Heb. 13.
to escape? no, no, the bed undefiled is honorable, but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge. Saint John tells such Reu. 21.
plainly, they shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone: you will think I am too bold to be thus sharp with you, but I say
the tongues of men can never speak enough of this sin, for the Lord has set
himself against such, and will be aswift witness against them: (for says he)
They assemble themselves Mala. 3.
by companies in the Harlots houses, and rise up in the morning like fed
horses, for every man neigheth Iere. 5.
after his neighbors wife, and now mark what follows: shall I not visit for
these things says the Lord, shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this?

Woe be to you Whoremongers Whoremongers and Adulterers, do not only draw
vengeance on the^ selves, but also on the nations among whom they live.
and Adulterers, who not only draw vengeance upon your selves but even upon
the whole nation wherein you live, against whom the Lord makes ready the
arrows of his vengeance, whose portion is in that lake of fire unquenchable,
Oh consider this ye that forget God, least he tare you in Psalm. 50.
pieces, and there be none to help!

Regard the words of Solomon, keep thee from the wicked woman, and flattery of
the tongue of a strange woman, desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither
let her take thee with her eye lids, for because of the whorish woman, a man is
brought to a morcel of bread: And a woman will hunt for Pro. 6.
the precious life of a man: can a man take fire in his bosom and not be burnt,
or can he go upon coals, and his feet not be burnt: so he that goes into
his neighbors wife, shall not be innocent, whosoever touches her: should a
man talk with one of these licentious livers about some of his worldly
affairs, he would think himself wise enough to confer with any man, and in
the eyes of the world seem so, and yet Solomon proves him ot be but a fool,
for (says he,) he that does it, destroys his own soul, yea he shall find
a wound and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be put away: and again in
anothr place, The mouth of a strange Pro. 22.
woman is a pit, and he with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall therein: and
thus I proceed somewhat the more largely in opening this breach of wedlock, to
the end you may see into what dangers these men do daily run into, which live
not lovingly and faithfully with their own wives, as the word of God enioyneth
them to do.

The Fifth Chapter.
We see now by our last Chapter, how far many husbands come short of the
performance of that duty, which by the word of God they are enjoined to
perform unto their wives, and the whole cause or chief ground we also see
there to be the want of love, or rather of true love: for if there were in them
that true love which the fear of God works in the heart of every good
Christian, then it would lead them to that knowledge wherewith S. Peter 1.
Pet. 3.
teaches husbands to be furnished with: which I must a little further touch,
for it is not enough for them to abide and dwell with their wives, but they must
dwell with them as men of knowledge, and men of understanding, and experienced
in the word of God, yielding themselves wholly unto the guide of his word, and
the obedience of his will and holy Commandments, this is the knowledge
wherewith he instructs them, and this will bring Husbands to perform that
which Saint Paul teaches, which is to love your wives* Ephe. 5.
as Christ loved his Congregation: that is with a holy, hearty and a constant
Husbands ought to live with their wives as men of knowledge, experienced in the
word of God.
love, for all these must be performed by you: and except you labor to gather
this knowledge from the word of God, as the Be does for her honey among the
flowers, by your continual exercise and meditation therein assure your selves
you shall never be able to perform your duties toward God, nor receive true
comfort by your Marriages.

He tells you also, that you must give honor unto the wife as unto the
weaker vessel, and because she is the weaker vessel and more apt to frailty
then thy self, thou must bear with her weakness, and not expect to find that
fullness of content which happily through thy wisdom thou would she
should perform unto thee in many things, for, for this cause also have thou
obtained thy wisdom and thy knowledge and thy understanding, that thou
might bear with the weakness of thy companion: we read, that when Samuel
had anointed Saul to be 1. Sam. 10.
a King over the people, so soon as he had anointed him unto that kingly
office, God gave unto him another heart, fitting him thereby unto the place and
calling he had appointed him: so no doubt but those men which he permits
unto that honorable function of Marriage, he furnishes with gifts fitting for
that calling, for it is a matter of no small weight when a man takes upon him
the government of a woman, but if he rightly consider what he takes in hand,
he shall find he had need with Solomon to pray that the Lord will give unto
him wisdom to rule and govern the wife whith he has taken, as he did for
wisdom to govern his people, and both the Husband and the Wife when they
come together to pray with Tobias and Sarah, that the power of Tob. 8.
the Devil have no domination over them, and so he shall be strengthened and
enabled to bear with the weakness of his companion.

We see if we put strong waters into a single and weak glass, it breaks
the glass because it wants substance of nature to bear it: and therefore we
will put such waters carefully into double glasses, which may conserve and
keep them: so we should not ouerburthen the weak nature of the woman, by
imposing upon her, that which the husband himself ought to perform, of which
(I have formerly spoken) and this is one Simile.
chief reason which should move the man to deal kindly with his wife, even
her weakness: for we see if we handle vessels A reason showing why a man should
deal kindly with his wife.
of glass and earth roughly or rashly, we crack and break them, and I would
that men were as wise and careful to consider the weakensse of their wives,
and to deal kindly, gently, and lovingly with them, so conseruing and
preserving that love which ought to be betwixt them, and would be if it were
not expulsed by their rough and unkind dealing with them.

And there is another reason or chief ground to be considered greater then any
of the former, which should draw men to the performance of this their duty, for
so St. Paul does teach us also, (which is) that every man should Another more
effectual reason for the same cause
have a special care to perform these duties imposed upon him, the rather or
for this cause, because they are beires with you of the grace of life, elected
by the favor of God in Christ Jesus to that fellowship of Saints wherein you
your selves hope to be nu^bred, and as dearly beloved of God as your selves,
bought out of the power of Satan by the precious blood of his dear Son, as
well as you, and heirs also of that eternal life which you your selves hope
to enjoy: and therefore if you your selves think to live as Saints in Heaven,
you must live together as Saints here on earth. These things as a loadestone
should draw you to the performance of those duties which you ought to perform
if you rightly consider it.

And so our blessed Apostle having given this godly and prudent counsel unto
Husbands to perform unto their Wives, gives a reason also wherefore these
things should or ought to be thus performed, which is, that your prayers be
not let or hindered, as if he should say, if you live disco^tently or frowardly
one with When man and wife agree not as they ought, they cannot pray as they
should.
another, it is impossible that you should perform that devotion in your
prayers, which you ought to perform to God, or have them accepted of him as
you would, and therefore if you would have God to hear you when you pray unto
him, or to grant you the things which you pray for and desire of him, agree and
live in love together, that so your praying together may receive comfort
together, and that the God of love may bless your Loves together.

I beseech you have a care of these things, and separate not yourselues in
these holy actions, for I know there be too many infected with these sins
amongst us in these days, which live untowardly and frowardly God knows, and
yet fear not to present themselves before his divine Majesty in this case, oh
dangerous thing! has God joined you together that you might be one, and will
you divide your selves and then appear before him, and bring him but half,
when his due is to have the whole, think you he will be served thus? no, he
is like the true Mother, which will not have 1. King. 3.
her child divided, he will either have the whole or none, he will not have you
thus to separate your selves, and then to presume to come in his presence: but
if any contention do arise betwixt the Man and his Wife, quench the fire before
it do burn too far, reconcile yourselues one to another speedily, that your
loves may not fade, nor your hearts stray, but join together in God, that so
your prayers be not interupted, but accepted of him, as you see the word of God
teaches you: and thus briefly for the duty of Husbands.

The duty of Wives.
The Sixth Chapter.
YOu see I have proved that the duties of Husbands are wholly grounded upon
Love, but we shall find that the duty of the Wife reaches yet further then so,
for it is not enough for her to It is not enough for a woman to love her
Husband, but she must be ruled and governed by him also.
be kind and loving unto her Husband, but she must be obedient and dutiful,
and under the subjection and government of him also, but because I will not
be offensive by presuming to write any thing herein of my self, I will lay my
foundations on a sure ground, and go no farther then the word of God shall
give me warrant herein.

We find that for the sin of disobedience in our grandmother Eve unto her
maker, amongst the rest of her punishments laid upon her for it, this is one,
Thy desire shall be subject to thine Husband, Genesis 3.
and he shall rule over thee: ye see here what duty is laid upon the the
woman, and that by the Commandment of God himself, you have now no power left
unto your selves to order your own wills and desires as your own selves
please: no, your wills must accord to the wills of your Husbands, and your
desires must be subject to their wills: it is your duties to yield them
obedience and the pre-eminence of rule: the very heathen Philosophers which
knew not the word of God, yet could teach that the rule for the Wife to live
by, was her Husband, if he lived obedient to the laws public: how much more
then if they live according to the laws of God, are you bound to perform it:
but Simile.
as a block though it be decked with Gold and Jewels is not to be respected,
except it represent the shape of somewhat, even so a wife, be she never so
rich, if she be not obedient unto her Husband, she is nothing worth to be
regarded: and whatsoever or whersoeuer we shall find any thing concerning this
duty of the Wife in the whole book of God, we shall find it to be built upon
this foundation, which God himself has laid.

S. Paul well understanding the mystery of his Masters mind, has very
plainly in many of his Epistles largely expressed this Ephe. 5.
matter, teaching wives to submit themselves unto their Husbands as unto the
Lord: here is the love taught you, that you must perform unto them, and here
is the duty too. For as you must perform all hearty love and true affectioned
zeal unto the Lord, with all faithful obedience unto his holy and heavenly
will: so you, under your Husbands and unto them, must perform the like, and
Saint Paul shows the reason too, why you must do this, (for says he) The
Husband is the Wives head, even as Christ is Ephe. 5.
the head of the Congregation, and he is the Savior of the whole body,
therefore as the whole congregation is in subjection to Christ, likewise let
the wives be in subjection to their Husbands in all things.

Thus you see how Saint Paul has labored to expesse this duty unto you, and
Saint Peter he teaches the same in effect also in these words, ye women be
subject 1. Pet. 3.
to your Husbands, that even they which believe not the word, may without the
word, be won by your conversation when they behold your conversation in
fear: And again, 1. Cor. 14.
let your wives keep silence with all subjection, suffer not a woman to teach,
nor to have authority over the man, but for to be in silence, for Adam Genesis 3.
was first formed, then Eve, also Adam was not deceived, but the woman was
deceived, and has brought in the transgression: Again, Let your wives keep
silence in the congregation, for it shall not be permitted unto them to
speak, but to be under obedience, as the Law says, but if they will learn
any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home, for it becomes not a woman
to speak in the Congregation, yea, a man shall be Lord and ruler in his own
house, and the woman shall be subject unto her Husband.

Yea, we shall find that among the ordinances which Moses gave unto the
Children of Israel, this is one, That if a woman having a Number. 30.
Husband, voweth or pronounces ought with her lips, either by ^ath or Women
oughr not to make vows without the consent of their Husbands.
solemn promise, whereby she binds her self: if her Husband heard it, and
holds his peace concerning her the same day he hears it, then her vow shall
stand, and her bond wherewith she bound her self, shall stand in effect: but
if her Husband disallow, her the same day that he hears it, then shall he
make her vow which she had made, and that which she pronounced with her
lips, when she bound her self, of none effect, and the Lord shall forgive
her. Thus you see how the Scriptures do all accord to that which God in the
beginning had commanded: namely, That the woman Genesis 18.
should be subject to the rule and government of her Husband, to this Genesis 31.
have all good women ever accorded. The obedience of Sarah unto Abraham calling
him 1. King. 1.
Lord, approves her duty: The obedience of Rachell and Lea unto Ester. 8.
their Husband Jacob affirms it, no less does the reverent duty of Bathsheba
unto David express it, the obedience of Ester unto Ashuerus, purchased not
only her own life and renown, but the lives of the whole Nation of the
Jews. And although it cannot be gain said of any, but that this Commandment
of Almighty God ought reverently to be obeyed of all women, yet how much it is
disobeyed in these days we daily see: nay, despised and disdayned at, so that
we may justly complain against them, and say, they be a rebellious seed.

For, as in the beginning they rebelled against their Almighty God, so do they
still repugne against him, refusing to be governed according to his will, and
the ordinance which he has appointed to govern them by, for by their husbands
now many of them will not be governed, they will govern both themselves Many
women very unquiet, if they may not have the rule of the whole family, which by
them ought not so to be.
and their Husbands, yea and the whole family too, or else there shall be no
quiet rule there, so that now it is grown to a proverb, that where the wife
bears the sway, the house is the quieter all the day: is not this badge given
you to your shame? and yet you will not see it, in these days the Devil has
so bewitched you, that many of you do not stick to say, that your Husbands have
not wit enough to perform such matters: think you that he that gave them their
authority, cannot give them wit enough to peforme that charge which he
commits unto them, but that you must be vmpire and judge too in your own
cause, to take the authority out of his hand, and as false usurpers make use of
that authority to which you have no lawful right?

If you suppose such a defect If any defect be in the Husband, how it should
be redressed.
to be in them, why do not you rather pray for them, that God may supply their
defects and wants? but it is too common a thing amongst you now a days, to
make your choice of such men as you may thus deal withal, and I would some of
you did indent before marriage for these things: but such women as would rather
have foolish Husbands, whom they might rule, rather then to be ruled by sober
wise men, are like to him that would rather be led of a blind man in an
unknown way, then to follow one that can see and know the way well. Oh that
your supposed knowledge or wisdom on which you so much depend, would open
unto you the danger in which you stand by committing this error! but it cannot,
so long as your wills do not with all obedience, subject themselves unto the
will and commandment of him unto whom all power should yield their obedience.

The Seventh Chapter.
I Had almost ouerslipt the repetition of an undutiful Wife of whom we read
in Scripture, but I may not, for it is worthy your best consideration, I mean
of Vasta Queen and wife of Ahashuerosh Ester. 1.
the great King of Persia and Media, whom upon a certain feast day the King
commanded to be brought before him in her great estate of pomp, even with the
Crown Royal upon her head, that as his love was great unto her, so she
being brought unto him in that glorious pomp which he desired, the delights
of his heart might be satisfied in her comely and beautiful person, and
likewise his Princes and Peers might see the same.

And we would think that this was but a small request which the King required
of her, and yet many a man does require as little as this at the hands of his
wife, or less, and yet obtaines it not: well, the story tells us she did
no better, but even so, for though she were a Queen, and should have been a
pattern of obedience unto all women, both in her Court and Kingdom, yet she
refused to come, and would not come, although commanded by her Husband, yea,
and that a King.

But Ecce, Ecce, behold, behold, she refusing to come to her Husband with the
Crown on her head who gave it her, and first placed it there, her royalty and
regaltie was therefore taken from her by him as unworthy of such a glory, and
because she refused to be obedient unto the Commandment of her Husband, whom
she ought with all reverence to have obeyed, she was not only rejected of
her Husband for being Queen, but A Queen punished for disobedience unto her
Husband.
utterly abandoned of him for ever, and divorced from him by law: nay, this was
not all, for it was not long before she saw another enjoy that majesty honor
and pleasure which she but lately possessed, and by her own folly lost, and
what greater hartgriefe in the world can come to a woman then this, to see her
self degraded and disgraced, and another to possess that honor which was
hers, before her face? and thus she which should have been a mirror unto
others in her obedience, is now made for disobedience a mirror unto all women
in her punishment: I could not omit this history being so fitting to this
matter of the wives obedience: but shall I tell you good wives, it is well for
you that this law is not executed now in these days amongst us, for I assure
you if it were, we should have Ten wives divorced before one buried, so apt are
you to peforme this bad act of disobedience.

And therefore I cannot yet pass it over, for the Apostle does open this point
of duty unto you very plain, and therefore I beseech you be not ignorant of
it, but mark it well, I recited the words in the former Chapter: He would
have you so subject your selves to your Husbands, that even they which believe
not the word, may without the word be won by your conversation, when they shall
behold your conversation in fear.

See, you must so subject your The Wife ought to be fearful of giving any
cause of offense unto her Husband.
selves unto them, that you shall even fear to give any occasion of offense
unto them. I know there be many that will not like of this, that the wife
should so subject her self unto her Husband, that she shall stand in fear of
him, and yet it must be so, for do we not read that God commands that every
man shall stand in fear of his Father and Mother, he does not say that every
child only shall fear, but that every man shall fear, if then it must be so,
how much more should the woman perform this unto her Husband, under whose
subjection he has committed her as a portion of her punishment for her
disobedience unto him.

But will you know what kind What kind of fear it is which is required of
women toward their husband
of fear this is which is here required, and how it must be performed? for it
is not a slavish kind of fear which is here required where the Apostle says,
your conversation must be in fear, but here is required of you a holy
conversation, zealous toward God and pure and undefiled toward the world,
with virtue, chastity, modesty, temperance, sobriety, faithfulness, and loving
obedience, for surely she that is fully possessed with these virtues, will so
love and so live that she will fear to offend her Husband, but rather yield
all humility and obedience for the commandment sake, and thus by this holy
carriage of your selves, shall you win those that are without the knowledge of
God or his word, to the knowledge both of him and his word, when they shall
behold your godly conversation in fear.

And see farther the mercy of our good God, unto whom he has committed you to
be governed by, not unto your enemies or unto strangers, but unto a kind and
loving Husband, unto whom you are as near as the very flesh unto his skin, and
as dear unto him as the aple of his eye, whose tender hearted affections are
always yielding unto a dutiful and loving wife. I hope now that good wives
will willingly yield unto this their duty of obedience unto their Husbands,
seeing by whom it is commanded, and to whom it ought to be done.

And the rather for that the mercy of God does extend it self unto them even
to the full, in that notwithstanding their transgression against him, yet he
has ordained them to eternal salvation by the merits of his 1. Tim. 2.
beloved Son, the words are worthy your best observation, and these they are:
Notwithstanding through bearing of Children she shall be saved, if they
continue in the faith, and love, and holiness with modesty: see here the
benefit of Marriage which brings so great a blessing with it: And note I
beseech you, you that are women of understanding, here is salvation offered
unto you by bearing of Children indeed, but it is with a prouiso if, if you
continue in the faith, and love, and holiness with modesty: you must yield all
The first duty of the Wife is obedience.
hearty obedience unto the blessed will of God, else what is the fruits of your
faith? or where is it, or the hope of your salvation? so you see it alludes
unto al these virtues I formerly spoke of, and the obedience which God himself
commands, for all these should be in women: for if you mark it, as it is
worthy your marking, you shall see that al our poetical paynters, wheresoever
they do paynt or set forth any of the virtues, as Faith, Hope, Eight chief
virtues which ought to be in women.
Love, Charity, Patience, Chastity, Temperance, Humility, and the like, all
these they do not set forth unto us in the shadow of men, but in the shadow
of women, showing thereby, that in them these virtues dwell, or should at the
leastwise. I will run no farther in this point of obedience, but will turn me
to the next duty of the Wife, which is Love.

The Eight Chapter.
ANd now concerning the duty of Love The second duty of the Wife, is Love.
which every woman ought to perform unto her Husband, I have in some manner
touched it before as occasion served in the duty of obedience, for indeed they
are as too twins, they go hand in hand one with another, and may not well be
Obedience and Love ought not to be separated.
separated, for where there is true obedience rightly performed, there also
love will be attendant, and as an agent help to perform the business, and in
deed it is so natural a thing for a woman to love a man, that we would think
she needed not be prompted or to be instructed in this point, but to perform
it truly and faithfully as it ought to be. I think we shall scarce find one
in five that does it, no not among ten, I pray God there be one in 20: And yet
I make no doubt but that a woman loves her Husband when she marries with him*
but the Apostle says, she must continue in love.

Why then it appears that the love she must perform unto her Husband, must
be like the ring wherewith he marries her, What the Marriage ring does signify.
it must have no end, it must continue as long as she continues to him, yea if
it be to the end of her life: and as the ring is not of any mixed or base
metal, but of the most precious and pure metal which may be: so it teaches
the woman that the love she must perform vnno her Husband, must be pure,
holy, and chaste, it must allow no mixture, no copartner in this fellowship, but
she must remember to perform the vow she made in the presence of God, and
before his Saints at the time of her Marriage, that she would keep her self
only unto him so long as she should live with him: and this you see the
ceremony or use of the ring teaches, and therefore with great and good
consideration has our Church ordained the use of it, and great in the error of
those men which refuse at such times to make use of it.

And now I have begune to speak of this vow which the woman makes unto her
Husband at the time of her Marriage, it gives me an occasion to take notice of
the small regard that women for the most part do take of this business, for
if we note the conversation of A woman ought to have regard of the vow that
she makes at the time of her marriage.
Wives unto their Husbands in these times, it will appear (as I said) for the
most part, that they never regard that vow they made, or know that they have
made any at all, for sure I think there be some so brutish they know it not,
but rather think they be but words of course or ceremonial rites of the
Church, and not concern them at all, yea, I do know there be such, but
alas their errors is exceeding great in taking so little regard of so weighty
a cause.

But I beseech you in the fear Note.
of God, note what I shall say unto you concerning this matter, for you shall see
it is a vow which she promises with her lips, yea and a great vow, and such a
one as in the whole course of her life she cannot make a greater, for if a
woman shall say or protest Numb. 5.
she will do such or such a thing, this is a vow, she binds her self to
perform it, but as I said before: If her Husband hearing her shall disallow of
it, and shall say she shall not do it, she is then freed from her vow
because of his authority over her, and it is said, the Lord shall forgive her
for vowing, so we see then it is a sin for a woman to vow or protest to do
any thing if she perform it not, unless it be contradicted by her Husband.

But here the case is otherwise and far more greater, for when she comes
to be Married to a man, she is then solie of her self, and free from the
command of any, and has free liberty to do then for her self what she How
great a sin it is to break the vow made in Matrimony.
will, and therefore her vow she then makes is of very great effect, and it
is as great a sin to break it, great indeed, in the regard of these things,
the place where she made it, the house of God, the congregation there the
Saints of God, but far more greater in respect she is demanded if she (will
perform these things) by the Angel and Minister of God in Gods behalf, and
she then there answers she will.

So we find when God had determined to give his chosen people the Children of
Israel his law, whereby they might know how to perform their duty unto him,
he sent his servant Moses unto them, to know if they would perform the law
which he was to give them, and they answered they would perform it, but as the
Lord did tell them after he had given them the Laws, That if they did not
regard his Commandments and obey Ex^. 19.
his will, he would send his punishment A proof by example that God will
punish the breach of the vow made in matrimony.
upon them in abundance, until he had utterly consumed them: so I must say
unto every woman that regards not her vow and promise which she makes at
the time of her marriage, and does not endeavor to perform the same as she
ought to do, let her assure her self she shall no less expect the judgment
and punishment of God, then they did.

Look in your Book of common The Book of common prayer, a looking glass for
women to see their duties in
Prayer in the solemnizatio^ of Matrimony, and there you shall see what you
have vowed to perform, it is that you will live with your Husbands according
to the ordinance and Commandments of God, that you will obey and serve them,
and this you see God has commanded you to do, and what greater vow then this
can you make? and it follows more there, that you vow to love, honor, and
keep them in sickness and in health, so here you see that love is the next
thing for the woman here to do, and this also she voweth freely of her self
to perform: also the next and last she voweth to forsake all other men, and
to keep her self wholly and only to her Husband, here is the effect and end
of her love, to be chaste, pure, and without spot, this is the love which wives
ought to perform to their Husbands, and I know all those which fear God will
acknowledge and perform as much* but I appeal unto themselves (even against
their own sect) if there be not too many in these days, which live so
brutish, so obstinate and rebellious against God and their Husbands, that they
seem not to know that either they owe this love as a duty unto their Husbands,
or have made so great a vow to perform it.

Look but into one of their acts, and let the rest (though many) alone, I
mean their breach of wedlock, those Adultrous works, and then where is this
love? how many forsake their Husbands unto whom they have made this vow of Love
and chastity, and yet live adulterously with other men: oh how many The
abhomominable whoredom of women.
have their secret friends and loves as they term them at home in their
Husbands absence, or meeting them abroad in private places! nay, haunting
common brothell houses, so insatiate, that even whores in stews are not more
common: and what is the cause of this, but their disobedience unto the
Commandment of God which would direct the^ to perform this duty of Love
holily as it ought to be, if they would.

But shall I display their actions abroad with my pen? oh no, if I should, I
should weary my self with writing and you in reading it, they themselves by
their lewd actions daily committed, do too much explain themselves to the
world, and therefore to tell such their duty to their Husbands, which will not
learn to perform their duty toward GOD, will be but vain, before such
swine, I will not cast such pearls. But to those which desire to know their
duty, to the end they may perform it, to these I write still, let their love
be pure and steadfast, and their whole conversation so holy, that as the
Apostle tells them, others may be won by their godly ensamples, and so
shall they themselves be brought unto eternal happiness.

The Ninth Chapter.
Our blessed Apostle having given instructions unto* Women how they ought to
behave themselves toward their Husbands, now proceeds to give instructions
unto them, also how to tire and array themselves, whose apparel (says he)
shall 1. Pet. 3.
not be outward with brayded hair and hanging on of gold, or in putting Women
ought not to array themselves in gorgeous apparel, but in decent a^tir^
on of gorgeous array, but let the inward man of the heart be vncorrupt with a
meek and quiet spirit, which before God is much set by, for after this manner
in the old time did the holy women which trusted in God ttyre themselves, and^
were obedient unto their Husbands even as Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him
Lord, again in another place (he faith) let the women array themselves in 1.
Tim. ^.
comely apparel with shamefostnesse and modesty, not with broyded hair or
gold, or pearls or costly apparel, but as becomes women which profess the
fear of God with good works.

I do not a little admire that Many women have read concerning these things,
yet make no good use of it, as they ought to do.
so many women which would be accounted wise in their knowledge, and have
themselves so often read these things, and been so long instructed in these
principals, yet seem either not that ever they themselves have read such
things, or ever have heard them of others, for I am sure so it seems in these
days amongst them, for the most part, but shall I tell you, you have learned
from the greatest to the meanest, and the eldest to the youngest, to adore and
deck your selves according to the fashions of the world, which shall perish
and they which delight in them, but to array and deck your selves with modesty
and shamefastnes, and such comely apparel as becomes those that profess
the fear of God, in this you are all to seek or disdain to learn to know,
although God by his word commands it of you.

But if there be any amongst you which makes conscience of these things, and
so strive to live according as they ought to Women given to pride, mockers, and
scoffers of those whia^ do religiously reform them selves.
do, are not such disdayned and scorned of the rest, and bra^ded by you with
the name of Puritan and holy sister? but where is your purity and holiness
while you thus deride others in their well-doing? I answer you, if you will not
endeavor to be holy and pure whiles you are here upon earth, you shall never
become Saints in heaven, but rather Devils in hell, For blessed are the pur^ in
heart (says our Savior Christ) Mat. 5.
for they shall see God.

And he himself which best did know what was fit for you, did make your
clothing but of beasts skins at the first, and when he sent his Son into
the world, he did not send him by any Princes, or Lady of great rank, or
amongst the proud A note for to pull down the pride of women.
ones of the world, he despised your pomp and pride, and did choose a poor
humble Virgin to be mother of his Son, and when he lived amongst us, we
find not that he gave us any example of pride, but of humility: his garments
were without lace or welt, yea, without seame also.

But if we view them in these days as they rae arrayed, we would think that
Hell were emptied of al her devises, toys, tricks and fashions, and that
women had got them all: for all that God has made under heaven, the whole
earth and the sea, with all the creatures therein In all the whole earth not
sufficient to satsfie the pride of Women.
are not sufficient to satisfy the pride of women in these days, the
entrails of the earth are daily torn and rent to seek for gold to adorn you
with, the bottomless sea and the poor fishes are daily robbed to find you
pearls to deck your selves with, and the hard rocks dug down to find you
variety of precious stones, nay, have you not robbed all the creatures of God,
both beasts, birds, and worms to furnish up this your pride? and yet all this
will not serve to satisfy you, but still you keep your No marvel if all
that God has made will not serve to satisfy them, when his own work will not
content them in themselves.
workman the Devil in work to find you more new fashions, and made him make
a journey from hell to bring you beauty to paynt your selves withal, for from
heaven I am sure you had it not.

Oh woe be to that soul on whose face God shall with anger look, denying to
know it because it is not as he made it! no marvel though all that God has
made under heaven will not satisfy your pride, when the works of Gods own
hands in your selves will not content you, but that you will alter that: In
all the histories of the Scriptures. I never read but of one wicked woman that
ever used this wicked art of paynting, (I mean Iezabel) and yet the judgments
King. 9.
of God upon her, in suffering the dogs to eat and consume her, will not
draw you from using this paynting trade, but still you provoke him to anger and
stir up his judgments against you daily, with your abnominable pride,
wherein you excel all that ever were before you. I know you will think I am
too bold with you, thus to meddle with your arraying your selves, in such
manner or fashio^s as you please to use them, but think what you will, and say
what you will, I must and will discharge my conscience, the matter it self
gives me cause to do it, being a duty of so great importance, belonging unto
women to reform the abuses thereof: and for which not only you your selves
shall bear your own destructions, but they also which have the government of
you, because they have suffered you to commit such things, I mean the
Husbands of such women.

Nay, this is not all, I would it ended so: but woe, woe be unto you, whose
pride shall be not The pride of woman, the destruction of themselves and
Husbands, and the whole common wealth where they live.
only the destruction of your selves and Husbands, but of the whole common
wealth wherein you live: of you because you committed this sin, and of them
because they suffered you to commit it. Is it not then high time to write and
speak against this sin, and those which commit it? yes, if either or both
may be regarded: I write not these things from my own brains, I menace you
not, it is not I but the Lord that threatens you and the whole land for it,
look into the third of Esaias, and see there what he says unto your pride.

Because the Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched-out
necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as they go, and making a
tinckling with their feet, therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the
daughters of Sion bald, and the Lord shall discover their secret parts, in that
day shall the Lord take away the ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and
the round tyers, the sweet balls, and the bracelets, 3. Esaias
the bonnets, and the tyres of the head, and the slops, and the headbands, and
the tablets, and the eare-rings, the rings and the mufflers, the costly
apparel, and the vailes, and the wi^ples, and the crisping pinnes, and the
glasses, and the fine linen, If God punish his own peculiar people for their
pride what can you expect.
the hoods, and the lawnes: And in stead of sweet savors, there shall be
stincke, and instead of a girdle, a rent, and in stead of dressing the hair*
baldness, in stead of a stomacher, ^ girdle with sackcloth, and burning in
stead of beauty, thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy strength in the
battle: Then shall her gates mourn and lament, and she being desolate shall
sit upon the ground. Now you painted butterflies of our time, which with the
Camelion change your selves into all colors, what say you to these things? you
see here what judgments God threatens to bring upon his own chosen people,
because of the pride of the daughters of Sion, and you far exceed them in
all things, and yet think you to escape unpunished?

The prophet says, that they were so proud that they went mincing and
tinckling with their feet, but you are grown so proud that your feet may not
bear you but that you must be carried in Coaches and drawn with horses,
which (though it be an honor wherewith Kings and Princes are pleased to grace
their well respected subjects with) yet is it unfit that Courtizans should be
coached, which should rather be carted. I would it were not so, they were
content with fine linen, but no linen or lawnes be it never so pure, will
content you, but it must be died into colors, blue was, and now yellow is,
and primrose, and straw color, and I know not what, but black will be the
next assure your selves, for as your pride has excelled all before you, so I
fear that your punishments when they come, will exceed all that were before
you. I should be tedious unto the reader, should I run far into this point
of the pride of women, but it is not my purpose to do it, but rather to follow
the example of the Apostle which tells them that such things ought not to
be, and to wish them that they would array themselves as becomes women which
profess the faith of Jesus Christ, in comely apparel, with shamefastness
and modesty, that the word of God be not evil spoken of through you.

The Tenth Chapter.
THere be yet many duties more, which are very needful for women both to
learn and to observe, as appears by the instructions which the blessed
Apostle gave unto his Son Titus, whereby to instruct the Timo. 2.
Creets with, wherein he instructs the elder women, that their behavior be
such as becomes holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, but
teachers of honest things, that they may instruct the younger women to be sober
minded, that The good properties which ought to be in women.
they love their Huabands, that they love their Children, that they be
discreet, chaste, keeping at home, good and subject to their Husbands, that the
word of God be not evil spoken of, but many of these things I have in some
sort touched before, only here I would have women take norise of a thing or two
not yet spoken of, and so I will draw to a conclusion.

The Apostle warns them not to be false accusers, and this touches busy
bodies of our time, which will go prattling, to carry news and bring debates
The Husbands smart sometimes for the wives tongues.
and contention amongst neighbors, by lying and slaunderouse speeches, so that
many times the men smart for the women's tongus and neighbors live at great
varience one with another which otherwise would live in love and peace
together. This ought not to be amongst women, but to be such as Salomo^
speaks of in the last of his Proverbs, who speaking there of a virtuous
woman, she will (says he) open her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace
is in her tongue, and doing thus, should they be able to perform the things
here commanded, and to instruct others in the duties belonging unto them.

Again, he commands that women be not given to much wine, and I would that
women were more careful to avoid this sin then Women ought not to delight in
much drinking of wine or strong drink.
they be, for we have too many women-drunkards amongst us, as well as
men-drunkards now adays, the more is the pity, but woe be to those that rise
up early to follow drunkenesse, and to them that continue until night, till
the wine do inflame them: and woe be to them that Ecclu. ^6.
are mighty to drink wine, and to the^ that are strong to power in strong
drink, great is the plague of a drunken woman (says the wise man) for she
cannot cover her own shame, we have example of this in Noah and Lot, (though
otherways a righteous man) yet being drunk with wine, committed Incest with
his own Daughters.

And even in these days we see many that have wasted great Ill diseases and
beggary the fruits of drunkenness.
substance by this means, and some bringing themselves to diseases, and
shortning their own days by inordinate drinking, these are the fruits of
excess, drinking and taking delight in wine and strong drink, therefore very
great care had women need to take of themselves that they be not given to much
wine, or to take delight in strong drink.

Another thing I note that the Apostle does admonish women of, and that is,
that they be homekeepers, or keepers of their own houses, hence it is that
the woman is often called the howse-wife, not the street wife, she must be no
gadder abroad, she must not spinne streat thread as too many do, which when
they have forced their Husbands to lay more upon their backs, then he is able
to put in his purse along time after, their own house will not hold them, but
they must gad from this place to that place, and Women ought not to be gaddars
abroad, but keepers of their own houses.
every where, to show their pride and their Husbands folly, thus did not that
virtuous woman which I told you of before, which Solomon speaks of, it will
not be amiss if I do discribe her unto you, for surely she that performs
that which the blessed Apostles have here taught concerning the duty of Wives,
will omit nothing of that virtuous woman he speaks of, or come short of her
perfections, and these are the words.

Who shall find a virtuous woman, for her price is far above the pearls, the
heart of her Husband trusts in her, and he shall have no need of spoils,
she will do him good, and not ill all the days of her life, she seeks
wool and flax, and labors chearefully with her hands, she is like the
Ships of Merchants, she brings her food from far, and she The
description of a good Wife.
rises while it is yet night, and gives the portion to her household, and the
ordinary to her maids, she considers a field and gets it, and with the
fruit of her hands she planteth a Vineyard, she girdeth her loins with
strength, and strengthens her arms, she feels that her merchandise is
good, and her candle is not put Pro. 31.
out by night, she puts her hands to the wheel, and her hands to the
spindle, she stretches out her hands to the poor, and puts out her hands
to the needy, she fears not the snow, for her family, for all her family are
clothed with scarlet, she makes her self carpets, fine linen and purple is
her garments, her Husband is known in the gates when he sits with the
elders of the land, she makes sheets and sells them, and gives girdles
unto the Merchants, strength and honor is her clothing, and in the latter day
she shall rejoice, she opens her mouth with wisdom and the law of grace
is in her tongue, she ouerseeth the ways of her Household, and eats not the
bread of idleness, her Children rise up and call her blessed, her Husband
shall praise her saying, many daughters have done virtuously, but thou
surmountest them all, favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, but a woman
that fears the Lord, she shall be praised, give her the fruit of her hands,
and let her own works praise her in the gates.

I hope now I shall not need to amplify this duty of Wives any further, seeing
I have already labored thus far in it, I will therefore conclude, leaving
you to the consideration of these things, and you to the tuitio^ of our good
God, whom I do beseech to look mercifully upon us all, and by his grace and
powerful spirit, to work in our hearts a true and speedy reformation of our
sinful lives, that so by the holy intercession of our blessed Mediator, and
the merits of his blessed passion, we may enjoy that blessedness, which every
good soul does long to enjoy.

Amen.
The duty of Parents.
The Eleauenth Chapter.
THis duty of Parents The duty of Parents I have divided into two part^
I have divided into two maine or principal points, the one the education and
governing of Children in the time of their youth, and the other what Parents
ought to do unto their Children when they are come to be of a more riper age.

And for the first, for the bringing up of Children in the time of their youth,
it will be thought The first, the bringing up of Children in the time of their
youth.
to be but to small purpose to spend my time in such a business, and that I had
more need to wright of the other then of this, considering that we see daily in
this our age with grief, that when many Parents have brought The second, what
they ought to do wben they be of riper age.
up their Children a long time with great care, costs and charges, and hoping
that then they shall be even past the worst, and so they to receive some
comf^^ by them for their long care and pains taking with them, to say plainly
and truly of them* (...) many of them are then even past the best, so that if
counsel in this case may be had, it might seem very well given, and the
pains taken in such a case well bestowed.

But for governing and bringing up of them in their Childhood or younger years,
it may be objected as I said before, to be a needless thing, considering that
nature it self does teach the very bruit beasts to nourish, cherish, and
comfort their young, and therefore men and women whom God has endued with so
many excellent gifts, as knowledge, understanding, wisdom and the rest, far
above all the rest of his creatures besides, cannot err in this point of duty.

And again, another reason may be alleged, that there has been so much and
so long teaching to this effect, that men and women in these our days for the
most part of them, have been instructed in these things themselves even from
their youths, and every private man's house is furnished with Bibles and Books
to this effect: so that every man may be his own Schoolmaster herein, and
will it be thought then that Parents cannot instruct their Children in these
things ^ surely no.

Indeed I do confess this in What a great blessing we enjoy more then our
forefathers did, through the plenteous and public teaching of the Gospel,
whereby we learn both how to govern our selves and others.
some sort to be true, and bless the Lord for this his work, ye^ be he for
ever blessed for this his great mercy toward us, for that we live in such and
so happy a time, wherein the word of God is so plentiful and openly taught us,
and every man that will may enjoy the same at home with him, to the comfort of
him and his: Our Fathers had not this privilege, they might mumble on their
beads, but not matter on their Bibles, on pain of cursings, but if they did,
they fried for it, and therefore blessed are your eyes in that they see, and
your ears in that they hear, and happy are you in whose hearts these things
are sown, which carefully and zealously bring forth fruit hereby, to the glory
of God and the discharge of your own duties herein, of which number I doubt
not but that God has plenty amongst us, which do carefully labor in the
discharge of these things, as well as he had in the days of Eliah Seven
Thousand more 1. King. 19.
then he knew of, that never honored Ball.

But give me leave a little I pray you, and I will but entreat you to take a
view as in a glass, of the abuses both of the Parents and the Children of our
time, and you shall see with grief many that do it not, and too may that know
not whether they have a duty to perform herein, or no, and too many that know
it, and never regard to practice it, for see we not that the Lapwing is not
more forward in going before she can cast off her shell, then the Impes of our
time are in speaking evil before they can well speak? I speak not of
speaking well, but of speaking Children forward to speak evil before they can
scarce speak.
plain, for does not the child call his own mother drab and queen, and his
father fool and knave and such like, and yet the foolish Parents rejoice to
hear them chat thus, nay, I would they did not teach them such things
themselves: but hereof it comes as a just plague for their follies, that
before they can well go from their hands, they hear them curse them to their
face.

Nay, look we further and see we not many that when they have but learned to
speak and go, they straight fall to pilfering and stealing, and yet even
these things are wincked at, yea and defended too many leand parents, for their
proffits sake as they think, as if the every were good husbandry: but look
yet farther unto them which be of more years, that one would think should
have some knowledge of God and of his laws, and do we not daily hear the^ as
we pass almost in every place, blaspheming the holy name of God with great
oaths, and singing of most lewd and filthy songs, full of most odious speeches
to the The leaudnes of Children is the ill guiding of the Parents.
grief of any good heart or chaste care: does not this show the bad and
negligent guiding and governing them in the prime of their youth, yes surely,
this is the very cause hereof, and therefore if writing or speaking will or may
do any good in this case, here is cause both to wrigh^ and speak too, and it
is high time to do it. These things when I had with grief considered, I
could not keep my pen from wrighting, for even for Sions sake I will not
hold my tongue, and for Esaias. 62.
Ierusalems sake I will not rest.

Moses the great Prophet and chosen servant of God being Parents ought to teach
their children the laws of God.
directed from the mouth of God himself, how to teach and instruct his people
whom he had chosen, the Children of Israel^ among other principalles of their
duty, this is one chief Deu. 11.
thing wherein he often instructed Deu. 31.
them, that they should teach their Children the laws of God, see here then
thy duty, what or whomsoever thou be, if thou be a father thou art commanded
to teach thy Children, and t(...) must teach the^ the laws of God, Deuteronomy. ^.
for this was not spoken to the Priests or to the elders or the rulers Deu. 6.
of the people only, but unto all the people in general, both high and low,
rich and poor, as well the meanest as the greatest* No man exempted from doing
this, but all must do it.
as well the unlearned as the learned, for none are here exempted, every man
must teach his Children the laws of God, his Commandments, his will, his
word, for so the Prophet David plainly shows, setting Psalm. 78.
down to what end thou must do this, to the intent that when they come up,
they might show their Children the same, that they might put their trust in
God, and not to forget the works of God, but to keep his Commandments.

This then is the duty which thou ar^ commanded to do, and th^^ must not (...)
the doing of it neither, thou must not tarry Parents ought not to defer the
teaching of their children in their youth
til they be men and women and so as thou think come then to the capacity
of understanding, no thou must teach it thy Children while they be children,
and thy wisdom must give them help to understand it, that so it may be
grounded into them in the time of their youth, for look with what the vessel
is first seasoned with of that it will always bear the taste.

This duty did old Abraham well know, although he lived almost a Thousand
years before the Law was given unto the people of Israel, for so God himself
testifies of him saying, That he knew that he would command his Sons to
keep the ways of the Lord, note the place I pray you, for it is worth the
noting, see how familiar God himself is with Abraham, he vouchsafes to talk
Genesis 18.
with him familiarly as one man How dearly God loves them which teach and
instruct their Children and Family his Commandments.
does with another, nay, as one friend does with another, for he opens his
very secrets unto him: what greater sign of love can be? shall I (says God)
hide from Abraham the thing which I do, seeing that Abraham shall be indeed a
great and a mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
him, and here follows the reason of all: For I know him says God, that he
will command his sons and his household after him, that they keep the ways
of the Lord, now What the duty of Parents is.
you see what the duty of a Father or Mother is, namely to teach their Children
the Commandments of God, but he has not done with thee yet, God goes
further with thee still, because thou shall have no excuse in not doing it, most
graciously he does vochsafe to teach us also how we shall perform When they
ought to teach them.
this Commandment, namely thus: Thou must teach them these things, when thou
sit in thine house, when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down,
and when thou risest up, thou must do this, and thou must not dare to neglect
or leave this undone neither.

For God threateneth his Deu. 28. Leui. 26. Ier. 48. and 49
own chosen people, not only to punish them with grievous punishments, but
even their land also if they disobey his Commandments, and we have many
places in Scripture to approve this unto us, but let me tell thee one thing by
the way, if thou be The man which knows not his duty, how can he teach it his
Children.
not well instructed in this duty thy self, thou can never teach it unto thy
Children, for how can a man teach another man, or his son or servant, any
art, mystery or trade, wherein he himself has no knowledge, therefore see
thou be able to teach them thy self, it will not serve thy turn to set them
to school and to appoint them Masters and Tutors to teach them, and yet these
be good men for it, and it is thy duty so to do, but it is not sufficient.

Thou must also teach them thy self, and be a principal teacher of them, for
thou must teach them at al times, and in all places, as thou see in Deu. 6.
when thou Deuteronomy. 6.
walk, and when thou sit, when thou risest in the morning, and in the
evening before thou go to bed, thou must not take thine own ease, nor refresh
thy self with sleep until thou have performed this thy duty unto God.

The Twelueth Chapter.
But it may be thou will go about to excuse thy self in this case as many
do in these days, and say would you have me perform these things, I am not
bookish, I cannot read, therefore how should I teach them these things being
an ignorant man? but deceive not thy self whomsoever thou be, father or
mother, for I tell thee ignorance shall be no excuse unto thee, the servant
that does not the will of his Master shall be beaten for it, yea, although he
knew it not, and why? because it is the duty of every servant to seek even
with diligence to know the will of his Master, and to do it.

Nay, thou can not plead ignorance though thou would, for none can do
it, for Moses tells Deu. 30.
thee, that this Commandment is not hidden from thee, it is not in heaven that
thou should say who shall go up to bring it us, and cause us to hear it
that we may do it, neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, who
shall go fetch it us and so cause us to do it, but it is very near unto
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart for to do it, and Saint Paul
tells us Romans 10.
plainly, this is the very same which we preach unto you.

If then it be so, that we may daily hear it to our great comfort, even at
our doors in every Parish Church, how then can we plead ignorance, if the
servant I told you of shall be beaten which does not the will of his Master
though he know it not, how much shall he be beaten with many stripes, which
does refuse to know his will, as too many in these days do? and thus you see
there can be no excuse thorough ignorance, so that every man must labor to
be so furnished Every man must labor to be furnished with knowledge, that he
may thereby instruct his Family.
with knowledge, that he may be able thereby to instruct his own Children
and family: and because it must be done continually, both in the morning and in
the evening, both when thou sit at home, and when thou walk abroad,
beware that thou do not as too many do, which when they have see their
Children to say the Lords Prayer, and to rehearse their belief and the Ten
Commandments, do thi^^e that then they have done enough for the whole day
though neither themselves, nor all the house besides do half so much.

O lamentable case! this must not be, but when thou have In what manner it
ought to be done.
taught them to pray, thou also must pray with them, calling thy whole Family
together, and so make your selves a holy congregation unto God, by humble
prostrating your selves unto him, that so as ye all have recieued of him your
preservation and quiet rest the night passed, even so all of you may join
together in giving him thanks for so great a blessing, and if thou would
that thy labors, and the labors of thy Children and Servants should prosper
the day following, then do you join together in Prayer unto Almighty God for
it, for so it must be, for where 2. or 3. be gathered together in his name he
has promised not Mat. 18.
only to be amongst them, but also to grant their requests, he will make thee
plentious in every work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, thy Children
shall Deuteronomy. 30.
prosper also, and in the fruit of thy land for thy wealth, and what would
thou more desire, and it must not be done now and then, when thou lystest, but
it must daily be done, for this is that morning and evening sacrifice, which
we must daily offer unto the ears of Almighty God even our humble hearts by the
caulnes of our lipes.

And seeing thou art commanded Parents ought to take their children to Church
with them, and examine them how they spend their time there.
to teach thy Children at all times, both sitting at home, and going abroad,
see that thou neglect not to take them to the Church daily with thee to hear
the word of God, and withal that they spend not their time there idly nor
vnprofitablely, but by a due examination of them when they come home, or as
thou walk abroad with them, know how they have profited, that so God may be
glorified in the work, your selves better instructed, and your duties
discharged.

And now that we have proved that there is a duty belonging unto Parents, and
that they see their charge for the performance thereof it will not be greatly
amiss if we see how this charge is by them performed, but the consideration
of these things makes me even with grief to Nothing more dear then time,
and yet see how these times abuse it.
lament, to see how negligently idely and lewdly most men do spend their time
in these days, that time then which nothing is more dear and precious,
nothing more slippery to hold, nor nothing more unrecoverable being past, and
for which they shall give account, this time I say which they spend in
idleness, Dicing, Carding, and Bowling, in drunkenes and whoring, whereby they
consume both themselves and the estate both of their wives and children, for
whereas God has given them six days for themselves to labor in, and has
reserved but one to be sanctified to his own use, all these be too little for
many of them to spend in these wicked exercises aforenamed, and therefore they
will lengthen out the time with the night two, but not an hour to serve God in
of all this time.

Oh wicked man! how dare thou thus abuse the great patience of the good God,
in thus consuming thy time, and robbing thy children of their patrimony, by
wasting those things whereof thou art but a steward, and for which thou must
be accountable unto him.

But here me thinks one does object against me and says, I am too bold in my
reproves, and am in an error, for though (says he) I do spend, yet I spend
but mine own, and not my childrens: But I tell thee, thou art in an error thy
self in doing thus, for what I have spoken, I can and will approve to be true
by the word of God it self in his due place, where I shall have more occasion
to speak of this matter then here What good instructions can those men give
unto their Children, which do daily run into all wickedness themselves.
I have: but what good instructions think you can these men give unto their
Children which do themselves daily run so dangerously even with greediness
unto their own destructions, for if sault have lost his savor wherewith shall
it be salted, Mat. 5.
and such as the tree is, such will be the fruit, if you be rude Mat. 7.
and vnciuell like the horse and Mule which have no understanding, what
knowledge can your children have then, and yet it cannot be denied but that the
world is too full of such.

The wise man forbids fathers to play with their children Eccle. 30.
least they bring them to heauidesse, but now adays parents will not only play
with their children, but run daily from play to play, thinking it to be a good
exercise for them to bring them to see stage plays and interludes, thus
corrupting their young years with vices, and making themselves actors in the
devils Comody: Solomon forbids parents to bring up their children
delicately, and yet you possess the^ Parets ought not to possess their
children with pride.
with so much pride in the time of their youth, that many times it is the
overthrow both of them and your selves, yea, and your selves would after
redress it and cannot: Oh that you that be parents of children would be more
circumspect herein, and wise in your own conversation, that you might be
lanthornes of light and not of darkness unto them, for your selves are the
cause of Parents the cause of the evils that are in children.
all these evils which we daily see in youth, your evil example it is which
daily corrupts your children, and you your selves will pay a dear price for
it, if you amend it not.

Is not this a miserable case, that Parents should thus neglect so great a duty
as this, which conserneth both the good of themselves and Children, little do
these men regard, that the souls of their Children are in their charge as well
as their bodies, and yet Moses does not record of Jacob Genesis 46.
that he brought so many persons Both Parents and governors of Families, are
charged with the souls as well as the bodies of those of whom they have the
government.
into Egypt, meaning their number, but he says he brought so many souls
thither, reckoning them by their better part, as of that which we should have
most care of, but what care have those Parents of their Childrens souls, which
are thus careless of their own, and yet the very heathen Philosophers can
tell us, that though what manner of children shall be borne unto a man, lies
not in his power, yet by right bringing them up that they may prove good, lies
in our power, therefore be you wise in looking to your own ways.

The 13. Chapter.
THe wise man would have Parents to be better instructed, to the end they may
better govern their Children, and to that end he plainly sets down by
what instructions and dissipline it must be done, for he tells you, that an
evil nurtered son is the dishonor Eccle. 22.
of his Father, and therefore would have you be careful in governing them in
the time of their youth, not giving them any liberty, nor wincking at their
follies, he says, That he that loves his son, causes him often to feel
the rod, that he may have joy of him in the end: he that chastises his son
shall have joy of him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance: Eccle.
30.
And he that teaches his son greeveth the enemy, and before his friends
he shall rejoice of him, though his father die, yet he is as if he weee not
dead, for he has left one behind him that is like him, in his life he saw
him, and had joy in him, and was not sorry in his death, neither was he
ashamed before his enemies, he left behind him an avenger against his enemies,
and one that should show favor unto his friends: he that flattereth his soon
binds up his wounds, and his heart is grieved at every cry: An untamed horse
will be stubborn, and a wanton child will be wilful, if thou bring up thy
son delicately, he shall make thee afraid, and if thou play with him, he
shall bring thee to heaviness, laugh not with him, least thou be sorry with
him, and least thou dash thy teeth in the end, give him no liberty Keep thy
child under in the time of his youth and so thou shall have joy of him in the
end.
in his youth, and wincke not at his folly, bow down his neck while he is
young, and beat him on the sides while he is a child, least he wax stubborn,
and so be disobedient unto thee and so bring sorrow unto thy heart: therefore
chastise thy child and be diligent therein, withould not correction from thy
child, for if thou Prou. 23.
smightest him with the rod, he shall not die thereof, thou smigbtest him with
the rod, but thou deliuerest his soul from hell: and again, if thou Eccle. 7.
have Daughters keep their body, and show not thy face cheerful toward
them, marry thy daughter, and so shall thou perform a weighty matter, Eccle.
42.
but give her to a man of understanding: How a man ought to bestow his
daughter.
If thy daughter be a wanton keep her straightly, least she cause thine
enemies to laugh thee to scorn, and the whole City to give the an evil
report, and so thou be feign to hear thy shame of every Deuteronomy. 23.
man, thou shall not hold thy daughter to whoredom that the land fall not to
whoredom and waxefull of wickedness: If thy daughter be not shamefast, hold
her straightly, least she abuse her self by overmuch liberty, Deuteronomy. 23.
beware of the dishonesty of her eyes, there shall be no whore among the
daughters of Israel, nor whorekeepers among the sons of Israel: A
misnurtered soon is the dishonor of the Father, a foolish daughter shall be
little regarded, and she that comes to dishonesty brings her father to
heaviness, a daughter that is past shame, dishonoreth both her Father and her
Mother.

Now you see what wise councounsell and golden precepts are here given to
Parents for the governing of Children, so that more cannot well be said or at
least need not, but only this, aduising you not to be negligent in the
execution of these things, as well for the discharge of your own duties, as
for the good of your Children, but I have heard some Parents so unwise, which
when their Children have done amiss, and they have been advised to give them
correction for it, they have answered I cannot do it, for I cannot abide to
fight with my children, see what a silly answer was here made! and yet many
such He that loves his chi^ makes him often to feel the rod, and so
preserves him from greater dangers. Pro. 23.
fools there be, call thou this fighting, thou errest, I might have said
thou lie, for here are no enemies opposed one against another to endanger the
life of either, but tender hearted love from a good father or mother which
seeks by gentle correction of a rod to deliver the soul of the child from
hell, will thou then not do so, then thou art guilty of thy child's going to
hell, and thou shall follow it thither too, if thou amend not, think thou it
is enough for thee to chide thy Child for his fault, That is not enough for
Parents to chide their children, but they must use correction also.
when he does amiss, I say nay, God will have thee to use correction too,
look upon the heavy judgment he showed upon old Elye and his Children,
becaue he did not correct them for their faults, and that alone may serve to
terrify and teach you too, not to neglect so great a charge.

We find that when the Lord did reveal himself unto Samuel, the first thing
which he made known unto him was, the evil he would bring upon his master
Elye, the words of God himself are these, behald I will do a thing in
Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two ears shall tingle: 1. Sam. 2.
In that day I will raise up against Elye, all things which I have spoken
concerning his house, when I begin, I will also make an end, and I have told
him I will judge his house for ever, for the inniquity which he knows,
because his son ran into a slander, and he stayed them not.

And in the next chapter following, An example or Parents not to defer the
correction of their children.
we see the execution of Gods justice in the performance of his word, for the
Ark of God was taken from them by their enemies the Philistines, and the sons
so Elye, Hophne, and Phynias, were both slain the same day, and old Elye being
Eighty years of age, when he heard 1. Sam. 3.
these tidings, fell backward Gods justice showed upon old Elye, for not
correcting his sons.
from the seat he sat upon, and so brake his neck, and his daughter in law,
the wife of his son Phineas, being with child, and near the time of her
deliverance, she hearing these heavy news fell suddenly in travel of her
childbirth and so dyed.

The 14. Chapter.
YOu see what heavy judgments God powered upon this man and his Children,
because he did not correct them, and yet they being in the state of manhood,
and he a very old man, you would have thought he had done enough when he
rebuked them with sharp words, telling them, and no doubt but that it was with
grief too, that all the people* reported evil of them, nay, wisely he tells
them more that if one man do sin against another, the judge may judge it,
but none may plead for him that sins against the Lord, and yet because he
did not more sharply and severely punish them, you see the Lord thus sharply
does punish both him and his.

Now what will you say to this example? I know what you would plade, you would
feign excuse your selves still, and say, that though when they be children you
then may govern the^, yet being past that state, they are Children when they
be grown to man's estate are not then past governing of their Parents.
grown past your government, therefore then you cannot so well govern them,
but you see here by these examples of Elyes sons, they are not then free from
your government, nor you freed from governing them, yet it may be you will say,
they are grown stubborn and disobedient; and will not be governed by you.

I will tell you then how you yet shall govern them, look in the 21. of Deuteronomy.
and there you How Parents ought to govern stubborn children in the state of
manhood.
shall know what to do unto such a stubborn and disobedient child whom you
your selves cannot rule, and the words are these:

If any man have a son that is stubborn and disobedient, which will not
harken unto the voyse of his Father, Deu. 21.
and the voice of his Mother, and they have chastened him, and he would not
obey them, then shall his Father and his mother take him and bring him to the
elders of his City, and unto the gate of the place where he dwells, and
shall say unto the Elders of his city this our son is stubborn and
disobedient, and he will not obey our admonition, he is a royoter and a
drunkard, then all the men in the city shall stone him with stones to death.

Now you see what the law of God does teach you concerning the government of
such disobedient Children whom you cannot govern, and this if old Elye had
done, he then had escaped that heavy iudge^ent which fell upon him and his:
and thus should parents do unto such leaud children, that so they may escape
the in did nation of God against themselves, for he will have such wicked
branches How Parents may escape the judgments of G^ by gover(...) their
stubberne children, it their state of manhood.
cut off, least they corrupt the whole body, therefore if they will not be
governed by thee, yet let not foolish pity move thee to disobey the
Commandment of almighty God by keeping them from that punishment which they
deserve, but rather as thou art commanded, so discharge thy self by bringing
thm^ to the Maiestrate, that hae according to the law may punish them, and so
thou be guiltless of their sin.

And as I have here in some measure set down the authority of a father, and
how that by dissipline Parents ought to geuerne their children with wisdom
as well as by instuction he ought to govern, so withal I must advise Parents
to take with them the counsel of S. Paull, for he would have Parents to
govern their Children with wisdom, not always using their authority, but
mildly and gently according to their years and capasities, his words are these.

Fathers, provoke not you children Ep^e. 6.
to anger, but bring them up in instructions and information of the Lord: and
again, Fathers provoke Colle. 3.
not your Children unto anger, least they be discouraged.

Yet means he not but that Parents may both chide and also correct their
children when occasion shall serve, but not rigorously and in their anger, not
caring how or with what they do Parents must not be too sharp in their
correction.
strike them, or being as many are, always rating or chiding of them, this is
it which withdraws them from that natural love and obedience which they owe,
and otherwise would show unto their Parents: therefore let Fathers and Mothers
be very careful in this point, how and in what sort they do correct their
Children.

And yet there be many which cannot be drawn to correct their Children except
it be in the very instant when they have done some offense, and then their
minds being thereby stirred up unto anger, presently they run upon them as we
use to say, without fear or wit, not caring (as I said before) how or with
what they do correct them, so that some time in this nature or rather
madness, the child receives that from the hands of his cruel Parents, that
of long time after, he is not freed of, nay of some not to their dying day.

Therefore in any case let not Parents should use their dissipline without anger
this counsel of Saint Paull be forgotten, but wisely, mildely, and with out
anger use your correction, for when children be come to some discretion, it
will be wisdom to pass by many faults without seeming to take notice of
them, and in any case Dangerous to use to threaton children to correct them.
not to use much threatenings of them, for many times the threatening of a
puishment to come, although perhaps not meaning to be performed, yet so fears
and terefieth the hearts of younglings, that it often causes the^ or to do
that which they ought not, otherwise would not do.

The second part of the duty of Parents.
The 15. Chapter.
THis second part of the duy of Parents, will seem harsh and very displeasing
unto many men of our time, which do suppose, that when they have brought up
their Children to some years, and as they think to be able to make some
shift in the world, and especially if they have brought them up unto some Art,
Trade, or means for them to get their living by in time to come, that then
their charge and care for them is past, and that they have fully discharged
themselves of their duty concerning them, and may then dispose of that goods,
or estate, which they have at their pleasure, either from their Children, or to
who^ or to which of them they please, as their affection serves, and this is
an error in many men, and yet this may not be, for neither are they so
discharged, nor may lawfully so dispossess their Children or dispose of their
goods.

nor any friend that gave me a penny to begin the world withal, and I have
had sundry wives, and have had Children by each of them, and I confess I have
had good dowries with some of them, and by the good endeavors of them and my
self, God has blessed me with that that I have, and shall I not now be
master of mine own? may I not give mine own goods to whom I please? or give
them to which of my children I do most affect, either Son or Daughter? or it
may be my Son will not be ruled by me, or is an unthrift, shall he then wast
and consume with his unthriftiness that which I have labored for? no, I know
how to prevent him and that by law too, or if I give it wholly to my dauter, who
shall bar me from doing it, or appoint me how I shall dispose mine own? I
have with great care and charge brought them up to these years, and now they
be able to get their own living, let them shift in the name of God, as I have
done.

Job. 37.
world is foolishness with God, for in his word, by which we are to be ruled,
he has commanded us otherways.

For although you have brought up your Children to the years of discression,
so that then you think they are able to make shift for themselves as you say,
yet may you not then so leave them to themselves, for there is yet more to be
done that must not be left undone, for thou must provide for thy son a Wife,
and for thy Daughter an Husband, and so as the wise man says: Thou shall
perform a weighty matter: Eccle. 7.
thou must not leave the younglings Parents ought to provide for the marriages
of their children, both sons and daughters.
to themselves for to make their own choice, but thou must do it, and that in
his due time: we find that Abraham was very careful to perform this duty,
althought he was so far Genesis 24.
in years that he could not travile about the business himself, for he
appointed his servant the steward of his house what to do and where to provide
a Wife for his Son Isaacke: and thus did Isaacke unto Jacob his Son, Genesis
28.
appoynting him where to go and there only to make his choice: thus did Hagar
although but a woman, and dwelling in the wilderness, yet she provided a Genesis
25.
Wife for her son Ishmaell.

Yea the very heathen did observe this rule, for Sechem the father Genesis 34.
of Hamor did sue unto Jacob for his daughter Dina, to be a wife unto his
son: yea, Ibz^n Judge of Israel though he had Iug. 12.
Thirty sons and as many daughters, yet he did provide for them all, both Wives
for his sons, and Husbands for his daughters, and many such proofs we have
in the Scrptures, by all which it appeareht that Parents have always even from
the beginning, been vere careful to observe this as a principal point of
their duty to their Children.

And this must be done in due time, thou must not do as too many do in these
days, which will not suffer their children to marry but when they will, and to
whom Parents not to force or limite their childrens marriage.
they plase, nay fathers will do more then fathers ouhgt to do, they will
disinherite their Sons, and bereave their Children of their patrimonyes, if
they will not marry to their liking, where wealth may serve to satisfy their
coveteous minds, and so in stead of being kind and loving Fathers unto their
Children, they become tyrants unto them, not so much regarding the younglings
likings, whereby they may live the rest of their days in love together, and so
bring up their children together in the fear of God as their own affections.

Whereupon by such enforced marriages if often comes to pass, that when the
young couples begin as it were to taste each of other, they so dislike one of
the other, that they forsake one another, the Wife the company The danger that
ensues by constrained marriages
of her Husband, or the Husband of the Wife, and fall to that abominable act
of adultery, and thus such Parents do become both culpable and authors of
their sin.

Yet I do not speak against this, ^as giving liberty unto youths that they
may marry at their own pleasure or liking without the consent of Parents, or
abridging the authority of Parents in this case, God forbid I should so do or
think, but I speak this against marriages constrained and limited, for
marriage was ordained as a remedy 1. Cor. 7.
against sin, but they which prolong the time of their childrens marriage,
either for pleasing their own affections in their choice, or for the desire of
wealth through coveteousnesse, or for that they will not part with any of their
substance in dowry with them, such I say are many times the occasion of their
childrens sin, for Saint Paul says it is better to marry, then to burn in
desire.

Had Judah given his daughter in law unto his son Shelah in Genesis 38.
time according to his promise, he had not committed that horrible fact of
Incest with her himself: Again, when Samson had made his choice of a wife, of
that heathen generation, the uncircumcised Philistines which were not only
enemies to the people of Israel, but also unto God himself, when he desired
this woman of his Father, and would needs marry her, he did not disinherit
him, or cast him out of his favor for it, but yet wisely rebukes him saying,
is there never a wife among the daughters of thy breatheren and amongst all my
people, that thou must go to take a Wife of the uncircumcised Philistians? yet
when he saw that his affection was settled on What Parents ought to do in case
of marriage to their children.
her, he was content both to go with him, and to procure the marriage for him,
and it is said there, that this marriage did come of the Lord, though his
Father knew it not, I could wish therefore that Parents would follow the
counsel of Manoah in this ^^g. ^4.
place, by their wisdoms to persuade when occasion shall serve, but nor
otherwise.

The 16. Chapter.
ANd now concerning how Parents ought to bestow their goods, we read that
Abraham was Genesis 15.
minded to make Eliazer the steward of his house, heir of all that he had, but
it was before he had any Children, and yet he was forbidden by God himself so
to do, for God having determined to give him issue of his A plain proof that
a man may not give his goods from his children.
own body, would not suffer him so to do, but tells him directly that one
that should proceed out of his own bowels, he should be his heir.

And the Prophet David he tells us likewise, that it is the special gift of
God and his great Psalm. 127.
blessing unto man, when he has heirs of his own body to possess those
lands or goods which he has gathered together, and shall leave behind him:
and this alone might serve to approve that a man may not dispose of his goods
from his children, but the Scriptures are plentiful of these examples.

Abraham gave his goods unto Genesis 25.
his Son Isacke as you see he was appointed of God, Aaron Exodus 28.
was commanded of God to santifie his sons unto the order of priesthood, unto
which the Lord had chosen him, and Elye did 1. Sam. 2.
place his sons in the same order, nay, he did not take it from the^ although
he knew that they were wicked: and David did not 1. King. 1.
at his death devide his Kingdom unto his sons, but left it wholly unto his
son Solomon, 1. King. 11.
neither did he divide it, but left it unto his son Rehoboam, and he also
left it unto his son Ab^am, 1. King. 14.
and he unto his son Asa, and 2. Cro. 1^.
he left it unto his son Iehosaphat, and Iehosaphat left it wholly unto 2. Cron.
13.
his son Iehora^, and yet we find he had six Sons besides Iehoram, 2. Cron.
16.
all which he left not unprovided for, but gave unto each of them great
portions and riches, as well 2. Cron. 2^.
of gold and silver, as strong cities for their habitation of dwelling, but
the kingdom he gave wholly unto Iehoram his son, because That the eldest son
has a prerogative above the rest of his brethren.
he was the first borne, the eldest of them all.

So that we see now that it came to him by his birth, and as being the eldest
son of his father, and not through his fathers affection toward him, and yet
we cannot say that he erred in doing this, for it is said of him, that he did
that which was right and good in the sight of God, and therefore it may not be
doubted but that God did direct him in this the disposing of his Kingdom and
goods, as well as in other things.

Thus also you see it is a clear case that the eldest son has a prerogative
above the rest of his brethren, and therefore must needs be respected above
them, and this care we find to be in Joseph, for his son Manassah when G^n.
4^.
he would have had his father to have laid his right hand upon his head rather
then the younger, and from these and such like places in the book of God as a
ground vnfailable, have all nations almost in their laws, held this as a
principal, that the eldest son should hold and enjoy, all such lands as have
come unto them either by descent from their Ancestors, or have been purchased
by their Parents.

But what shall we say of those men, that will not only dispossess their sons
from those lands which they themselves have purchased, and that upon very small
occasions* but also to maintain A great fault in Parents.
their own ryotous and vicious kind of living, will dispossess them of all
such lands or goods which are their childrens own proper right even from their
ancestors? what an heavy account have these men to make unto God for these
things? but I hope I have now satifsied the worldling of whom before we spoke,
that he may not give his goods from his Children, or unto which or whom he
please, for God will have the generations proceeding to receive the benefits
and labors of the former, as the children the fruits of the Parents labors:
but if he will needs be partial to his children, I will tell him yet how he
may do it, Ismaell may not be heir with Isack, they be not fit
yoake-fellowes, yet Abraham may give Ishmaell a portion, but it must be but
bread Genesis 21.
and a bottle of water, and he must send him away with it too, when he has
it, for they may not dwell or enjoy the heritage together, because he is not
the son of his Wife but of his servant.

But Isack because he is borne in lawful wedlock, he must be his Fathers
heir, and so he Bastards may not be joined in equality With children borne in
lawful wedlock.
may dispose of his Bastards, he may give them portions, but you see how, they
must be but small ones, he may not give his Childrens portions unto the^, I
mean the substance which his children should possess of right, there be too
many guilty of this fact in our days the more the pity.

But this worldly wise man having no lands, but such wealth or goods as by his
labors he has gathered, ^hinketh he may be bold with that, to dispose of it
where he please, and how, for so he says: but I tell thee nay, for though it
be but goods, yet thou must not do it, for Abraham had no land at the time of
his death, more then a little piece Genesis 25.
of one field, which he bought for a burial place for his dead, but dwelt in
Tents, and was a stranger himself all his days in that land which God did
promise to give unto his seed, and after performed it, but being exceeding
rich both in goods and cattle, yet you see he might not give these goods from
his son, for whether it be goods or lands, yet no man may attribute more
unto himself then this, that God has given them unto him for his necessary
use in this life, but after for the good of his ofsprings to come, wherein the
great wisdom and mercy of The wisdom and mercy of God in providing for us
before we be.
our God appears in this his work, which should stir us up unto great
thankfulness for so great blessings by his divine wisdom and power provided,
laying up in store for us before we come into the world by the hand of our
Parents.

The 17. Chapter.
ANd as I have in this former Chapter proved that a man may not dispose of his
goods from his Children, and amongst them that the first borne son has a
prerogative above the rest? so now I must speak concerning the Daughter, what
is to be don for her, for this worldling before named, says he would give his
goods if he pleased from his son to his Daughter, but he may not do that
neither, for in all the book of God we have no such warrant or example ^ndeed
we do not find amongst all the men afornamed, any that makes mention of his
Daughter, and yet we know they had daughters as well as sons, who^ no doubt
but they did provide for, and did not leave without portio^s and dowries for
though Jacob does not make mention of his daughter Din^ Genesis 48.
amongst his Sons when he^ gave them their inheritance, yet may we not
think but that as a Father he provided for her other ways, but he did not
join her in equaltie with them* for still in all times and places, the son
has had his prerogative as I have proved; above the Daughter.

And with great wisdom it is done too, for the man did not The reason why man
has a prerogative above the woman.
first sin in the transgression of the Commandment of God, but the woman did
first sin, and therefore was she justly punished Genesis 3.
with servitude not to be in equality of rule equal with the man, but to be
in subjection unto him, and he to rule over her: indeed if she had kept her
in the bounds of her obedience unto her maker, and not been the original of
sin, it may be supposed, she had been equal in The perogatiue that man
has, ought not to be dispensed with.
authority with him, cheke mate, and no diversity of superiority had been
betwixt them, but now the case is altered, there is no equality in this nature,
but the man has wholly the prerogative, and therefore great were the offense of
that man, which should take the benefit away from the man, and give the same
unto the woman, as from his son to his daughter, but the proof following is
greater: indeed we find that Caleb the son of Iephune gave unto his
daughter Ioshu. 15.
Achsab the whole country of Hebron, with both the sprngs above and the springs
beneath, but she was the only daughter of her father, and he then had no sons
living, and God had promised to give that land to him and to his seed.

And yet Moses was in doubt himself whether that a woman might inherit land
or no, for we find that the daughters of Zel^phehad came unto Moses and
demanded Number. 27.
a portion of land for their inheritance among the families of their tribe,
because all the males of the family of their father was deceased, but it seemed
unto him so difficult a matter to answer, that he was fai^e to bring the cause
before the Lord, and the Lord answered, that they demanded but right, for said
he, if a man do die and leave no Here the matter is by God himself fully
decided.
sons, then the inheritance should turn to the Daughters, against this who can
or dare speak, and now I hope I have proved that no man may give the portion
due unto his son, from him, to his daughter.

But I have another objection yet of this politition to answer unto, I do
remember he said he had married sundry wives, and he had had children by each
of the^, and it may be, it is with him as it is with a great many more, the
first wife is forgotten and her children and her children are as little
regarded, and therefore to please his last wife, he will suspense with the
others children: there be too many use such tricks in these days, but if he
will be a scholar in Gods school, he must learn another lesson.

For we shall find, that if a man have had children by sundry wives, and that
he loves the one more then he did the oother, if his first borne son he
Deu. 21.
the son of her that is not lo^^^, yet when the time comes the he gives his
goods to his children, A principal point for fathers to regard, and against
partiality.
he may not make the son of her whom he loves his first borne, before the
son of the hated, which is inddeed the first borne, but he shall acknowledg^
the son of the hated for the first borne, and give unto him a double portion of
all that he has, for he is the first of his strength, and to him belongs the
right of the first borne, and thus we see plainly that there may be no
partiality used in these causes.

But now to conclude this last part, and to make the matter yet more plainer
then we have done, and to prove that the father may not give his goods from
his children, nay, that he has no right so to do, but that of right they
belong unto his Children, we have yet a very plain example for this matter in
the story of the prodigal son, who coming to his father for a portion of his
goods, he does not say unto him, I pray you father that you will be pleased to
bestow upon A plain proof of the right which the child has in the estate of
the father.
me some small portion, either of your goods or money, which you will, and what
you please or may well spare, he does not so, nor does he desire to lend him
such or so much money neither, no he is more bold with him the^ so, for he
comes bluntly and plainly unto him, neither to beg nor to borrow of him,
but to ask his own, saying: father, give me the portion of goods that
falls unto me, or as some translations have it, the portion that is due unto
me, or my portion.

Surely, if he had had no right nor interest in the goods of his father, he
durst not have been so bold and saucy as thus to demand or challenge a
portion thereof as he does, neither does he stand to his fathers courtesy,
what he will give him, for as he does demand but his own, so he Luke. 15.
demaundes no more, nor he asks no less: well, then it appears it was his
right.

But now for the confirmation yet further of this matter, let us see how the
Father takes the business, for if his son have A confirmation yet further
of this matter.
exceeded the bounds of his duty, no doubt but as a father he will soon
reprove and correct him for it, but here is no such matter, and therefore it
does appear plainly that he did no more the he might do, for the kind and
loving father presently without delay, yielding unto his forms request,
divided his goods betwixt his two sons, and so he gives unto him his portion:
how many fathers follow this parterne in these days, and will hear their
son in such a case? nay, some will spare nothing at all while they live,
others will spare very little, and some perhaps do somewhat, but upon
conditions hard enough.

This son when he had received his full portion, and by his unthriftiness and
ryoting had sperit and wasted this his portion, and poverty so hardly
oppressing him, that he thereby was constrained to return unto his father
again, who with joy yet does again receive him: his elder brother angry
herewith, tells his father that for all his long service done unto him, yet he
never gave him so much as a Kidd to make merry with his friends, and says he,
do thou thus for such an unthrift? but his father answered, son, be content
thou art always with me, and all that I have is thine, what could he more
say then this? and does not this plainly teach us, that a father may not give
his goods from his children, for if it were all his sons, where was any to
give unto others, or if he had been partial in the distribution thereof by
giving that to one which belonged to the other, then he had done wrong also.

But it may be he will yet object and say, this was but a parable which our
Savior Christ spoke concerning the sinner that had run astray, who yet by true
repentance humbling himself unto his heavenly father, he receives him to his
grace and favor again, and not a point of doctrine to be taken in this case:
Objections answered, and the whole matter confirmed with truth.
but thou errest in that point also, for although it be parable as indeed our
blessed Savior spoke many things in parables, yet he being the very truth and
wisdom it self, could not commit any error in this or any other parable,
but still by one truth expressed another, and therefore to say otherwise, were
erroneous and blasphemy.

But yet I must answer one objection more which this worldling make, which is
this: I^ may be says he, that my son is disobedi^^ unto me, or is an v^
thrift, and shall he leawdly and unthriftily wast my goods, or that which I
h(...) labored for^. To which I answer(...), mista^^e me nor, for though I
have showed that a father ought ^^do thus for his son, yet I do not say he
ought to do this for a disobedient, wicked, or unthrifty son, for such a one
I have showed ought to be punished by the Magistrate and that severely,
neither did the father of this prodigal give him a new portion when he had
ryoted away that which That this privilege belongs not unto lewd and wicked
children.
he gave him, although upon his repentance he received him into his favor
again, neither do we find that any of these aforenamed, gave any double
portion Genesis 27.
to any of their sons, Isaok had but one blessing to give, though he had two
sons, nay, these men did give these portions unto their sons at the time of
their deaths, but not before: but if a father for the advancement of his son
be pleased out of his love to spare him some part of his goods while he does
live, yet if he wastfully and royotously consume it, I see not that his father
Parents supplying the wnats of vicious children becomes authors of their
unthriftiness.
should feed him with a new supply, for so he may be author of his sons
unthriftiness. And thus briefly you see how a man may or should dispose of
his goods by the rule of the word of God, and this may suffice to satisfy our
pollitition, for this matter.

The duty of Children
The 18. Chapter.
ANd now concerning the duty of Children whereof I am purposed to write,
indeed there was never more need to write of these things then now, and
never more teaching of them then in these days, but never was instructions
either by word or writing less regarded of them, then now they be.

And no marvel, for if God himself have spoken and none would hear him, if
he have stretched out his hands, and none Esai. 1.
would regard, so that he has been forced to cry out unto the The great
disobedience both of men and children in former ages.
heavens and the earth, to bear witness of the disobedience of his Children,
if it be thus with men of understanding, what will it be with Children? if it
were thus with men thousands of years ago, what will it be with Children in
these times? if the Apostles of Christ were mocked Act. 2.
and said to be full of new wine, when they preached the word of God unto the
people, and Luke. 3.
Christ himself despised for teaching them, and said to have a devil in him,
surely if grace and fear of God were then fled from men, what hope shall we
have to find it now in Children, who have been disobedient even from the
beginning, scoffers and mockers as Ismaell of Isack, Ham of his own father,
and of the saints and Prophets of God as of Elisha?

But be wise ye children and take heed, for never such did escape the heavy
judgments of God, nor never shall in time to come, as appears by these,
Ismaell cast out of his fathers Genesis 21.
house and favor, and yet his first borne son, Ham also not only Genesis 9.
loosing the blessing of his father, but both he and his posterity became
accursed? the Children which wicked Elish 42. of 2. King. 2.
the^ devoured by two she Bears, well, I will yet with patience rest in hope,
if Jonas be commanded Jonah. 1.
to preach against Nineue, he may not leave to do it, and fly to Tharsus: my
master has given me a talent to use, shall I lay it up in a napkin for him,
noe I dare not do so, but I say still for Sions sake I will not be silent, but
with Solomon, exhort you that be children Prou. 4.
to hear the instruction of a father, and to give ear to learn
understanding, despise not instructions by Good counsel ought not to be
refused by whomsoever given.
whomsoever it be taught, whether from the mouth of a learned divine, or of a
lay man, for gold of it self is pure in what base thing soever it be put, and
the diamond is still precious, though God the author of all good things
proceeding from man.
it lie in the dunghill, neither is there any good thing that can proceed from
the heart of man, but by the powerful working of the spirit of God: therefore
let me entreat you, (who hearts God shall move with desire) to seek the
knowledge of your duty, to read these few chapters following, wherein I have
briefly set down what duty you owe, and must perform unto your Parents, if
you mean to please God.

And although I write these things unto children, yet for that the younger
sort, for want of years are not able to understand them, I will leave these
ABC trewants, whose delight is rather in their play the^ learning, and will
address my words to those of more riper years, whose time should show their
knowledge, having long since learned past the graces, and now have their rules
by roate without book: what said I, that they are past grace by learning too
many rules without book, yea indeed it is true, and therefore I may the bolder
speak it though with grief, for we see many in these days which should have
knowledge by their learning, but do The great abuse which scholars make of
their learning.
show by the leawdnesse of their lives, that grace has not yet wrought any
good knowledge in them, but that they have learned too many rules without book
as I said, for in Gods book or any other good book I am sure they never
learned such things.

There be many such scholars Youth coming to learn lattine, and yet forget
their Primer lessons.
that have learned many lattine books over, but have quite forgotten their
English Primer lessons, to believe in God, and to keep his Commandments, and
therefore to the end they may become good scholars in Gods school, it shall
not be amiss to put them to conne over their old lessons again of their
obedience unto their Parents, Honor thy Exo. 20.
Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee: and it is not amiss for others neither, it may do well
for both, let none despise it, the wiser sort I am sure will not.

It has pleased the Almighty and powrefull God which works all in all
things for a secret Judgment and purpose, and for his own godly will and
pleasure, to provide and appoint an hour in the which thy Father and Mother
should come together, to the end that thou thorough them might be made, he
was present with thee in the womb of thy mother, and fashioned thee, and
breathed life into thee, and for the great love he bear unto thee, provided
milk in thy mothers breasts against thou wast borne, moo^ed also thy Father
and Mother and all other to love thee, to pity thee, and to nourish thee, and
as he has made thee through them, so has he cast thee under the power and
authority of them, to obey and serve them in his stead, and to that end has
given thee a special Commandment even from his own mouth, that thou shall
Honous thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus 20. Leui. 19.
which is not only understood in the outward ceremonial actions, as putting
off the hatt, or bowing the knee, but thou must The duties which good children
ought to perform unto their Parents.
also love them with all thy heart, fear and dread them, and wait on their
Commandments, and seek their worship, will and profit in all things, and as it
were to give even thy life for the contenting of them, counting them worthy of
all honor which thou may procure unto them, remembering that thou art their
good and possession, and that thou owe unto them even thy own self, and all
that thou art able to do, yea, and more then thou art able to do.

Understand also that whatsoever thou do unto them, be it A good note for
children to regard.
good or evil, thou do it even unto God, and when thou do displease them,
thou displeasest God, and when they are angry with thee in a^y good cause, God
is angry with thee: neither is it possible for thee to come into the favor of
God again, no though all the Angels of heaven should pray for thee, until
thou have submitted thy self unto thy Father and Mother again, and therefore
thou must be very wary and circumspect to perform this thy obedience unto thy
father, with the true zeal of thy heart, thou must not only be obedient for
fear of their displeasure, correction, or punishment, neither must thou obey
them for hope of reward or some benefit which thou do expect from them, this
hypocritical obedience is not that which How far the duty of children
extends.
God commands thee to perform, and to which he has gieuen a blessing: no,
I tell thee God will judge and punish thee, if thou do not perform this
obedience unto them, even with the sincerity of their heart, and in
uprightness of conscience, for he beholds the heart, and according to the
uprightness of it, God does judge.

For he is that powerful God that created the heaven and the earth of nothing,
and that of Genesis 1.
the dust of the earth has made thee, only to serve and obey him, and he it
is that commands thee to this obedience, that thou honor thy father and thy
A principal note to be observed in God thus placing this Comman dement.
mother, and note how he has placed this Commandment* for it is worthy thy
observation.

God having given unto man but Ten Commandments, and but four of them
concerning the duty of man unto him, the other Six concerning the duty of man
unto man, and yet as the most principal of them all, he has put this formest
of the Six, Thou shall honor thy Father and thy Mother, and well knew he
that placed that formest in the rank, that that was the right place for it,
and that he that would not obey, reverence, and honor his own Parents, would
likewise neglect and forget his duty unto other men, and therefore as an
introduction and instruction to that which follows, he does begin with this,
Honor thy father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee, and see the great mercy of our God which to the
performers of this his Commandment, unto which we are by duty double bound to
perform, he is pleased to give a blessing.

And as he commands it Luke. 2.
there, so likewise in many other places he does the like, the Prophets and
Apostles do likewise teach the same, and therefore if you will be children of
God your heavenly Father, and live under the obedience of his command, without
which you cannot but perish everlastingly, you must perform this his will and
command in this, that you honor and ob^y your Parents, yea, ye shall Leu. 19.
every man fear his Father and Mother says God, and consider in what manner
you ought to perform this, you shall stand in awful dread of your Parents,
not of the rod or of their correction only as I said, no, no, such servile
fear, but considering their dear and natural love toward thee, how
tenderly, carefully, and lovingly they have nourished thee, even from thy
birth, and still do seek thy good by all means possible. In respect of this
their great love unto thee which thou Worthy notes for Children to regard.
did never deserve, nor never can satisfy, thou ought likewise in thy
love to them again, to be even so jealous of thy self, that thou should
fear, least in any thing thou do, thou should offend such loving
Parents, this is that fear which thou ought to perform unto them, and
which God requires of thee.

The 19. Chapter.
ANd seeing we are now entered into this duty of Children, which God by his
divine wisdom has compiled in these few words Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, and yet in them has included the whole sum of all duties which ought
to be performed unto them, which though I have begun to touch in the former
Chapter, yet for that I am to speak unto Children, it shall not be amiss if I
do somewhat enlarge this matter, for as I said before, it is not to be
understood to be only in the putting off the cap, or ^owing the knee, and yet
these things must be done because by these outward things thou do seem to
give honor unto them.

Thou must not (as too many The reverence which children ought to perform^ unto
their Parents, and how to honor them.
proud youths do in these days) stand in the presence of thy father and
mother with thy he^d covered, yea, and that amongst strangers, and talk unto
them as boldly and saucily, as it were unto their fellows or equales: is this
the honoring thy Father and thy Mother? nay, this is to dishonor them, for in
their presence thou ought not to stand but with great reverence, and if they
be in any company, thy regard should be more in performing of this duty, in
giving unto them the more honor, and because thou can not better perform
thy honor unto them then by obeying them, nor greater dishonor them, then by
being disobedient unto them, though I have touched it before, where I said thou
owe unto them even all thy whole endeauours, whatsoever thou can do, and
therefore thou must be ready and willing at all times and in all places to
perform their lawful commandments, at their beck and word to run, go, and
to show all good obedience unto them that may be.

Thou must not be like that Mat. 2^.
disobedient son, whom his father ^ad to go work in his vineyard, and he
answered he would, but did not: neither must thou answer as the other did, who
said he would not, yet afterward went.

For thou must neither delude Children may not delude their Parents by lying
words.
thy father with lying words to say thou will do his command, and have a
wicked intent in thy heart not to perform it, nor thou must not dare
rebelliously to gainsay his word, but if thy father or mother do command
thee to do any thing, thou must gladly, heartily, willingly, forthwith even
instantly with all diligence perform their just request: and thus shall thou
perform thy duty unto God, by this thy obedience unto the^, for else how can
thou say thou performest Children perform not their duty to God, which
perform not their obedience unto their Parents.
thy duty unto God, when thou performest not thy duty unto thy Parents, whom
he commands thee to obey and honor?

Thou must remember also, that thou art their good, and therefore of thee, and
by thee their good or profit should arise, I mean so long as thou a^t under
their authority or gou^rment, thy whole endeavors both of body and mind, must be
altogether bent unto the good and profit of thy Parents. Chileren ought to
dea^e justly in the use of their Parents goods, seeking wholly their profit.
I say it must be wholly, thou must not keep any part of it back, either to
thine own use, or to use unthriftily to the hurt of thy Parents, for thou
owe unto the^ more then thou can do, and therefore a great and heavy
judgment does hang over the heads of those wicked children which do p^^loyne
and steal away the goods of their Parents though never so privately* either to
give unto those who^ they do affect, or otherwise to consume or wast after
their own wills.

And even so it is with those The hurt which many leaud children do unto,
their Parents in not dealing justly with them.
who^ their parents do appoint unto any lawful calling labor or business, if
they neglige^tly, leawdle, or idely do spend that time, which they ought to
employ only in those affairs: do they not rob their Parents of that profit
which should arise unto their parents by their industry in that time, and so by
their lewdness do great hurt both unto their Parents and themselves, yea
surely, and how great an offense this is wherein they thus disobey and
dishonor their Parents, and consequently God himself judge you.

And as it is thus by these in wasting and consuming the goods Scholars
abusing their time in learning, wrong their Prents in doing it.
of their Parents, even so it is with them which wast and consume that most
precious time which they ought to spend in schools, to the attaining of their
learning, by play and idleness, thereby wasting the profits of their Parents
labors, nay, I would it were not thus with those, whose learning should teach
them to make better use of their time then they do, both dishonoring God and
their Parents.

The 20. Chapter.
But I will not stand upon amplification of words, they are plain enough
themselves, and the whole Book of God is full of instructions to this end, and
the soul that desires knowledge will seek it there, and amongst others very
much has Solomon labored to teach this duty of obedience unto Children, as
appears in many places of his Books, as in the first of Pro. My Son hear
thy Fathers Pro. 1.
instructions, and forsake not thy Mothers teaching^ and again, hear ye
children the instruction if Pro. 4.
a Father, and give ear to learn understanding, for I do give you a good
doctrine, therefore forsake not my law, for I was my fathers son, tender and
dear in the sight of my mother, when he taught me and said unto me, let thy
heart hold fast my words and keep my Commandment and thou shall live: And
again, Hear my Son, keep thy Father Pro. 6.
Commandments, and forsake (...) thy Mothers instructions, bind them always
upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck, it shall lead thee when thou
walk, watch this when thou sleep, and when thou wakest, it shall talk
with thee, (...) for the Commandment is a lanthoras, and instruction a light,
and correction for instruction is the way of life: And again, A fool
despises his Pro. 13.
Fathers instructions, but he that regards correction is wise: Again, A wise
Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish son is a heaviness to his Mother:
Again, a wise son will obey the instruction of his Father, but a scorner
will hear no rebuke.

But before I pass further, I must not so lightly pass over A parlse
supposition which children have of their Parents, correcting them.
some of Salomons words here spoken, for I know there be many foolish Children
in these days, which when their Parents reprove or correct them for their
follies or faults committed, do either suppose it to be more of spleen and
anger toward them then otherwise, or that they do not bear that natural
love toward them which they should do, but let not such idle and leawd
thoughts possess either thy heart or mind, but remember that he tells thee
that correction for instructions are the way of life, and that he that
regards the correction of his Father, is wise: well, I will go on with
Salomons words (for says he:)

He that destroys his Father or Pro. 19.
chaseth away his mother, is a leawd and a shameful child: Again, he Pro. 20.
that curses his father or his mother, his light shall be put out in obscure
darkness: Again, Obey thy Father Pro. 23.
that begot thee, and despise (...) thy mother when she is old: again, he
that robs his Father and says Pro. 25.
it is no transgression, is the comp^nion of a man that destroys: Again, the
eye that mocketh his Father Pro. 30.
and despises the instructions if his Mother, let the Ravens of the valley
pluck it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

And thus you see how Solomon has labored to express this duty of Children
in their obedience unto their Parents, and all good children have applied
themselves to perform the same, even from the beginning, yea, and long before
the law was given by God to that end, the very law of nature thorough grace did
work this obedience in them, as appears by that rare obedience of Isack unto
his Father, yielding himself even to become a sacrifice Genesis 42.
unto the hand of his Father: Jacob likewise obeying the command Genesis 27.
of his Mother, obtained the blessing thereby.

But Joseph's: dutiful obedience Genesis 47.
unto his Father, and cherishing of him and his in his old age, shows unto
all good children, a perfect pattern of all dutiful obedience: and the
obedience of the daughter of Iephtah, likewise may not be forgotten, who
although her father had vowed to offer unto the Lord in sacrifice, and that
she had liberty at Judge. 11.
her pleasure, two whole monet^^ to go unto the mountains to bewail Examples
of the obedience and duty of good children unto their Parents.
her virginity, yet at the prefixed time, she willingly came and offered her
self unto the hands of her father, to perform his vow with her.

Solomon also when his mother came to speak with him, so 1. King. 2.
soon as he saw her; he left his kingly seat and caine to meet her, and
reverently bowed himself unto her, and caused her to be placed on his right
hand as he sat on the throne of his kingdom: many such examples there be
besides these, as T^b^^ and others, all teaching this duty Tob. 14.
unto children.

And as God has commanded it thus to be done, see how highly he likes of
those which do perform it, the stone of the (...)bites does plainly Ier. 35.
show where the Prophet Jeremiah from the mouth of God himself pronounces
these wore's unto them, T(...) Lord of hoasts the God of (...) cause you obeyed
the (...) of Ionada^ your Father (...) How God blesses those children which
obey their Parents.
kept all his pre^^pts, (...) (...)ding unto all that he has commanded you,
therefore thus says the Lord of heast^, the God of Israel, Ionadab the son of
Recha^ shall not want a man to stand before m^^ for ever: what need I now ^o
cite more places of Scripture to this end, our Savior Christ himself Luke 2.
became a pattern unto you in this point, for he became obedient unto his
earthly Parents: If these things will not suffice, then will no^e.

The 21. Chapter.
But I must ye proceed a little further in this poyn^ of obedience, f^^ there
be many which when they are come to some years as they think of discretion,
that then will be no longer under the obedience of their Parents, but to
dispose of themselves at their own pleasure, nay, I would to Go^ that some of
them, did not th^^ oppose themselves against their Parents: well; they find
the word of God does teach them otherwise, for thou must not then so dispose of
thy self: can thou be content to give them leave to nourish cherish, and to
maintain thee both in sickness and health all the time of thy youth, and will thou now ^e like a wild and unruly colt, that casts off his bridle and shows
his master his four shoes.

If thou did want the use of thy limbs, or thy sight, or the use of thy
speech, thou cast then be content to be governed by them, even until thy
old age or dying day, and will thou enjoying these and all other blessings
from Almighty God, even to the full, when thou come to those years wherein
thy wisdom Children should take regard of the experimented wise counsels of
their aged Parents.
should show it self like a flourishing olive tree, yielding obedience and
honor unto thy Parents, thereby comforting and ioying their aged years: then,
the^ I say to cast them off, yea and that good also which might come to thee by
that wise and prudent counsel which they by long experience have gained, and
might to thee, sure prove an anchor hold of exceeding much good.

And this I speak also in reproof, Children ought to be ruled by their
Parents in case of their marriage
yea, to the reproach of those giddy headded wantons of our time, which will
not give their Parents leave to make their choice of marriage for them, nor be
ruled by them in their choice: whereupon as a just plague unto them, it often
comes to pass, that not having their Parents goodwill in their choice, they
not only lose that which is an invaluable loss, I mean the blessing of their
Parents, which though children regard not in these days, yet in times past it
was of such reverent regard among Gods children, that their fathers blessing
was unto them as precious as their What an account good children made in times
past, of the blessing of their Parents.
granfathers inheritance, whereby thorough want of the fathers love, and this
blessing, a just plague and punishment from God, for so high an offense, it is
commonly seen beggary follows, I speak not this unadvisedly as of
supposition; for God is witness with me that I speak the truth, I have seen
it with mine eyes to my grief of heart.

Oh sin of disobedience, even in the highest degree of nature, when a son
or daughter shall presume in private, to take unto themselves the estate of
marriage without the consent of Parents, ought not the father to know? yea, and
to make choice what flesh should be joined unto his own, and what fruit should
be grafted into his own stock, and to see that it should be for the good and
honor thereof, yes surely, and those which be good and gracious Children, will
give their Parents the pre-eminence thereof, and also be ruled by them in
these things, but there be some which can be content to be ruled by their
Parents in case of marriage, for the benefit of their help which may arise
thereby, but they are not willing to stay the time which their Parents shall
think fit for them.

But this did not Isacke, for he Genesis 25.
would not presume to make any Good children have always had regard to leave
the choice of their marriage to thire Parents.
choice, but stayed his Fathers pleasure, although it were till he was Forty
years of age: And Jacob, when his father did appoint him, then went to the
place where he did appoint him, but not before: where are those that do follow
the steps of these holy and chosen children of God, that I many extol them to
the world, alas they are not in these days to be found.

And yet the very heathen which knew not God nor his laws, yet the very light
of nature taught this duty unto them, not to make their choice of marriage Genesis
34.
without the consent of their Parents, for thus did Shechem the son of
Hamore, sue unto his Father for his good will to marry with Dinah the daughter
of Jacob, and the servants of God had always a special regard hereunto,
Samspon also would not presume Judge. 14.
to marry without the consent of his father, no, although he liked the woman
exceeding well.

And as the natural Parents have this authority over their Children, so does
it likewise belong unto those which be gardians and foster fathers as we term
them, which have the bringing up of youth, whether they be of kindred or
otherwise, as we see Ruth was obedient unto her step Rut. 1.
mother, and upon these and such like causes is our law grounded, which permits
not a ward, being under the government of his guardian to marry without his
consent.

The 22. Chapter.
ANd as I have labored to express this duty of obedience unto children, and
yet but briefly run it over in respect of that which, might be spoken herein,
so it is needful in some sort to show the limitation thereof, for it is not
general, but is included within her bounds, I did a little touch it before
when I said it consisted in all good and lawful things, and indeed it goes
no farther, for if thy father or mother do command thee to do unlawful In what
cases Children may refuse the command of their Parents.
things, as to commit Idolatry, to worship God contrary to his word, thou must
not obey them in these things, or if thy father or mother do command thee to
commit treason against the King, Prince or Magistrate whom he has set over
thee to govern thee, or felloniously to murder any, or to steal, perloyne,
or defraud any man of his right, thou must not obey them in any such things,
for as God has commanded thee to obey them in goodness, so has he forbidden
thee to yield obedience unto them in evil, the Children ought to shun the
wickedness of their Parents.
Children that follow the wickedness of their Parents, God himself will
puninsh them, we have proof thereof in diverse places of the scripture, but the
Prophet Ezekiell expresses it to the full, I pray you read the chapters, for
the doctrine therein is worthy of your greatest regard, you shall there find
that the Lord says:

Behold all souls are mine, both of Eze. 18.
the Father and of the Son, the same soul that sins it shall dye, but if
the son seeing the wickedness of his Father, fears, and does not commit
such things, surely he shall line says the Lord: so that thus you see
plainly that the Children may refuse to be obedient unto any wicked command,
either of their Father or mother: And the Apostle Peeter teaches us by Act. 4.
his example rather to obey God then man, and Daniell does the Dan. 6.
same: And as God has commanded thee to perform this obedience unto thy
Parents, and has appointed thee in what manner and nature to do the same, and
granted his blessing unto the performers thereof, even so to Children which are
stubborn and disobedient unto their Parents, God himself will punish.
the stubborn and rebellious children, which will take no regard of this his
will to walk in the obedience thereof, such disobedient ones does he not leave
unpunished, nor never did, but either by the severity of their Parents, or if
that gentle and natural punishment will not serve, then gives he them up
into the hands of temperall Maiestrates, so publicly to punish them, as I
expressed before in the duty of Parents, but if both these in the execution of
justice upon so high an offense, be slack in punishing them, then he himself
does take the cause in hand, yea, and he himself does severely punish it, as
we see by his justice showed upon the wicked sons of Elye, whom he slew both
in 1. Sam. 4.
one day by untimely and sudden death: and of that rebellious son of David,
Absolon who^ the Lord 2. Sam. 18.
himself caused to be hanged on a tree by his own hair, until his enemies
came upon him and slew him, many such examples there be to this end, but these
may suffice. Children ought not to forsake their Parents either in poverty or
age, but to relieve and comfort them even till death.


And take heed that thou grow not weary of this thy duty, but that with all
love thou do continue this thy obedience unto them, even to their dying day,
and that thou despise them not either in age or poverty, for he that dispiseth
Father or Mother God will punish, but use them with all honor as Solomon did
his Mother, and cherish and norish them in age as Joseph did: remember 1. King.
2.
that Ruth would not Ruth. 1.
forsake her Mother in law, and what she gained by her labor, she brought
home to relieve her aged mother with.

And now with Joshua I have Ioshu. 24
set before you the ways of the the Lord, and I beseech him to give us grace
to walk in the obedience thereof, I had thought likewise to have set before
you, some of the abuses of these our times, wherein the wicked ones so much
forgetting their duty to God and their Parents, that not regarding their own
shame in the world, no, nor the fear of Gods judgments to come, do daily
disturb, trouble, nay misuse and abuse their own Parents, but least I should
in expressing such things give way to that which I ought rather to suppress,
I will rather bury these things in mine own breast with grief in silecce: The
Devil has two many actors on the stage of this world that play these parts
daily too public, the God of heaven and earth keep your hearts and consciences
free from such things, and keep you in the obedience of his holy Commadements.

Amen.
The duty of Masters.
The 23. Chapter.
GReat is the folly of young people in this our time, which by all means they
may possible seek to free themselves from the estate of servitude when they are
therein, to the end they may be Masters A great folly in young people, that
seek to be masters before they know how to govern.
and gouenors themselves of others, before they have either years or wisdom
sufficient to manage so great a business, or discharg so weighty a matter as
they then take upon them in the estate of governing, neither able to make
choice of their servants with wisdom as they ought, nor how to use them with
a good conscience as they should.

But David gives us good instruction Genesis 39.
for this business, for he wills us to choose him to be our servant, that is
religious and upright toward God, that so our affairs may prosper as
Potiphers did thorough the service of Genesis 30.
good Joseph and Laban by the service of Jacob, for he that is not a faithful
servant unto God, will never be a faithful servant unto his Master, and as
there does come a blessing by the godly, so the wicked servant brings a curse
where he is, for as one scabbed sheep marreth a whole flock, so often times
one leawd servant spoils a whole family, but who follows the rule of the
Prophet How to choose a good Servant.
David in the choice of his family, he says that he that has a proud look
and a hauty stomach shall not dwell with him.

But there be two many in these days of the contrary disposition, for they
will keep none but such as can fight, swear, and swager it out, well, David
would not do so though he were a King, no, he that leads a godly life shall
be his servant, there shall no deceitful person dwell Psalm. 101.
in his house, and he that tells lies shall not tarry in his house, nor
sight, but I would there were Masters should not suffer their servants to
swear, though in the sale of their wares.
not now two many which do suffer their Servants to lie, swear, yea and
forswear too, in the sale of their wares, and yet these be counted good
shopmen, and fine chapmen, indeed so they be for the Diuills wares, it is no
marvel if your Children spend that vnthrifitily which is so ungodly gotten.

But as you see it is a choice It is not enough to choose a good servant, but to
preserve him still in goodness.
point of the Master to be careful what servant he takes into his family,
so the Master must be careful likewise to bring up his servants religiously,
in the time of their service, and that must be, in seeing that his servants
come to the public exercises, of hearing the word of God in due time, and
that they there remain all the whole time of prayer and teaching, and that
they be in as convenient place as they may, that so they may have the
oversight of them, for it is not enough that the Master bring his servants unto
the Church, and then let them give them the slip at the Church door, or go o^*
as soon as they come in, and s^(...) to Tauernes, or Alehouses* or as bad
places, or else get into some corner of the Church* where either they may sit
and talk all the time, or else sleep it out.

This the good Master may What good counsel of a Master given in due time
may do.
prevent, by giving them counsel, that if they will serve him, they must be
careful to serve God above all things, and be religious in Gods house, if they
will have any countenance of him in his house: but many men are more careful
in planting of Orchards or Gardens, or choosing of sheep for breed, or
following their worldly profits, then they are in planting a godly family in
their houses, whereby God may be glorified and his Church profited.

Or if they have servants under them to do their work and labor for them,
that so they may live at the more ease, pleasure, and idleness themselves,
then all is well as they think, or turn it otherwise if you please, and make
the best of it by the way of good husbandry, as a mean for them to thrive by,
and yet you shall find the end thereof to be only this, to satisfy their
never satisfied coueteousnesse.

Men do regard their beasts as much as this, their ox, their ass, their
horse, and such like, yea and will be very careful for the keeping of them,
to the end their profit may arise by them: the wise traveler will be so
careful for his horse (which but only for his pleasure he is to ride on) that
he will spare time even from his own meat and rest, to see that his beast
shall both be made clean, lie clean, and have his fill of prouender, to the
end he may be the better able to bear him on his journey: the husband man
likewise in the care of his cattle is very laborious for his profit, protecting
them from weather, water, and such like dangers, and is continually amongst
them, shifting them from ground to ground, and from pastuer to pasture, to the
end they may the better feed and profit, and that Many leawd Masters do make
less account of their servants, then others do of their beasts.
if any disease do befall them, he may the sooner remove it from amongst them,
and in these things men are wise and careful enough as is fitting: but my
dear brethren, there be many amongst us which bear the name of Christians,
and have the government of servants, which to their shame I speak it, do make
less account of their servants, the^ these men do of their beasts, for they
will look to their beasts themselves carefully enough, so do no^ many a one
to their servants, but God forbid it should be so withal, yea, I know there be
many that are very careful to perform this their duty, as well in providing
and giving them all things needful for them, as in setting them to their
work and labor, and I doubt not but that the fruit thereof they find in their
several callings.

But I speak of those who can be content, and do carefully enough set their
servants unto their labors, as it is fit indeed they should, but do give them
small comfort and cherishing in their labors, loading them with labors like
Pharoahs task masters, Exo. 5. The cruelty of bad masters
but not half filling their bellies with victualles as the traveler I spoke
of does his horse, so that many times the poor servant having labored all day,
and had but a small dinner, yet at night comes to so short commons, that when
he has saved the maid a labor in making clean the dishes which were set
before him, he has yet a fresh stomach to a good supper if he might come at
it, is not this a hard case? yet I would it were not true.

And I will tell you the cause of this, your selves are in the The negligent
care of the master brings the seuruants want.
fault of it: you are careful enough to look to have your own due, as it is
fit you should, but not careful enough in giving them their due, for too many
of you do put that off to be performed by a false steward, and so many a poor
servant is punished both in belly and back, to help to maintain the pride
and pleasure of his Dame or Mistress.

You put them in trust with these things to see them fed, sweet kept, and
wholsomely lodged, think you that these things do not belong unto you, to see
them done as well as unto your wives? yes surely they do, and yet I say in them
to do them is more fitting, but to you it belongs to see them faithfully done
as they The duty of the Master binds him to see that the want of his servant
be by himself supplied.
ought to be, for how can thou look that thy servant shall labor faithfully
with the strength of his body for thee, or to say the truth, how can he do it,
when his body is enfeebled by means of due nourishing, with hole so^ food or
things useful for him, which should nourish and strengthen him, this is too
common a thing amongst us, and it is a great reproach unto this our English
nation, and yet this is not all neither.

For there be some which can be content to maintain their servants reasonable
well, for their profits sake which may arise by their labors, while they are
able to do any for the^, but if God do send his visitation upon them, either A
great fault in many Masters.
by sickness or lamenes, then if they have not an out garden house, or some back
place to put them into, where they shall be sure to have but a slender looking
to, the^ to an Hospital with them, and so rid themselves of them, or else
basely, nay gracelesly turn them out of doors to shift for themselves in that
heavy case* what an uncharitable, yea an vnchristian-like part is this? and
yet such there be, the more the pity.

But if it be not lawful to muzell the mouth of the Ox that treads in the
corn, how much more is it unlawful for thee to keep back the due from thy
servant that labors with the strength of his body for thy profit, or if thou
cast him off, or into an Hospital when he is lame or sick, how can thou
seek of him the labor of his hands when he is well again?

The 24. Chapter.
THe good Centurion did not thus, he did neither cast off his The charecter of
a good master.
sick servant nor send him unto any Hospital till he were healed, no, he kept
him still at home in his own house, and did not put others in trust to seek
help for his servant, but carefully performing the duty of a good master, Mat.
8.
setting aside all his affairs and business, he goes himself to seek
help for him.

How many masters being rich men in ourtime will do the like, no, they think
it will be a disgrace unto them, and abase thing for themselves to do such a
business, especially for his servant? but if it were for his wife, son or
daughter, whom he dearly loves, then happily he would not stick to go
himself, but for his servant he has other enough to send about such a
business.

So had this Centurion, and you se he went himself, and I tell you whom
soever you are, that you ought to have as great a care for the health and
welfare of your servant, for the time he is in your Cor. 7.
service, as if he were either your son or daughter, nay, is he not Coll. 4.
the Lords free man, and have you 1. Cor. 7.
not all one master in heaven? and you not both bought with one price, and is
he not fellow heir with you of the same kingdom of grace, which you hope to
be of? yes verily he is.

And believe me brother, for I tell you no leassing, father, mother, son or
daughter, master, servant, King and subject, be but names and titles in this
worldly regiment, in Christ Jesus we are al one, none better then another, all
brethren, and must all seek All one by Christ.
Christ, and our brothers good in Christ, or else we never shall have benefit
by Christ, how can you then or how dare you abuse your brother though he be
your servant, in keeping from him such things as be necessary for him, or due
unto him, whether it be his food, his clothing, or his wages, or any other
necessaries? ^r oppress him with labor as Phar^ahs task masters did the
Children of Israel? there be too many such which are even The law a hi^drance
unto many evil Masters.
as tyrants unto their servants, and more would be, were it not for the law.

I speak not this to abridge the privilege or authority which the Master has
over his Servant as occasion serves, I know that the master has full
authority, not only to employ his Servant to labor, but also to correct his
Servant as accasio^ shall be ministered, for the wise man tells us, that Eccle.
33.
meet correction and work belongs How evil servants must be punished.
unto the Servant, I know he goes farther and says: The yoke and the whip
brings down the hard neck, so taine thy evil Servant with whips and
correction, but yet I pray you note that he gives this rule, not to be
excessive toward any, and without discretion faith he, do thou nothing.

But says he, If thou have a faithful How highly a good servant ought to be
resprcted.
servant, let him be unto thee as thine own soul, for in blood have thou
gotten him, whereas thy servant works truly, entreat him not evil, if thou
have a servant entreat him as a brother, for thou have need of him as of thy
self: And S. Paul, when he had declared unto servants their duty, he
admonished masters in like manner saying, and you masters do you the same
things Ephe. 6.
unto them, putting away threatenings, and know also that even your mrster also
is in heaven, neither is there any respect of persons with him: And again, you
masters do v^^^ Collo. 4.
your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that you also have ^
Masters ought to do nothing but that which is just unto their servants.
master in heouen, and thus you see that both Saint Paul here and the wise man
in his Book, do both agree in this, that the Master ought to show lenity and
gentleness unto his servant, and so by loving and kind usage, with frie^dly
speech as to a brother, win him to the performance of his duty, for surely
very willingly does the servant labor when the masters countenance is
^hearefull toward him, but where the The Masters countenance ought to be
cheerful unto his servants
Master does not only show a cheerful countenance, but also uses friendly
words among his servants, and gives them their due besides, it cannot be but
with great joy and comfort, these servants do pass over their labors how hard
so ever they seem to be unto others, and the master finds great comfort in
them also.

The 25. Chapter.
THus you see what Justice Saint Paul would have Masters to use unto their
servants, namely to do unto them as you would have them to do unto you, and as
it he should say, would you have your servants to deal justly and truly with
you? then do you deal so with them: would have them to be kind and loving
unto you? then be so unto them also: nay, you see he would not have you
threaten them, and the wise man in his book gives the same counsel, for
says he, if thou entreat thy servant evil, and he run away, will thou seek
him, for indeed many times the Master threatening to give his Servant The
servant through threatening, running away is often times the undoing both of
himself and Master.
severe correction for some fault committed, and yet paraduenture not meaning
so to do, yet the simple servant he knowing or fearing the rigorus correction
of his Master, forsakes his service and runs away: sometime to the undoing
of both, if in this nature he go away from you, how can you seek after him
when you your selves are the only cause thereof? keep secret therefore your
mind, and if you see just cause to use correction, do it privately in his due
time, but say not in his hearing or that he may hear thereof what you intend
for to do, and so you shall perform the counsel of the wise man which says
without discretion do thou nothing.

But this just and equal dealing of the Master stretches it self yet
farther, as against these evil minded men, which seek to abridge their
servants of their due liberty, I mean when they have obtained thereunto, by
their continuance and faithful service, the wise man says, Let thy soul love
a good servant, and defraud Eccle. 7.
him not of liberty, neither leave him a poor man: but there are some so far
off from performing this, that they rather A good servant must not be
defrauded of liberty.
will use all means though never so unlawful, to detayne them longer then
their prefixed time, especially if there may come any profit by their service,
but as for rewarding them for their good service doing, they are so far off
from that, that in stead of enriching them, they will impouerish them, for if
the poor servant will have his liberty, how soever his right, it shall cost him
money before he have it, and especially if he be able, but the just God who
sees these unjust dealings of such masters to their servants, will himself
punish the same.

For he will have a year of Iubile for your servant as well as there was for
you, thou shall not rule over him severely, but shall Leu. 15.
fear the Lord thy God, so that he that does wrong unto his servants, is void
of the fear of God, you see this is plain, but we will see further what the
Lord will have done* then see what he A duty which Masters should perform,
but who does it?
commanded his chosen people, the children of Israel to do, the words (...)
these, If thy brother an Hebrew sell himself unto thee, or an Deu. 15.
(...)esse, and serve thee six years, e(...) in the seventh year thou shall
let him go out from thee, thou shall not let him go away empty, but shall
give him a liberal reward of thy sheep and of thy corn, and of thy wine,
thou shall give him of that wherewithal the Lord thy God has blessed thee,
and remember that thou wast servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God
delivered thee: therefore I command thee this thing this day.

What say you now to this you cruel and unjust Masters, of whom I have before
spoken, will you like Pharaoh still harden your h^rts against them, and will not
obey: then harken what the Lord by his Prophet Jeremiah says further unto
these men which have detayned the^ A heavy judgment pronounced against such
Masters which detayne their servants contrary to right. Ier. 34.
servants contrary to his command, Because you have not obeyed me, in giving
freedom and liberty every man unto his brother and servant, behold I proc(...)
^ liberty for you says the Lord to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the
famine, and I will make you a terror to all the kingdoms of the earth, and I
will give these men which have broked my covenant, into the hands of them that
seek their life, and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of
the air, and to the beasts of the earth.

Now you see how God himself does take in hand the cause of the wronged
servant, and how severely he does punish it: therefore you that be masters
deal you justly with your Servants, and as Saint Paul says, Collo. 4.
Remember that your master also is in heaven, and as it must be thus with
your household servant, even so it must be with the hireling which labors for
you, you must not defraud him of his Leuite. 19.
due, nor put him off from day to day, and suffer him to come with cap in hand
to entreat for that The labourer must not be put off for his wages.
which by his labor he has hardly earned, but remember that the Lord
commands that the workemans hire abide not with thee till the next morning,
Behold the hire of the laborers Iam. 5.
which have reaped your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud cries, and
the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of
hoasts says Saint James, and again the Lord says, thou shall not oppress an
hired servant Deu. 24.
that is needy and poor, neither of thy brethren, nor of the stranger that is
in the land within thy gates, thou shall give him his hire: for his day, What a
man ought to do to the hired servant or day labourer.
neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor and therewith
sustayneth his life, least he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin
unto thee: I need not amplify these things any farther, seeing that the Lord
himself has so plainly described it unto you.

The 26. Chapter.
ANd as I have in this Chapter before showed unto you, that the Master ought
not to abridge his Servant of his liberty The Servants that ru^^ into evil by
too much liberty, the Master is not only guilty of, but in election of a
double punishment if he seek not for to reform it.
when it is due unto him, even so also, the Master must see that his Servants
run not into evil, by giving them too much liberty in the time of their
service, for this is an evil which also reyneth in our time, and of which the
master is not only guilty, but also in danger of a double punishment by it, in
regard that the redress thereof lies in his power, and he not only sees it,
but also suffers it, and thereby comes a chief author thereof himself.

The wise man says, If thou set thy servant unto labor, thou Eccle. 33.
shall find rest, but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek librety, set him
to labor that he go not idle, for idleness Idleness the ground of much
evils.
brings much evil: And again, set him to work, for that belongs unto
him: Oh that men would be careful to follow this counsel of the wise man! he
says that labor belongs unto the servant, but the great men of our time
will take no notise of this, or if they do, they will seek to The want of
employment of servants the cause of their evils many times.
excuse it, saying, I am no base mecanicall person, I have sufficient to to
maintain my servants to attend me, and do nothing else: I do believe it to be
so, and find that to be the reason, that Cards, Dice, and Tables, are more
common in your houses, then Bibles and other good Books.

Abraham was as rich a man as Genesis 13.
any of our time, the whole land could not bear the substance of him and his
nephew both at one time, he was so rich, he was a Kings fellow, he kept a
great multitude of servants, he was able on the sudden to make 300. and od
men fit for war of his own household, and yet we Abraham and Iobe commended
from Gods own mouth, for bringing up of thrir servants.
find not that he kept any of the^ idle, but employed them all in some good
exercise or other, and therefore for the good and virtuous bringing up of his
family, he received commendations even from God himself: Job was a mighty man
also of wealth exceeding rich, the greatest man even of the whole ^ast country,
he kept a multitude of servants, but none of them idle, that we are sure of,
and therefore from the mouth of God himself he has this high exaltation,
that he was the Phaenix of the world in his time, he had no fellow, there be
others likewise which will set their servants to labor, but not regard whether
they do it or no, but if they do bring them home the price of their days
labor at night, then they are content, they look no farther to that business,
and so the lewd servant may do even what he will under such a Master, he may
go to plays, to whores, to drunkenesse, or any thing, as too many do. The
Master not regarding how his servant uses his time, becomes guilty of the
evil which his servant abuses.


Is this the setting of your servants to labor? nay, this is but your serving
own turns, and your covetousness, and therefore you are guilty of the evil
which they do thus commit, because you prevent it not by seeing how they
dispose of themselves in this time wherein you appoint them to labor, and if
that your calling serve not to employ them in some bodily labor, yet you ought
to be careful that they have not more time to spend abroad out of your sight,
the^ that time only which your business requires, for these things also
belong unto your charge.

For if that Masters were as The evil of the Master, corrupts the Servants.
careful as they ought to be, servants could not have that liberty to use and
to abuse as they do, but where the Master himself is an evil liver, as a
drunkard, a haunter of brothell houses, a gamester, or an idle gadder from
home, there the servant must needs have liberty, and no marvel then if such a
master have such servants: and do we not see daily, that too many do wrong
themselves and their whole family by these abuses? how unfit are these men to
govern others, which have no power to govern themselves: Oh you whom these
things concern be wise and circumspect in your ways, and remember that the
charge of the servants which are committed unto you is not small, but that a
great account you must give unto God, how you have governed those souls
committed unto you.

The 27. Chapter.
ANd as the Master ought not to give his servant more liberty then is fit, so
also he may not suffer them to be possessed with Servants puffed up in pride,
seek liberty and abuse both themselves and it.
pride, by arraying them or suffering them to be arrayed above the estate of
servants, for this is one chief point which makes them to seek liberty, and
this did Solomon well understand, and therefore tells you plainly, that he
that dilicately does bring up his servant from his youth, at length he will be
even as his son, and our own experience in these days confirms the truth of
this unto us, to the grief of many good minds, whose eyes and ears are daily
cloyd herewith, and who is in the fault of this? thy servant, nay, you that be
Masters are, you suffer and maintain them in such pride, that many forgetting
their duty unto God and you, do fall into such lewdness, as many times are
both the ruin of your own estate and of themselves too: and were they not
suffered thus to exceed the nature of servants (as I said before,) in pride and
idleness, there would not so many of them haunt the dancing schools, fencing
schools, tauernes, and alehouses as do: can you excuse your selves now, are
you not guilty herein? oh I would you were not.

Indeed there be many of you, that if that which they spend in pride, and these
abuses did come out of your own purses, I do Master ought to see the laying
out of money given to their servants that it be put to good vse^.
think that it would be otherwise, will you say they have it from their
friends, I say still the more unwise then are you, which do suffer it to be
thus idely spent, but some of you do know that it comes in another nature,
from whence it should not come, and this you tolerate to save your own
stakes, are you guilty herein then, or no?

Again, there be some which can be content to set their servants Masters
ought not to suffer their servants ^o gad on the Sabborh day at their own
pleasure.
to labor all the week days, but when the Sabbath crmmeth which ought by
Masters and Servants to be wholly sanctified unto God, with thanksgiving for
the benefit of his blessings received the week past, many of them scarce see
their servants all that whole day, or if they do see them at meat time, then
all the rest of the day they enjoy wholly to themselves without contradiction,
which how leawdly they spend we see with grief, their pride is cause of this
as well as liberty.

The time has been, that a Servant might have been known by his habit, but
now the Master is not known from the Servant, nay, I have seen the Servant
better maintained in the time of his service, then he has been able to
maintain himself when he has come to labor for it with his own means, what
folly is this in Masters thus to do? in time not long past, a good Merchant
has not been arrayed as now your Servants be.

I could unfold more abuses growing from this pride in Servants, and the
Masters fault in suffering, then I am willing ^o disclose, or is fit I should,
lay no colors on it to hide it, they will not serve, I do know you would
excuse it, and say you do it for A bad fault in Masters when they will seek
to excuse the pride of their servants.
your credit sake, but in this you offend God, and discredit the common wealth,
by making a breach in those good laws which have been ordained against such
abuses. I pray God to give you grace to see these things, and wisdom to
redress it, but it has spread so far, that I fear it has taken such deep
root, as will not easily be weeded out, except authority do put their unto a
strong hand.

The duty of Servants.
The 28. Chapter.
Our blessed Lord and Master Jesus Christ, which left no est ar^ of persons
without instructions fitting unto their several callings, has very briefly,
and yet most truly and plainly prescribed unto Servants the fullness of their
duty also, but in few words he concludes the whole business, he does not
give the^ many several instructions, least so they might forget some of them
by the way, and therefore includes all in one short sentence, and this it is,
He that knows the will of his Master and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes.

Now you see here that there is Servants of what degree soever, and bound with
a more seuerer bond then man can invent, to perform their duty unto their
Masters
no servant of what degree soever he be, if he be a Servant, but that he is
bound by a more sure obligation then the wit of man can invent, even the holy
commandment of that blessed one, whose command by all must be obeyed, upon
pain of damnation, even he it is that gives this admonition unto thee, to
do the will of thy Master, No o^ liting nor quit ^cating will serve, our
Savior himself has given servants so plain a direction of their duty, that
none may or can gain say it.
or else he tells thee plainly what penalty will ensue upon it, thou must be
beaten with many stripes for not doing of it, nay he does not leave thee thus
neither with this admonition only, he goes a little further yet, for to stop
all quillets which may arise and put all doubts out of question, for he knew
that there were and would be many that would be more curious to contend about
what they ought to do, then willing to do that they should do, and therefore
tells thee, That the servant that does not the will of his Master, yea
although he know not the will of his Master, yet even he shall be beaten too.

Now seeing that the case stands thus, that this burden lies upon the
shoulders of every particular Servant, in the name of God bestirre your selves
like men, stand to your tackling, rouse up your selves, seek, labor, and
strive continually to perform this work of obedience unto your Masters, that
so you may avoid this danger of many stripes: and it shall not be amiss for
this our purpose, if we a little peruse the word of God, to see what we find
there more concerning this matter, that so as in a glass the servants of these
our times may see, and seeing know, whether they peforme the same or not.

And we shall find that Saint Paul knowing the errors of Servants how slack
they are in performing their duties vnro their Masters, and how needful it
was that they should be instructed herein, has very carefully in many of his
Epistles largely set forth this duty of servants, both what inward and outward
obedience is to be required of them.

That it must be even with Ephe. 5.
fear and trembling, for so he says: And so Saint Peeter, he 1. Pet. 2.
teaches the same also saying, Be ye subject unto your Masters with all
fear. And again, Let as many Timo. 6.
servants as be under the yoke, count their Masters worthy of all honor, that
the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of, and they which have
believing Masters, despise them not, for they are brethren, but rathey do
them service, because they are faithful and beloved, and pertakers of the
benefit.

Again, Servants be obedient Servants must not be men pleasers, but that they
do must (...) singlen^ of heart Colio. ^.
unto them that are your bodily Masters according to the flesh in all things,
not with eye service as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God,
and what soever you do, do hartyly as unto the Lord, and not unto men, and be
sure that ye shall receive of the Lord the reward of inheritance, for you
serve the Lord Christ.

Again, you Servants be obedient unto your masters, and please them in all
things not answering Servants must not answer again unto their Mastris.
the^ again, neither be ye pickers, but show all good faithfulness, that in
all things ye may do worship unto the doctrine of God our Savior.

Again, ye servants be obedient The frowardness of the master should no way
be a hindrance unto the performing of the servants duty.
to your Masters with all fear, not only if they be good and courteous, but
also if they be froward, for this is thanks worthy, if a man for conceience
sake to wards God endure grief wrongfully: for what praise is it, if when ye
be buffeted for your 1. Pet. 2.
faults, ye take it patiently? but if when you do well, you suffer wrong and
take it patiently, this is acceptable It is (...)godame^cy or a servant to be
patient when he is buffeted justly, but if it be done wrong fully, then to
bear it with patience, is of high commendations.
unto God, for hereunto are you called.

For Christ also suffered for us leaving for us an example that we should
follow his steps; who did not sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed it to him which judges righteously: Saint Paul by these
things did teach this Doctrine unto Christian servants thus to do under their
Masters though infidels and unbelievers, because of their places: for indeed
the Master is Gods vicegerent in his family, therefore if Christians unto
infidels must perform this obedience as we see it is commanded by our blessed
Savior, for his words have no limitatio^, but are general, all must obey, and
all must be obeyed.

How much more in these days of grace and knowledge, should servants,
professing themselves to be Christians, strive to perform their duties even to
the full unto their Christian masters, whom God has chosen and called in his
son Jesus Christ, to be partakers of his heavenly treasures as well as
themselves.

Therefore my brethren I beseech you in the fear of God, What inward
obedience is required of servants.
that you (...)careful in the observing of this, which here from the word of
God you may gather, namely to be obedient unto your Masters even inwardly in
your heart, in fear and trembling, for if your spirits within you be not
truly humbled, how then can you perform that obedience outwardly which is of
you required? let the Servants count their Masters worthy of all honor, there
must be a reverent estimation of them even in your hearts, before you can give
them this honor duly and truly as it ought, for without this hearty love and
inward affection toward them, your outward obedience will be but false and
hypocritical, Servants must sear to offend their Masters, and why.
and all this your zealous duty must be mingled with fear, for so Saint Paul
teaches because you are to perform this duty and service as unto God, and not
unto men, and being thus prepared, then you shall be able to perform all good
outward obedience which shall be required of you.

And this obedience must be performed without partiality, as (...)ll to the
poor man as to the (...)h, for it is no thanks unto you (...) ^erforme this
obedience unto (...) Masters they being great (...), or rich men, their
wealth, places and authority requires be performed as well to the poor, as to
the rich.
it, they will command it of you, and you dare do no other but yield it them,
but if your Masters be poor and as men despised of the world, then they to
be precious in your eyes, and you in the zeal of your conscience and duty
unto God, to give unto them that duty which you ought to do, both inwardly
from the heart performing all The true token of a dutiful servant.
faithfulness unto them, and giving them the reverence due unto them, being
uncovered in their presence, and showing all outward reverence of the body unto
them. This is a token of grace, thus it ought to be, and thus it must be, that
the doctrine of Christ which you profess, be not slaundered by your
disobedience.

The 29. Chapter.
ANd here I have occasion justly given me, to reprove those bold and fancy
youths of our time, which forgetting their d^ty unto God, do show no
reverence at all unto their Masters, and especial if they be poor, they
then will be so fellowly with them, that a man would rather take them to be
neighbor and neighbor, then Master and The (...)reverent behavior of
servants unto their masters
Servant, nay, I would this were the worst as bad as it is, for many of them
are not only undutiful, but even rebellious against their Masters, nay, even
against God himself, and therefore culpable of eternal punishment: for if
their Master do but reprove them, yea and that justly too, do they not give
them word for word again, nay 10. for one, and A disobedient servant that
despises the discipline of his master, rebelleth against God himself.
if they come to correct them, are they not ready to resist them? so that many
of them will neither be reproved nor corrected by them.

Is not this rebellion against God thus to contemn his ordinance in him whom
he has set over thee, to feed thee, cloth thee, learn thee, yea, and to
rule thee? is it not our Saviors own words here, that he must be beaten with
many strips which does not the will of his Master? if so, what shall he have
then which scorneth to be instructed, and despises the discipline of his
master? surely, his puishment must needs be very great.

Well my friends, judge whether it be better to follow your own minds herein,
or the counsel of Saint Paul, he tells you plainly, it must be
otherwise, such disobedient courses Servants must be obedient unto their
Masters in all things.
must not so much as once be thought of amongst you, but you must be obedient
unto them even in all things, and so shall you perform the commandment of our
Savior Christ.

And yet there be some of so stubborn and rebellious a nature, that if their
Master do proffer them a blow, nay, scarce that too, yet they will straight
leave his service, and as without leave so without care or fear of Gods
Servants must not fly from their Masters for any unkind usage.
laws or man's, cast off the yoke of their obedience, although it be to the
very undoing both of their Master and themselves, but how great an offense this
is, the story of Hagar does plainly Genesis 16.
show, who though her Mistress unkind and rough dealing with her, was the cause
why she fled from her, yet the Lord so disliked of it, that he commanded her
not only to return unto her again, but also to humble her A special point
for servants to take notise of.
self unto her: hereby showing, how great an offense she had committed, in
which, such humiliation must be used for reconcilement: you wild headed youths
of our time, consider this.

But it may be some of you will be judge of your own cause and say, it cannot
be that she was so hardly dealt withal as I am, for I neither can get those
things which of right I ought to have, and yet am oppressed with labor, and can
neither get kind word or good look of my Master or Mistress, but say or do
what I can, they are still brawling, chiding and discontented.

Do thou think that the fault in thy Master is the cause why thou do not
give him content to please him? nay, nay, assure thy self, that it is rather
the corruption of thine own heart, that keeps thee from performing thy duty
with more obedience and diligence, that so thou might please him, or is it
because thou take not that course which Abraham's servant did, who when his
Master sent him about his Genesis ^.
business, he made his humble prayers unto the Lord, that he would prosper
the things he went about: this was the way he Servants must pray unto the Lord
to send prosperity to their labors.
went about his business.

See here my friends, the duty of a servant what he ought to do, and how he
assuredly may please his Master or Mistress, he must begin his labors in the
Lord, by sanctifying them unto him by prayers, he must continue them in the
Lord, as doing them unto the Lord, and not unto men, and so he shall be sure
both to please the Lord and his Master, be he what he will, but Servants
notwithstanding the unkind or unjust dealings of Masters unto the^, yet ought
with patience to bear it, performi^g still all fa^^hfulnesse unto them, and of
God shall receive their reward so doing.
if thy Master be kind and loving, and supply unto thee all good and necessary
things needful for thee, it is no thanks unto thee to be obedient and
dutiful unto such a Master, for he has deserved it of thee: but if he be
as thou say unkind unto thee, either in keeping back such things as of
right thou ought to have, or otherwise froward or churlish unto thee, or if
he correct thee unjustly, in these cases if thou with patience do bear it,
and notwithstanding do perform thy duty unto him, with all good
faithfulness, then be thou sure that the Lord will recompense this his
unkindness with kindness again unto thee from him self, for so both the
Apostles do confess, (as I have showed before) but will you have further
proof yet for this point, will you see how God has dealt with others in
former times? read then the History of Jacob, and it will satisfy you
herein, and show you a worthy example.

The 30. Chapter.
WHo could have served a worse Master then Jacob did of his own Uncle Laban,
seeking Genesis 31.
so many ways to defraud him of his due as he did, not once nor twice, but
ten times or many What a careful servant Jacob was though he had a bad
master, and how the Lord rewarded him.
times? so that as he confesses, if the God of his fathers had not beheld his
labors, he had even sent him away empty, notwithstanding his paynefull
labors spent 20. years together in his service, by day being consumed with
heat, and in the night with frosts, so careful over his business, that he
would not suffer his eyes to take their rest in the night season, yet all this
time of his me^y wrongs he bare with patience, and never neglected any part of
his duty the more for it: and how God rewarded this his painful service, the
story plainly shows, to the great comfort of all good servants, what
wonderful blessings he bestowed upon him, both delivering him from his unkind
Master and cruel Brother, and giving unto him blessings abundantly.

Yea, I have another president yet to show you which I may not let pass,
worthy your best consideration, I mean the wrong The ch(...) life of Joseph
should be an ensample to servants.
which Joseph suffered, both inwardly in mind, and outwardly in body: inwardly
in mind by the lasciviousness of his unchaste Mistress, daily tempting him to
that abominable act of Adultery, which his chaste soul hated, and shut up in a
dungeon or prison almost three years together: who could have suffered more
the^ he did, what an unkind part was this of a cruel Master unjustly casting
so good a servant into prison so long time, and that upon so small, nay so
unjust a cause: neither regarding the Genesis 39.
good and faithful service of his servant, of whom he had had good experience
by his long continuance with him, nor with wisdom entering into the equity of
his cause, but rashly, nay foolishly, at the false accusation of his lascivious
wife, casts off, yea into prison so virtuous and so good a servant, whom he
knew of his own knowledge that he feared God, and that all that he Joseph
bearing patiently the wrong done unto him is rewarded with glory and honor.
had, prospered the better under him.

Yet did he not exclaim of this his unjust Master, nor once seek to have his
just cause heard with equity, but with great patience bears he with all these
his great wrongs, and how greatly God did reward him, we see it to be with the
glory of the whole kingdom of Egypt.

O see you that be servants, see these worthy spectacles and regard the^, let
not the unkindly or unjust dealing of your Masters, be any means to withdraw
your affections from performing your labors both faithfully and willingly in
their service, but remember that the work is the Lords, and not your Masters,
for you serve the Lord Christ, and of him shall receive the reward, as you see
is here proved.

But how little are these things Servants ought rather to suffer wrong, then to
offer any.
be regarded of servants in these days with grief we see, not to be in
bearning wrong with patience at the hands of their masters but in offering and
doing wrong unto them, not seeing in themselves into their own faults, but
prying with Argus eyes into the faults of their Master or Mistress, and if they
find but a small hoale in his coat, they will make a great rent of it before
they have done, and that fault which he in his own house has committed
Servants ought to keep their Masters imperfections private to themselves, and
not make them common.
by his lewd servant, is made common to all his acquaintance and companions,
thinking themselves well if they may see any imperfections in them, that they
may deride and scoff at them behind their backs, nay, slander their Masters
in their reputations whereby they do live amongst men.

And thus whereas he does think that he maintayneth a good and faithful
servant, that does uphold and maintain his credit, he nourishes a serpent
that seeks subtly and secretly to slay him: and therefore worse is such a
servant to his Master, then a thief that openly comes upon a man to rob
or to spoil him, for from such a one he happily may escape, and so be free,
but never from such a servant, the poison of Aspes is under his tongue, the
wound is deadly.

And as the servant may not wrong his Master by disclosing any private fault
in him to his disgrace, so likewise he must be no blab of his tongue, in the
disclosing of any business or secrert of his Masters among his family, or being
a tale carrier whereby any strife may arise either in the family or amongst
neighbors, he must take heed of that, and especially that by telling of lies
he sow not sedition in the family, for this a wicked Servants may not by any
means cause contention to arise either amongst friends, or in a family.
and a dangerous thing, when strife and contention is raised in a family by
unjust means, neither must he be an abuser of his fellow servants by
quarrilling or fighting with them, or beating and mususing them in the absence
of his Master.

But it may be you will object against me in this point and say, my Master is
pleased to give me some authority over my fellows in his absence, so that I
am to see his business performed by them in due time, and if they shall neglect
the doing thereof, I shall be blamed for it more then they, and therefore I must
be rough sometimes with some of them, or else I shall not get the^ to perform
their business as they should.

Why brother, I tell thee this is no sufficient argument for thee to take upon
thee the authority of a Lord or Master to beat and correct thy fellows, but
if thy Master put thee in any authority more then the rest for the performing
of his business, as thou say, yet see that thou be not puffed up in pride
to take upon thee more then is firt, but by Servants ought not to correct their
fellows, but to leave that prehemine^ce unto their Masters.
loving and kind words, and good instructions from the word of God, and good
examples from thy self, seek to win them to the performance of their duty, so
shall thou get love, and not hatred of thy fellows, and credit and good report
both of thy Master and all others but if there be any so lewd a servant, that
he will not by these good means be won by thee to perform thy Masters
business appointed for him to do, then let thy Master understand thereof
that he may give correction unto such a servant, and have the privilege of a
Master in correcting his own servant: but let not thy hand be upon him, but
remember that he is thy fellow servant, least thereby thou be hated and
despised of thine own fellows, and get thee an evil report amongst men, and
always remember the lesson which Saint Paul teaches, That you so behave your
selves in all things, that the doctrine of Jesus Christ, be not slandered by
your conversation.

The 31. Chapter.
ANd here I have just occasion given me, to reprove the lewd ^es of too too
many wicked servants of our time, that take no regard of the slaundering of the
doctrine of Christ, nor of their own conversations, no nor salvation neither,
and yet they would be counted Christians, but they show themselves worse then
infidells, devils in the shape of men and women, by their works.

Is not their best actions performed even with eye service only, no longer then
Masters looking on, no longer true labor, if he be absent, are not they
absent likewise, are they not contentious, quarrellers, fighters, abusers of
their fellows and like unto ruffians in their Masters houses, blasphemers of
the sacred name of God, using, nay abusing his holy name in every idle action,
so that when the devil is in their Heavy judgments are appointed for wicked
servants.
hearts, yet the holy name of God is abused in their profane lips, forgetting
that the Lord himself has said He will not hold Exo. 20.
him guiltless that takes his name Zacha. 5.
in vain: but as he has already Luke 12.
sent out his dreadful curse against the blasphemer, so he has a judgment
to come of many stripes for such disobedient servants.

And who is so blind that sees not the exceeding intolerable vice of pride by
which the devil leads daily so many of you unto your own destructions? for
have it you will to maintain this vice by hook or by crook, the Masters
estate shall pay for it else, is not this a great fault too common amongst you,
and spread even into the meanest degree of Tradesmen, and of handicrafts, and
which, who, or where are those The great abuse of the pride of servants.
which are not guilty of all degrees of you.

Oh that you did but see what mischiefs you daily fall into by your
intolerable pride! wherein you are grown to such a height, that now ye
disdain the estate and habit of servants in your array, and to be maintained
as you ought by the estate of your Masters: who now can know the Master from
the Servant by his attire? it has not been thus in times past, neither ought
now so to be by the laws of the land: but what speak I of the laws of the
Land, to those which regard not the Laws of God? for which way you get that
which in pride and riot you daily consume, your consciences will best tell you,
yea and accuse you of one day, except you repent.

But sure I am some rob, cousin, The pride of servants, by what means it is
maintained.
and deceive their masters to procure it, for if they can take ought of his
that he sees not, or does not presently miss, then all is well as they
think. Saint Paul charge you not to be pickers, but for to maintain this
your pride, what will you not pick and steal?

Others there be, which if they cannot get it thus, they will get it in an
other fashion, for if their master will deal justly or kindly with his friend,
and will make no gain by him, and put them in trust so to do, they will have
Gehesaies Gehesie ought to be an example unto all lying Servants 1. King. 5.
trick but they will have somewhat of him, they will lie but they will have it,
nay I would they did not lie with the tongue, and steal with both hands to.

Such Gehesies do little regard that he got Namans leprosy for his labor, but
tell them this, they will answer, their master is no Elisha to work miracles,
and therefore fear not, oh my brethren, you little regard that the eyes of
the Lord are as near unto you when you do these things, as the heart of Elisha
was unto his servant Gehesie.

Is this to perform the duty of Christians: nay, to slander the doctrine of
Christ and all good Christians, is this the thing you do when you should serve
the Lord and not your selves? nay, the Devil you serve and your selves, here
is no regard of seeking A note worthy to be regarded of Servants.
the Lord with a single heart, nor doing their service faithfully, as unto the
Lord, nor remembering, that of the Lord they shall receive the reward of their
service, be it good or bad.

But as he is merciful, so he is Gods judgments against wicked servants.
just also and has pronounced this sentence against you, that he will cut you
off and give you your portion with the unbelievers: more might I speak of such
evil servants, but I will rather smother such things in mine own breast,
which of mine own knowledge I know to be true, then explain them in
wrighting, for I wish rather to suppress such evils, then to express them.

I have been somewhat sharp in this my reproof I do confess, but mistake me
not I pray you, for I do not speak generally unto all, God forbid I should, I
hope better things of many of you, for I doubt not but there are some Eliazers
among you Genesis 5.
that fear God, and do faithfully serve both him and your Masters, and do
sanctify all your labors xnto him by prayer, that so both you and your
labors may prosper: some paynefull Jacobs likewise, which with all your best
endeavors perform your labors witho^t grudging or murmuring: some chaste and
faithful Ioseph^s, whose Masters sleep secure, finding themselves blessed
thorough the providence of your wisdoms in the fear of God, and I rejoice
herein, and bless the Lord in his mercy toward you, praying for the
continuance of his blessings upon you, and the increase of your multitude, for
there was one righteous Noah in the old world: And one faithful* Abraham in
Canaan, and one righteous Lot even in Sodom, and Seven Thousand in Israel in
the days of Eliah that never had bowed a knee unto Ball, and I hope there be
some amongst Servants that do daily strive even in these our days, to
perform this their duty of obedience unto their Masters to the full, with a
single and an upright heart, as to the Lord only. And thus I have briefly
run over this duty of Servants, and by the help of these our blessed
Apostles, have showed unto you what duty our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ commands you to perform unto your bodily Masters: And I have se^
before you likewise some of the abuses o^ these our times wherein so many are
carried away by their own selfewils unto their own destructions.

I do now beseech you brethren in thee Lord Jesus, that you become more wary
and wise in your conuersations, having more regard unto the command of our
blessed Savior, in performing this task imposed upon you of your obedience
unto your Masters, in seeking to know their wills, and so with all diligence
to do it, that so you may not only avoid those dangers of many stripes, but
also enjoy the benefit which he has pruided for all those that with all their
best endeauours do labor to perform this their duty, which shall not by any
other, but even by him self, be performed unto you, saying, well done good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful in few things, be thou Mat. 2^.
ruler over much, enter into thy Masters joy, which joy so far excels all
earthly things, that no tongue of man can utter them, nor the heart of man
conceive them, therefore happy and blessed are all those that shall enjoy
them, even so, Amen.

FINIS.
Morning and Evening Prayer to be daily used in private Families.
Morning Prayer.
O Almighty and our most merciful and loving God, and Father in Jesus Christ,
we thy most unworthy servants through thy mercy presuming to prostrate our
selves here before the face of thy divine Majesty, do most humbly beseech thee
for his sake to accept this our bounden duty and humbled hearts which as a
Morning sacrifice with all humbleness we here present unto thee, yielding
praise and thanks unto thy sacred Majesty for all those manifold blessings,
which in thy mercy thou have daily thus plenteously powered upon us thy most
unworthy servants, and amongst the rest we forget not that bodily health, peace
and prosperity which thou in thy mercy do still continue unto us with that
quiet and comfortable rest which we have enjoyed this night past, and that
thou have now brought us to the beginning of this day in safety, These and all
other things whatsoever, we do praise thy most glorious name for, and now
still do most humbly beg of thee, that thou will be pleased to receive us this
day and all the days of our lives under thy powerful protection, Oh defend
and keep us from evil, guide us with thy grace sanctify us with thy spirit,
grant that in all things, yea and above all things, that our whole care and
endeavors may be zealously to walk before thee in holy obedience unto thy
heavenly will and holy commandments, bless us we humbly beseech thee in the
labors of our hands, grant that we take nothing in hand unadvisedly, but what
shall be agreeable unto thy most holy will; thou that know what is needful
for us better then we our selves do, vouchsafe we pray thee to give unto us
the good things which we have need of, whether it be for our souls or
bodies, even for thy dear and only Sons sake Jesus Christ blessed for ever:
we do most humbly beg them in of thee that form of prayer which he himself
haught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

Evening Prayer.
O Blessed God, which gave the people of Israel in charge every day to offer
unto thee a morning and evening sacrifice, that there by thou might be
glorified and praised for their daily protection and preservation, we most
unworthy wretches presuming through this thy mercy to prostrate our selves
here before thy divine majesty, to offer unto thee this our bounden duty, do
most humbly beseech thee for thy blessed Sons sake Jesus Christ blessed for
ever, that by the powerful assistance of thy holy spirit, thou will sanctify
our hearts unto the performance hereof; for we confess, in respect of our
manifold sins, we are far unworthy to present our selves before thy glorious
majesty, and much more that thou should regard us or accept any thing which
we do but we most humbly beseech thee enter not into judgment with thy
servants for who then shall stand before thee, our very righteousness is like
unto a filthy cloth, the thoughts of our hearts are daily and hourly corrupt
before thee, who can tell how often he offends? we have been always
rebellious Children against thee, disobeying thy commandments, contemning thy
judgments, and abusing thy merits, and it is thy great mercy that has stayed
thee, that thou have not utterly consumed us long since, even in the midst of
our sins, when they were unregarded of us, or we unrepented of them: but
since thou have been pleased to infuse now again into us thy grace to see our
sins let this thy grace work in us we beseech thee a true and unfeigned
repentance of them, pardon, oh pardon all our sins O Lord we humbly beseech
thee for thy blessed Sons sake Jesus Christ we most humbly beseech thee to
pardon all our offenses, which eieither either this day, or any other day or
time from our births to this hour we have committed, whether in thought,
word, or deed, whersoeuer, whenever, howsoever, or against whomsoever
committed, let that innocent and most precious blood which thy blessed Son
has shed to wash a way the sins of thy servants, wash and purge us from all
our sins, and seeing that from us of our selves no good thing can proceed, we
humbly beseech thee to create in us new hearts, and by the powerful working of
thy holy spirit sanctify both our hearts and souls unto thee, that we may
hereafter strive to perform a more holy and zealous obedience unto thy
heavenly will and holy commandments, then ever hitherto we have done, for our
blessed Saviors sake we beseech thee to grant these and all other good
things unto us which may daily further us in the works of our salvation, and
here as we are by duty bound, we render unto thee humble and most hearty
thanks for all those great and manifold blessings which in thy great mercy
thou do daily thus plenteously power upon us most unworthy wretches; and
amongst the rest, we forget not that bodily health, peace, and prosperity
which we do still enjoy, with the blessings which we have this day received.
These and all other things whatsoever, we do praise thy most glorious name
for, and do most humbly beg of thee to continue thy mercies and blessings
still unto us in all the good things that we have need of, and amongst the
rest, we beseech thee to receive us under thy powerful protection this night,
that so we may rest in peace, and sleep in safety, for we know there is no
safety but in thee and with thee, in vain are our houses any protection unto
us, or our beds any place of rest for our weak bodies, if thy blessing be not
with us. Oh suffer not Satan to trouble us in our sleeps, nor any danger to
annoy us, but we beseech thee let thy holy Angels watch over us while we take
rest, that so when we shall wake again we may render due praise unto thee,
unto whom all praise belongs, neither do we beg these things for our
selves here alone, but for thy whole Church wheresoever dispersed. More
particularly we pray thee be gracious unto this land wherein through thy
goodness we live and have o^^ being, and herein as wet are by duty bound, we
humbly beseech thee to power thy blessings on that great pillar of thy Church
our dread Sovereign Lord Charles, by thy gracious appointment King of great
Britain France and Ireland, we beeseech thee enrich his royal heart with
such graces and gifts as shall be meet for that high place and calling
wherein thou have placed him, bless with him his and our noble Queen Mary,
his faithful privy Counselors, the reverend Clergy, all true hearted
Nobility, loyal Gentry, and loving Comminalty, we beseech thee let thy
blessings dwell on the heads of these so long as the Sun and Moon endures,
neither forget we the poor afflicted members of this thy Church wheresoever
dispersed, or howsoeeuer distressed, and every particular member thereof
howsoever afflicted, whether outwardly in body, or inwardly in mind, even as if
our selves were in their case, so beg we for them patience, comfort, and a
speedy release of their several calamities, that they with us, and we with
them, may in the end rejoice together with thee in thy heavenly kingdom: which
Lord we beseech thee to hasten, prepare us for thee, and come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, even so, Amen.

T. C.


