A SERMON OF Gods Omnipotency and Providence.

PSALM. 95. 3. The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.



Printed by C. L.

And are to be sold by Matthew Law, in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the
Fox. 1615.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, It may seem mere presumption, and vain ostentation, for
one of my years to commit so unworthy labors to the (...)sse, especially when
so many aged and re(...)end Divines, of excellent learning, pro(...)nd
judgment, and continued experience, (...) silent in this kind. My apology
for my (...) is, the common plea, I mean importu(...) of friends, and for mine
own part, I (...) not in conscience deny so religious a re(...) of my
Christian auditors. God that (...)es the secrets of all hearts knows it, that
(...), and self love, were never the spurs (...)cke me on to this bold
attempt: only (...) has been the height of my desires, the go^d of Sion, the
benefit of Gods Church (...) people: if therefore thou repeast any pro(...)
from these my pains, I have attained to the top of my wishes. Howsoever,
here I present them to thy favorable censure. In the mean time, I commend both
thee and thy grouth in grace, to the help and furtherance ^^ Almighty God.
Canham.

Thine in Christ Jesus, BEZALEEL CARTER.

A SERMON OF Gods power and providence.
PSALM. 135. 6. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven, in the
earth, in the sea, and in all deepes.
Right Honorable, Worsh. and Well-beloved,
THe Scripture is infinitely large The Lord omnipotent for four reasons.
in setting forth unto us the power of God: I know, says David, in the verse
foregoing, that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all Gods. 1. The
Lord is mighty, for he does whatsoever he pleases. Genesis 18. 14. 2. He is
mighty, because he works by no means. Job. 26. 2. 3. Psalm. 148. 5. 3. He is
mighty, for he works by weak means, Exodus 8. 6. Acts. 12. 25. Lastly, he
is mighty, because he can do more then ever he did from the beginning, or
will do to the worlds end. Mat. 26. 52. Now his power in doing whatsoever he
pleases, is laid down to us in this text: Whatsoever pleased the Lord, etc. At
this time I resolve to read it in the present tense, Whatsoever pleases the
Lord, that does he, etc. and I hope I shall offer no violence to my text, for
God is one and same, God yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, his arm
is not shortened, nor his power diminished, it has been alike from the
beginning, and shall continue alike, till time shall be no more, Whatsoever
pleases the Lord, etc.

Now for my method, take it thus.

1. I will show you that God does what he pleases. 1. In heaven. 2. In the
earth. Division.
3. In the seas. 4. In all deepes.

2. I will come to use and application.

1. In heaven.
By heaven, I understand whatsoever is above the earth: Paul I remember makes
1. Particular.
mention of three heavens, a first, a second, and a third heavens; like Noah's
Arc that was contrived with a first, second, and third room.



coelum empyreium, comprehending the seven planets, and the firmament, which
is the receptacle of all the fixed stars.

Paul calls the highest heavens, the Paradise of god, and the seat of the
blessed.

I might take occasion to show you that God does what he pleases. 1. In the
first heavens. 2. In the second heavens. 3. In the third heavens.

But least I should seem rather curious then profitable, I will handle this
point generally, that God does what he pleases in heaven. The heaven is the
Lords throne, 1. King. 8. 27. the Angels at his command, as diligent as the
servants of the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 9. if he says to one, go, he goes; to
another, come, he comes; to a third, do this, he does it: If to destroy
Sodom, ready to destroy: if to preserve Lot, they can do nothing, til Lot be
come out of Sodom. Know thou not, said Christ, to him that smot off the high
Priests servants ear, that I could pray to my father, and he would give me
more then twelve legions of Angels? Matthew. 26. The sun, and the moon, and
the stars, the orbs and arches of heaven, obey his voice: he caused the
sun and moon to stand still till Joshua prevailed over his enemies, Josh. 10.
13. and the stars from heaven to fight against Sisera, Judge. 5. 20. He
commands the winds and storms, and the winds and storms obey him, Mark. 4. 36.
The thunders, and they are obedient to him: He sent thunder to plague the hard
hearted Egyptians, Exodus 9. 23. He sent thunder at the prayer of Samuel, 1.
Sam. 12. 18. The winds were his servants to bring in quayles to the Israelites,
Numb. 11. 31. And when Jonah fled from the presence of the Lord to Tarshish, he
raised up a mighty tempest, Ion. 1. 4. The swift and speedy lightnings are his
attendants. When he came to deliver the law to Moses, he came in a terrible
manner with lightnings, Exodus 19, 16. He covers the heavens with clouds, and
prepares rain, Psalm. 147. 8. In the time of Noah the Lord opens the windows
of heaven, and commanded the clouds to rain, and then the earth was covered
with water, Genesis 7. 19. Again, he commanded that it should not rain for the
space of three years and upwards, in the time of Eliah, 1. King. 17. 1. and
then the windows of heaven were shut up, and the rivers were dried up, 1. kin.
17. 7. He gives snow like wool, and scatters the hoare frost ashes. Psalm.
147. 16. He tames the birds of the air, even the wild ravens: the wild
ravens fed the Prophet Eliiah, 1. Kin. 17. 6. In a word, all things in heaven
obey him, the Angels, the Sun, the moon, the stars, storms, tempests,
thunders, lightnings, rain, snow, hayle. He gives by his voice, the multitude
of waters in the heavens, he causes his clouds to ascend from the ends of the
earth, he turns his lightnings to rain, and brings forth the wind out of his
treasure, Ierem. 10. 13. Whatsoever pleases the Lord, that does he in heaven.

In the earth.
As he rules all things in heaven, so he 2. Particul^
rules all things in earth, mooueable and immooueable, man and beast: he
rules all men, yea the very steps of a man are ruled by the Lord, Prou. 20.
24. he fashions the heart of every man, and understands their works, Psalm. 33.
15. by him Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; by him Princes rule, and
all the Judges and Nobles of the earth, Prou. 8. 15. It is he that gives
deliverance unto Kings, and rescueth his servants from the hurtful sword,
Psalm. 144. 10. he pulls down Princes, and raises up Princes, according to
his pleasure. He chased the Amorites, Exodus 34. 11. he fought for Israel, Ios.
10. 42. he gave Hezekiah victory, 2. King. 19. 34. he gives the victory, he
gives the overthrow; in a word, he rules all men, the mighty of the earth,
Emperors, and Kings: The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, Prou.
21. 1. and not only so, but whatsoever is in the earth besides, with life or
without life, * even ^en and ^attel. ^^. 8. 8.
from the lion to the creeping thing: he caused a lion to destroy the
disobedient prophet, 1. King. 13. 24. so he gave Samson victory over a lion,
Judge. 14. 12 and likewise David victory over a lion, 1. Sam. 17. 34. He sent
two be(...)stroy the forty two children that (...)ked the Prophet Elisha, 2.
King. 2. (...) Frogs, flies, lice, and grasshoppers are t^^ Lords mighty army:
he spoke the word and they mustred themselves up against Pharaoh, and made war
against the wicked Egyptians, Exodus 8. 5. 9. 1. 10. 28. The worms likewise
obey the voice of God: he sent a worm to destroy Jonah his gourd, Ion. 4. 7.
and so do the serpents, for he sent fiery serpents amongst the children of
Israel, that stang them so as many died, Numb. 21. 6. The Lord is he that
causes (...) trees of the earth to flourish, even the (...) Cedars of Lebanon,
and the tree (...) earth to wither, like the wild figg^ (...) ^at^^. 21. 19. he
raised up a wild gourd ^^ comfort Jonah, and the next morning he caused it to
die away, Ion. 4. 7. He causes the earth to bring forth the bud of ^he herb,
that seedeth seed according ^^ his kind, Genesis 1. 11. he, I say, rules the
earth, men, beasts, trees, plants. The earth is the Lords, and all that therein
is, the round world, and they that dwell therein, Psalm. 24. 1. Whatsoever
pleases the Lord, that does he in (...) in earth.

In the seas.
Thirdly, God does that which he pleases in the sea: The sea is his, and he
made it, and his hands prepared the dry land, Psalm. 95. 5. he divided the red
sea, so as the Israelites passed through upon dry land, Exo. 14. 23. He
commands the sea, yea the fishes of the sea are commanded of God from the
greatest to the least: He caused a whale to swallow up Jonah, and the same
whale to cast him up again upon the dry land, Ion. 2. 10. and when Simon had
gone a fishing all night, and could catch nothing ^ at length Christ caused him
to lau^ (...) to the deep, and then he encloas^ (...) ^ole multitude of
fishes, Luke 5. (...) God, says David, rulest the raging of the sea, when the
waves thereof arise, thou stillest the^, Psa. 89. 9. his ways in the sea, and
his paths in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known, Ps^. 77. 19.
When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from the barbarous
people, the sea saw it and fled, Jordan was turned backward, Psalm. 117. Thou
have, faith the Psalmist, placed the earth upon her foundations, thou couerest
it with the deep as with a garment: the waters would stand above the
mountains, but at thy rebuke they fly, Psalm. 104. 5. as if he had said, If
thou, O God, did not curb in and bridle the raging of the sea, it were
impossible but that the whole world should be overwhelmed with water, the
waters would stand above the mou^tains, but at thy rebuke they fly: and Psalm.
33. 7. He gathers the waters of the sea together as upon an heap, and lays
up the deepes in his treasure: and yet in another Psalm, The voice of God is
upon the waters, he fittes upon the floods, and remains king for ever and
ever, Psalm. 29. 10. Whatsoever pleases the Lord, that does he in heaven, in the
earth, and in the sea.

And in all deepes.
4. Particular
he delivered Jonah being encompassed with the deepes, Ion. 1. 2. he makes
the deepes to boil like a pot, Job. 41. 22.



the bottomless pit, Reu. 20. his power is deeper then hell, Job 11. 8. hell
and destruction are before the Lord, Pro. 15. 11.



Whatsoever pleases the Lord that he does, The limitation of this doctrine.
etc. Yet this must be understood with limitation: for some things there are
which God cannot do. God cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. God cannot deceive, God cannot
sin, God cannot deny himself, etc. here then arises the difficulty, how can it
be said, that God does whatsoever he pleases, since you have named
particulars, that he cannot effect nor bring to pass? God cannot sin, God
cannot cause that which is done to be undone, etc. and therefore God is not
omnipotent, neither does he whatsoever he wills. But the answer is easy:
opera non potentiae sed impotentiae, to sin, to die, etc. these proceed from
weakness and infirmity, and therefore if God were subject to these, he were
not Almighty: for to sin is a token of imperfection, yea of slavery: know
you not says Paul that his servants you are whom you obey. Ioh. 8. 34. If God
could be overcome by sin, he should be the servant of sin, and if he
could subject himself to the bondage, and slavery, and service, and dominion
of sin, and be vanquished and overcome by it, he were not Almighty: for this
would derogate from his omnipotency, because it implies a contradiction, to be
omnipotent, and yet to yield to the conquest of sin: and therefore here
rather appears the mighty power of God, that he is not subject to these
infirmities, it is the great power of God, that he cannot lie, and so for
sin in general, therefore it is not in God, because he is Almighty and
omnipotent. But I leave the doctrines, and hasten to the use. I will first
deliver one use in general, and so we will come to more particular
application.

Since God rules all things in heaven, The general use.
and earth, etc. therefore nothing comes to pass, without his special notice
and providence, nothing comes by accident, nor nothing comes by chance. The lot
is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition is of the Lord, Prou. 16. 33.
who says a thing comes to pass, and the Lord has not done it? out of the
mouth of the most High proceeds evil and good, Lam. 3. 37. The Lord saves man
and beast, Psalm. 36. 6. God cares for the birds of heaven and feeds them,
Matthew. 6. 26. and he numbers our hayres, Matthew. 10. 30. Nay, takes notice of
every tear that is shed by the faithful, and puts them in a bottell, Psalm.
56. 8. Nay, his providence extends to the lilies of the field, and to the birds
of heaven, even to the little sparrow. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away, as it pleases the Lord, so come things to pass, Job. 1. 21. Indeed
ordinarily we ascribe whatsoever betides us, to fortune, and chance, and to the
influences of the stars, as if God were not the disposer and ruler of all his
works: there can be no evil in the city, says Amos, but the Lord has done
it, Amos. 3. 6. plagues come from God, punishments from God, crosses from God:
the covetous man imputes his losses to fortune, his increase to fortune, and
generally untimely deaths, burnings, blastings, etc. these are imputed to
accident and chance, when indeed sin is the cause, and God is the author of
punishment. Man suffers for sin, Lam. 3. 39. our sins are the cables, and
cartropes, that hurries down Gods vengeance upon us. I kill, says God, and I
give life, I wound and I make whole, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I form the light, I create
darkness, I make peace, and I create evil, I the Lord do all these things,
Isai. 45. 7. This in general.

Now in particular this doctrine may serve, First for terror to the wicked.
Secondly, for comfort to the elect.

Terror to the wicked. 1. In regard of this life. 2. In regard of a better life.

Consolation to the elect. 1. for this life. 2. for a better life.

deeper then hell, since the measure of it is longer then the earth, and
broader then the sea, Job. 11. 8. If they look up to heaven, the mighty God of
heaven their enemy, Christ their enemy, archangels, and Angels, the orbs and
arches of heaven, the stars and the planets, all things in heaven ready at
Gods command to bandy against the^, nay the gates of heaven bard up against
them, as it was against the five foolish virgins, Math. 25. 12. If they look
down to the earth, the earth is weary of bearing so vile a burden: if they
fly to the sea, that swells and rages against them: if they fly to the East,
God is there, if to the West God is there, if to the North he works in the
North, if to the South he hides himself in the South, Job. 23. 8. So as the
estate of a wicked man, is like the estate of him that the Prophet Amos speaks
of, that flew from a lion, and a bare met him, Amos, 5. 19. Or like Plinies
flying fish, which being in the sea, is chased by the fishes, and flying into
the air is pursued by the birds, which way soever they go they run headlong
to their destruction: if they take the wings of the morning and fly to the
sea, God commands the sea, and that makes war against them, as it did against
the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 28. If they return to the earth, the earth shall be
cursed to them as it was to Cain, Genesis 4. 12. If they look up to heaven, they
fly from a lion to a bear, God likewise ready to execute vengeance upon them
for their wicked courses. And therefore truly said the Devil to Saul, Do thou
ask counsel of me, and God is thine enemy? 1. Sam. 28. 16. It is vain to
consult or ask counsel, if God opposes, if God takes in against us, it is a
vain thing to trust in charrets or horses: woe to the rebellious children,
says the Prophet, that strengthen themselves with the strength of Pharaoh, and
trust in the shadow of Egypt: for the strength of Pharaoh shall be their shame,
and the trust in the shadow of Egypt their confusion, Isai. 30. 1. 2. Though
hand join in hand, says David, nation join with nation, kingdom with
kingdoms, though hand join in hand, yet shall not the wicked escape
unpunished: I kill, says God, neither is there any that can deliver out of my
hands, Deu. 32. 39. Though they dig down to hell, thence shall mine hand take
them, though they climb up to heaven, thence I will bring them down: though
they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them thence,
and though they be hidden in the bottom of the sea, I will command the serpent
and he shall bite them, Amos 9. 2. 3. This then is the estate of a wicked man,
but I purpose to handle this point more particularly.

First, God does what he pleases in In heaven.
the heaven, and therefore in what a dangerous, in an uncertain, and slipperie
estate is every wicked person, that stands not in good grace and terms with
God, but stands in the estate of rebellion, and is out of his favor, which way
soever he turns, encompassed about with as many enemies as God has
creatures. For even as Princes out of their absolute authority leauie up
forces, in the court, in the city, in the country, amongst their subjects
superior and inferior: So I say the Lord has, as the earth and sea at his
command, so likewise all his celestial courtiers the Angels, as it were his
Nobles, whereof one is able to overthrow an hundred fourscore and five
thousand, 2. King. 19. 39. and as he has his no^^es, so has he his inferior
officers, the sun^^, the moon, all the planets and stars, whereby he can and
does astonish and amaze wicked and godless and rebellious people. He binds the
waters in the cloud, and the cloud is not broken under (...). The pillars of
heaven tremble and quake at his reproof, he has garnished the heavens, and
framed the crooked serpent, Job. 26. 11. 12. 13. He commands the sun, and it
rises not, ^e closes up the stars as under a signe^, he makes the stars
Arcturus, Pleyades, and Orion, and the stars of the South, Job. 9. 7. 8. 9.
He commands the pillars of heaven, the sphear^^ and constellations, the
planets and stars, Arcturus, Pleyades, and Orion, all these are ready to
obey the voice of God, and if he please to command them to plague the
ungodly: and there is not the least of the Lords army, not the least Angel,
star, not the least meteor, but is able, if God but speak the word to
destroy, I say not an Egypt, an Asia, or a world, but ten thousand worlds.
Surely, it is a wonder that any wicked man should dare to sleep upon his bed,
that they should give sleep to their eyes, or number to their eyelidds, Prove.
6. 4. being so infinitely beset with millions of enemies: how miserably was the
poor servant of Elisha affrighted, when he saw that an host of men had
encompassed the (...), and cried out to Elisha, alas master what shall we do?
2. king. 6. 15. And how fearful were the children of Israel when they departed
Egypt, and were pursued by their enemies, they were sore afraid says the text
and cried to the Lord, Exodus 14. 10. A ^ so I say it is a wonder of wonders,
that men should be so secure, that they should not tremble even as Belthazar
trembled, when he saw the hand writing upon the plaster of the wall, Dan. 5.
5. that their hearts should not fail them, that dismaiednes and fear^ ^ould
not swallowe them up: When ^mies, not of Egyptians, but Angels ^ursue them, nay
when as all things created from the earth, to circumference of heaven, the lion
and the bear, the great bear and the lesser bear, the crooked serpent,
Pleyades, and Orion: all ^ods heavenly host, bid them battle, and set
themselves continually in battle array against them.

Secondly, how can they think to be In earth.
safe upon the earth, or to prosper upon the earth, since God is the ruler of
the earth; methinkes every ungodly wretch should be of Cains mind, that
feared least every man he met with, were appointed for his executioner, Genesis
4. 14. May they not justly fear that the earth will take part with her Lord
and maker, and swallowe them up, as it did Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.
1, 2, 3. yea, that the least worm and creeping thing should be made strong
enough to destroy them: thus proud Herod was worried with worms, Act. 12. 23.
and so we read in Joel, that the Lord plagued the nation of the Jews with
most contemptible creatures, grasshoppers, cankerwormes, catterpillars, and
palmerwormes, Joel 2. 25. Pope Adrian was slain by a gnat, others with the
stone of a raison, some with an hair in their broth, some one way, some an
other, and methinkes then that every vile person, should fear the vilest and
basest of Gods creatures, even frogs, flies, and lice, least these should be
appointed for their destruction, that they should fear to walk in the air for
fear of infection, or yet to remain in their houses, for fear least their
houses should revenge Gods quarrel upon them: may they not fear that every
morsel they eat should be their bane, and every drop of liquor they drink
should be their poison? but what says Solomon, Sentence against evil is
deferred, and therefore the heart is fully bent to do wickedly, Eccles. 8. 11.
God does not open the sluices and floodgates of heaven upon us as he did upon
the old world, Genesis 7. 17. the earth does not open her mouth to devour, as in
the time of Moses, Numb. 16. 1. God raineth not down upon us fire and
brimstone, as he did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19. 24. We see many an old
sinner, many an old adulterer, many an old swearer, many an old drunkard, and
therefore men draw on sin with cords of vanity, Isa. 5. 18. and commit all
manner of wickedness with all greediness; these let them know (though God be
patient waiting for their conversion) yet as he is patient, so he is just, and
therefore though he forbeares long (as he is slow to anger, Exo. 34. 6.) yet
even as a stream being stopped carries all before it, or as wet wood being once
kindled burns the faster; so though his wrath has been a long time kept in
with the floodgates of his mercy, yet in the end his fury shall break out,
like a violent stream, to the utter destruction of the wicked. Long did he
bear with the old world, long did his spirit strive with man, Genesis 6. 3. but
in the end he turned the whole world into an Ocean, Genesis 7. 17. long did he
strive with Jerusalem, but at length, she was made a prey to the teeth of her
enemies, Psalm. 124. 6. and not one stone left upon another: long may the Lord
bear with the wicked, but as sure as God is just, so assuredly in the end his
wrath and jealousy shall smoke against them, Deuteronomy. 19. 20. how then can they
sooth up themselves, and flesh up themselves in their sins? how can they
think to be safe upon the earth, since the righteous Judge of the whole world,
Genesis 18. 25. is Lord over the earth? or how can they think to thrive and
prosper upon the earth, since the earth is the Lords, and the plenty of the
earth? Psalm. 24. 1. Gold is mine, says God, and silver is mine, says the Lord
of hosts, Hag 2. 9. Except the Lord builds the house, they labor in vain
that build it; except the Lord keeps the city, the keeper watches in vain,
Psalm. 127. 1. what a madness is this in a besotted worldling, to carke and to
care, and to dig, and ditch, and delue, and beat his brains, and rise early,
and go to bed late, Psalm. 127. 2. as if they would command the earth in
despite of heaven? I tell thee whosoever thou art, if God but command, the
heavens above shall be as iron, and the earth as hard as brass, your land
shall not give her increase, nor your trees their fruit, Leu. 26 19. and
therefore cease from your immoderate labor, and sue for Gods blessing, for
without it you sow much, but bring in but little, and put all your earnings
into a broken bag, Hag. 1. 4.

Thirdly, how can a reprobate think In the sea.
to be safe upon the sea, since God likewise rules the seas. I remember what I
read of Jonah: When Jonah fled from the presence of the Lord to Tarshish, he
betook him to the sea, Ion. 1. 3. but as soon as ever God gave commission to
his creatures, the winds broke forth, and made war upon Jonah, Ion. 1. 4. the
waters encountered with the winds, and made war upon Jonah: nay the fish, the
whale opened his mouth, and lay waiting to devour Jonah, the mariners that
were to land him safely in Tarshish, conspired to cast him into the sea: nay,
if God but set against us, then shall we even like Judas set against our
selves, Mat. 27. 5. Jonah did not in this extremity plead for, but against
himself; Take me, says he, and cast me into the sea, and so shall the sea be
calm unto you, Ion. 1. 12. and how can wicked persons hope for the least
safety upon the sea: if the Lord but command the storms and winds, they obey
him, and these shall work their overthrow; if he but command, the sea, the
ship, the pirates upon the sea, the rocks, these shall work their destruction.

But suppose that neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea sets against them, yet
has In the deeps
the Lord an other army, and when he arms himself to vengeance, even the
sweet waters, and delightful springs shall run upon the world as it were with
drawn swords: and has not the Lord infinitely fought against us with his
watrie army, witness our late floods and inundations, breaking down banks,
carriyng away mils, bridges, etc. the Lord armed these fresh water soldiers
with such strength and power, that nothing was able to resist them: and
therefore still see the miserable estate of an unsanctified man, if he escapes
one evil he meets with an other, if he escape a first, he meets with a
second, for the Lords quiver is full of arrows, and his thunderbolts are never
spent, if neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea, yet shall the deepes revenge Gods
quarrel upon them: even thus miserable are they in this life, even as Jonah in
the whales belly was compassed with waters, so are these with enemies above,
beneath, and round about them.

And yet behold, this is but their miserable The 2. use ^ the 1. part f^ terror
to the wicked.
estate in regard of this world: see again their miserable estate in regard of
a better life. Is it possible that an unclean person should ever think to
dwell with God, so long as God rules in heaven? consider this point in the name
of God, and let it be a doctrine to work terror and amazement in us. God has
said it in his word, that neither buggerers, fornicators, nor adulterers shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven, Ephesians. 5. 5. God that has the keys of heaven,
and has the keys of hell, this God has spoken it, and how can thou then
that runnest to the harlots house, and make thy self a slave to
uncleanness, how can thou ever think to dwell with God, that ever abhorred
uncleanness: and so for covetous persons, that forsake the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof, to surfeit upon filthy Mammon, how can they
over think to dwell with that God that ever abhorred covetous persons,
malicious persons, drunkards, swearers, liars? how can they ever hope to dwell
with that God, that abhors malice, abhors excess, abhors swearers, and liars?
how can such deuillish and damned persons ever think to be saved, since the
heaven of heavens is the Lords? Deuteronomy. 10. 14. God he is holy, God he is
righteous, God he is pure: how can thou then, thou that art unholy, thou that
art vnpure, thou that art unrighteous, how can thou ever think to set thy
foot within the gates of the new Jerusalem? a stinking carcass stinkes not
more vilely in the nostrils of man, then an abominable sinner stinkes odiously
in the nostrils of God. Let all sinful wretches know this, that God is their
mortal enemy, he will wound the head of his enemies, and execute vengeance
upon his enemies, Deuteronomy. 32. 41. we loath not a toad nor a scorpion worse then
the Lord hates them; we hate not the devil, nor the devil hates not man
worse then God hates them, and therefore questionles the Lord will never admit
them into his holy kingdom, neither covetous earth-wormes, beastly dru^kards,
hellish blasphemers, extorting usurers, God will never receive these into his
sacred presence, but shall send them packing with the wicked and the reprobate
into everlasting damnation: whosoever works abomination and lies, shall have
no part in the kingdom of heaven, Reu. 21. 27. the frogs of Egypt stanke not
more rankely in the Egyptians noses, Ex. 8. 14. then these smell rankely in
Gods nosthrils: and therefore I say, God will stop his nose against them, and
give them their portion with hypocrites. All the fearful, all the
unbelieving, and abominable murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers, idolaters, and
liars shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
Reu. 21. 8. And therefore now The conclusion of the use in general.
to draw to a conclusion, as Peter says, humble your selves under the mighty
hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. so say I, humble your selves under the mighty hand
of God: God he is a mighty God, able to work your ruin upon earth, and to
cast both body and soul into hell fire: humble your selves therefore before the
thron of his grace; for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. Thou drunkard that destroiest the temple of God, and the good
creatures of God by thine intemperancy, and runnest into all manner of
enormities, that thy drunken humor hurries thee into, that make streets and
towns ring of thine unruliness, thou that art mighty to drink wine and strong
drink, how dare thou rise early, and go to bed late, to follow drunkenness,
since God has denounced a woe against drunkards? Isa. 5. 11. and that God that
has denounced a woe against thee, is able to cast both body and soul into
hell fire.

Thou covetous earthworme, that make a god of thy goods, that diggest down
to hell for riches, and eatest the poor as men eat bread, that art choked
with the love of the world: thou greedy catterpiller, how dare thou continue
in this sin, since God has said it, That neither thieves, nor railers, nor
covetous persons, shall inherit the kingdom of God? 1. Cor. 6. 10. and this
God is able to cast both body and soul into hell fire.

Thou blasphemer of the name of God, that rentest and tearest the name of God
in pieces, and spewest forth black, and fearful, and damnable oaths, and
make swearing, and cursing, and deuillish speaking, thy best language: how
dare thou take the name of the Lord in vain, since God has said it, that he
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain? Exodus 20. 7. and
this God is able to cast both body and soul into hell fire. Dares a son
offend his father? durst Pilate offend Caesar, Ioh. 19. 13. dares the borrower
offend the lender? no man will willingly offend him that is able to work him
an inconvenience; and think we then that it is a safe thing to offend the
living Lord of heaven and earth, that is able doubly and redoubly, and trebly
to requite us, and to render vengeance to those that know him not. If you will
not be reformed, says the Lord to the obstinate Jews, but walk stubbornly
against me, then will I also walk stubbornely against you, and I will smite you
yet seven times for your sins, Leuit. 26. 24. I remember what I read in the
2. Sam. 16. 6. concerning David and Shemei: when David went down, the wind
and the people increased with Absalom, then indeed Shemei cared not for David,
but railed on him, and cursed him, and cast stones at him: David prevailed
against Absalom, then he hasts to David with his thousand people, trembled and
quaked before him, O says he, let not my Lord impute wickedness unto me, I
know that I have done amiss, I know that I have offended, etc. so truly if
God had not an ouerruling hand, if he were not able to recompense evil to his
adversaries, then there were some reason that we should be secure and careless
of his majesty; but since his might is so boundless, that it reaches from
heaven to the earth, from the earth to the lowest hell, so as he is able to
destroy the mightiest even with the breath of his nosthrils, oh therefore let
us humble our selves before his Majesty, let us cry out with the poor
Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18. 9. or with the prodigal
son, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15. 21. let us cry out with Paul, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Act. 7.
24. let us with the Nineuits fly to God, with prayer and fasting, Ion. 3. 5.
let us with Manasseh, humble our selves greatly before God, 2. Chr. 33. 12.
with Daniel, confess our sins, and seek the Lord, Dan. 9. 3. with Peter, let
us weep bitterly, Matthew. 26. 75. let tears run down our cheeks like a
river, let us take no rest, neither let the apple of our eyes cease, Lam. 2.
18. until we have recovered the favor of God, and found rest to our souls,
Mat. 11. 29. What man dares presume to move the wrath of a King? The wrath of
a King is as the messengers of death, Prou. 16. 14. or as the roaring of a
lion, Prou. 20. 2. Indeed there are many court claw-backs and Parasites, to
humor and flatter a king, to cry out upon every occasion, as Herod's auditors
did, The voice of God and not of man, Act. 12. 22. ready to bow to him and
adore him like a God: but who dares come to him, as Eliiah did to Ahab, and
confront him to his face, 2. King. 18. 1. and how then should we dare to offend
the king of kings, whose lordship is heaven, and earth, and sea, and hell: for
he fills all places, Ier. 23. 24. the landlord of the whole world, the God
of gods, and Lord of lords, Isa. 41. 2. whose face is as a flame of fire, his
voice as the roaring of many waters, that has charets innumerable, and rides
upon the wings of the wind, that measures the waters in his fist, that compts
heaven with his span, and co^prehends the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighs the mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance, Isa. 40. 12. If
we dare not offend a King whose breath is in his nosthrils, that shall die like
a man, nay if he do wickedly shall perish like a beast, Psalm. 49. 12. and be
cast into the burning Topheth, which is prepared for the king, Isa 30. how then
should we dare to sin against the almighty God of heaven and earth, which
has his way in the whirlwind, that as it was said of the monster Leuiathan,
esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood, Job 41. 18. that puts his
hands to the rocks, and overthrows the mountains, Job 28. 9. Before whom the
earth trembles, and the mountains melt, Judge. 5. 5. Oh let us cast our selves
down before this God, for he is a great God, and a great king above all gods.
This of the first use.

2. This doctrine of Gods omnipotency, The 2. use for consolation to the godl^
may serve for the comfort of the Elect: for since God rules all things,
therefore they may be assured, that none of all Gods creatures shall hurt them:
what says the spirit of God, concerning the righteous; they shall laugh at
destruction, and death, and shall not be afraid of the beast of the earth: The
stones of the field shall be in league with them, and the beast of the field
shall be in league with him, Job. 5. 22.

First, God rules in heaven: this may administer In heaven*
infinite comfort. For by this they may be assured, that none of all Gods
creatures in heaven shall hurt them. The wind shall not blow upon them, nor a
cloud shall not rise but for their good, a drop of rain falls nor, storms
nor winds nor lightnings happen not but by the appointment of God, and
therefore he is said to make the chambers in his clouds, and to ride upon the
wings of the wind, and to break the bottles of rain, Job. 38. 38. to have
his treasures of hail, and his treasares of snow, Job. ^8. 22. He causes the
sweet influences of the Pleyades, and looses the bands of Orion, he brings
forth Mazaroth in their time, and guides Arcturus with his sons, Job. 38. 32.
If then (as it is said in an higher sense) if God be on our side, who can be
against us? so if God the general of the army be on our side, which of all
his creatures can be against us? no, if he be with us, he shall open his
treasures of snow, he shall command his clouds to pour down their ^^rst rain,
and their latter rain, and the grass shall grow upon the mountains, Psalm.
147. 8. the elementarie regions the stars, and the planets, shall fight for
us: The Sun shall stand still in Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Aylon,
Josh. 10. 12. the sun and moon stood still at the prayer of Joshua, the
sun in Gibeon and the moon in the valley of Aylon; the sun shall forsake
her wonted race, and the moon shall cease from her course, for the good and
benefit of Gods Church and people. Nay, the Angels Gods domestical servants,
in the check roll, that wear Gods liuerie after a special manner, these shall
attend upon the elect. The Angels of the Lord pitch round about them that fear
him, and delivers them, Psalm. 34. 7. and the writer to the Hebrews, Are they
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which are
heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. nay, they are not only guarded by Angels, but
by armies of angels: an host of Angels met with Jacob, Genesis 32. 2. and an army
of Angels with chariots of fire were ready to protect Elisha, 2. King. 6. 17.
an Angel were sufficient to protect the whole Church: one army might be
sufficient, but not one angel, not one army, but legions, millions, and
mirriads of heavenly soldiers, pitch their tents, about every one that fears
the Lord. May we not say of this doctrine, as was said of Goliath his sword,
there is none to it: this this, is a machlesse doctrine for a wounded spirit:
fall in with God, and make thy peace with him, and not only his other creatures,
but even Archangels, and Angels shall guard thee.

2. God rules the earth, and therefore In earth.
this may administer further comfort. God raises up states, and he casts
down states, for the Lord is Judge, Psalm. 75. 7. It matters not then how
grievous thy distresses be, nor how many thine enemies be, for the Lord can
raise the poor out of the dust, and the needy out of the doung, that he may
set them with the Princes, even with the Princes of the people. Psalm. 113. 7.
That child that has a wealthy, and powerful, and potent father, fears
neither poverty nor enemies: and what need we then that have the Almighty
Jehovah for our Lord and father, that looks down with us or against us, Psalm.
33. 12. and binds all his other creatures to their good-abearing, Hos. 2. 21.
what need we fear so long as God rules the earth: Let God take in with Samson,
not a band of Philistines can prevail against him: nay Samson without sword,
or spear, (when the spirit of the Lord came upon him) he slew a thousand men
with the iawbone of an ass, Iud. 15. 15. Gideons three hundred men, shall (with
the knocking of potsheards) chase their enemies that lie as thick upon the
ground as grasshoppers, Judge. 7. 22. Jonathan and his armor bearer shall
terrify an host, 1. Sam. 14. 15. little David, with a sling and stone, shall
vanquish mighty Goliath that was harnised with an helmet of bras 1. Sam. 17. 5.
and had boots of brass upon his legs, and a shield of brass upon his
shoulders, v. 6. If the Lord be with Jacob, Esau shall have no power to bid him
battle, Genesis 34. 4. If the Lord be with Abraham, Pharaoh his cruel enemy
shall enrich him, Genesis 22. 19. Thus does the Lord, order all things for the good
of his people: he makes their enemies their friends, and delivers them in
battle from the power of the sword, Job. 5. 20. God is my shepherd, says
David, and how can I want? Psalm. 23. how can he want that has God for his
shephard: lift up thine eyes, said the Lord to Abraham, Eastward, Westward,
Northward, and Southward, all the land that thou see will I give thee, Genesis
13. 14. Gods wealth is not in the East only, or the West only, but Eastward,
Westward, Northward, and Southward: and therefore no good thing can be wanting
to those that fear God: Psalm. 34. If you keep my Commandments (it was the
Lords promise to the Jews) I will send you rain in due season, and the land
shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall give their fruit,
your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and your vintage to the sowing
time, and you shall eat your bread in plenty, and dwell in your land safely, you
shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you upon the sword: five of
you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred shall put five thousand to flight: Leu
26. 4. 5. 6. In the name of God, and fear of God, let us consider this point:
do thine enemies rise up against thee? and thine adversaris increase, Ps. 3.
1. as God said to Abraham, fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler, Genesis 15. 1. so
say I, fear nothing, God is thy buckler: be thine enemies never so malicious,
God that is greater then thine enemies, he shall cause those that rise against
thee, to fall before thy face. If they come against thee one way, they shall
fly before thee seven ways, Deu. 28. 7. Yea, does their malice reach to
blood; do they lead thee before Kings and Rulers for Christ his sake? still
trust in God, that God that delivered Daniel out of the lions iaws, preserved
Shadrach, Meshack, and Abednego amidst the fiery furnace, that delivered the
children of Israel with an high hand against Pharaoh king of Egypt, Exodus 14.
8. this God is able to preserve thee in spite of thine adversaries: and he
has said it, that he will never forget thee. Isa. 49. 15. If the Lord
sustain thee, what need thou be afraid of ten thousand people though they
should beset thee round about, Psalm. 3. 6. Again, for the things of this
life, how can thou want, since God rules the earth. That God that gave
riches, and treasures, and honors to Solomon, so as he gave gold and silver as
stones, 2. Chron. 1. 15. That God that chose David from a sheepfold to a
kingdom, Psalm. 78. 70. this God is able to supply thy wants, and he has
promise to make thee plentiful in goods, Deuteronomy. 28. 11. Let us seriously
consider this point: when thine enemies rise up against thee, think of Gods
power: when the world frowns upon thee, think of Gods power: when the
streams of affliction overwhelme thy soul, think of Gods power: nay resolve
with Job, though he should slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job. 13. 15. no
question the thought of it shall be as comfortable unto thee, as the cool water
to the weary passenger, Prove. 25. 25.

Thirdly, to proceed to further matter of comfort: God rules the sea, and
therefore In the sea.
the child of God shall be safe as well by sea as by land: no place is more
full of perrill and danger then the sea, dangerous for pirates, dangerous for
storms, dangerous for rocks, yet notwithstanding, there does the Lord
mightily uphold his people, even amidst the billows and storms of the sea.
Excellent for this purpose is that in the 107. Psalm. 2. 3. 4. when the storms
rise, and lift up the waves of the sea, when they mount up to the heavens, and
descend to the deep, so as their souls melt for trouble, when they are tossed to
and fro like a drunken man, and all their cunning is gone, etc. when those that
are upon the sea, are in this fear and perplexity, ready to be devoured by
the seas, to be swallowed up in the sands, and to dash against the rocks: when
the winds whistle, and the sea roars, and swells, and darkness ouerspreads al:
when every one is at his wits end with astonishment, why then says David in
the same Psalm, they cry unto God in their trouble, and he brings them out of
their distress, he turns the storm into a calm, so as the waves of the sea
are still, and they come to their desired haven, v. 30. Thus you see, sea and
land, every place is a place of Sanctuary, of rest, and refuge, to the
righteous man, according to that, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. thou shall be blessed in the
city, and blessed in the field: or that in the Psalmist, blessed in thy going
out, and coming in, Ps. 121. 8. Lo surely thus shall the man be blessed, that
fears the Lord, Psalm. 128. 4. abroad, at home, by sea and by land. Thus God
dealt by the Israelites, when they travailed by land: he guides them when they
came to the sea: he divided the red sea, and led them through it, Psalm. 78.
13. when they did travel in the day time, he led them with a cloud, and when
they went in the night he led them with a pillar of fire, v. 14. when they were
thirsty, he gave them water out of the hard rock, v. 16. When they were
hungry, he sent them Manna from heaven, and rained down flesh upon them like
dust, verse. 27. Thus the Lord dwells with his servants, Ioh. 14. and not only
so, but he follows them wheresoe-they go. Ios. 1. 9. The Lord is their
keeper, the Lord is their shadow at their right hand, so as the sun shall not
smite them by day, nor the moon by night. Psalm. 121. 5. 6. 7.

Lastly, God rules the deepes, therefore In the deeps
shall he likewise curb the fresh waters, that they shall not ouerflow thee,
Job. 21. 11. Let Sisera oppose himself against the Church, and the river
Kishon shall sweep away Sisera, that ancient river the river Kishon, Iud. 5.
21. And the waters of Marah, though never so bitter, yet at the prayer of Moses
shall the waters of Marah be made sweet to the Israelites, Exodus 15. 25. Nay
they shall but only drink of the waters of Marah, no let Moses smite on the
rock Horeb, and the waters of Massah and Meriboth shall flow forth like a
river, Ps. 105. 41. Is Naaman the Assyrian a leprous, the river Jordan shall
cure him, 2. King. 5. 15. Are the waters of Jericho never so deadly; the
Prophet Elisha shall heal them for ever: 2. King. 21. 12. And are the ungodly
for their sins never so much visited, with the common plagues of floods, and
ouerflowings, and inundations, yet notwithstanding we may still say of the
righteous, as David in another sense. Surely, in the floods of many waters they
shall not come near him. Psalm. 32. 6. Thus heaven, and earth, and sea, and
deepes, are attendants upon the Saints. But behold a greater comfort then any
of these, God is the God of heaven, and therefore every Christian soul may be
certainly assured of his own salvation: for there can be no condemnation to
those which are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, Romans 8. 1. This then is the blessed estate of a righteous man, the
angels pitch their tents about them here, and they shall live an angels life
after death, Matthew. 22. 30. The sun shall not hurt them in the day time, nor
the moon by night, and after death they shall shine like the sun, in the
glory of the father, the stars and the planets shall fight for them in their
courses, and after death they shall glitter like the stars for ever, Dan. 12.
3. God has spoken it in his word, God that is able to perform his promise,
Romans 4. 21. And I am verily persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any thing shall be able to separate us from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 38. 39. God has promised it, he that
never promised more then he was able to perform, nor never performed less
then he promised: I says Christ, give eternal life to my sheep, and they
shall never perish, and none shall pluck them out of my hands: for my father
that gave them is greater then any, and no man is able to pluck the^ out of my
fathers hand, Ioh. 10. 29. Christ reasons here from the omnipotency, and mighty
power of God, so boundless, and infinite, and endless, that those which
repose their confidence in him, need never be afraid. If God give eternal life
to his sheep, who is able to take them out of his hand? If God write our names
in the book of life, who is able to raze them out again? if he justify who
can condemn? Romans 8. 34. if God be on our side, who shall dare to lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? no I am verily persuaded, that neither
principallities nor powers, neither Beelzebub, nor Belial, nor all the devils
in hell, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. The
devil may go about like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour: but God has the
Devil in a chain, and greater is he, that is in us, then he which is in the
world. Ioh. 4. 4. Trust in God, and the gates of hell, shall never be able to
prevail against us. Matthew. 16. 18.

FINIS.

