ACHITOPHEL, OR, THE PICTVRE OF A Wicked POLITICIAN. Divided into three PARTS.

2. SAM. Chap. 17. Verse 23. And when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not
followed, he sadled his Ass, and arose, and gate him home, and set his house
in order, and hanged himself, and was buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

Printed for M. S. 1629.

To the most Reverend Father in God, JAMES by the Grace of God Archbishop of
Ardmagh, and Primate of all IRELAND.
Most Reverend Father in God,
MY best endeauours, long since engaged to your Graces service, have never yet
found themselves sopropitiously befriended by occasion, as to make the World
the witness of their sincerity: my deep apprehension of your Gracious
favor, which first invited me into those parts, seconded by my inbred
disposition, more ambitious to express a thankful heart than directed to
private ends, could not sleep without some public acknowledgement. But it is
the greatest unhappiness of thankful industry, to entreat no better
Orators to plead in her behalf than the tongue or pen; both of which oftener
subject themselves to the command of sycophanticke Parasites, than obseruant
friends, and suffer themselves sooner to be armed against worth, than drawn in
defense of ingenuitie. But with me the case stands otherwise; as with one whose
words or writings can never sufficiently enable themselves, either to commend
the sincerity of mine own affection, or flatter the eminency of your
deserving. The one being set above expression: the other of envy or
adulation. Sorry I am, that this deformed child of my industry, presuming
rather on the precedencie of birth than worth, should before others of his
brethren (worthier in my choice) adventure to ask your Graces patronage. But
opportunity in this can challenge an advantage before worth, in that she can
as well improve the worst as crown the best. Could I have proportioned this
poor present either to your Graces Judicious acceptance, or my affectionate
observance, it had cast it self into another mould than the model of this
slender Treatise, readier to shrink from his patrons learned censure, than
able to stand out in the Authors approbation. But such as it is, I humbly
present with my self unto your gracious acceptance; wishing it no other
destiny than my self, whom you since my coming having cherished in your
favor, have confirmed your grateful Votarie. The subject I here offer to your
view contains the pith and matter of three Sermons, presented heretofore to my
Mother the Uniuersity of Oxford, in whose name they will no doubt find an
easier passage into your Graces protection. Not that I hold these riuelets
worthy so copious and sweet a fountain whence they sprung; but that your Grace
having often honored our ancient Mother, as well with your acceptable presence
as learned exercise; cannot but cast an indulgent eye upon her unworthiest
children. The scene, wherein I have bounded my discourse, presents unto your
censure a sacred Tragedy, consisting of four chief Actors, viz. David an
anointed King: Absolon an ambitious prince: Achitophel a wicked politician, and
Chushai a loyal subject: a passage of history for variety pleasant, for
instruction useful, for event admirable. If the penman climb not the height
of such a subject, I shall not I hope fall below the measure of your gracious
acceptance. In which confidence I shall find my ambition abundantly satisfied,
and rest,

Your Graces in all Christian duty to be commanded N. C.

The Text.
2. SAM. Chap. 17. Verse 23. And when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not
followed, he sadled his Ass, and arose, and gate him home, and set his house
in order, and hanged himself, and was buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

ACHITOPHEL, Or The wicked Politician.
THe chiefest objects whereon Treason Part ^.
sets it self a work, are, Ambition and Discontent: whereof the former is
wont to fashion the greatest hopes out of the least advantages; the other
seems like tinder to catch fire at the first touch, and turns the least
indignity into the greatest indignation. This was well known to that grand
Politician Achitophel, who finding Absolon David's son affected with either
malady, determined to apprehend the least opportunity to execute his own
malice, and David's ruin. David, He a long time hated (as is probably
coniectured by some interpreters) for the murder of Vrias his near affine, yet
subtilty and secrecy, the two hand-maides of humane policy, stood always
betwixt his hypocrisy, and the kings suspicion. Absolon he found, in the heat
and pride of his youth, above measure ambitious of his fathers Scepters,
extremely discontent with his foul disgrace, and long banishment: The one
pointed him out the way to supremacy, the other to revenge, easily persuading
his erroneous judgment, that it seemed too small a satisfaction for Absolon,
again to be entertained as a subject, too great a courtesy for David to live
a King. Every hour which adds to the length of his Fathers reign, seems to
borrow years from the thread of his expected Royalty, and Justice her self
seems to claim a part in his traiterous ambition: Such is the prerogative of
selfe-bred actions, to shut out prejudice, and promise to themselves as much
success as they find excuse. Here Policy taught Achitophel to strike whilst
the Iron was hot, and join issue with the first advantage. Time, the best
moderator of hasty humors, might perhaps have smoothed over Absolons guile, or
have slacked David's indignation: And occasions of this kind at first let slip,
are afterward rather wished than found. What he long plotted is now come to
execution, and his expectation so long groaning with ambition and revenge, at
length rackt on the last extremity. What his policy in proof deserved, it
promised it self in men's opinions, and himself, the first proiector, He
found entertained the chief Actor in this conspiracy.

Nothing now seems wanting to the project but an open attempt to invade
applause: and hostile preparations must show themselves in a readiness, rather
for formalitie than opposition; as though he had already won as much, as
expectation, and victory seemed already legible in Absolons gracious presence,
and the peoples forward acclamations. But such consultations never speed well,
where God is excluded the Counsel Table, and Hope, which usually flatters the
ambitious with the best success, oftentimes betrays them to the worst.

David all this while lies secure, as one who out of a fatherly ingenuitie
might sooner expect the hostile invasion of a foreign enemy, than the secret
stratagems of so dear a friend: For what indulgent Parent could fear his own
overthrow to spring out of his own bowels? Or there to find the ruin of
himself, where he hoped to erect the Trophee of his name and memory? But
treason at length early knocking at his doors, awakes his sleeping jealousy;
and time it is to fly unto foreign succors, where he finds his own sons
and subjects the forgers of seditious treason and unnatural rebellion. But
that great Counselor which turns humane wisdom into folly, and directs all
purposes to his own ends, is not wanting to his servant David, making earnest
intercession: Chusay is secretly suborned by David, under the pretense of love
and service, as a supposed friend, but disguised enemy, to creep into
Absolons bosom, and oppose Achitophel that transcendent Politician:
Achitophel, who as an Oracle of God had for his deep wisdom hitherto passed
current, is now shut out, and Chusay this new Counselor admitted audience.
Here begins the dawning of David's happy deliverance, and Achitophels deserved
tragedy; for as the distemper of our first concoction (as Naturalists observe)
is seldom or never corrected in the second; so the first groundwork in State
policy, ill laid or tempered, can afterward scarce promise a reformation. But
Princes actions are commonly confined to no other laws than their own wills,
and bootlesse it is for Achitophel to give further counsel where he wants
persuasion: Despair and indignation are at hand to second his repulse: and
nothing now seems left him for refuge (so far as the eye of his worldly
policy could discern) but the prevention of David's officers in his shameless
execution: And when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not followed, etc.

2 This parcel of Scripture, containing a brief history of Achitophels last
Actions and End, naturally shoots into these two branches: first his
Provocation: secondly, his Action: the Provocation was the neglect of his
counsel, expressed in the former words of my Text [ And when Achitophel saw
that his counsel was not followed] His actions are deciphered in the latter
clause [ He sadled his ass, and arose, etc.] In the Provocation or motive we
may observe these two circumstances. First, what Achitophels counsel was, and
wherein it consisted. Secondly how, and which way it was defeated. To begin
with the first, we may reduce his Policy into two heads: for it consisted,
either in his apt choice, or wise direction: the former was evident, in that he
took advantage of such a Subject to countenance his Rebellion, who amongst all
the children of Israel was the likeliest to go farthest. Absolons birth,
feature, plausabilitie, and high spirit seemed to speak him a King at first
sight: as though nature and industry, policy and valor stood in competition
which should challenge most in his advancement. In the first place to examine
his birth, we shall find him a Kings son: and although the second of his
fathers race, yet the first in the peoples hope. Of the eldest little mention
is left us save the name, as of one by impotence of nature, or disasterous
influence of the stars, half canceld out of the Catalogue of David's sons:
besides the claim and title to his fathers kingdom, but newly began, and not
yet established on succession, gave no small encouragement to his high ambition:
where birthright affords no certain challenge to kingly dignity, and the
fathers choice in designing out his successor is scarce reputed warrantable,
what other obstacle can stand betwixt him and Sovereignty, but Gods immediate
will, or the Peoples suffrage? The former (as it seems) he little regarded,
as one who either doubted of his providence, or showed himself too confident
of his conniuence: the latter as a matter out of question seemed sooner found
than sought. As though opinion, which had so long fawned on his worth, could as
easily persuade their suffrage, as command their service. Had yet any sense of
religion, or care of the public good invaded the minds either of young
Absolon the Prince, or Achitophel the old counselor, they might first of some
Prophet or other have enquired Gods secret purpose of depressing David, and
exalting Absolon: or at least have esteemed hereditary succession the best
challenge: Well might Gods almighty hand disdain opposition, which never yet
met resistance, and common equity, have stamped that current which customary
right, and the law of nature had already established amongst most nations. But
their design is not grounded upon Gods law, or natures privilege, but their
own seeming advantage; as though the divine counsel ought to sloope to humane
policy, and nature forsake the scene where worldly wisdom comes in action.
Behold here the first and chiefest character of a worldly wise Politician, who
cares little how great a rupture he make through God^ sacred laws and common
equity to meet with his own advantage, choosing rather to lose his soul than
his wicked purpose; as one by Patent allowed to dispense with any obligation of
conscience and religion. Hence may easily be discovered the error of vulgar
judgments, who measuring inward sufficiences by the improuement of our outward
fortunes, repute those men wisest which rise highest: But true wisdom in
whose. scale consists the choice of the best ends and fittest means, has
taught us rather to entertain than serve preferments; and prize the quiet
calm of a settled conscience, before the stormy (...) of ambitious greatness.
It Is not the want of wit to project, but of wickedness to practice, which
keeps virtue poor, and desert unregarded: neither are great aduancements the
usual badges of great worth.

2 The second thing whereof Achitophel took advantage in Absolons pers^n, was
his fair and comely feature. Absolon amongst all the children of Israel, was
reputed the fairest: His lovely visage, disheueld hair, the seemly symmetry
and proportion of all his parts were as so many silent Orators to be speak
applause, and persuade affection. Our friends and foes we seldom owe to choice
but Nature, which stamps in every man's face her especial characters of beauty
and deformity, of love and hatred, ordaining them rather commanders of our
fancy, than servants to our discretion. Whence Aristotle had good cause to
make this comely feature of the body, one of the complements of humane
happiness; as that which gives the habit of our virtues a more glorious
luster, and opens a more speedy passage to Heroicke actions. What greater
motive could have happened to a seditious multitude, whose affections, led
rather by sense than reason, are better taught to fawn on shows than
substance, and swallow the most poisonous drugges in golden pills. Nothing
more dangerous than painted sin; and ugly vice couched under the protection
of a comely countenance, will lose the name, and seem a virtue. So much is the
bewitching power of a beauteous personage to inchant the wisest judgment, that
persuasion is oftener found in the Orator than the Argument, as though his
looks went as herbingers before his language, to prepare a room, and
entertain attention. Of these eminent gifts of nature, notwithstanding not
granted to our free choice, but rather trusted to our husbandry, no question
but Almighty God the lender, will expect an interest. He that either hides his
Talent in the ground, or mis-spends his portion, shall find the reward of a
faithless servant: Much more such graceless Tenants, who turn their
endowments to their worst uses, and make Gods munificent gifts the means and
groundwork of wicked and irreligeous actions. Where God sowes he expects his
harvest in the same kind: and no grain so mean in our estimation, out of
which in proportion he requires not a timely crop. But where he finds our
industry slack in performance of this duty, or our malice opposite to his
profit, he commonly works his own ends out of our iniquities; and what parts
and endowments we abuse to sin, he justly directs unto revenge.

4 A third advantage in Absolons person suggested to Achitophels observation,
was his fair carriage and popular plausibilitie. A sweet and courteous
deportment, seasoned with morality and religion, never wants deserved
commendation; as the surest character of an ingenuous disposition, and the most
powerful servant of honest policy. For as in our most religious actions, we
should study rather to profit than to please our auditors: yet who never
affects to please, shall seldom have the happiness to profit. So much more in
civil affairs, the best improuement is popular estimation: and virtue, though
never so eminent, shall scarce be reputed current, if not stamped by applause,
or crowned with common approbation.

-- Non te quaesiueris extra seems rather an axiom of a speculatiue and
retired Stoicke, than a practicke Statist. An upright and honest man (I
confess) would rather find himself at home in his own conscience, than seek
himself abroad in other men's opinions: as one, whose first care ought to be
to form himself to Gods will, and his own content, his second to husband his
means to men's applause; yet comes this far short to disprove an affable and
kind behavior, or countenance a harsh or Cynicall disposition. Had no other
affection than this, possessed the soul of Absolon, or in him presented it
self to Achitophels observation; discretion might have pleaded in the behalf
of the former, and honesty of the latter; and neither have wanted its deserved
commendation: the one perhaps might have been thought ambitious, to inherit as
well the peoples love, as his fathers virtues: the other, to have applauded his
Princes happiness in the peoples love. Nevertheless popularitie at the best
is a favor which wise and discreet subjects sooner win than affect:
beginning usually with the Princes ^ealousie, and ending with the owners ruin.
The defect might better become a subject, the excess a King: neither ever had
those Athenian Ostracismes found place in Justice, had not popular greatness
threatened the state with danger or dissolution: How much more dangerous shall
we esteem this popularity of Absolon, springing from a rotten and corrupted
heart, managed by wicked means, and directed to a treacherous conspiracy?

Three especial stratagems were here put in practice, which might well seem
fashioned in Achitophels forge. For the sending of Absolon for Achitophel to
Hebron, excludes not a former consultation; neither is it probable, he would so
far have trusted him with his secret counsels, had he not first found him
inclining to his faction. The first engine of his seditious purpose, was, his
Glossing, and fine complement, both in words and gesture, whereby he was said
to steal away the hearts of the people from his father David: he usually stood
in the palace gate, he observed the appproach of suitors, he examined their
particular grieuances, enquired the place of their abode: finally, he kissed
and embraced them, O (says he) that I were made Judge in the Land, that I
might hear every man's cause, and do him Justice. What zealous subject almost
out of the seeming simplicity of his words, would not swell with expectation,
and become as prodigal in his hopes, as the other in his promises? The
distance between Princes and private men, makes us often ouervalue courtesies,
and the indiscouery of such men's natures causes diverse times their worst
actions to carry the best construction: but great promises are commonly
seconded by small or slow performances; and an easy matter it is to be over
prodigal on the score, where we never intend a payment. To boast wisely of our
actions and sufficiences, howsoever opposite to simple modesty or
plaine-dealing honesty, was never accounted a solaecisme in the iudgling art of
humane policy. But admit Absolon in this case had promised to himself as much
as the people, and suffered his confidence to spread her wings beyond his
abilities: yet serves this little, to excuse his action from unnatural
disobedience, or masked treachery. It was the part of a shameless Cham to be
an industrious spectator of his fathers nakedness: of a railing Rabshakeh or
cursing Shimei, to divorce him from his Subjects hearts. Nature would have
persuaded a gracious child with Noah's two modest sons, to have looked awry, or
gone backward, no sooner to see ere he could hide his fathers shame.
Allegiance might have instructed a loyal Subject to prize his Sovereigns
credit before his own, and drown his greatest honors in his Princes service.
But setting aside these near and high relations of a Son to his father, or a
Subject to his Prince, the division and divorce of friends to a generous
temper, even amongst the Heathens themselves, has always seemed a wicked
revenge, or base ambition. Honor seldom bestows her favors, but on such as
win them in open field: and Heroicke spirits have always chosen rather
dearly to buy, than basely to steal a victory. To steal away the hearts of
our friends, savors more of a fleering Parasite than a wise Politician; and to
seek secret ambushes in case of open trial, argues rather the weakness of
our cause, than the strength of our discretion. Nevertheless this seemed a
good ground for Absolon to set, and Achitophel to work on: And little can true
wisdom or Religion persuade in the Rear, where wicked policy commands the
Vant-guard. A second stratageme put in practice by Absolon, and perhaps plotted
by Achitophel, to augment his own plausabilitie, was, publickely to slander
his fathers government with injustice and oppression. The same Art which taught
him to flatter his inferiors, instructed him the way to calumniat his
superiors: So near are these two opposite vices knit together in a wicked
cause. See (quoth Absolon) (after examination of each Sutour) thy cause is just
and good, but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.

David began now to decline, as well in strength as government. Age and Disease
commonly grow together: and where the master begins once to droope, the
servants prove either carelessly negligent, or lawlesly insolent. These
inconveniences perhaps admitted by David's Officers, and observed by Absolon,
rendered him obuious to exception. Greatest places are commonly subject to the
greatest censures: But when Almighty God was never wanting to David, I cannot
imagine David to be much wanting unto his people. And although Strength and
Valor, the darlings of his youth, began in him to faint, yet Wisdom and
Experience, the children of his riper age, stepped in to undertake his quarrel.
No otherwise then can we interpret this exception of Absolon against his
Father, than a malicious slander, devised for no other end, than to make him
odious, and himself acceptable; which he by so much the more hoped easily to
effect, by how much he saw the giddy multitude (as at all times, so)
especially in this declining age of David, as desirous of Novelty, as subject
to discontent. The best Governors seldom please long, and the worst may for a
time. Worth is seldom so eminent as in the absence: And the best Magistrates,
like the Images of Brutus and Cassius (related by Tacitus) seem then most
glorious, when they are most wanting. Envy and Detraction, like two venomous
Serpents, lurk always in the path of Justice: and the best Rulers seldom
find the freest passage. He that goes about to persuade a multitude they are
not so well governed as they ought to be, shall sooner want argument than
attention. The reason whereof (as a learned man has observed) is, because the
abuses and corruptions in every State most incuitable, are (for the most part)
sensible to vulgar capacities; but the hindrances of Reformation only apparent
to men of experienced judgments. As easy was it here for Absolon to slander,
as to speak: his eyes could no sooner open, but epsy some object or other to
animate his own proiects, or the peoples discontent. Such is the boundless
malice of base Informers, with the venom of their aspicke tongues, to poison
our sincerest actions, and present, as in a Perspectiue, the least mites and
mole-hils of our imperfections like huge and mighty Mountains. This found
David in the midst of a calm and settled State, when mischief had scarce yet
known her own strength, nor time as yet teemed with all the engines of
graceless villainy. What then shall we now expect in these doggedayes of the
worlds declining age, wherein malicious detraction is esteemed the quintessence
of wit, and an inge^uous acknowledgement of men's good deserving, accounted too
great a courtesy? Surely the best revenge I can here invent for innocence, can
be no other than preces and lachrymae, the armor of a Christian, and that
constant resolution of the sweet Psalmist, I will pray yet against their
wickedness. The third and greatest imposture Absolon practiced to make
himself plausible, was the pretense of Religion: A vow he pretended at least,
to have made of his return to Hebron, and there praising God after his safe
return to Jerusalem. David is solicited to consent unto his journey: neither
could such a petition brook a denial, which comes vshered in under the show
of a religious office. Hebron seemed to David a place fit for sacrifice, to
Absolon for conspiracy. Jerusalem was too near his fathers sight, or rather
too far from his treacherous purpose to admit of such a wicked Conuenticle.
The meeting of such Conspirators so near the Court, might soon have opened the
eyes of sleeping jealousy, and betrayed the treason to discovery: David's
countenance might perhaps have daunted the courage of his friends, or have
won their loves. And lest the peoples affection to Absolon should grow cold
in his absence, he leaves behind him his Parasites to solicit his cause, and
at his approach to give the signal. Moreover to strengthen himself the better
against public hostility, or private mistakes, he carries with him a
garrison from Jerusalem to defend his person, and sends for Achitophel to
Hebron, to direct hi^ counsel. Nothing but the pretense of Religion could be
thought a fit vizzard to hide the face of this dangerous conspiracy, from the
sight of suspicion. Deceit never thriues better, than when she least seems her
self: and Vice seldom dares to show her self in public, unless she steal
the robes of virtue, and actuate her malice with slye hypocrisy. Satan
transformes himself into an Angel of light, when he intends the greatest
mischief, and instructs his disciples in the like Policy. This has been the
Devils shift and practice in all ages: neither ever comes wickedness better
armed than with the show of seeming sanctity. Jeroboam the Son of Nebat who
made Israel to sin, had no other pretense than Religion to withdraw the ten
Tribes from Jerusalem, by setting up a new Idolatry. The Scribes and Pharisees
in the New Testament, who under color of Fasting and long Prayer, devoured
Widows houses, professed the most rigorous and strict obedience of the Law.
Amongst the three sects in Jerusalem in the time of the siege by Titus and
Vespasian, Josephus observed those to have been the most notoriously wicked,
who termed themselves the zealous. But alas Pandora's box was not yet empty:
the most of evils was reserved to these last and worst times, wherein the
greatest sins are accounted Articles of Faith, and a sincere profession
styled Heresy. Ignatius had not yet sent his brood into the world with the
Popes patent, as so many Pedlers, to sell damnation: Nor the Tridentine
Council concluded, that Idolatry and Superstition should pass for true
Religion. But since the approach of this Medusa's head, the world seems to
have suffered a fatal Metamorphosis, and wonders to find her self so gross
a changling. Could our small scantling of time dispense so far as the
discovery of the Roman Church, we should find their whole Religion to be
little other than a politic hypocrisy, directed to nothing else, but gain
or greatness; pretending nothing but piety, professing little else than
malice or profaneness. What vulgar judgment can interpret otherwise of their
pedlers-packe of Indulgences, and sundry other superstitious iuglings, but as
of a mere merchandise of Soul^s, wherein every graceless Parricide, as in a
common Market, at the hands of a mercenarie Priest, may cheapen and buy his own
salvation? Had all the Achitophels or Absolons in the world lost their
politic inventions, they might (I suppose) find them again improued in this
State-Religion. No disunion of the Church so small, which their rigorous
constitutions pronounce not heresy: No sin so heinous, for which their Pope
dares not grant a dispensation: As though sanctity consisted not in the
internal disposition of the man, but in the outward conformity of the Church,
and Piety, were pinned on the sleeue of worldly Policy. This politic sin
of hypocrisy, I no sooner lose among the Romanists, than I find again
amongst our homebred Scismaticks. A sect of men, I confess, with whom I should
hardly grapple, stood they not armed in my way. How much the odious name of a
Puritan has abused many a sincere Christian, we may learn by the writings
of Becanus the Jesuit, who has paralleld our Puritanes in England, with the
Huguenots of France, and the Caluinists of Germany: or not to go so far abroad,
we may well see in some of our own mungrell Divines, who as it were betwixt
hawke and buzzard, can see nicely to distinguish betwixt a Puritan in opinion,
and a Puritan in discipline: and have taught the name contrary to the first
institution, so far to enlarge it self, that a Protestant must make a hard
shift (either by Popery or Arminianisme) to save himself harmless. But with
such men's humors I never sided, to whom I profess my self as opposite in
Affection, as in Opinion. Nevertheless I have observed in the world a sort of
People, of a malignant spirit, envying in others what they want in themselves,
having commonly neither will to learn, nor wit to teach; neither humility to
obey, nor discretion to command: Yet (forsooth) will they seem so precise and
contemptuous of other men, as if Religion might be quoted in their looks, and
Sanctity were only engaged to their service. These can sooner espy a Mote in
other men's eyes, than a Beam in their own: as though Conscience were set to
the height of their Spleen, and Zeal were never taught any language but
detraction. Sometimes, like those ancient Andabates, they fight with their eyes
shut, striking the man that stands next: Or like unskillful Gunners discharge
their shot cre they approach the mark: other times perhaps they take their
aim; yet so, as they seem to mistake the Man for the Matter, as if they
intended to spare the Vice, and wound the Person. Hence are Pulpits become like
Roman Pasquils, stuck full of malicious slanders and infamous libels, apter
to disturb the Passion than inform the Conscience. But such fiery spirits I
carelessly pass over scarce worth a Scholars pen; in whose greatest downfall
can scarce be hoped the honor of a victory. But having dwelt so long on this
last circumstance, I must (leaving many matters behind) follow my first man
Achitophel observing Absolon.

5 The fourth and last advantage observed by Achitophel in Absolons
disposition, was, his stont courage, and manly resolution. What greater
argument of valor, than to rouse a Lion in open chase, and promise to himself
a passage to victory through the jaws of danger, and deposition of a lawful
King? David's fortunate success he might well have read in Goliahs overthrow,
and the yoke imposed on the furious Philistines. Time had not yet razed the
Trophies of his triumphant youth, nor age cancelled from his countenance the
Characters of his undaunted courage. The subversion of a stately kingdom was
never esteemed an easy conquest: And Sovereignty seems a Center, unto which
Providence has chalked out the lines of few men's ambition. It Is more than one
Hesperian Dragon of difficulty and disaster, which is set to guard this Golden
Tree: And what combat can be expected, but of such a Captain, whose least
fear is his greatest danger? Yet Absolon, engaged by Achitophels advice,
undertakes the combat. Absolons stout heart gives sudden fire to his ambition,
and Achitophels counsel stands in readiness to back and strengthen his
ambitious courage: the one to Act, the other to Project; the means his
advancement. Strength and Policy, which seldom shake hands, are here
accorded, or at least, for a time they will entertain a truce. Achitophel
being confident enough of his counsel, required no fitter instrument to
actuate his malice, than Absolons courageous resolution; knowing right well
that nothing could prove more prejudicial to a State, than armed madness. This
is no small work of worldly policy, to stand aloof, and give aim to wicked
purposes, and abuse the hasty humors of hot spirits to their own advantage.
Which may be well observed in our latter Machiuillians, who have delivered
this precept as a principle; Make no difference between an evil servant and a
good, but use them both to thy own ends. Cateline, thirsting for nothing more
than the ruin of his country, and expiation of his disgrace received from the
Senate, could make use as well of the pride of Leutulus, as the rash valor of
Cethogus: The high blood of the one, and the fiery spirit of the other, served
him to good purpose: the one to countenance, the other to animate his wicked
action. In like sort the Persian Nobility (as we read in Zenophon) enraged
against Artaxerxes their King, sought occasion to side with the valor of the
Grecians, and stir up the high spirit of Cyrus the younger brother, to
revenge himself against the elder. The fairest colors are subject to the
deepest stains, and the most free and eminent dispositions are commonly
obuious to the greatest alterations, and suffer themselves to be soonest
poisoned, if once tempted with vainglory or discontent. No marvel then if
the sons of Achitophel, suruiuing in our times, instructed by their fathers
counsel, take advantage to work their own ends out of other men's
discontented passions. If a search were made, some (I fear) would be found
amongst us as far transcending Achitophel in malice, as perchance they come
short of him in wi^ and policy: who daily labor to fasten on their associates
the badge of their own virulent disposition; for which perhaps, besides the
glory of their own shame, they cannot with Achitophel, so much as pretend a
cause, or devise an end. But such men shall surely answer as well for their own
seducements, as other men's transgression: neither shall our faults herein be
reputed less, than the interest we challenge in our Brothers friendship. It is
the part of the foulest Spider out of the fairest flowers to suck poyso^* Of
industrious Bee^ out of stinking Hemlocke to gather Honey. And those who would
rather be accounted ^tes than Spiders, should rather labor to improve the
worst humors to some good temper, than pervert the best unto ungodly actions.
In the former we should follow Gods own example, who directs, and disposes
wicked men's actions to his own good purposes: in the latter the Devils, who
takes occasion out of the most sacred things to work mischief. Hitherto
(Beloved) have we taken a suruay of Achitophels wicked policy in electing a
fit subject, and apprehending of his best opportunities for the treason. The
next point left to our examination, is, his Direction: the which while I,
according to my small scantling of time, and your patience, (I fear already
tired) shall strive to open, my small in-sight in worldly policy, shall (I
hope) excuse my errors, or at least the discourse of so great a mischief,
deserve your best attention.

6 Thus long have we beheld Achitophel, as in his private study, designing out
a fit subject, whereby to work his revenge on David. We are now to observe him
sitting in counsel, and instructing Absolon. The advice he gave, we find to
be twofold: The first subordinate and preparatory to strengthen the faction:
The second last and principal to execute the action, and secure the success.
In the former he counsels Absolon to go in, and abuse his Fathers Concubines:
Go in (quoth he) to thy Fathers Coucubines* whom he has left to keep the
house, and when all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy Father,
the hands of all that are with thee, shall be strong. In which counsel we may
observe a double project: first in securing his own, and his friends estate:
secondly, in uniting the people more firmly to Absolons obedience. Neither in
this stepped he besides his policy: He served himself first, and his Master no
otherwise than for himself; and thought that counsel lost, as ill bestowed on
Absolon, wherein he could not promise himself either safety or advancement.
He thought it ill siding with a doubtful rebel, or inconstant friend.
Absolon, howsoever professedly he had engaged himself to Treason, might
deceive his opinion or fail his expectation. His pretended discontent toward
his father, might (for ought he knew) be only personated, to make trial of
their allegiance, or his resolution inconstant to forfeit them to danger.
Absolon, though a Traitor, was yet a Son. David, though provoked, was yet a
Father. No Gordian knot was ever so cunningly knit by policy, which nature
cannot cut, or time dissolve. The privilege of youth, or prerogative of a
Son may make this action seem rather a escape, than a sin. His faults, how
great soever, will seem rather Achitophels, than his own* And that which
Justice in others will term Treason, indulgence in him will interpret
weakness. David may remit, and Absolon reconcile, what the one suffered, and
the other acted: and then must Achitophel and his associates either stand at
stake to maintain their Masters action, or hazard their lives on the brittle
confidence of the Kings mercy. The breach of a sons disloyalty may perchance
be peeced up with filial submission: but Achitophels revolt seems to expect
no issue but death or victory. The middle way in policy is always rejected as
dangerous, and the extreme requires the most desperate, and extreme attempts.
Achitophel is not here wanting to himself; Absolon must yet be engaged to a
more Notorious action, incapable of forgiveness, where in all Israel may read
his absolute revolt, and his Fathers greatest indignation. Absolon must be
known neither to regard, or hope for his fathers reconcilement. David's anger
must be thought inexorable, as that which Justice requires, and the honor of
a king commands. If Absolon hope to wedde the Throne of Israel, he must first
violate his Fathers Bed: and to this his notorious act of treason, let him
further add the sin of incest. Petty crimes are the effects of inferior
offenders; Absolon must be thought as great as himself: as one, who would
play the King as well in his sins, as his ambition. Neither can this
wickedness be safe or shameful enough, if secret. Secrecy, which in other
matters commonly proves the mother of security, is here reputed the nurse of
danger, and Guilt, which usually shunnes the light, is here desirous of
discovery. To sin closely, argues either fear or modesty: neither of which
can protect a rebel, or beseem a King. Set up a Tent (quoth Achitophel) on
the house top, that all Israel may witness thy sin, and thy fathers shame,
and make the world at once both blush and wonder. Let thy Brother Ammon sin
in a corner to decline censure: Sin thou in public to strike censure
speechless, and outface the seuerest frowns of Justice. Let Ammon commit
incest with his Sister* Go thou in unto thy Fathers Concubines. What was the
weakness of lust in him, ought to be the strength of thy aspiring greatness.
Thy greatest safety consists in thy greatest villainy: and the least blush
seems to betray thy cause to dissidence and danger. Let Ruben trespass with
one of his Fathers wives: Go thou in unto ten of thy Fathers Concubines; that
this thy fact at once may surmount both example and imitation. Then the hands
of all that are with thee shall be strong: They shall speed no worse than
Absolon, and therefore ought to fear no more. To fall with our Captain seems
the least duty: To rise with him the greatest honor: and who but a Coward
would fear to hazard the life of a Subject, to make a King? Great dangers and
great honors begin and end in the same circle: Neither is the path strowed
with Violets and Roses, but death and slaughter, which leads to the tents of
Victory. This was Achitophels first counsel, as dangerous to decline, as
desperate to execute: But desperate and extreme purposes are engaged to the
like means; and sincere honesty in the course of policy, where she finds not
her self admitted as the chief Mistress, will seldom prove a trusty servant.

7 Out of this counsel of Achitophel, not only plotted by himself, but acted
by Absolon, will arise two especial observations: The first is, the fulfilling
of Gods judgment, and Nathans prophecy, threatened before to David for his
sinning with Bathsheba, and (...) murder* Behold (says God through the mouth
of Nathan) I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and will
take thy Wives before thine eyes, and will give them unto thy neighbor, and he
shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of the Sun: for thou did it
secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun.
Such is the wisdom of Almighty God, which can work his own good out of our
wickedness, and make ourvniustest actions the isntrumental examples of his
own justice. Our very sins, though false traitors to the owners, prove
trusty executioners of Gods judgments: and an easy matter it is for that
wise disposer of all worldly actions, to turn man's greatest shame into his
greatest glory. Secondly, we may observe it as a Maxim in worldly policy,
That a sin can seldom secure it self, but by addition of greater. Where the
house is swept and garnished, and one Devil is too little to enter, seven
Devils greater than himself, are pressed to give a fresh assault: For there is
no way left for sin to propagate its power, but sin; nor can truth ever be
entreated to adventure her self as a pledge for falsehood, or stake her credit
for a professed enemy. Religious providence, and worldly policy, may (I
confess) sometimes run together, but seldom shake hands. The path of the
one, as a strait line, we find always as one, and like it self: of the other,
crooked, and various, and engaged to many difficulties. If ever they chance to
meet, it is but as in a point, and so soon part The further then we run in
this maze of worldly policy, the further we estrange our selves from Piety:
and the distance* which at first seemed below the Sense, will at length be
found above the understanding. Every ponderous substance (as Naturalists
observe) the more it descends, the faster the motion: No moment of space or
time, wherein we trauerse the way of wickedness, which adds not some weight
to the massy burden of our original impiety, and hastens not our passage to
perdition. One sin seeks to secure it self by many, and smaller crimes
find no safe protection, but in the shelter of the greater. Treason and
usurpation cannot support themselves, but by the sword of Tyranny. Malice
i^uokes Revenge to help her, assisted with her servants, Murder and
Detraction. Ingratitude will soon break into open defiance, and neglect of
Gods precepts is commonly seconded with Contempt; at the least when all others
withdraw their forces, Impudence and Hypocrisy are sworn to back their
quarrel; whereof the former can outface the seuerest censure, the latter
blind the eyes of the strictest inquisition. Who cannot here observe a great
distance between Christian and worldly policy? The one counsels us to make
up the breach of our sins by a sincere repentance; the other to enlarge it
with greater villainy. Bind not two sinner together, for in one thou shall not
escape unpunished, says the wisest of Kings. But these Politicians holding
themselves wiser than the wisest, hold repentance base, and perseverance in
sin generous. Nobler they suppose it to adventure forward with danger, than
retire back with shame; as though they meant to show themselves industriously
resolute to sell their part in heaven, and purchase their own damnation. But
these we must leave a while to their own resolutions, perhaps we shall find
them again, with Achitophel hanging on the gallows; whose second and last
counsel, offers it self in the next place to our examination.

8 Hitherto has Achitophels care bin to strengthen the faction, both to secure
himself, and unite the hearts of Israel more firmly to Absolon their leader.
His second Direction concerns the speeding of the execution; Let me now choose
out (quoth Achitophel) twelve thousand men, and I will arise, and pursue after
David this night, and I will come upon him while he is weary and weake-handed,
and make him afraid, and all the people which are with him shall fly, and I
will smite the King only, and I will bring back all the people unto thee. The
man whom thou seek, is as if all returned: So all the people shall be in
peace. In which politic advice of Achitophels, three remarkable
circumstances offer themselves to our observation; which by reason of the
scantling of time, and your wronged patience, I shall be constrained rather to
touch, than handle. In the first place, his desire was to have as well as his
Head in the conspiracy, so his Hand in the execution: perhaps because he
hated David, he was ambitious to show himself the executioner of his own
revenge and David's ruin; perhaps out of vaineglorie, that he might seem as
able to act, as wise to project a mischief* perhaps out of an officious
flattery to engage Absolons thankfulness by a do^ble service: But that which
seems to me most probable, was his extreme jealousy, not daring to trust so
young an experience with a matter of so great moment. Absolons youth seemed
perchance too shallow to entertain the depth of his directions, his blood too
near to outface the frowns of a fathers anger, or the awe of filial duty,
could not be supposed a fit actor in David's Tragedy. The hardest Iron at the
first touch of the Load* stone is restored to its first temper, and conceiues a
Magneticke inclination. And why might not David's fiery assault, or gracious
countenance in his rebellious son Absolon, enforce nature to return unto
herself, and kindle in him the sparks of filial duty and obedience? Here may
a man read the state and condition of wicked po^icie, exposed to a thousand
dangers, and subject to a thousand i^alousies. Well may such men, as Damocles
at Dionysius Table, feed their hopes with the choicest dainties; yet Gods
fearful judgments, as a sword pendulous over their heads, is always ready to
threaten a destruction. It Is not then a good, but an evil conscience which
makes men cowards: Only he, who wants guilt, wants fear; and nothing but a
clear conscience can challenge true mother-hood in a courageous resolution.
The second point we observe in Achitophels counsel, was a stratagem of
Diuersion: His quarrel was not against the people, but David; his purpose to
preserve the Kingdom, but destroy the King: and therefore thought it not so
meet to hew out his passage to David's overthrow through the blood of the
subjects, as by the Kings forfeit, to purchase them to Absolons obedience. His
first care was to strike at the root it self, well knowing the branches would
fall of their own accord; and the peoples allegiance once dead in David,
would soon quicken again in Absolon. The strength of Israel is shut up in the
Princes palace; and the same power which conquers the one, is soon master of
the other. This counsel seems to partake as well of good as bad: with the
death of one, to redeem the life of many, in the rigorous laws of hostility,
seems not a duty, but a great courtesy: But to sell a King to buy a
kingdom, and stake one Prince for many subjects, is less than courtesy, and
more than cruelty. Neither was this course affected by Achitophel to spare the
lives of innocents, or avoid a greater mischief; but that he found it an
easier way to conquer David, and reduce the people under the yoke of Absolons
jurisdiction. The good which politicians use to pretend, commonly swells in
show, but shrinkes in substance: as the Ocean, they would seem to flow in
their kindnesses, and embrace us with twining arms, as the waves the
continent; but seeking to lay hold on them, we find them commonly to ebb into
nothing, and snatch back their own with some advantage. If they chance to be
authors of any good, it serves only to flatter opinion, and deceive simplicity;
not that they love good, but that they may be the better armed to work
mischief. To commit evil for a good end, seems to bear a better pretense
before men, than excuse before God: but to suffer, or act some good for an
evil end, is the height of man's wickedness, and the Devils institution. The
third and last circumstance in this Achitophels counsel, was, by a sudden
and unexpected assault, to take the best advantage of his own strength and
David's weakness. I will (says he) suddenly fall on David while he is weary
and weake-handed, and the people shall fly. To join with men's misfortunes and
add to misery, serves rather baseness of the man, than confidence of the
cause; and to second Gods afflictions with our own revenge, is a mark of Gods
instrument, but the Devils servant. The apprehension of an apt opportunity, is
of it self (I confess) a matter indifferent, as well to good as wicked
policy: Yet hasty and unexpected actions commonly carry with them a greater
suspicion of guilt, than discretion; as that which seeks to prevent a trial,
and fears discovery. Time, the father of truth, would (questionless) have
betrayed Absolons cause to common examination, and reduced the discontented
Commons to their first temper. David might have given satisfaction, and
allegiance have revived in his subjects hearts. Necessity, which perhaps begat
the effects of ill government, might have urged the causes; and reason, which
at the first seemed to fawn on their discontent, might afterward be taught to
correct her errors and suppress their insolence. All this Achitophel knew
right well; and therefore chose rather to take advantage of the peoples sudden
passion, than their maturer judgments: as one who had good cause to shun a
legal ^ury, where he could promise himself no other than loss in the fatal
verdict. Hitherto (beloved) have we traced the foote-steps of our grand
traitor Achitophel through all his politic counsels, and unnatural
rebellions. Your expectation I know (though almost tired) has long ere this
run to the place of execution, and proclaimed his coming: But your wronged
patience and my want of time, has enforced me to repriue him till another
Session.

COmmon censure has stamped it for a current Proverb, Part
That it is better for a man to be fortunate than wise. For worldly wisdom,
though she seem always to fawn on fortune, yet can never command, and
seldom entreat her ser^ice. It has been thought the pride and privilege of
that power which we call Fortune, to bestow her best favors where she finds
least worth; to crown folly, and cross wisdom; to make fools happy, and
the wise unfortunate: As a Queen, she is supposed to show her greatest Majesty
in Man's weakness; to pity sloth, and envy industry; as most jealous, lest
man's wit or endeauours should challenge any part in her prerogative. But he
that knows wisely to arbitrate betwixt the clouds of Pagan ignorance, and the
clear Sunshine of Christianite, betwixt Poeticke fancies, and Prophetical
visions, shall find vulgar opinion only mistaken in the name, ascribing that
transcendent power of disposing worldly actions, to a Deity which they called
Fortune, which Christian knowledge might have taught them more properly to have
termed Providence. And howsoever they have bounded her large Empire beyond
their own reason; yet Christianity has traveled much farther, and yet can
prescribe no limits: as that which transcends into an infinite, and
out-reacheth the eye of all discovery. And though no place has been found so
base in the Theater of Nature or Civil actions, wherein Providence cannot show
the abundant Trophies of her magnificence: Yet there desires she to triumph
most, where to men she seems to have least power. Her chiefest glory is to set
up her Ensigns on the gates of man's pride, and tread on the neck of worldly
policy. No marvel then, that in the great politician Achitophel, in whom
neither loyalty could command restraint, or persuade duty; whom neither
undoubted valor could check, or danger terrify: only Providence could
challenge a jurisdiction. His politic observation of Absolons disposition and
rare endowments, designing him out as a fit subject for his treason, seconded
by his crafty and irreligious counsel of abusing David's Concubines, (through
which in my former Sermon in this place, I vshered forth your attention) had
hitherto passed current, and found in event as much as it promised in
expectation. Absolon had hitherto expressed himself no worse a learner than he
a teacher; that the world might well doubt, whether the one were more happy to
project, or the other to put in practice. Nothing now seems remaining behind,
but to strike the last stroke, and give the fatal onset. David's overthrow,
and Absolons advancement together appear in sight; and his long and tedious
ambition, as it were within a league, arrived at the port of victory. Let not
Absolon play the truant in his last lesson, and within a few hours the voice
of Israel shall salute him King. But the change of a good Master, oftentimes
makes a non proficient Scholar: Achitophels precepts must be corrected by
Chusay, his second Tutor. Two eyes are presumed to discern more than one; and
the rugged and uneven knots in our first invention, ought to be filed by the
second. Though Achitophel in counsel be a Politician, yet Absolon in ambition
is a King: and therefore ought to arrogate to himself as well the honor of
the Conquest, as of the Scepters. Too much it might seem for Achitophel to
have both; too little for Absolon to have no hand at all in this Kingly
project. If Absolon dare not trust his own advice, yet let him show his
liberty of consent. Wisdom consists as much in choice, as in invention;
neither seems it the least of Absolons prerogative, amid diverse counselors to
declare himself a King.: Achitophel shall be suffered to speak his mind as an
assistant, not to determine causes as a Judge; and therefore must pardon
Absolon, if approving him in all the rest, he in this one dissent. But
oftentimes he that can best act, can worst pen his own part. And therefore no
marvel, if Absolon, usurping the office of Achitophel, began to fail in his
last act. But to leave Absolon to his headstrong will, we must here search
more nearly into the neglect of Achitophels counsel: which being the second
part in the former subdiuision of my Text, offers it self as a subject for
this days exercise. And when Achitophel saw that his counsel was not
followed, etc.

2 Achitophels counsel thus defeated (as you have heard) offers it self to
our enquiry under the observation of the causes, and their concomitant
circumstances. The causes preceding the fact, we may observe to be twofold:
either Primarie, or Secondary. The primary we find to be no other than
Almighty God, from whom all other inferior agents derive their strength and
action. Where Nature begins and Reason ends, there must we place that
omnipotent and eternal power, as the center from which all operations first
spring, and the boundless circumference into which all discourses run.
Betwixt this Eternal and Inferior Agents, as the distance knows no
proportion, so Reason could never find resistance or opposition: and easy was
it for that omnipotent providence, to whom Achitophels counsels were from all
eternity discovered, to decree as well the means, as the end of his defeat.
For as in the vast frame of nature, bodies compared one with the other seem
Heterogeneall, consisting of diverse and opposite operations: yet as so many
wheels in an artificial engine, are by the same hand directed to the same
common use; so the actions and counsels of men, howsoever casually they seem
to meet, and iustle one the other, are notwithstanding preordained by the same
Infinite counsel, to cooperate to the same universal end. Whence will
naturally arise this observation, That howsoever men may propose to themselves,
it is only in the power of Almighty God to dispose. A proposition better
known as a Proverb among men, than acknowledged in their practice. Had yet
the great Politicians of this world as much Logic to judge, as cunning to
contriue their own plots, they would questionless out of the combination of
second causes, without respect unto the first, rather suspect a fallacy, than
promise a demonstration. Had they as much acquaintance with Gods Word, as their
own wicked and profane Axioms; they would have heard the Lord often
threatening in holy Scriptures to stagger the counsel of the wicked, and turn
the wisdom of the wisest into folly. Had they rather desired to be
instructed, than flattered by experience, they would have found of their
profession, in steed of a few crowned happy by event, ten thousand miscarry
in the means. A good success, like a slye Parasite, rather soothes than
commends our actions, and like a coy Mistress, prostitutes her self to men's
neglect, but frowns on their ambition. But these are popular arguments,
subject almost to common sense; wherein every common observation may claim a
share. Should we search with more subtlety, either as sound Divines, or deep
Philosophers, into the mysterious manner of Gods working; we shall find no
small argument to be drawn from the disparitie betwixt Divine providence and
Worldly policy. The plots and counterplots of men are usually grounded, either
upon open Resistance, or slye Diuersion. The one is taught us in the Book of
Nature; wherein we may read the interchangeable conquest of the elements in
their mutual conflicts and operations: the other is grounded on Civil
observation as well as nature, which in the shortest and easiest way commonly
finds the safest victory. But Gods Almighty hand, which never knew
Resistance, or needs Diuersion, easily knows how to work his own ends by his
supernatural concurrence with worldly agents, in their most affected proiects.
The same means which wicked men propose to themselves, as the safest agents
for their desired ends, he makes the instruments of their own ruin; that the
most exacteft plot, wherein policy could ever* hug her own invention, may
seem the most exquisite example of her own shame. Easy was it for that great
King of Heaven and Earth, with thunder and lightning from heaven, to have
pashed Absolon in pieces, and scorched up his seditious army; more easily could
he have broken the subtle nets of Achitophels politic invention, than
Sampson the Philistines bands, or an Elephant a Spiders web: But intending
rather to make them their own execution^rs, he suffers them to run in their
own Labyrinth, till they meet their own ruin. What way in Nature could
Pharaoh devise more exquisite to increase the strength of Israel, and make them
populous, than to tie them to their daily burdens? Whence could Moses have
better derived his greatness in Pharaoh's Court, than from the bulrush cradle
floating on the tears of the weeping river? How could Pharaoh have feared or
expected, even in his own tyrannous decree, proiected for his own safeguard,
and Isreal's extirpation, to have found Israel ransomed, and himself ruined?
that his own daughter should preserve that as a Cabinet of pleasure, which
Moses mother bestowed on him as a mournful Coffin? Little thought Joseph's
brethren in selling him to the Egyptians, to have purchased their own shame,
and his future greatness. Little thought those Roman Emperors, in their
raging persecutions to have sown the seed of the Church in the blood of the
Martyrs, and have seen Christianity most triumphant in her greatest wounds.
Little thought Pope Leo the tenth, in sending his Indulgences into Germany, to
have met with such an opportunity as the peoples discontent, and the Heremite
Friars defeat, to have stirred up the hot spirit of Luther, to have given such
a fatal blow to his own greatness, and see his tyrannous Hierarchy in such
a terrible combustion. Such is the infinite wisdom of that Providence, to
ordain worldly policy to afford not only the aptest instruments, but the
exactest opportunities to destroy it self; and there to declare our greatest
weakness, where we repose our greatest strength. Whence by way of application
we may draw two other consectaries, expressing no less apparent footsteps of
Gods Almighty providence in disposing the affairs of men. First, that in
prevention of worldly plots and stratagems he commonly shows not himself but
at the last push, and seldom discouers our danger till we suppose our selves
most secure. Had Gods wisdom ran the course of humane policy, he might
have prevented, as well as defeated Achitophels design; he might have stirred
up David's jealousy, betime to have shut up Absolon in prison; or according to
the preposterous rules of the Ottonian Justice, have rewarded his future
treason with a present execution. Absolon might have failed as well in the
first as last precept; or at least Achitophel might have read in Absolons
disposition, his wilful weakness or inconstancy. But God pursues not ours,
but his own glory, as one who is then most willing to show his power, when our
hopes or abilities can challenge least.

8 Our second Consectary drawn from Gods omnipotent providence, is, That God
sits not as an idle spectator, but interposeth himself as a chief actor on
the Theater of worldly actions. It was not only an idle, but a wicked dream of
Epicurus and his followers, that God, busied in the contemplation of heavenly
matters, gave over the government of the World to Chance, or Nature: as if he
supposed it a Mill or Water-worke, which once framed by an Artificer, and
animated by an active power, should work of its own accord, and preserve in
it the principles both of motion and continuance. Which opinion (for ought that
I know) might be fastened on our Master Aristotle, who not only in his
Physickes seems to deny a Providence; but in the whole course of his
Philosophy seems to prefer Nature as a Deity, whom God should rather serve
than command: yet here, should I freely discover mine opinion, I should think
our Philosopher mistaken, in dividing one and the self same thing into diverse
names. To separate God from Nature is to divorce Nature from her self: which
seems of it self absurd; but to ascribe act and motion unto the latter, and
appoint the former to sit idle as a spectator, or at least as a necessary agent
to serve Nature, is more absurd to think a finite more excellent than an
infinite; which is strange how so great a wit should once imagine. But we out
of the principles of Christian Philosophy, may easily be taught a double
concourse of the Creator with the creature: the one General, which I hold to
be no other than that we usually call Nature: the other Special, which
humane Ignorance or Admiration has termed Miracle. Neither can reason imagine
the natural generation of things to be any other than a continuate Creation,
wherein Almighty God, according to the Aptness and Preparation of the subject,
daily ministers new forms, or conserues the same: which the Divines term
Preservation. For to give a Creature, without Gods immediate concurrence, an
ability of producing the like or equal substance to it self, or by his own
power to derive out of that first Chaos a new form or nature, seems to me to
trench too far on Gods Prerogative; I had almost said, to emulate God in the
second part of his Creation. But to leave this Commonwealth of Nature to its
first institution, and enter into the view of men's actions, we shall find a
more special concurrence of Divine providence, than in the former. To what
other cause else should we owe that miraculous preservation of Gods Church,
which through the violence of so many ages has saved it self entire, with so
small a number, and great an opposition. Time, which has seen the Rise and
Fall of so many famous Kingdoms; the invention and decay of so many learned
labors; the erection and defacing of so many stately Trophies; Time, which in
her vast gulf has not only swallowed up antiquity, but for the greatest
part envied her history; has yet cherished in her bosom this one darling,
and kept a sure register of all her actions. Should I descend to particular
examples of Gods concurrence in man's actions, I should sooner lose my self,
than find an end. The most irreligious Heathen, through the thick clouds of
ignorance, have often espied the glimpse of Gods dreadful lightning, and often
quaked at his thunder: They have felt his finger in their wounds, and
acknowledged his strength in their weakness: Yea, such has been the power of
Almighty God, to expose their own wicked actions as a table of their
confession, and extort an acknowledgement of his victory out of their
blasphemy. Julian, that wicked Apostate, though as politic to obscure, as
malicious to oppose the truth of Christ Jesus; was yet in the end constrained
to shut up his tyranny with a Vi^isti Gal^leae. In like sort, we read of
Mahomet the second, the first Emperor of the Turks, that at the siege of
Scodra against the Christians, in the defense of so small a City against his
mighty Army, finding God his enemy, he blasphemously asked by way of
exprobation, whether God had not enough to do in Heaven, that he should
interpose himself in his affairs on earth? He that will not deny a God, must
of necessity grant a providence, and who knows himself, and sifts into his
own will and actions, must needs acknowledge a supernall power, which
determines them to good or evil. Here, stood it with my time or your patience,
could I proceed to tax Pelagius, and his latter spawne the Jesuits and
Arminians: who imagining our will to be her own mistress, have admitted God
no otherwise than as a servant or assistant; as though that Almighty power were
not authorized to preordaine, but only bound to second our conversion Their
salvation they would rather owe unto themselves than grace; as though they
sought the first cause in their own inclination, and expected nothing of God
but a Moral and strong persuasion. But although in deed they will deny a
certain and special Predestination, yet in words they will grant a
Prescience. Here would I willingly ask a question out of my Text: Whether God
absolutely foresaw Absolons inclination of rejecting Achitophels counsel, or
not? If they grant the Negative, they deny a Prescience: If the Affirmative, I
demand again, whether this foresight could imply a necessity of event, or
leave Absolon to his own free choice? If the former, they must deny him a
Free Will of declining to the other side, which they labor by all means to
establish: If the latter; they must either acknowledge Gods prescience to be
uncertain, against the ground they have already granted; or at least affirm,
that a certain knowledge may be of such things as shall never come to pass.
Here the Jesuits are better provided to shift than answer; like the subtle
Sep^s, to make an escape by troubling the water: and rather than they would be
thought to know nothing, they will say any thing. Where the Scripture shows no
fair countenance, and Reason faints, their recourse to Schoole-subtilties must
be their only refuge. But were there no Smith in Israel, yet might these
Philistines be entreated to sharpen our sword for our defense against their
battery. God (say they) from all eternity foresaw the inclination of man's
Free Will, upon which he grounded his decree of withholding or conferring
farther grace. Here I must ask again, Whether God foresaw it in his own
decree, or the disposition of the second causes? If they assent unto the
former, then must this foresight in the order of our understanding, not
prevent, but rather second the decree; which they deny. If they stick to the
latter (as indeed they do) I demand how second causes may be supposed to
work, except they were predetermined and actuated by the first? That second
causes work not in their own, but their owners strength, is their own
principle; and to grant them an operation, not depending on the first Agent,
were to set an instrument to work without a hand. I would ask moreover,
Whether God foreseeing Achitophels counsel and Absolons inclination, bad the
power to hinder it or not. If so, then was it in his power to foresee what
himself could hinder; which checkes the certainty of Gods knowledge, and
inuolues an apparent Contradiction. If not, how can we imagine him Omnipotent,
which cannot challenge so much power over second causes, as to turn and divert
them to his own uses? This argument Vorstius and Episcopius found so strong
against them, that to back their absurdity, they must add apparent blasphemy;
allowing God either no Prescience at all, or such as is only uncertain and
(...); which impious and gross opinion I hold sufficiently confuted in the
mention. But I have stayed here too long, and have far to go: wherefore
having taken a general survey of the primary, or chief cause of Achitophels
defeat, let us descend to the second causes, which in the next place offer
themselves to observation.

4 Gods power has expressed it self legible as well in the Book of Nature as
of Grace: and natural Agents (as you have heard) as they derive their
operations from his strength, so they are determined by his will, and directed
to his glory. Here we find Nature in second Agents not set against her self,
though raised a pitch beyond her private inclination; and the first cause
without either need or violence, to entertain the service of the second.
Whence, ere we descend to each particular inferior agent, will arise one
general observation: That Almighty God bringing to pass miraculous and great
events, commonly admits the cooperation of second causes. As easy was it
questionless for that great Architect of nature, who out of waste and
emptiness begat a world, to create, as to command, to cause, as to entertain
the operation of inferior Agents. Here might History show her self prodigal
of examples, but never bank-rupt: every moment, in the ordinary course of
humane actions, begets some instance or other to demonstrate Gods gracious love
and favor to the world; who, able to dash both Policy and Nature out of
countenance, is notwithstanding pleased to admit them as his obedient
hand-maides. But to express the secret cooperation of God, working by second
causes, is a matter which has heretofore staggred Philosophy, and puzzled the
apprehension of the sharpest and acutest Divines. Nevertheless, so far forth
as the infinite power of God may dispense with man's enquiry, we may reduce the
manner of his working to certain heads; to decline as much as we can the two
enemies of understanding, Obscurity and Confusion. The action then of Gods
concurring with second causes, concerns either the beginning, progress, or
end of the same act. In the beginning we may call it either Positive or
Negative. The Positive consists either in the furtherance or hinderance of
humane actions; both which may be either internal or external. The internal
promotion or hinderance is again divided into two acts: for either it
concerns the supportance of the creature, which in the first moment is termed
Creation; in continuance, Preservation; or the preordination of the Agent,
which with our Divines, against the Tenent of Arminius, I dare to call
Predetermination. The external, is the presentment of some external and
present object to the apprehension of the sense, will, or understanding; which
latter acts, concur as well in Gods hinderance of humane actions: For the
same Almighty power, can at once both promote his own, and hinder men's
counsels. This Hinderance is many ways brought to pass; for either the
impediment is cast on our authority, power, will, or state. Our authority of
free-working i^ curbed and restrained by the Law, whereof the breach is a
sin: as that of Adam in Paradise, whose liberty could not dispense with the
tasting of the forbidden tr^e. Our Natural power is checked by many
interuenient causes: first by cutting off the agent from life and being, as
that of the siege of Jerusalem by Senna herib, by smiting in one night an
hundred fourscore and five thousand; or the bringing of (...) the Prophet to
(...), by the consumption of (...) men by ^ire from heaven* Secondly, by
detraction or diminution of the power; as I^roboam was res^rained from
apprehending the Prophet, by the drying up of his hand. Thirdly, by opposition
of equal or greater strength; as Vzziah was hindered by (...) and his
fourscore Priests from offering in the Temple. Fourthly, by removing or
subtraction of the object, as our Savior saved himself from the violence of
the Jews, and the Tribune Paul from the conspiracy. An impediment may be cast
on our will, either by Gods Predetermining power, which against Arminius we
have formerly maintained, or by some outward perswasiue argument. The
arguments, wherewith he usually dis-swades our will from commencing any action,
are commonly drawn either from the Topickes of seeming impossibility, and
apparent difficulty; or unpleasantness, loss, and dishonor. By the first,
for a while the Scribes and Pharis^es were restrained from offering violence
unto our Savior, because they knew him of the people to be esteemed as a
Prophet. In like sort, God heretofore set a bar betwixt his own people and
the Idolatrous Israelites, lest they should traffic as well sins as
familiarity. By the second, Joseph's brethren were diuerted from the murder of
their Brother, becouse a milder course seemed to serve their purpose. By the
third and last, Joseph was dissuaded from adultery with Potiphars wife, and
David from touching the Lords ano^nted. An obstacle may be cast on the act it
self two manner of ways; either by taking away the object, which with some we
have reduced to the impediment of the power, or by disabling the influxe and
power of the agent, in regard of the patient: whereof we have an example in the
three Children, unconsumed in the fiery surnace. The Negative act of Gods
concurring, is permission, and is clean opposite to the other; and therefore
ought to be squared by the same distinction: for as Logicians have taught us,
Opposites ought to suffer the same diuiston. Only from hence we must except
the impediment caston our actions by the law or anthoritie; for otherwise would
there follow an apparent contradiction, that the same act should be a sin,
and yet no sin: a sin as it is by the Law forbidden, and yet no sin, as
it is by the same power permitted. These acts forespoken of Gods concurrence,
seem to pr^uent and precede the action of an inferior agent. In the action it
self, we find two special acts; the one, an actual determination of the
agent to the object, the other, a direction to the end. An instance of the
former we have in (...) cruelty upon the children, which was diuerted by our
Savior, by the substitution of another object. Of this latter, in King
Ahasuerosh, who amidde the spoils of so many virgin concu^ines, lighted on
Hester, whom Providence had marked out to be the preser^er of the Iewesh
nation. The concourse of God, after, and in the end of humane actions, is no
other than the direction of the event to a further purpose: which we observe in
the Jews cruelty in crucifying our Savior; the execution of whose malice,
was found to be the most exquisite means of our salvation. But I have almost
lost my self in this Labyrinth, whereinto, though Philosophy seems to have
taught an entrance in, yet Divinity never discovered a passage out; as that
which begins with man's smallest knowledge, and in his greatest ignorance. Hence
are we taught, not so far^e to trust to Gods providence, as to neglect the
ordinary means which God offers to our industry or observation, Hezekiab,
though he had already received under Gods own hand and seal, a lease of
fifteen years to the date of life almost expired, neglected neither the
Prophets counsel, nor the help of his Physicians: and David in this place, a
man after Gods own heart, and confident enough of his protection, has
notwithstanding his present recourse to second causes, as preordained of God
for Achitophels defeat, and his delivery. Which second causes coming next in
order particularly to be traced out, your favorable attention will (I hope) a
while longer hold the candle while I briefly read them.

5 The inferior agents concurring to the neglect of Achitophels counsel, are
reduced unto two heads: The impulsive, and isntrumental. The impulsive cause
which moved God to defeat Achitophels counsel (so far as according to the
language of men we may speak of God) was David's prayer, whereby he besought
him to confound the counsel of Achitophel his professed enemy. The good use of
prayer amongst devout and religious men, has always been esteemed both the
first and last remedy in our greatest dangers, as the surest key which opens
and shuts the door of Gods secret closet. When our friends shrink from us,
and all worldly stratagems are out of sight; when dangers present their Gorgon
faces as hideous as our fears, and death stands at our elbowes to summon our
appearance to the last arraignement; only prayer is left to intercede as a
gracious Orator, and effectiue advocate. Though Achitophel in wit and industry
would show himself a politician, yet David in sanctity must express himself
a Prophet: and though Absolons hopes are grounded on his worldly strength, yet
David's strength is erected on Gods protection. Neither in his sacred
^iaculation, where in he addressed himself to Gods will and mercy, was his
desire vntutured, or his devotion ignorant. He kn^w to whom he spoke, and
observed a distance: as fearing lest his religious zeal might seem unmannerly
if unseasonable. The greatest offices are commonly subject to the greatest
solaecismes, and Prayer, devotions must trusty messenger, if not well directed
or acquainted with her Embassage, may soon degenerate into superstition. But
so well instructed was David in this religious courtship, as if the end of his
suite had been others institution, and his example our rule. Whether we respect
the Author, and, Object, Time, or Form of his earnest petition, we shall
obs^rue him as discrecte as religious, as one which ow^d his oraizons as much
to knowledge as devotion. First we find his prayer neither to be ignorant, nor
hypocritical; but as proceeding from a generous and uncorrupted heart, vsh^red
in by sincerity, and accompanied with contrition. He measured his meditations
rather by weight than number. He was not taught, as a Popish peniteutiary, to
count his beads in stead of his prayers, and make his fingers the
intellige^cers to his faith. He knew not so much complement as the Devils
formal Courtiers, who desire as little to be believed of God, as understood
of men; and esteem prayer rather as a decent formalitie, than a religious
exercise. Secondly, the end of his Prayer, was, no other than the preservation
of his people, and his own defense: neither in his own defense sought he
revenge but justice; his prayer was not directed against the person, but the
sin; neither his desire (for ought I see) so much in the ruin of Achitophel,
as the diuersion of his policy. Tur^e (says he) the wisdom of Achitophel
into folly. We find not in this form the affected curses of the Romish
Synagogue, which rauing (...) at the time dogging him in his way, might as
easily have taught as David suffered. But the Pope perhaps may command what
David never durst to entreat of God: And what is a King and Prophet to Christ's
universal Vicar? or David's prerogative to his Supremacy? Too much might it be
thought for David to banne or excommunicate a graceless Son, or a rebellious
Subject: yet may it perhaps seem too little for Peter's successor, in whose
hands are the keys of heaven, hell, and purgatory, to shut and open at his
pleasure. Loath I am (beloved) to jest in earnest, or turn a serious
blasphemy into a pleasant Irony. But nothing works us more, than our shameful
actions: and the same power which turns humane wisdom intofolly, makes it
unto men ridiculous. To bewail folly with Heraclitus, argues charity; and yet
to laugh at it with Democritus, can be interpreted no sin but justice.
Thirdly, the object to which David's prayer was directed, was no other than God
himself, as one best acquainted with his (...), and most able to relieve him.
Had (...) (...) tought the complement of our Roman Courtiers, o^ the religious
mysteries of (...), he might have prepared Gods ^ares before, by the
meditation of some (...), or at least have made pr^nision of some (...) (...),
to (...) him safe from danger. The holy Legend (had he lived in these riper
times) might questionless have instructed him in the particular ^ffices of
each Saint, as well as the ancient Roman records in the prerogative of each
inferior De^ie. A thousand to one but some humble S. Francis would have been
singled out to deliver his petition; or some charitable S. Thomas Becket, who
could not deny a Parrat his assistance, would have been m^ued with the petition
of a King. But David (it seems, better kn^w the King himself, than these his
Courtiers, and neglecting these inferior officers, presents his suite to ^o
other than God himself, whom nevertheless he found (if we believe
Scriptures) facile enough both to heart his prayer, and grant his request.
Fourthly, the time and opportunity of his prayer cannot but minister somewhat
to observation. He deferred not his petition, like a malefactor on the (...),
or a profane Seaman in perplexity, to the last extremity: but he begins
where desperate and careless sinners would (at least) desire to end. No sooner
had Fame, as a swist Pursiuant, euertaken Achitophel in his renolt, but he
makes his (...) to Almighty God, as one who knew well that it was his office
rather to govern than obey Destiny. The same hand of vengeance which by Moses
entreatie was restrained from the overthrow of the idolatrous Israclites, and
by a general prayer and repentance from the desolation of Niniuch, he could
not imagine either slack or impotent in defeat of his enemies, or defense of
his faithful servant. Fifthly, we observe his prayer to be short and pithy,
not tedious and impertinent; as thinking it meerer that his heart should
dictate to his tongue, than his tongue interpret to his heart. His prayer was
not crude and unconcocted, abounding with as many Tautologies as words, but
seasonable and Patheticke, expressing no less than his earnest desire, and
directed no further than the present purpose. Here, as our Savior in the
Gospel heretofore taxed the Pharisees of long and tedious babbling, might I
proceed to reprehend some Pharisees of our time, were I sure to be mine own
interpreter. But I am much afraid, lest, through the sides of a few factious
and fantastic spirits, I should be suspected to wound Religion. The sixth and
last circumstance in David's prayer, was, that it proceeded from him
extemporary, as best suting with an extemporary and sudden accident. Hence our
modern Mass Priests might have been taught a more profitable Art of Prayer,
than the sale of set Liturgies for all occasions. No invention of man could
ever prove so infinite as to sift the precise corners of every man's conscience:
neither is it in the wit of man, but God, to dictate a present form for all
future accidents, and prescribe a special Antidote against all temptations.
Herein commonly the Physician shows himself no sooner than the disease, as one
who would have us depend rather on his present favor, than our premeditated
counsel. And in such cases I take that of our Savior, [ Dabitur in illa hora]
to be understood. Nevertheless from this, or other the like eiaculatory
prayers, warranted by Scripture, and practiced by holy men, little ground of
argument can the Brownists take for their opinion; who admitting no distinction
betwixt public and private prayer, would have all to proceed from an
extemporary and sudden meditation. As though God could not as well direct our
study, as strengthen our delivery; and there were not a place as well for
attention to follow, as invention to dictate in our Devotion. For the
confutation of which men's unwarrantable industry, we need go no further than
our Saviors own example, who prescribed us a set form of Prayer; or David at
least, of whom we now speak, who has left behind him so many sweet and
divine meditations, as a testimony of his sanctity, and a pattern for our
imitation. Hitherto (beloved) have I discoursed of the Impulsive second cause
of Achitophels defeat. The isntrumental causes, whereunto my method in the
next place is engaged, concern either the immediate prevention of Achitophels
design, or discovery of it to David and his Army. The former consisting of
Chushai's loyalty and Absolons weakness, discouers unto us as well the
character of a trusty Subject, preferring his Kings safety before his own
ambition, as of an unexperienced young Prince, more willing to hearken to the
voice of flattery, than wise direction. The latter, Gods power in the weak
simplicity of a silly Ma^de, the instrument of this discovery. In the brief
touching of which points, I hope to find your patience a little more
propitious than the time.

6 As much as the dignity of a King transcends the Subject, is the obligation
of the Subject to his King: neither is the duty less we owe to the safety of
our Sovereign, than the safeguard we challenge in his protection; as the
center, next under God, from which we derive our honors, and to which we owe
our services Of this duty, Chushai, David's trusty servant, was not ignorant,
neither was his knowledge better tutoured than his industry. The same hand of
Kingly munificence which dispensed him his honors, pointed him out the li^es
of his obliged loyalty; neither was he more slack to obey than David to
command. Return into the City (quoth David to Chushai) and say unto Absolon,
I will be thy servant, O King, as I have been thy fathers servant; so shall
thou defeat the counsel of Achitophel. Almighty God, who formerly heard
David's prayer, directed his advice, and Chushai's industrious loyalty. In
undertaking of which design, we shall find David blessed in so good a
servant, as Chushai worthy of so good a Master; whose carriage of so dangerous
a business in so honest and discreet a fashion, seems to copy out unto us
all the offices of an honest politician. In the first place, we find his
obedience and resolution, neither shrinking from the awful looks of danger,
or forfeyting his Masters trust. The apprehension of an unexpected friend, or
reconciled enemy, might have betrayed his errand to watchful jealousy:
suspicion might have called his very looks to examination, and guilty fear,
the child of treason, might have delivered him over as a spy to present
execution. Achitophels deep in sight in State affairs, and Absolons confidence
in his oraculous advice, might have either sounded his disposition, or dashed
his counsel out of countenance; and then should he find his best service
rewarded with death or torture: at least, had his message met the best
success, and ransomed his Master David from so imminent a conspiracy, yet,
according to the rules of worldly policy, he could not yet suppose Absolons
jealousy more dangerous than David's obligation. Princes, unwillingly owe
courtesies greater than themselves, and commonly prefer a bank-rupt debtor,
before an ouer-deseruing creditor: as if the very sight or remembrance of a
beneficial friend, should seem a perpetual exprobation of ingratitude. A
smaller disparagement it seems among worldly Tyrants to want Justice, than
Power; rather to be thought willing to offend, than not to be thought able to
requite. These objections urged to Chushai's likely conjecture and politic
observation, might easily have checked his forwardness in David's service, and
strangled his resolution in the very birth. But he out of a clear and
courageous spirit, neither fears an enemy, nor suspects a friend, nor seeks
his duty abroad in other men's forecasts, which he might find at home in his
own bosom. In the second place, we may observe his trusty love to his Master
David: occasion might here seem to smile on his advancement, and Absolons
growing fortunes, as the rising Sun, might have tempted his ambition: David
seems ready to depart, and Absolon to enter the Scene of life and sovereignty:
and who, in policy, would not rather choose to have his fortunes to live in
Absolon, than dye in David? To have betrayed the fathers trust, might have
engaged the sons affection; and to raise himself a fortune out of his Masters
ruin, though the greatest breach in the laws of loyalty, had seemed one of
the chiefest Maxims in the art of Policy. But he, as a faithful subject,
respects not what he might, but what he ought; not so much what occasion might
seem to offer, as what religion might be known to justify: as one who would
rather owe his misfortunes to his trusty service, than his preferment to
dishonest treachery. Thirdly, we may note his secrecy and discretion in
managing so dangerous and great a project. He invaded not the young Princes
ears with a sudden and unexpected onset, or like an intruding Polipragmon,
showed himself more officious than wise, to out-runne the goal, and let slip
before occasion. He expected, not prevented his opportunity; and suffered
Absolon to ask, before he thought it convenient to give his counsel: that
Absolon might seem more indebted to Chushai's wisdom, than Chushai to
Absolons approbation. Neither in his advice did Chushai show himself factious
or unmannerly; he seemed only to dislike Achitophels direction in this one
design, not without a silent acknowledgement of his former wisdom. The
counsel (says he) which Achitophel has given at this time is not good. The
advantage of Achitophels reputation amongst those that had tried his policy,
and of the peoples prejudice of such as should contradict, taught Chushai's
discretion to disapproue rather the counsel, than the counselor, and mitigate
his dissent with some color of former approbation. This design, inspired by
God himself, directed by David, and practiced by Chushai, seems to give
warrant to this observation, That there is as well a good as an evil policy;
as well an honest and discreet conueyance of our actions, grounded on religion,
as an indirect proceeding engaged to unwarranted and unlawful actions. He
that would have us to be innocent as Doves, has taught us also to be wise as
Serpents; and he that dispenses us the means to atchieue our ends, permits us
also the proper and best direction. But how precisely to divide betwixt an
honest providence, and unlawful policy* neither on the one side to violate
Gods precepts, nor on the other to neglect our own right, seems a matter as
curious to determine, as necessary to understand. To be Gods servant and the
Times, at once, seems incomparable; esp^cially, in such a disorderly mixture
of humane actions: in which (as Bodin would counsel us) it behooues a wise man
to show himself as various as the season. We cannot command, but obey
occasion. The means and opportunities whereof Statesmen take advantage in
defeating of their opposites, are rather found than chosen; and the manner and
direction of our proiects rather prescribed us by chance than skill, as such
whose causalitie depends not on our will, but observation. Nevertheless
between the iniquity of our times, and the strictness of a good conscience, a
space is le^t wide enough to give a passage for a religious and wise
discretion: and by how much the plots of men, and changes of State seem more
dangerous to Gods children, by so much is their care and providence, in
declining the snares of the wicked, the better warranted. For God condemns in
us as well the neglect of our care, as his providence; as on^ whose wisdom
works seldom without, but with and in our industry.

7 The second isntrumental cause which shows it self in the privation of
Achitophels counsel, was found in Absolons inclination. Achitophels proiects
having long since past the first conception, are now come unto the very birth:
but Absolons unexperienced youth, as an unskillful midwife, made it abortiue in
the delivery. The ground of his error I can interpret to be no other, than
the usual disease of Princes, who had rather be soothed than advised, and
have ears more facile to the tongue of flattery, than the heart of loyalty.
Flattery by Tacitus, was well termed the old sickness of the Roman
Commonwealth, as the love of flattery, the stain and blemish of the wisest
Emperors. Those whom neither the sword could conquer, nor treason undermine;
whom neither pleasure could allure, nor riches persuade, nor greatness tempt
to the least dishonor, only flattery could bring into subjection. For as the
object of flattery, self-love, is most universal, and no where excluded
humane nature: so adulation in it self, every where, finds occasion to enter
without resistance or impeachment. And whereas all other vices are
countermanded and checked by their contrary virtues, this one seems to
challenge a prerogative above virtue her self, in that she finds acceptance
among her enemies, and grows stronger by opposition. No marvel then, if
Absolons youthful weakness, unable to endure the siege of so puissant a
beleaguer, revolted from Achitophels (as I may say) irreligious loyalty, and
yielded to Chushai's pious flattery. Chushai's adulatory counsel we may
observe to consist in three especial circumstances. First, that he persuaded
him to enter the field in his own person, and make himself the owner as well
of the victory as the Sovereignty; as though it had seemed a matter not
becoming the greatness of a King, to owe the honor of his Scepters to the
valor of a servant. Secondly, in that in his advice he seemed more firmly
opinionated of the peoples love, and Absolons popular estimation. What we
desire, that we easily believe: neither prize we our periections dearer in
themselves, than in other men's admiration. Our virtues never please us better,
than when, by reflection, they seem augmented in the false glass of popular
opinion. Neither shall Sophocles the Tragedian, be so well accepted in
describing men's manners as they were, as Eu ipides, who presented them as they
should be. More honor found Homer in expressing men's manners to the best, than
Hegemon to the worst. And howsoever the two famous Painters, Pauson in limming
out the most deformed, and Cleophon the most semblable and likely Pictures,
expressed in their work as much art as industry: yet who with Polignotus, so
cunningly can handle his pensill, as to paint out men's best parts beyond truth
or existence, shall easily purchase the reputation of the rarest workmanship.
Thirdly, Chushai's counsel seemed more to aymeat Absolons honor and
magnificence, in that he persuaded him to oppose his Father David, rather by
open strength than undermining policy. For Absolon to have entrapped his
Father David by a secret ambush, had been termed rather a treason than a
victory: and by how much the field is more ample than the closet, seems a
clancular conspiracy, inferior to an open hostile opposition. To scrue
himself into his Fathers kingdom by cunning engines, might derogate from his
valor, and obscure the glory of the conquest. A pitched field would be thought
the best scene, whereon honor ought to display her Ensigns, and the sword the
most graceful actor. These adulatory suggestions of Chushai, howsoever
prejudicial to Absolons design, had nevertheless the advantage of
Achitophels well wayed policy. For as sick and queafie stomachs had rather
appetite should vmpire their desires, than judgment; affecting for the time,
rather to be pleased than profited: so Chushai's advice tempered and seasoned,
(as it seems) to Absolons vainglorious and ambitious humor, was as soon
swallowed as suggested. From which example, practiced by Chushai, and paralleld
by the like in^ances in all times and histories, will arise this observation:
That flattery is the most exquisite and dangerous policy. A proposition
requiring no other confirmation, than common practice; wherein we esteem those
ax^omes established as the most undoubted truth, which by ordinary experience
are found most succesfull. A happy success is that which crowns our actions;
neither is our natural knowledge more indebted to sensible experiment, than
our politic to civil observation. Hence an ordinary path, by policy, seems
to be trodden out to all preferments, through the back-doore of adulation,
through which, every base and undeserving Parasite shall find an easy
entrance, while desert, waiting for a turn at the fore-gate, shall freeze ere
it obtain admission, and pine away in fruitless expectation. No marvel
then, if flattery, which some have termed the eight liberal Science, have
gotten the start of the other seven, having been tried to be most compendious
and ready way to all advancement; at least one, to whom all other professions
owe their grace, and direct their service. The curious workmanship of
artificers, the subtle nets, and pleasant dreams of Philosophers, the hired
voices of Lawyers, the sugared pills of Physicians, the set and formal gravity
of Divines, the oily tongues of Courtiers, the scraping legs of Peasants,
seem all corriuals in courting this proud Mistress, and prostituting their
service to adulation. Here (Reverend and Beloved) might I in modesty ask of
you, as sometime the King of Israel of Elisha the Prophet, Father, shall I
strike? But your gravity checks my swelling passion, and seems to answer me
with the same Prophet, Thou shall not strike. What, would thou smite them
whom the Lord has made already capti^e? I am no shameless Cham, to discover a
fathers nakedness, no remorselesse Nero, to open and expose the entrails of
my mother. The veil of Charity is in my hand, to cover a multitude of sins,
if I chanc^ to meet them in my passage; yet had I rather ever to shut mine own
eyes, than behold mine own sorrow, and my mothers shame. With Noah's two modest
sons, I purposely look awry and go backwards; not so much as to see that,
which I have no hands to hide, no browe to justify. Should I wander with
Acteon in so wide a forest, my unwary eyesight might unhappily glance on
Diana naked, and make it self guilty, as well of danger as observation. But
casting mine eyes on this learned and grave assembly, me thinks I could
promise my self as much liberty to speak, as truth prerogative to warrant.
Can any prescription plead a stronger immunity from the yoke of flattery,
than the charter of the Muses? or any nation under heaven vaunt of a larger
freedom, than the children of the Prophets? and yet here I may well fear,
lest my observation may betray flattery to discovery, and my language to
exception. Afraid I am almost to open mine eyes and look abroad, lest I
should epsy flattery dispensing offices, conferring dignities, conniuing at
offenses, violating privileges, debasing worth, disgracing learning, and
undermining honesty. Flattery is not always clothed in the same weeds or
colors; she can put on black as well as white: in the seat of Justice she
can show her self in purple, in the Court of Princes she can strut in gaudy
silks, and (for ought I know) in the chiefest place of learning and religion,
can shroud her self in scarlet. There was a false Lucifer among the Angels, a
wicked Saul among the Prophets, a traiterous Judas among the Apostles: and an
easy inquiry, might heretofore, have discovered a scycophanticke Shaw among
the Doctors.

-- Satis esse vid^sse, reuertor. If adulation should be now found to soiourne
in our Cloisters, I could wish, by Chushai, she should be taught her best
office, which is the common good, and the Princes preservation: so should we
never fear that censure, which Tacitus gives of the Roman Senators living
under Tyberius, That they ambitiously stood up in Senate, and strove to outvie
one the there in servile baseness: much less should we deserve to be laughed
at with those Thebans, who (as we read in Iustine) fawning too much on Philips
greatness, bought their new protection with the loss of their ancient
liberty. But I have too long entangled my self in this discourse of
Flattery, wherein (I fear) I have neither observed the time, nor flattered
your patience. I must now briefly descend to the instrument of the discovery,
which in the next place presents it self to examination.

8 Almighty God, in bringing to pass matters of the greatest moment, rather
makes than finds the fittest instruments; as one who would rather have the
subject indebted to his choice, than his choice to our estimation. He, to whom
it was as easy to create as suborne a creature, could as well give as take
occasion, and for his sacred purpose as soon fortify the weakest, as single
out the strongest. Achitophels politic advice suggested to Absolon, defeated
by Chushai, communicated to Zadocke and Abiathar the priests, is at length by
David's servants, discovered by a Woman, a silly Maid, whose unexperienced
youth, unable sex, and meaner estate, could express no other character than
weakness; is notwithstanding designed out by God as the choysest instrument
of securing the state of Israel, and a Kings delivery. The rarest workmanship
is commended as much by the worst, as the best instruments; and it is Gods
frequent practice (to speak with the Apostle) to make known the riches of his
glory on the vessels of his mercy. Our Savior Christ, to whom all the Kings
and Emperors of the earth owed observance, whose least alliance could have
royalized the basest family, was pleased notwithhanding as an inmate to make
himself a passage into this world through Mary's neglected womb; his cradle
was no better than a cribbe, and his first entertainment no higher than Joseph's
fortunes. Neither was his birth a better argument than his life and actions. He
might have breathed in the air of some Princes court a kingly education, or
committed the tuition of his youth to the institution of the learned Doctors:
Rome was then in her pride, and set the foot of her magnificence on the neck
of the proudest nations. Athens, the mother of the Grecian wisdom, had long
ere this triumphed in her fruitful and glorious offspring: And the Scribes
and Doctors at Jerusalem, sitting in Moses chair, could have challenged a
right beyond the Delphicke Oracle: and yet we find neither his knowledge
fathered by the most famous teachers, nor his manners indebted to the seuerest
institution. The shop of a Mechanitian seemed his first Academie, the Publicans
and sinners his familiar hosts and friends, and the poor fishermen, returning
from their broken nets, admitted into the number of his choice Disciples. By
which, we Christians may be taught, not to repose so much confidence in the
strength of our mighty and great confederates, as to neglect the industry and
good will of our weakest and mean associates. Virgils silly Gnat could awaken
the sluggish shepherd from his improuident slumber, to decline the approaching
Serpent; and the impotent Pismire has bin taught to rouse up the sleeping
Lion, to make an escape from the hunters snares. Thus we find the chain of
God Almighties providence linkt together by so many dependant causes, began in
Gods counsel, seconded by David's prayer, continued in Chushai's loyalty, and
Absolons weakness, shut up at length in the action of a silly Maid: which as
an introduction might lead our discourse a Scene further, to the last
Catastrophe, and Achitophels bloody Tragedy: to which, having so much at this
time trespassed on your patience, I shall (God willing) engage my next exercise.

He must needs run, whom desperation leads, and the Part 3.
Devil drives. That old Serpent that first set mischief a work, scorns as
much to retire, as delights to persevere, and neither slackes or stops his
pace, till he find the place of execution. How far his wicked industry has
gone hand in hand with Achitophels treacherous designs, your present memory
may witness, in my former exercise, and your attention. The defeat of his
pernicious counsel, with the causes presenting themselves to the horror of a
guilty conscience, seconded as well with outward disgrace as inward discontent,
turns his own weapon against himself, and makes his policy* the most
exquisite instrument of his own destruction. This great Politician, whom (as
the Oracle of God) the people of Israel had never suspected of inconstancy, or
accused of indiscretion; whose wise service had instructed Absolon in all his
parts, and so iudiciously (as it were) chalkt out unto him the way to
sovereignty, might seem to deserve more in the eyes of Absolon than
misprision. What less reward can our best industry expect, or gratitude
express, than acknowledgement or approbation? What greater evidence of present
ability can our understandings minister, or our hopes promise, than the stamp
and seal of our former actions? Had Chushai ever showed himself so wise, or
Achitophel so weak, that Chushai in the scale should ouerpoize Achitophel?
Shall the fancy of a shallow Courtier conquer the wit and experience of so
great a Statesman; and the smooth tongue of flattery, ouer-reach the deep
grounds of a settled judgment? What then remains for Achitophel, than by his
sudden flight to express his noble indignation, and foreshew Absolons ruin in
his own? He will hang himself first, to teach Absolon the way to the same
end; and to outstrip him in the last act, rather politickly prevent, than
basely fear the shameful stroke of execution: And Achitophel saw that his
counsel was not followed, etc.

2. The Scene whereon we now enter, contains the last actions of Achitophel,
whose Catastrophe shuts up all in his shameful end, and honorable burial.
The actions preceding his death, are expressed in these four circumstances. 1.
That he sadled his ass, 2. That he went home, 3. That he put his house in
order, 4. That he hanged himself. In the first, we may observe his Tyranny,
in imposing on his silly Ass the burden of his transgression. In the second,
his Treachery, in leaving his Master in his greatest extremity. In the third,
his worldly Providence, in preferring the preservation of his temporal estate
before the preservation of his own soul. In the fourth, his desperate
execution of himself, in distrust of Gods mercy, and daring his justice to the
last extremity. The latter clause concerns his ceremonious funeral; which,
howsoever in it self a passion, as we respect Achitophel as the subject: yet
so far as it may have reference to his former testament and ordination,
wherein this may seem included, it may be termed an action, wherein he showed
himself ambitious, to file and furbish over the stain of his shameful life
and end, with an honorable burial. These are the lists of my present
meditations, wherein as God shall enable my discourse, and your Christian
patience second, I shall proceed in order, and first of the first [ He sadled
his ass.]

3. So contagious has been the sin of our first Parents, that it not only
usurped jurisdiction on mankind, the spawne of our Father Adam, but invaded,
without resistance, natures universal Monarchy: in so much, as the Heavens,
Elements, Plants, and Beasts themselves, by the divine institution of their
creation, as disdaining to serve ingratitude, are by the Apostle, said to
groan under their tedious burden, and desire to be at liberty. Why the
creature should desire this freedom, four reasons are alleged by Peter
Martyr on the Romans. First, because of his perpetual turmoiles and labors,
serving only for the use of man. Secondly, because they together suffer the
same affliction. Thirdly, out of the sympathy and fellow-feeling of one
another adversity. Fourthly and lastly, which is the greatest of all, because
they are constrained to become the servile instrument of sin, and by
consequence, the subject of Gods fury. This wrath of God, though general (as we
have said) to all the creatures, we find no where more legible than the silly
Ass; a beast created, as it might seem, to torture it self, to supply the
defect of man's industry: wherein, according to the Egyptian Hierogliphickes,
nature seems to have patternd forth unto us the exact image of Patience,
Fortitude, and Frugalitie; gifts not unworthy the choice of the most generous
temper, had not the sin of man exposed them rather to scorn than imitation.
Such is the unchristian censure of our supercilious times, who disdain to
salute virtue, except she come accoutred in golden garments. Of this poor
creature notwithstanding, whereof they scorn the name, they cannot want the
use. The ignominy of a servile disposition is the reward of his best service;
the profitable fruits of his painful industry, the glory and improuement of
his Masters ambitious husbandry. If such injustice, offered by a man to a
servile beast, seem opposite to the laws common equity, which commands every
thing his own: how huge in the eyes of every Christian Judge swells their
tyranny, who command their servants and inferiors to carry the burden of
their transgressions; as though they meant to ride them on the spur with
themselves to hell? The obedience of Achitophels Ass to serve him in this
wicked action, was only passive, as of one to whom the law of nature had
prescribed no other rule than his masters raines. But the sacred image of God,
stamped in the reasonable soul of man, is to us both law and liberty, as well
to preserve the rights of Magistrates, as our own privilege. An obedience we
justly owe to our superiors both active and passiu^, so far forth as it may
stand with the right of nature, and Gods honor, as that which God expressly
commands, and no community can want. But when the sword of the Magistrate
pretends a title to any part of divine prerogative, it finds always, in the
way of resistance, the right of the cause, or sincerity of a good conscience,
whereon, as on a rock of Adamant, it may sooner hacke it self to pieces, than
make a breach for entry. Hence wise Magistrates may be taught to exact no more
of their inferiors, than their commission from God dares to countenance, or
their duty to him commands: much less in regard of their own worth, to
slight the good offices of the meanest servant. Our consciences and opinions
are seldom so flexible, as our joints to fawn on greatness: neither is the
judgment of the wisest governor able so much to challenge a Monarchy in the
weakest understanding, as to command opinion. Balaams Ass could see the Angel
of the Lord with his sword drawn against him, when his Masters eyes were shut;
and therefore had good reason to leave beating his poor beast, when he opened
his mouth to prevent his danger. But if any wise Christian desire the
ministerial offices of these servile creatures, let them imitate the example
of our Savior Christ, who came meekely on an Ass riding into Jerusalem, where
the Ensigns of gracious acceptance, and the shouts of H^sanna's applauded his
arrival: Not as Achitophel, who arose in haste, and went home to his house;
not like our Savior to save, but like himself to betray his friend: which is
the next circumstance which awaits our observation. [ And he arose, and went
home to his house.]

4 The truest touch*stone of friendship, is adversity, which commonly vnmasketh
our enemies to discovery; and singles out our best friends for trial. Here
Achitophel, as an ill actor, fainted in the last Scene, and chose rather to
show himself what he was, than what he ought. His master Absolon, whom he had
engaged to so great a danger, he left to greater. Sink he might or swim for
him, as the windy gu^t of his new counsel, or the inconstant tide of occasion
pleased to befriend him. His great hopes, grounded on the rise of Absolon,
having promised so much in the bud, began to wither ere they saw the
blossom: And a vain project it seemed unto him to venture with a banckrupt,
and out of his masters blasted field to expect a harvest. If Absolon will
needs wed himself to his own will, and his seducers counsel, let him run
his own hazard; Achitophel stands engaged no farther, than his own
direction. If Absolon fall so short of his ambitious wishes, as Achitophels
wise augury, let him suffer alone himself, as not deserving Achitophels pity
or society. He was once warned, and therefore twice armed, to withstand so
weak an assailant as Chushai his fained friend. And why shall Achitophel show
himself so superstitious to observe him, who neglects himself, and sleights
his friends? Two dangers here offered themselves at once; the one the desertion
of his young master, the other the neglect of his own estate. But with a
Politician the choice is easy; and therefore it is time to hye him home, to
order his own house, which had left the Commonwealth in a combustion. His
master might as well find him absent, as neglect him present, and sooner meet
him in his death than counsel. From whose example, a good Christian may be
taught so much policy, to try his friends in adversity, ere he trust them in
prosperity. Those vermines which undermine the house, are taught to run from
the ruin, and quit that mantion which preserved them, because they never loved
it further than it served their own purpose. But a true friend hides himself
as a glow-worme, obscured in the day of prosperity, to reserve his light for
the obscure night of adversity. Chushai, as we have formerly showed, had
less reason to suspect Achitophels head to want Absolons arm, than David's
arm to want direction: yet to prefer the loyalty of a friend, he chose
rather to cast himself on rash adventure, than known experience, and hazard
the shipwrack^ of himself to save a friend. If any man should demand how far
friendship may challenge a jurisdiction in our conversation? God will answer,
that he must first join ere we shake hands. A true and just amity shines not
so much in the subject wherein it grows, as on the subject whereon it works;
as that which desires not so much to purchase, as to deserve applause. It was a
poor shift of Naaman, out of the sincerity of his unfeigned love, to excuse
his fained Idolatry in this sort: When I come into the Temple of Rimmon, and
my Master boweth down to the image, and leans on my shoulder, and he leans
down with me, the Lord be merciful unto me in this thing. Had his eye offended
him, or his hand mistook his message, he had not only sufficient warrant, but
command to pluck out the one, and cut off the other: Much more are we warranted
to dissolve the strongest contract betwixt outward friends, where God shakes
his rod between a friends impiety and our affection. But neither of these
motives found footing in Achitophels design. Had the distrust or dislike of
his Masters cause dissuaded furtherance, he had not suffered him so far to
run beyond prevention. Had his motive afterward grounded it self on
justice, he might have turned his counsel another way, rather to his masters
good than his own ruin; at least, by his submission he might have pieced up
this breach of Treason, and have cast his fortunes on so favorable a calm as
David's atonement, with his dear, though rebellious, Absolon. But Absolons
case was desperate, his own treason evident, David's remissiue pardon unlikely,
his own house unsettled: and therefore out of the grounds of his own worldly
policy, he thought it more expedient to arise and go home to his house, and
set his house in order. Which is the third, and comes next in order to be
handled.

5 In setting of Achitophels house in order, we may by way of explication,
observe two points. First, what we ought to understand by his house: secondly,
wherein this ordering of his house consisted. A house so far as the word (...),
in the original language renders it, signifies as much as an Artificial
receptacle fitted for habitation: whence afterward by an apt Metonomie,
expressing the place containing for the persons contained, it was taken for a
Family, as we find in Scripture mention made of the house of Saul, and the
house of David: in which sense (...) or a house, is by Aristotle, in the first
of his Politickes, defined to a daily ^ocietie of people dwelling together. And
howso^ner the name of family among the ancients seem to derive his original
from the s^cietie of diverse servants, living under one roof and regiment: yet
use has taught it so far to enlarge it self, as to signify a company,
consisting of three essential parts, to wit, of the Husband and the Wife, of
the Father and the Son, of the Master and the Servant; the due administration
of which, wherein every member answers in harmony to preserve the whole, we
call Oeconomie or good husbandry. An institution founded on the law of nature,
as the first and strongest band of humane society, and the first groundwork
of a commonwealth. The setting of such a house in order, which is the next
point to be scanned, is either the general administration of a family, which
we may call husbandry; or else a final determination or ma^ters, as we would
they should stand at the time of our death, expressed in our last will and
testament. Herein Achitophel, although a wicked caitiffe, scarce deserving a
good Epithete, seemed to show as much piety as policy, in settling his estate
by providence while he lived, which after his death, might be shipwrackt by
dissension or confusion. So much of the image of God he had left undefaced in
him, as to show him some obscure glimpse of eternity, to seek that being in
posterity by propagation, which the times disasters were readier to cancel
than preserve. A president surmounting the example of many Christians of our
times, who imagining all the world to be borne for them, and them for
themselves, neglect former presidents, and stop the passage to all posterity,
as if the line drawn out so many ages from their first father Adam, should
break off with themselves, and attain its highest pitch in their perfections.
It was a noble, though arrogant reply of Iphicrates to Hermodius in Plutarch,
boasting too much of his continued line, and ancient nobility; Nobilitas mea in
me inc^pit, tua in te desijt: wherein he vaunted himself by providence and
virtue to have so much improued, as the other to have decocted his fortunes and
an ancient family. To lend posterity a head, may to a wise man seem a greater
glory, than to borrow from ancestry a tail; and on the other side, to play
away in sport our predecessors labors, a greater dishonor than to piss on
our Parents ashes, or raze their monuments. Amongst all the temporal blessings
of Almighty God, promised or derived as rewards to his faithful servants, I
find none greater in holy Writ, than the multiplying of their seed, and
spreading of their family. Behold (says God to Abraham) I will make of thee a
mighty people: And that which God in his especial favor prizes, as so great a
guerdon to his best favorites, shall unworthy man esteem a trifle, and value
so far below the rate? He that prouides not for his famili^, is worse than an
Infidel, says the Apostle. Not (I suppose) that a provident Heathen was
absolutely to be preferred before a negligent professor: but that in this
comparison of settling a man's estate after him, in regard of posterity; a wise
Infidel might challenge a precedence before a careless Christian; according
to that of our Savior in the Gospel, The children of this world, are wiser in
their generation than the children of light. Herein Achitophels policy shook
hands with honesty, which seldom met before in consort: but no sooner could
they meet, but part; as if they meant to meet no more. He settled his worldly
estate on earth, but forgot his eternal hope in heaven. He reserved to
himself out of all his legacies, the worm of a guilty conscience, which he
could as well shake off as himself; which leads our discourse to a second
observation, arising from this point, That worldly wise politicians prove most
improvident for future life, and prefer temporal blessings before eternal
happiness.

6. Where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be also, says our Savior.
Whence a reason may be rendered, why Achitophel, despairing of any portion among
the Saints in heaven, set his mind to dispose of his possessions here on
earth. Riches, which the wisest sort of Philosophers, have esteemed no other
than the complement of temporal felicity, are the maine of their ambition,
while the fruition of the eternal joys in heaven, stands as doubtful in
their hopes, as unsettled in their opinion. But this providence in disposing
worldly affairs, at the best, can be reputed no other than the child of
Nature, whose Mole-eyes, through the glimmering light of humane reason, can
hardly pierce so far as its own sphere; much less through the clouds of
humane ignorance, and the worlds contagious fogs, open to it self a passage to
that eternal glory, to which none but the light of grace can direct or command
an entrance. No marvel then, if worldly men, having all their cares bounded
in this world, run always in the same circle, and respect only their own
center, disdaining (as it were) any interest in any superior Orb. This, they
esteem their highest heaven; without the which, with Aristotle, they can
imagine neither Locus nor Tempus; neither place to contain their treasure, nor
time to add to their mortality: if at any time, by the permissiue indulgence
of Almighty God, some sparkle of grace presents itself, it is but as the
lightning, no sooner seen but lost; enough to show it self, but too little to
give direction; enough for their curiosity to dispute, but too much for their
faith to apprehend: And therefore rather resolve they to set up their rest in
this world, which they know, than to hazard themselves on so dangerous a
discovery, wherein they should show themselves, at least diffident, if not
desperate. This seems to have been the resolution of wicked Cain, who,
although shut out from Gods presence, sought out a place in the land of Nod to
build a City, which might bear his name, and preserve his family. Himself,
as it were, branded with the black coal of reprobation, he quickly submitted
to perdition, in this desperate resolution, My sin is greater than can be
forgiven me. His posterity, he committed rather to chance and policy, than to
Gods protection; as though his own care had been sufficient to undermine the
Divine providence: or at least he had proved so good a proficient in the
school of policy, as to work his own desperate fortunes to his sons
advantage. Amongst many such examples of this kind, which in this age of ours
are too too frequent, I find none more remarkable than of a certain Lawyer,
whom Bellarmine (as himelfe reports) in the time of his sickness coming to
visit, and urging unto prayer and confession, replied, That he could wish,
that prayer were made for his wife and children, whose welfare in this world he
greatly tendered; for himself, as lost and desperate, he gave over to
perdition: Bellarmines observation of this desperate man, might, me thinks,
have opened his eyes to have seen that mystery of iniquity, closed up in
their Babylonish Hierarchy. How many thousand souls, whom they ought to
purchase unto Christ, sell they daily unto Satan, to buy their own gain or
greatness? as if they conspired, all in one, to shipwreck their hopes of
another life in heaven, to bolster up a Papal Monarchy here on earth. Their
fire of Purgatory had long since been extinct, had it not maintained the Popes
kitchen. Their Indulgences had long since waxed stale, and lain upon their
hands, had not the costly marriages of the Popes N^eces, or rather Daughters,
set them out in a new Edition, to make them vendible. The ^doll of their
pretended Supremacy had wanted adoration, and Peter's imaginary Chair^ been
broken and hurled to the ground, had not covetousness on the one side, pomp
and ambition on the other, as two supporters, labored to keep it upright: And
little could St. Paul himself effect by his powerful preaching among such
Athenians, with whom there is never wanting a Demetrius, a silver Smith; who,
lest his shrines should want sale, will stoutly stand up for the honor of
Diana's Temple. Well may we call that a mere politic religion, or rather a
masked Atheism, wherein, Gods pretended service is set up as a pillar to
underprop an Antichristian Hierarchy; and Religion, which should command our
best observance, becomes the slave and servant to ambition. Herein Achitophels
design seems to fall short of their industry: He sets his house in order,
(for ought we find) without any sense of Religion, or prejudice to Gods Church.
These men use the sword of the Church against Religion, constraining her at
once both to inflict, and smart at her own wounds. Achitophel left the
commonwealth in a combustion to set his own house in order: but these
firebrarnds of State, set their own houses in order first, that they may the
more easily disturb the good temper of a settled Commonwealth. Achitophel,
for ought we know, shut up all his treacherous designs in his own execution;
leaving as hereditary, rather the stain than the guilt of his odious treason
to posterity. But these Iesuiticke factours, unwilling to cut off the entaile
of their traitorous inclinations, either by despair or repentance; like a
brood of Vipers, bequeath a legacy of their venomous quality unto their
offspring: in which, as out of a Cockatrice^ eggs, is hatched, preserved, and
multiplied, the accursed spawne of treachery and sedition. Which last clause,
leads our discourse to a second point, to wit, the consideration of
Achitophels death, in that he hanged himself, which comes next in order to be
handled.

7. In Achitophels death, you may with me observe two especial points; 1. The
cause. 2. The manner. The cause, grounded on the motive forementioned in my
former exercise, was Despanre: The manner of his death, as shameful and
ignominious as his life and action. To begin with Despair, we shall find it
an infirmity of man's nature; rather deserving men's pity than indignation. A
child it is, whom the guilt of sin begets on an evil conscience; which no
sooner beholds the light, but couets darkness, as if it made no more use of
life, than to instruct him the next way to death. In this bottomless pit of
despair, wherein no passenger could cast anchor, Achitophel now finds himself
plunged; and therefore, as arrested by deaths immediate sergeant, prepares for
his next appearance. Better dye once, than fear always; and shut up all
mischiefs in one death, than spin out life in many mischiefs. Those lofty
Scenes of State, wherein Achitophel has either hitherto acted himself or
prompted others, must now shut up in an ill Catastrophe; and who sitter to end,
than he who began this Stately Tragedy? To live at another man's benevolence,
seems the smallest privilege of a subject to dye at his own command, the
greatest prerogative of a King. A base headsman must not share so great a
glory, as the chopping off a head enriched with so much policy, nor lustice
seem to entreat any other hands than his own in his stately execution.
Behold here the last resolution of this matchless politician, proposed
afterward (as it seems) as a pattern to many high spirits amongst the
Heathen; whose judgments infatuated with false principles, misconster the
badge of cowardice, for the most honorable seal of courage: as if it were a
point of valor to shake hands with death, and faintly give themselves over to
his mercy, with whom, as an enemy, they ought to combat. True honor never
fears to stare death in the face, but seldom courts it as a friend; often, as
a corriuall, it struggles with it for victory: but never gives up the hilts, or
cries quarter, till ouer-mastred by a greater and disproportioned strength, he
finds them wrested from his hands. So great an impression not with standing got
this wicked opinion of selfekilling amongst the ancient Romans, that a speedy
dispatch of our selves in case of extremity, seemed to challenge as much
honor, as with a Christian it deserves shame; as we find it not recorded
only, but in a manner recomended, by that turn-coat Lipfius out of the
principles of his Stoicall Philosophy: whose broken rudiments he had (as it
seems) better conned than Christianity. But how far out of our voluntary
disposition, we ought to entertain the stroke of death, is not easy to
determine without distinction. A concurrence of our wills we may interpret two
ways: either for a Passi^e obedience, indebted rather to constraint than
choice, wherein Nature submits her self to Justice or necessity: or an Active
violence, derived for the most part from fear or rashness; wherein reason
suffers her self to be led captive by boistrous frenzy, arming the strength of
unwilling Nature against her own bosom, and life, her sweet companion. The
former concurrence of our assent, or at least submission to such extremities,
we find warranted not only by permission but command, so far forth, as the
Justice of the cause conspiring with a regulated conscience, imports necessity.
Those blessed Martyrs of the Church, whose glorious wounds and scars, shine as
so many orient pearls in their white robes of sanctity, have marked and sealed
them out to posterity, as examples of the highest imitation. Those valiant
champions in defense of their Country and Religion, exposed to the merciless
iaws of death, or the bloody phangs of uncertain hazzards in a Christian
warfare, what age so envious which will not crown with present honor, and
register to future admiration? Yea, wicked malefactors themselves, in whom
Justice often preuents Nature in an untimely execution, may seem to cancel
some part of their former guilt, in giving by their submissiue patience, the
strictnes of the Law a just satisfaction. And therefore without question, the
sweetness of life ought not to share so great a moyty in our affections, as to
shut out our obedience, when either Religion stands at stake, or our Country
craves our assistance, or Justice challenges her prerogative. The other
exposure of men's lives to certain death, where necessity on either hand
threatens apparent ruin without repriuall, I could charitably interpret, as of
Sampsons design in razing the house to his own and the Philistines destruction,
or of Lucans and Seneca's advice in making choice of their own death, by
cutting their own veins: but that Gods Almighty providence in our greatest
designs, shows it self most pregnant beyond man's expectation, and commands
rather our patience than prevention. But for such untimely and unnatural
designs, where in the hands are made isntrumental executioners to the heart,
as pricked on with the horror of a guilty conscience, and distrust of Gods
favors, neither Christianity gave ever president, nor Stoicall Philosophy
among all her strict axioms a warranted precept; as an action odious both to
God and man, which begins with sin and ends with shame. Which leads our discourse
from the immediate cause of his death, to wit, his despair, to the manner and
quality of it, his shameful end.

8 Shame is the sworn servant unto sin, an odious but officious hagge; whom
life could never entertain without sorrow, or death easily shake off, till
memory forfeit her records to time, and time to oblivion. It Is the misery of
guilt with constraint to cherish in her bosom the child she hates, and
bequeath such a fatal issue to posterity, whose brows shall carry the true
stamp and character of her own deformity. And how great a sovereignty
soever sin might seem to challenge in the sphere of humane nature, which our
first Parents by their disobedience forfeited to her jurisdiction; yet shall in
the end find himself conquered, in that sin living for the most part in
darkness, shuts up all her malice with death, while her untoward babe shall
survive to vpbraid her actions in the light, and arraigne her after death at
the bar of Justice. Had Achitophel been as provident to prevent an ill report
after death, as ambitions to preserve reputation during life, he had measured
his actions by a betterend, or at least in the event directed his worst ends to
a better purpose, than lose at the last cast which he was so long a winning, or
have stained the fame of his former actions with so base an execution. His
eminent gifts of Wisdom, howsoever sorded and wicked in themselves, as
directed rather to his own private ends, than Gods glory, or the honor of the
Commonwealth; might not with standing, out of a foreconceiued opinion of his
worth, have found in the common voice, a favorable construction. Old vices
commonly find welcome under new names; and nothing so witty as Sin to invent
new Epithets to shut out shame, and entertain plausibilitie. Luxuris and
leacherie, the bane of nature, may pass current under the title of
Good-fellowship. Ignorant pride and supercilious contempt may call themselves
retired gravity, or stout (...) Gr^ping Covetousness and base Usury, may
find entertainment under the show of thrifty husbandry: (...) and Oppression
shall be styled severe Justice and strict Government. At least from each of
these, common conniuence would make a shift to extract somewhat which might
savor of ingenuitie, to cover guilt from the strict inquisition of truth, and
stop the harsh mouth of censure: wherein at least it should show it self no
less ingenious, than Aristotle in his Ethickes, who in painting out to the
life his I doll (...), is observed to have stolen the chiefest marks of many
notorious vices to character one imaginary virtue. No worse, but rather better
favor, might Achitophels life seem to have deserved, especially amongst the
common rout of his inferiors, who valuing the worth of their superiors,
imagine them as eminent in wisdom, as they transcend in greatness, as if
they conceived them fashioned in another mould, and wrought to another nature;
that the least slips or scapes which in ordinary men we can interpret no
other than the effects of infirmity, should in them be thought to proceed
from premeditated counsel, and mature deliberation, as critically directed to
some especial end or other in the State. But admit his sinful proiects had
lain open to discovery, yet sauouring of a reaching wit or seasoned with
discretion, they might seem rather amongst vulgar judgments, the fruits of
politic prevention, than humane weakness. Our intellectual gifts we commonly
value above our Moral virtues, and therefore hold it a smaller disparagement
to be taxed of d^shonesty than indiscretion: As if we rather coueted an
inheritance here amongst the children of this world, than to have our names
enrolled with the children of light. Thus far Achitophel had carried his
matters in such fashion, as might speak his wisdom though not his honesty.
Had Absolon through his advice, advanced himself to the Throne of Israel, his
notorious treason had passed for profound policy; neither could the world ever
term that act treason, which is of a King, or for a Kings promotion. Had
Achitophels project fallen below expectation (as he did afterward) it was
Absolons weakness to reject advice, not Achitophels to suggest the best
counsel. But shift the Scene, and let the self same Theater which even now
found him plotting Absolons advancement, contriuing the means and manner of
his own death; and you would imagine him all this while but to have personated
a wise man, and now in the end to resume his proper habit: like a certain beast
of Scythia recorded by Pliny in his natural history, whom he reports to be
able to change himself into all variety of shapes and colors, yet returning to
his own form, expresses the resemblance of an Ass. A good emblem of a
wicked politician, who sitting as it were at the stern of state, and holding
the helm in his hands, must of necessity vary himself a thousand ways to obey
all winds, and second all tides. But Nature, which is the worst dissembler of
guilty actions, will one time or other betray it self to discovery, or atleast
plain-dealing Death will strip him naked, and lay him open unto shame, and leave
him as a fool to men's contempt and Gods vengeance Shame and reproach, the most
vnwelcom guests to Achitophel in his life, are here invited as friends to bear
him to his sepulcher; and the kind and manner of death most odious to God and
man, is thought the safest and sweetest in his foolish choice. Among so many
ways whereby every man may make himself a passage to death, he must needs choose
the worst, to dye as a dog on a tree, and make himself guilty as well of his
shameful death, as the ignominious motive. Death is the common destiny of
mankind; to fear or wish for death, is the mark of a coward and shame of a
man. To end our course of life in a warm bed, is natures tribute, and the crown
of silver hairs: to cancel cares in the field by the hand of an enemy, is the
chance of war, and the honor of a soldier: To die by the sentence of justice
and stroke of the executioner, is a satisfaction of the law, and expiation of
the guilt. But to die out of cowardice and despair, to die by the enforced
violence of our own hands, to die as a thief on a tree, not expiating the
guilt of sin by giving satisfaction to the law, or affording nature any right
in expectation; and, which is more than all the rest, to quit the vexations of
this world, to incur greater in the next, and to tread with unresolved feet
that unknown path of death, whose common entrance shuts up in as doubtful an
end, as celestial joys and infernal torments; what settled judgment will
not brand with the odious blot of extremest folly? in sight and comparison of
which, the greatest vanity in the world should lose her name and seem
discretion. Here may we see the weakness of humane wisdom tutored by
temptation, and directed by the common enemy of mankind; as the strength of
Sampson over mastred by the wiles of Dalilah; which commonly affords the owner
no greater courtesy than confusion, and their names and memory no other
Trophee, than a living shame, or a lying sepulcher. Which by occasion directs
our enquiry to the third and last action, preordained (as it seems) by
himself in his life, but executed by his friends after death, his pompous
burial: He was buried in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

9 Whether this last action of Achitophel be rather to be ascribed to
Achitophel himself, as prescribed by his last Will and Testament; or to his
children as their last duty and obligation to their dead Parent, we will make
no long dispute. It seems an act of both, wherein either party may share an
interest, as commanded by the one, and executed by the other. From each
observation may be copied out unto us some useful doctrine for instruction. In
Achitophels providence in seeking to preserve his name and memory, in so
fleight a Trophee as a stone or statue, we may read the shallow reach of many
politicians of our age, ambitiously setting up their garnished sepulchers in
Churches and high places, as idols of admiration to be worshipped by ignorant
spectators: which, notwithstanding in a judicious censure, live only for a time
to vpbraid their folly, and fall after a time into the dust and ashes, as the
rotten bones they shroud up in oblivion. Envious time which has eaten out the
workmanship of so many famous Architects, and left not so much as stones or
ruins for antiquity to boast, or posterity to admire by the mouth of History,
his best Secretary, might hane discovered the weakness of such considence, as
grounds it self on such uncertainties. Babel the greatest ambition of humane
industry, undertaken (as it were) by the joint handicraft of mankind, neither
by disparitie of religions, or difference of languages as yet divided into
factions; wherein (as Philo Iudaeus notes, and holy Scriptures not obscurely
intimate) the chiefest men of rank and estimation in engraven stones sought to
preserve their memory; what other legacy in her fall has she bequeathed to
our observation, than the want of discovery, the whetstone of diligent
Antiquaries, and tortures of the most curious inquisition? How much better is
the content of a quiet conscience, grounded on the assurance of Gods promises
for future happiness, than such painted sepulchers, which present in a manner,
nothing to posterity but their own ruins, and their founders weakness.
Nevertheless, from this officious care of Achitophels children toward their
deceased Father, may Christians be taught the reverend respect they owe to the
ashes of their dead ancestors. The raising up of monumentall statues to the
memory of others, ought we rather to interpret the duty of Posterity, than the
ambition of our deceased parents: yet in such wise, that they ought rather to
humble us, with the thought of mortality, than puff us up with glory of our
Parents Nobility. Neither can such monuments, besides shame and infamy, (if
erected to wicked men) express any other than the common Epithaph of mankind.
That he lived and died. The greatest Tyrant in the world can command no more;
the poorest beggar can challenge to himself no less. Hitherto, Beloved, has
my discourse, seconded by your favorable attention, followed Achitophel
through the bypath and indirect passages of his life and actions, from the
beginning of his conspiracy with Absolon, to his shameful death and pompous
sepulcher: whose story deserving a more able discovery than my poor
description, out of all these circumstances, will minister this one true and
undoubted Corrolary: That honesty is the best policy. When worldly policy
commonly hides her self in darkness, and Proteus like, transformes her self
into a thousand shapes, to avoid discovery; this one only dares boldly
adventure in the light, and justify all her actions: this one, couets no other
likeness than her own, as not ashamed to present her face to view and
censure. Finally, this alone, is sufficient to preserve a competent estate in
this life, and after death advance us to Christ's glorious Kingdom, where we
shall reign with him for ever amongst the Saints in heaven. To which Kingdom
etc.

Deo Triuni laus in aeternum.
FINIS.

