THE FOVNTAINE OF ANCIENT FICTION.

Wherein is lively depictured the Images and Statues of the gods of the
Ancients, with their proper and particular expositions.

Done out of Italian into English, by Richard Linche Gent.

Tempo e figliuola di verita.

IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA.



LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip.

1599.

To the right virtuous and well-disposed Gentleman, M. Peter Dauison Esquire,
Richard Linche wishes all affluence of worldly prosperities, and the fruition
of all celestial graces hereafter.
WOrshipful Sir, the first thing that I here will request at your hands, shall
be pardon, in presenting unto your view a subject so much disagreeing with your
own disposition. The matter it self I grant can challenge no such grave
Mecenas, being indeed wholy fabulous: but the willingness of my soul, to
show some sign of gratefulness for courtesies received, has enforced me to
adventure so far upon your acceptance, as to offer this strange-borne child of
idleness wholly unto your favorable patronage. And herein I imitate the
fashions and vsances of the ancient Persians, who always when they saw their
king, would offer up something or other that they had about them unto him, as
a token and testimony of their love, duty, and reverence and one day the king
being abroad, one of his subjects upon the sudden met him, who having nothing
in his hands to give him, ran in all have to the waters side, and brought him
both his hands full of water, which the king graciously accepted, and gave him
thanks as for a greater present. This piece of work (Sir, may be compared to
those hands full of water) being indeed of little vvorth and value, and also
very hastily performed, which as it is, I offer in the fullness of love, and
do desire a favorable censure for the same: for I know, that as a handful of
water is an unmeet present for a king, so this matter so stuffed and compacted
of poetical and vain fiction, is not altogether beseeming the countenance
ofso grave and so worthy a personage. But my error herein proceeds wholy
of my vvillingnes to do something that might merit your forepassed favors, and
to discover a good meaning of gratefulnes, though the means it self perhaps
prove not grateful unto you. Howsoever it is, I consecrate it wholy unto your
self, and crave patience if any hastbred imperfection therein offend your
better judgment. Thus recommending you unto the safeguard of the divine
Majesty, I vvish you all fortunes suitable to your virtues.

Yours in all loiall fidelity most assured. Richard Linche.

To the Reader.
HE that believes, that in his writings he pleases all men's humors, too much
crediteth his own opinion, and flattereth his own judgment: for men indeed
that have attained to the true maturitie of knowledge, and arts perfection, it
is good to agree with, as for lame, and yet snarling censurers, it is
matterlesse to satisfy: for so much as the prodigality of such their lavish
opinions, has his first conception of old father Ignorance, and is brought up
and educated by an infectious nurse, called Selfeglorie. This matter now
handled, was undertaken suddenly, and dispatched hastily, for which he craves
milder constructions, and in very deed had it not by an extraordinary accident
happened into the hands of a stranger, it had not now (poor father forsaken
child) endured the insupportable tyranie of lawless censure. But when I found
that it was so far gone, and as it were irreuocably escaped from out my hands,
and even ready to be thrust out naked and clothlesse into the world, I chose
rather to father it, and re-entertaine such my wandering traveler, and bestow
some few lines in his behalf unto the reader, than that so bare a subject
should pass in his imperfections vnepistled, or not befriended with the
authors name in such his priuatenesse and obscurity. Such as it is therefore,
either culpable in words too much affected, or in disproportion being not
methodically composed, or in shallowness in the not proper understanding of
the first authors meaning, it must now pass, as for me it is too late to
recall it, and too needless to repent it, for howsoever it is, it once never
imagined to have been now subiest to the error-searching sight of a general
eye, being only pend and translated for mine own exercises and private
recreations. But herein I am something too tedious, for as it is an absurd part
in an architector to frame a long and vast entry for a little house and of
small receipt, so for me to use many words in this place, whose substance (you
will say) challenges no worthiness, they should be friuolously bestowed, and
time purpose-lesse entertained. For the indifferent Readers I cannot but
promise equal allowance: for any venom-lipt roughcensuring Satires, I keep
sorrow for their woodborne inciuility and rustike imperfections, and do arm my
self with steele-mettald patience to abide the shocke of their injurious
toung-oppressions. And so in have I leave you.

Rich. Linche.

The Images, Statues, and Pictures of the gods of the ancients, with their
several expositions.
THere have lived very few people, or rather none at all, since the first
proportionlesse and indigested heap of all things (whatsoever) was reduced by
divine providence into this admirable form: which have not among themselves
embraced a certain and peculiar sort of religious adoration. For the soul of
man even upon her first entrance into this earth-framed and corrupted
receptable of her celestial essence, does seem to bring then with her a
certain kind of natural religion, the divinity whereof procures the
discrepance betwixt men and beasts, which as they want the intellectual sense
and feeling of any such motion, do therefore neither worship or reverence any
deity: Only man, whose body is framed erect, with his eyes still looking on
that perspicuous and thought-amazing composition of the heavens, is forcibly
constrained to believe, that there has been some one of eternal and infinite
command, that has had that unspeakable wisdom, and inexcogitable care, as
first to compose, then to govern and dispose this so rare and miraculous
wonderment: and him they entearme by the name of GOD; as it were the giver of
al good things, who by his infiniteness is eternal; incomprehensible, and
invisible. But such their belief extended not so far, nor was it so
impressed in all men's hearts, as that every one therefore attained to this
stainelesse and truth-yeelding opinion. For at the first, the corruptible
sottishness, and faith wanting weakness of man was such, as illustrating the
heavens and their reuolutions, the earth and her increase, the sea with her
strange courses, only with the external eyes of their faces, not admitting
the same to any contemplation or soul observance, the vulgars, and such as
blindfolded went groping up and down in the dark for knowledge, were entangled
in such an intricate garden and Labyrinth of error, that they were firmly
persuaded that there was a god in this Statue, another in that picture of
earth, stone, and other metals, and oftentimes in painted Images: from whence
it proceeded, that there were then in such frivolous and superstitious
reverence, so innumerable multitudes of gods among the ancients. For not only
the several humors of diverse Nations, but every particular City, caused
their Image that they would worship, so to be framed, according as they were
then to crave and request some especial and extraordinary boon of their
wooden deities, or having already obtained it, intended thereby to manifest
their thanksgiving and gratefulness. And being (as it were) rockt asleep with
the pleasing conceit of this their superstition, it grew so far upon them,
that in the end they worshipped and devoutly adored men like unto themselves,
such as were known to have invented and found out some special good and
adiuvament for their easy and quiet living, or to have (as it were) hewn out
and forced from their deepe-searching capacities some strange and uncouth art,
science, or profession. And to these men were erected and dedicated excellent
graven statues, in whose curious architecturie all those good things and deeds
which they devised or atcheeued here among men, were lively and exactly set
forth and intersected. And although this kind of Idolatrous veneration, firmly
possessed the thoughts of men generally, yet universally it extended not. For
there then lived, who carried an irremoueable belief of the sacred deity of
one God only, which was euerduring and invisible, and therefore shaped not to
themselves any further Image or representation (which who so seeks to
entertain, walks in the erroneous paths of soule-endangering ignorance.) The
Jews (which among the ancients attained nighest unto the sure and infallible
truth) worshipped one God only, and him they adored not in counterfeit and
stone-built Statues, discerned only with the eyes of the body, but with the
cleere-shining light of the mind, and were still rapt with premeditating and
contemplative thoughts of his ymeuse and incomprehensible divinity. And as
Cornelius Tacitus affirms, Cornelius Tacitus.
they accounted them wicked and impious, who of themselves would make such
countershape or representation of God, composing in it likeness and similitude
to the proportion of a humane and terrene body: and therefore neither in their
Cities, nor in their Temples admitted they any such vain and senseless
adoration. Lycurgus (who in perfection and maturitie Licurgus.
of true knowledge, did no way equalize the Jews) would not by any means that
there should be contrived any frame or Idea of their gods, because (says he)
they cannot be likened neither to man or any other living creature, and being
likewise invisible, who can depicture that which his eyes never faw. Lactantius
writes, That the Aegiptians worshipped Lactantius.
with all devotion the four elements, and yet not making any Image or picture
of them. The Persians, the Scythians, and those of Libia, never had Statues,
Altars, or Temples, but only made their resort in several conuenticles to
consecrated woods and groves, and to them only they submitted themselves in
reverence, and powered out there devotion. And so likewise did those of Maxilia
in Gallia Narbonense, worshipping in all humility certain woods and groves,
which they purposely consecrated for that intendement: and directed up all
their devout prayers and obtestations to leauelesse trunkes and stocks of
trees, whereupon Lucan writes thus of them:

They worshipped stocks, and armelesse trunckes of trees,
Which neither shape or due proportion have,
And to these posts all reverence they gave.
Cornelius Tacitus (writing of Germany) says, That the Germans not only
denied all reverence to any pictures of their gods, but would not by any means
suffer any Temples to be built or dedicated unto the^: saying, that it was very
incongruent and inconvenient to shut up their deities within the walls of so
small a circuit, and that it was not a thing meet or agreeable for their
infinite greatness to be shaped out to the small form and proportion of a
humane body. As the Grecians did after that, and the Romans, and before them
the Egyptians, who all framed their Images of their Gods to the due likeness
and proportion of a man's body. But yet they did not so far ouershoot
themselves, as to think that their celestial gods had either heads, hands, or
feet; but to show (as Varro says) That the soul of man, which is imprisoned
Varro.
here in the fleshly dungeon of the body, resembles the divine souls, which
inhabit in the celestial dwellings of the heavens: and for that the mind or
soul cannot externally be seen or proportioned, they did prefigure it, and
make it apparent by the shape of a humane body. Porphirius says, as Eusebius
Porphirius.
reports, That the Images of their gods were made to the likeness of men,
because God (says he) is al spirit and reason, whereof men, and no other
creatures do participate. Lactantius gives another reason of Lactantius.
these Statues, saying, that they were first made for the conservation of the
remembrance of deceased kings and governors, for the perpetual eternisement
of their famous and memorable atcheeuements: whereupon Eusebius writing of the
Ecclesiastical history, Eusebius.
likewise writes, That it was a general custom among the Gentiles to honor
the greatest personages, and men of best demerit, by representing their Ideas
by Statues or Pictures, and so by that means keeping them as it were alive by
the memorious trophies of their neuer-dying worthiness; whereby their
succeeding posterity might evidently perceive what respective regard was had
and cannonized of those who had in their life time adioined to their valerous
approuements, civil and virtuous conversation: you shall read in Pliny, that
in Rhodes were found at one Pliny.
time more than three thousand Statues, and not many less in Athens, or in
Delphos, and so also in many other places of Greece. In which foolish
superstition, Rome also (though not so lately) was unto any of those nothing
inferior, who had indeed gathered together so many pictures and supposed gods,
that it was said, that in Rome there were another sort of people made of stone,
for what pictures soever they could get, either of painters or ingrauers, they
omitted no means to compass, and with those would they beautify their
houses, not only in the City, but even in their country or farme-houses: which
indeed was judged to be too effeminat and soft for the strict and severe life
of the Romans. Lucullus (as Varro Lucullus.
writes) had such delight in such Images, that almost every day infinite
numbers of people resorted to his farms in the country to see his strange
pictures and curious engraued Statues. And this note the ancients observed,
that those their Images were made with a devise, as when they pleased
themselves, they might take off their heads, and set them upon others. Whereupon
Suetonius speaking of the glorious and insolent Suetonius.
humor of Caligula, says, That he perceiving himself to have surpassed all
other Princes and Governors his predecessors in greatness and powerful
command, began to sooth himself up so far in that insolency and
superarrogation, that he commanded all these heads of their greatest Gods,
which either for devotion or rare workmanship, were most adored, as that of
Jupiter Olympius and others, should be taken away, and upon themshould be
placed the true portraiture of his own, most exquisitely hewed and engraued.
And Lambridius likewise says, That Lambridius
the Emperor Commodus took away the head from that famous and art-exceeding
Image of Nero, which was so cutiously with such ingenious architecturie
depictured, and upon that likewise commanded his own to be erected. Not long
after this, the Statuaries of Princes were so regarded and held in such
reverent embracements, as whatsoever (occasioned by what means you will) had
fled to these priuelegious places, had been freed from any pursuing danger
whatsoever, and not to be enforced or brought away during his stay in that so
regarded sanctuary. Only we read of Marcus Antonius (who as Suetonius
affirms) flying Suetonius.
to the Statue of Julius Caesar, for his better safeguard, was by Augustus
caused violently to be haled from thence, and afterward stopping his ears to
all prayers and entreaties, commanded him to be slain. The Statues of Princes
were oftentimes portraied out naked, oftentimes also clothed, and most commonly
gloriously depainted with gold: as we read with Titus Liuius, who says, That
Acylius Glabrio was the first in Italy that made any golden Statuarie, Titus
Liuius.
and after that it was generally accustomed through all the Country. Alexander
Afrodiseus writes, That in Alexander Afrodiseus.
those days the Images of their gods, and of their princes were made as it
might seem naked, and a greater honor thereby was attributed unto the^, as of
those whose clemency and justice lay open and manifest unto all men:
signifying that Princes and Magistrates ought to be naked as it were, and
immaculate from all corruptible vice, carrying in themselue a christalline and
clear conscience, not cloked or covered with any inward mischeef working or
deceitful thoughts. Upon any pompeous solemnity of any exercises and sports,
not only the Images of their gods were carried by several turns on men's
shoulders, but also the Statues of Emperors, valerous Captains, and far
famed commanders, were likewise presented on those feastiuals. But Alarius, in
that he was ignoble by birth, and of mean descent (as Salust says) had not
Salust.
then to carry any picture of his own, nor of his ancestors, but in steed of
those, he there manifested the high and condign rewards he had received for
these so honorable and renowned prises which he won, and triumphantly carried
away in many gallant and victorious expeditions. Assuredly, the Images and
Statuaries of the gods in those days were almost innumerable, and framed into
so many several and infinite fashions, as to endeavor to set them all down,
were as difficult, as blindfolded to work my self out ofsome intricate and
strange-framed Labyrinth. Only those whom approved and autentike Authors will
warrantise current and passible, we will now remember: and yet if all other
Nations had observed that course which the Egyptians used, happily we might
have touched the most part of them. For according to the writings of Plato, in
Egypt were reserved Plato.
among all their most reverend and sacred relics, those engraven or painted
Images which were then already framed and left unto them from their
ancestors, never laboring or studying to invent more, as almost all other
Nations at that time busied themselves. In Greece for the most part their gods
were fashioned, according as the several humor of the people then affected,
every one enucleating thereby theirselfe-pleasing conceits, and inward
delectations: so that because the Lacedaemonians were generally martial people,
and very oftentimes in wars employments, their gods were always depictured in
co^plete armor. And the Phenicians (in that they were given to Merchandises,
and other worldly gaine-procuring travels, accounting him only blessed that
possessed greatest treasure and abundance of wealth) caused their gods to be
hewn out with a great swollen bag or purse in each of their hands. And so
likewise in diverse other discrepant fashions, were their Statues in those ages
framed, according as they then believed to be in them several natures, powers,
and effects: by reason whereof, (as Eusebius rehearsing the words of Porphirius
says) The ancients to make the diversity Porphirius.
of their gods appear, depictured some male, and some female, others virgins,
and others married, and so accordingly habited them in their agreeable
vestments. The metals and substance of which Statues, Eusebius (taking it from
Porphirius) thus says: That Porphirius.
God being absolutely clear, pure-shining, and corruscant, whose
eies-dazelling luster man cannot comprehend with terrene sense, they always
framed his picture of the most fine and precious transparent crystal, and of
the most pure and unblemished marble that they could by any means and by all
strict inuestigation acquire and compass: sometimes also they would frame his
Statue of the most glorious gold, to show the eternal and divine fire that
burns continually where he remains, and that his nature is free from all
corrupted rustinesse of our humane affections. Others that would have his
Statue of black stone, entend thereby to note his inuisibilitie. It is written
by Plutarch, That the making of thesekind of Statues, Images, and Pictures,
has been very ancient, Plutarch.
but (says he) the fathers in those days, did make them for the most part of
wood, because it seemed to them, that the hard and art-resisting metal of
stone was too stubborn and harsh a stuff for them to make their gods of, and
that either gold or silver were too base, as being excrements of an vnfertile
and fruitless soil, because whereas the mines of those metals are found, are
sildome seen any plant or root to grow: and such ground as brought not forth
flower, herbs, and other fruits, they held as accursed and unfortunate. These
men indeed which lived in those days, were not so bewitched with the
enchantments of the sweet-seeming, though soure-prouing delights of this world,
nor regarded they the use of either silver or gold in such inestimable prise,
but studied only, and were laborious to search out such life-preseruing
commodities, as they might thereby be fed and nourished. Plato in like manner
would have such Statues Plato.
altogether of wood, For (says he) the earth being a place consecrated unto
the gods, there ought not to be composed thereof any Image or Picture, so
likewise neither of gold or silver, for that among the possessours of those
metals, there is hatched and brought forth detestable contentious, and
malicious enuies. And Lactantius saynth, That such glorious Lactantius.
and gold-embossed Statues of their gods, did only show the auaricious minds
of men, who under the shadow of religion and devotion, would be continually
possessed with infinite store of riches, both of gold and silver, and other very
precious stones and jewels, whereof they made them such sumptuous Images, which
indeed many of the^ regarded and endeared, more for the inestimable cost and
charges bestowed upon them, than for any reverence of those gods by which they
were represented. But the opinion of Plato, as I have said, was to have them
altogether made of wood: For Iron (says he) and other such hard metals are
used and employed in many fatal and horrible bloody massacres, and are the
occasions of huge and infinite slaughters. Tibullus speaking of their
domestical Tibullus.
gods, whom they called Lares, thus says of them: Marvel not you foolish men
to see these our gods made of stocks of dry trees, for such (says he) in
the prosperous days of our contentfull fathers, when religion, faith, and
Justice were sincerely and lovingly embosom'd, were reverenced with truer zeal
of unfeigned veneration, than are now adays these gorgeous and gold-composed
Statues. It is written by Pliny, That Images and Pictures be of great
antiquity Pliny.
in Italy, yet they were not made of any other metals but wood: and some few
of stone, since Asia was vassallized and subiugated to the Romans. And for
that unto all such Statues and Images of their gods, was annexed and adjoined
the picture of Eternity, I think it not amiss in this place in some sort to
touch it. Although Boccace writing of the Progeny of the gods, says, That the
ancients have derived it from Boccace.
Demogorgon, as the principal and first of them all, and who inhabited in the
middle center of the earth, encircled round about, and circumuested with a dark
and obfuscate cloud, breathing from his mouth a certain liquid humiditie: but
herein I will proceed no further, having no further warrant for such
depicturance: only I will now reuert my pen to the Statue of Eternity,
which what it is, the name does clearly discover, containing in it self all
worlds and ages, and not limited or measured by any space of time: And
therefore Trismegistus, Plato, and the Pythagorickes, called Time the Image of
Eternity: in Trismegist.
that it is reuolued in it self, and admits no date. Whereupon for the more
ample and copious manifesting thereof, we will hear the opinion of Claudius
Claudius.
in his Stiliconyan comends, who there makes a description by a Serpent, that
compasses round with her body the den or cave wherein she lies, in such
sort, that making as it were a circle, she holds in her mouth the end of her
tail: by which is signified the effect of time, which in it self always
goes round: which description is taken from the Egyptians, who before that
the use of letters and of writing was invented, signified the circumference of
a year by a Serpent, with her tail between her teeth: For that in times
there is the like coherence and depencie, for the end of one year or time
passed, is the beginning of the other succeeding. And I remember the picture of
Eternity to be by some thus defigured: A woman clothed in rich robes down to
her feet, holding in her right hand a round ball, and upon her head is
instrophiated a thin veil, which spreads and casts it self down so far,
as both her shoulders are therewith wholly circumcinct and covered. The Image
weighed in the heedfull balance of advise, is not much unlike that reported by
Claudianus, which we will endeavor (though not in his right colors) thus to
compose.

Down in a vale (close hid from Phoebus eye,
Held in the arms of two heauen-threatning mountains,
From out whose bosom furiously their fly,
With unresisted force, two swiftwing'd fountains)
There dwells an aged Cave: that nere will die,
Though death sits pictured in her horrid countenance,
She sends forth Times, and calls them back again,
For Times and Ages aye with her remain.
Upon her lap a greene-scal'd Serpent lies,
Whose hugeness fills her wide rotunditye,
Darting forth fiery sparckles from her eyes,
And what she finds, deuoures most hungrilie,
Her wrinckled tail fast twixt her teeth she ties,
Even which she seems to gnaw most greedily,
All in a circle thus she sits involved,
Whose firm tenacitie is never dissolved.
And at the gate of this so strange-fram'd den,
In Matrons habit, and in grave attire,
Stands gracious Nature noting with her pen,
Whom she lets forth, and whom again retire:
And round about the cave the souls of men
Fly here and there, as seeming to aspire,
And longing to recover heaven; but these
With Nature must remain till death shall please.
In furthest nooke and corner of the cell,
Sits an old man, whose colored hair
Is far more white then any tongue can tell,
And whose clear lovely face exceeds all fair,
Writing down laws for those that here do dwell,
That ignorance may never cause despair,
And as he sits, each star he does divide,
And every Plannet in his course does guide.
Prescribing with immutable decree,
To every one their courses as they lie,
By whom all living things (what ere they be)
That have or life, or death, do live and die,
Then straight he turns him round about to see
How Mars attends his course full busily,
Who though through doubtful paths he long does stray,
Yet at the length all tends but to one way.
How Jupiter the worlds ne're-failing friend,
Directs his circuit through the azur'd sky,
How Luna at her brothers iournies end,
Rides in her purple coach most gloriously,
How soure-fac'd Saturn his slow steps does tend,
And how fair Venus through the air does fly,
And next to her succeeds heavens messenger,
Posting amain as Phoebus harbenger.
Who when (He) comes in his al glorious shine,
Great Nature meets him in most reverent wise,
To whom the aged man does make a sign
In courtesy, as though he meant to rise,
When straight the gates of this same cave divine,
Open themselves with wondrous subtleties,
Within whose adamantine cell is seen
What from beginning of the world has been.
Here, every age of sundry mettall's framed,
Apactly seated in his due degree,
And of those metals so they still are named,
Whether of wood, brass, iron, or steel they be
Here shall you see, the silver age so famed,
Staining the former in clear purity,
But when you see (that) of resplendent gold,
The other, but base metals you will hold.
The description of this cave or den (according Boccace.
to the opinion of Boccace) imports thus much: That Eternity has an
absolute and sole command over all times, and therefore she lives far hence
remoted in some unknown vale: where humane steps never approached, but is even
unfound out of the celestial inhabitants, that is, those happy souls which
stand before the presence of the greatest, who only knows all things: she
sends forth times, and recals them back again, for that from her, all ages
have had their beginning, instantly possess their being, and with her for ever
shall continue: she sits incircled and inuolued in her self, as we have
already discovered in the former description by the form of a Serpent, who
continually with her tail in her mouth, turns her self round with as great
slownesse or leisure as is possible, showing thereby that Time with a creeping
and unseen pace, steals by little and little clean from us. At the entrance
of the cave (where Nature sits) the souls of men seem to flutter and houer
over her head: which imports the infinite numbers of men that are every day
created, bringing then with them their souls, and for that they appear to
fly directly over the bosom of Eternity, it means, that whosoever attaines
unto (that) excellency of perfection, must first enter his aspiring steps by
the means of Nature, and for that cause she is placed at the door or portall.
The aged man, which there sits dividing and parting the stars, may be called
God, not that he is old, for time over him loses her virtue, and works no
effect; who of himself is perpetual and everliving: but that the ancients
heretofore have pleased so defigure him, and because he effects all things by
infinite wisdom, ruling and commanding all creatures whatsoever, by his
unspeakable power, they therefore attribute unto him old age, wherein is
commonly found more wisdom, gravity, and experience than in youth. Thus far
Boccace reports, not touching any thing at all the explication of the ages
and worlds, which followed in that his description, in that indeed they were
not so enigmaticall, but every one might easily admit the conceiving knowledge
of so familiar intendements. Therefore now we will proceed, beginning with the
Image or Statue of Saturnus, according as it has been by the Ancients
heretofore composed.

Saturn.
Saturn being expulsed heaven by Jupiter (as histories record) and thrown
down from thence into this middle region: after many days sailing upon the
sea, at the length he arrived in Italy, where he lived many years with
Ianus, then king of that part of the Country where Rome afterward was built:
but poorly and meanly he lived, as indeed all the people in those times did,
as having unfound out the use of tilling and planting, whereby corn and other
fruits of the earth might suppeditate their wants of necessary food and
victual. The use of which things they now learned from Saturn, who painfully
instructed them in the perfect knowledge of the nature of each soil, and how,
and by what industrious means of art any ground (fruitless of it self by
nature) might become fertile and rich. This learned and powerful skill of
Saturn, Ianus infinitely admired, insomuch, as (manifesting his gratefulness,
for so be hoofefull and commodious a good turn received) he communicated part
of his kingdom for him to live upon: affording him many other princely and
respective regards. And further commanded his people, that when he died, they
should with all reverence honor him as a god, a thing easily embraced by the
ignorant Heathen in those days, who in that they had received so unexpected a
benefit from his means, willingly condiscended to ascribe and attribute unto
him all godlike reverence, and devout adoration, as men indeed unto whom the
sole and eternal God had not ministered the Key of understanding, that their
closeshut hearts living in the dark cave of ignorance, might therewith be
opened and unlocked for the admittance of the true acknowledgment of his sacred
deity: but they only worshipped him for their god, who by his humane
knowledge had found out some new means either for the earths better increase,
or other like profit that were most available for their labour-lesse and
sluggish living. And therefore they willingly adored Saturn as a mighty and
puissant god, dedicating unto him many sumptuous Statues and temples. And him
in his Statue they framed with a hook or sith in his hand, demonstrating
thereby (as they meant it) the invention of tilling of the ground, because with
that the corn once recovering his maturitie, is cut down. Other writers there
are, that would have him signify Time, as that with his sithe he should
measure and proportionise the length of Time, and therewith to decurtate and
cut away all things contained therein. Those also would have him to be in the
shape of a very aged man, as one who began from beginning of the world, holding
in his hand a child, which by peecemeales, he seems greedily to devour,
importing the revenge he took, being banished heaven by his own children:
those which escapt the furious gulf of his maw, were only four, Jupiter,
Juno, Pluto, and Neptune, which intend the four elements, Fire, Air, earth,
and Water, which are not perishable by the all-cutting sickle of devouring
time. Martianus Capella depictures him, holding in his right hand a Serpent,
with the end of Martianus Capella.
her tail in her mouth, still turning round with a heavy and dead slow pace,
and he has his temples redemyted with a green wreath, which seems still to
flourish, his hair of his head, and his beard all milk white, looking like
one of many years, withering and declining, and yet manifesting that it is in
his power to rebecome youthful, fresh, and blooming. The wreath on his head
imports the beginning or spring of the year, his hair and beard the snowie
approach of churlish Winter, the slownesse of the serpents paces the sluggish
revolution of that planet, which as it is of all the greatest, so it asks
longest time for his circular circumference, and in that from this plannet
proceed dolorous and dismal effects, they shape him to be old, louring,
sorrowing, hardfauonred and sluggish, his nature being cold, dry, and
melancholy. The same Martianus says, That the nuptials of Mercury Martianus
and Philologia, when she had searched and perviewed each corner of the higher
and lower heavens, she found Saturn sitting with great solitude in an extreme
cold mansion all frozen and covered with yse and snow, wearing on his head a
helmet, on which was lively depictured three heads, the one of a Serpent, the
other of a Lion, and the third of a Boar: which three by many constructions
may signify the effect of Time, but in that it is by the Authors themselves,
but slightly approved, we will wade no further in it. And yet Macrobius
touches it very nearly, when he describes Macrobius.
him with a Lions head, a Dogs head, and a Wolfes head: intending by the Lions
head the time present, which duly placed between that past and that to come,
prevails most, and is of greatest force; or discovering thereby the stormy
troubles of man's life, by the rough, unpleasing, and grim aspect of the Lion:
by that of the Dog, is meant the present time, who always fawnes on us, and by
whose alluring delights we are drawn unto vain and uncertain hopes: The
Wolves head signifies the time past, by his greedy devouring what ere he
finds, leaving no memory behind of what he catches within his claws.
Astarte the daughter of Celum, and wife and sister of Saturn, made for her
husband a princely helmet, which had four eyes, two before, and two behind,
which continually shut themselves, and slept by turns, so that two always were
open, and upon his shoulders were likewise made four wings, two of them
volant, and two couchant, which signified, that although he slept, he always
waked, and flying, continued fix and permanent; vnclouding hereby the nature
of Time: these heads were cut out with exquisite subtletie, and rare politure:
Eusebius further says, Eusebius.
That the same Astarte placed also upon the head of Saturn two wings,
demonstrating thereby by one of them the excellency and perfection of the
mind, and by the other he meant man's sense and understanding. For say the
Naturalists, the soul of man when she enters into the humane body, brings
with her from the sphere of Saturn the force of knowledge and discourse, so
that the Platonickes understand by Saturn, the mind, and the inward
contemplation of things celestial, and therefore called the time wherein he
lived the golden age, as a time, entertaining quiet, concord, and true content.
And Macrobius among the rest of his descriptions says, That his Macrobius.
feet are tied together with the threads of woll, agreeing thereby with the
Proverb of the Latins, saying, That the gods do not any thing in have, nor
make any forced speed to castigate the iniquities of men, but proceed with a
slow and unwilling progression, as giving them time and leisure of amendment.
And thus concerning the Statues of Saturn.

Ianus.
IT lies far from my intendement in this treatise to touch in any sort the
life of the gods of the ancients, or to tell now how Ianus was one of the
richest kings of Italy, and how he received Saturn then an exile, and
participated part of his kingdom unto him in lewe of those his knowledges
discovered: for so much as my purpose only extends to tell of the Images and
Statues which in those times of blindness and superstition were erected and
consecrated vuto their gods. According therefore to Macrobius, Ianus was the
first that in all Italy caused sacred temples Macrobius.
and sanctuaries of devotion to be built, ordaining sacrifices and such like
rites of expiation to be used with all reverence and zealous solemnization. By
reason whereof he himself was afterward among those ignorant Plebeians, held
and cannonized as a god. And because I say that he was the first inuenter and
setter up of such sacrifices, the ancients would never offer up any of their
oblations unto their gods, unless they had first inuocated the helping
assistance of Ianus. And this reason also induced them the rather thereunto,
for that he was afterward supposed to be the god which continually sat at the
door or portall of heaven: so that the petitions and prayers of men below,
could not pass or ascend unto the hearing of their gods, unless he had first
granted and allowed such their access and admittance. The gates or doors of
the heavens are said to be two, the one placed at the East, the other at the
West; through the first the sun enters, when he comes to illuminat with his
brightness the worlds obscutitie; and through the other he goes out when he
descends to the Antipodes. Those therefore that by the sun understand Ianus
(as Macrobius and others) attribute unto him the charge or keeping of those
gates, in that he is always freely licensed to enter in and go out through
them at his pleasure, and for this cause they shape him forth with two faces,
for that the sun always looks round about him, both before and behind in each
part and corner of the world: and in one of his hands they put a long rod or
wand, and in the other a key; showing by the one the rule and government he
commands over all the world: and by the other he opens and vnlocketh it as
it were from the close prison of vapourous cloudinesse, when he discouers the
oriental resplendencie of his radiance, and how he shuts it up again when
he leaves it to the gloomy government of the night. Neither is this to be
understood by the day and the night only, but by all the year also, as when
the sun vnloseth the spring from the stubborn embracements of the Winter,
enamelling the pleasant verdure of the earth with so many delicate and
diuers-coloured flowers, where is found all choice of pleasing pretinesse in
that gorgeous fair of bounteous Nature: which at his due time ended, the sun
locketh up such the sumptuousnes thereof, suffering the earth to lie naked to
the merciless tyranny ofyce and snow, whose all-perishing coldness benums her
vselesse and stiffewaxing ioints, which lately so empresse-like flourished, and
was so gloriously invested. The 2 faces of Ianus signify also Time, the one of
the^ being withered and hoary, intends the time past, the other youthful and
beardles, means the times after coming and succeeding. Pliny Pliny.
writes, That Numa king of the Romans caused the Statue of Ianus to be hewn
out in such sort, that the fingers of his hands appeared to be three hundred
threescore and five, to demonstrate thereby that he was God of the year, and
had the sole rule and government thereof. Whereupon they called the first
month of the year Ianuarius, of Ianus, there then king. The Phenicians, as
Marcus Tullius and Macrobius report, understood by Ianus, the world: Marcus
Tullius, and Marcobius.
and therefore framed his Image in the form of a serpent, holding her tail in
her mouth, continually turning round and circumfered: as that the world does
nourish and feed it self, and the times thereof depending and cohering one of
another. But returning to the two faces of Ianus, some will have such
depicturance to signify the wisdom and grave intellect of prudent Princes,
which besides that by their wise counsels they do act things politikely and
discreetly, instantly, and for the time present, carry likewise in themselves
a fore-prouiding prescience to prevent, and thereby to remedy succeeding
mischeefs and ensuing dangers: for that with the one face before, and the
other behind, they continually behold and view round about them, recording
things past, and premeditating those likely to follow: the which things the
ancients prefigure unto us by the Statue of

intending (as Plutarch says) That Princes and Governors Plutarch.
ought to be the true patterns and mirrours of gods among men. And as the
Romans worshipped Anteuorta, and Postuorta as companions and fellows with
their gods; the one pre-knowing what will come, the other remembering things
past, as that from the divine powers, nothing live obscured or unrevealed: so
in the Image of Ianus, with two faces, is imported the wisdom and knowledge of
kings and rulers, which ought not to be ignorant in any thing whatsoever,
which may tend to the quiet religious and civil government of their people
and country. There have been also who have depictured Ianus with four faces, as
there were Statues of the same found in diverse places of Tuscane: and
undoubtedly they manifested thereby the four seasons of the year, being all
of diverse natures and effects, but because the description of the Spring, the
Summer, Autumn, and Winter are with every one very familiar, I will cease to
proceed therein, commemorating that only of Ovid, when he speaks of the
regal seat of Phoebus:

Before divine Apolloes regal seat,
The beauteous spring sits crowned with curious flowers,
Next whom (with ears of corn about her head)
The summer sits in her all-parching heat,
And Autumn (dy' de with juice of grapes) downepoures
A world of new-made wine of purest red,
Next whom (as placed all in due arow)
Sits grim-fac'd winter couerd all with snow.
These Stations are many times thus intellected: by the Spring is meant Venus:
the Summer signifies Ceres: Autumn challenges Bacchus: and for the Winter,
we oftentimes understand Vulcan: and sometimes the winds with Eolus their
commander: because from these proceed those tempestuous storms, which are
commonly predominant in that season. Under the feet of lanus is oftentimes
placed twelve altars, meaning thereby the months of the year, or signs of
the Zodiake, which the sun yearly in his expedition does circulate. There
was found in Rome a Statue dedicated unto Ianus, which had as it might seem,
four doors, and underneath four columns, which underpropped and supported
the weighty heaviness of the Image, in every one of which columns were set
four several shells of fish, wherein were intersected the twelve months with
greatest curiousness of art delimated and filed. And let this suffice for the
Statues of Ianus, progressing to the Images and Pictures dedicated to the
Sun: for that he seems to be the graund patron of all Times, and that all
things whatsoever have their being and increase through his virtues and motions.

Apollo.
THe error that so possessed the unsettled and wavering thoughts of the
ancients, believing that there were many and diverse gods; proceeded from the
opinion that they then carried of wiseappearing and learned-seeming men in
those days, who with their pleasing delivery of things, supposed to be
revealed unto them, brought and seduced the people into such a settled belief
of those their absurdities, as long after it continued, ere they could free
their entangled conceits from such their bewitching ensnarements: for they
only seeking from what original cause the birth and increase of things upon
the earth might arise (wholly ignorant of the true conceiuement thereof, as men
guided only by others opinions, and common natures reasons, and therefore not
able to advance their cogitations to the imbracement of the true cause indeed,
being the invisible and everliving God) some of them judged the elements to be
the chief and efficient workers of what the earth yielded forth and produced.
Neither did all of them attribute this unto all the elements together, but some
only gave the cause of such increase to the virtues of the water, some to fire,
some to the air, and many also to the earth. Whereupon the Poets (as Aristotle
says) Aristotle.
being the first that chaunted forth the powers of such their gods, induced the
silly and soon-persuaded people to think, that there were then in efficient
power many and diverse. By reason whereof, and upon such surmises, they called
Neptune or Oceanus, the father of the gods; and the mother of them Vesta or
Ops, the wife of Saturn: whom likewise they entearmed, Lagrand Madre,
understanding thereby the earth, in that from her as from the original proceed
al increases whatsoever, and this was generally the opinion of the Arcadians.
Thales Milesius ascribed the cause of Thales Milesius.
such generation of things unto the virtues of the water, and so diverse others
were of diverse and several opinions: and in the end they brought the vulgars
to believe likewise, that the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, were the only
causes of such increase on the earth: whereupon it issued, that they were
afterward regarded and worshipped as gods, having Altars, Statues, and Temples
consecrated unto them. And yet generally with the Assyrians this persuasion
prevailed not: For (say they) we may well erect Temples and Images to many
other gods, but unto those whose true shapes we may continually behold with
our eyes, it shall be very purposelesse: yet notwithstanding (says Macrobius)
because some in those days affirm the son and Jupiter to be all one, in one
part Macrobius.
of Assyria there was found a Statue made and erected of the Son, all
gloriously beautified and polished with gold, in the form of a young man
without a beard, who stretching out his arms, held in the right hand a
coachmans whip, and in the left a thunderbolt with certain ears of corn:
showing thereby the powers, both of Sol and Jupiter. And because that of all the
celestial bodies he carries greatest force in the creation of terrene
things, the ancients through him understand many times many of their gods, as
his virtues, natures, and effects are many. Whereupon it grew that they framed
him in so diverse and several shapes. But leaving such their opinions to
themselves, we will now speak of him as he is Apollo, Sol, and Phoebus, which
three I do make all one, him therefore the ancients (as I have already said)
shaped with a very youthful countenance, beardlesse, and young-yeard. Alciatus
(speaking of that youthfulness which the ancients Alciatus.
then framed and set down in the shape of a beauteous Nymph, with her apparel
exquisitely well wouen, excelling in curious work of foliature, having her
temples bound about, and instrophiated with sweet smelling garlands, resembling
much the goddess Flora) depainteth there among such works of youthfulness
the true form of Apollo and Bacchus, as unto which two it did only belong to
be always young: Whereof Tibullus likewise speaking, Tibullus.
among other his descriptions, thus says: Bacchus alone, and Phoebus aye are
young,
Though both of them have beards both white and long.


Where Tibullus depainteth Apollo with a bread, though Macrobius and generally
all others, set him down otherwise, as Dionisius the Tyrant of Syracusa
likewise approves, when he (taking occasion to discover the sharpness of his
conceited ieasts,) with great fury pulled away the beard from the picture of
Esculapius, saying, That it was very inconvenient and incongruent, that the
father should be beardlesse, and the son to have one so wondrous huge and
exceeding long: for that indeed it is read, that Esculapius was the son of
Apollo. Many that have depictuted the shape of Apollo, make him holding in his
hand a Harp with seven strings, agreeing in number with the planets of the
heavens, which moving with a due destinction, yield forth a pleasing harmony.
Macrobius Macrobius.
says, That the sun continually stands amidst the planets, commanding them
to hasten or enslacke their reuolutions, in manner as in efficient vigor and
strength they receive from him their virtues and operations. And for this cause
likewise the ancients called him the head or guide of the Muses, which
likewise were framed like unto young virgins of beauteous and youthful
aspect, habited as wandering and siluane Nimphs, with diuerse-shaped
instruments in their hands, melodiously and with a soule-rauishing touch
continually playing: and from these all the liberal sciences acknowledge their
being, whereupon they were entearmed the daughters of Jupiter and Memoria, as
instantly becoming skillful and perfect in what they undertake to learn. They
were impalled with coronets, composed of sundry-shaped flowers and leaves, to
which were annexed beauteous garlands of palm: and oftentimes also they had
their temples curiously adorned with feathers of diverse and strange colors,
by which is intended their victorious preuailement over the Pierides,
contending for the pleasantness of their voice to compare with them in
singing, which being afterward foiled and disgraced in such their
super-arrogating challenges, were for their sancinesse therein, metamorphised
into tatling birds, which with us we call Pies, ready and prompt to bring
forth many familiar languages by use and teaching. Some think also, that such
their coronets of flowers and palm, signified the triumph which they carried
away from the Sirens, presuming likewise to compare with them for the cleerest
and most delightful voices. And in Rome of latter times was seen a Statute
dedicated unto the Muses, which on the head and culme of the picture had many
and diuers-fashion'd feathers infixed; and they were thought to be those of
the Sirens. The ancients when they intended to set down how the liberal arts,
and all other sciences, depended one upon the other, and were as it were knit
and coheared together, depictured the Muses, holding one another by the hand,
and heedfully dancing (as it were in a round) lead and guided by Apollo: which
means that superior light and understanding, which illuminateth and
enknowledgeth the intellectual parts of men. The heavens (according to the
opinion of the Platonickes) have every one their several Muse, called by them
oftentimes Sirens, as most harmoniously and sweetly singing, alluded unto the
celestial orbs, which in number are likewise nine, and have their motions
according as they receive their several powers from the son, which commands
absolutely both above him, here with us, and in the lower center: by reason
whereof he is called Dio del Cielo, della Terra, e dell' Inferno: and the
ancients attribute unto him powerful commands over all the three. The Harp
which (as I have said before) he holds in his hand, denotateth the celestial
and incomparable music of the heavenly orbs: his shield or target by his
side, represents the circular composition and rotunditie of our hemysphere; for
the ancients defigure him with a shield on his arm, and some also give him a
quiver of arrows on the other side, which may signify, that as they once
losed from the bow, penetrate and enter in with great force where they hit, so
the forcible virtues of the Suns transparent rays, search out and pierce
through the smallest crase or voidance on the earth. Others that say Apollo is
called Dio dell' Inserno, and give those arrows so appropriated unto him, do
mean, that from the ouer-vehement ardour and riscaldation of his beams,
pestilences and infections are engendered and nourished on the earth: but yet
say they, not so universally dispersed, or undoubtedly mortal, but with the
moderate warmth and temperature thereof, they are chased away, and healthie
aires and natural increases spring up and re-succeed. Among other things
appropriated unto the Sun, the ancients dedicated unto him a Wolf, and their
reason was this: That as the powerful virtue of the Sun sucketh up and
dries the watrish exhalations of the earth: so the voracious greediness of
the Wolf dispatcheth and consumes that prey which in his famine meets him by
chance. Afterward it grew that some were of opinion, that the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars, fed themselves and were maintained and nourished with the
moistures and humidities, ascending from the earth. And this Homer seems to
affirm, Homer.
when he says, That Jupiter with other gods (meaning the Sun and certain
Stars) descended down to Oceanus to a banquet. It is reported, that the Wolf
is of so sharp and clear sight, that he sees very perfectly in the thickest
night, piercing through the vaporous mistiness of the same, as the Sun upon
his first appearance and second hours circuit, rarifies the condensate air,
banishing the obfustate and conclumerated cloudinesse thereof. In Delphos in
the temple of Apollo, there was found the picture of a Wolf of stone and other
hard metals, exquisitely well cut out and hewn, and the lively parts thereof
were with such great cunning and curiousness of art intrauersed, as it
possessed the beholders eyes with an earnest and continuous admiration. And
this picture there was held with such great veneration, for that Latona begot
with child by Jupiter, and transformed afterward to a Wolf (as fearing to be
detected by Juno) brought forth being so metamorphised, and in that strange
shape, Apollo: or that as some others think, that picture was regarded there
with such zealous observance, for that it was supposed to be a Wolf which
discovered the sacrilege and robbing of certain endeared relics from that
temple: howsoever, my opinion is, that the ancients used to appropriate the
names of such beasts to their gods, as they perceived to be in them any
assimilitude or correspondencie of natures and effects. Martianus therefore
says, That Martianus.
unto Apollo was consecrated the Crow, in token of his foretelling and
prophetical divination: and likewise the Swan, manifesting thereby by the
contrary colors of these two birds, that the perspicuous and corruscant
tralucencie of the sun, makes the aspect of the day in cleerenesse and
brightness like to the feathers of the Swan, and after his departure from us,
absenting his irradiance from the worlds illustrement, he causes the night to
look of that pitchie and gloomie countenance, resembling in darkness and
ietty hue those feathers of the Crow. Pausanias writes, Pausanias.
That in many places of Greece they reverenced with great devotion a Cock, as
the bird of Apollo, because in his morning notes he pre-warneth us of the
appropinquation of the Suns return. Homer makes Homer.
mention, That the Sparrow-hawke (as we now call them) was consecrated to
Apollo, and he calls her his swift-posting messenger. And in the same place
he writes, That Telemachus returning home into Ithaca, beheld a Sparrow-hawke
in the air eagerly pursuing and chasing a Dove, which he took as a special
divination of succeeding good hap, and that he should now free and empty his
house of those ouerearnest and importunate suitors which daily remained there
for the love of his mother. Eusebius reports, Eusebius.
That in Egypt the Image of Sol was so framed, that it seemed to be set in a
ship, carried up, and supported by a Crocadile: meaning to signify by the
ship, that quick motion and lively stirring, which in each moisture and
humiditie works for the generation of what it contains: and by the
Crocadile is understood that wholesome and sweet water from which the Sun by
virtue of his temperate rays exhaleth away all corruptible and infecting
humors. And further, touching the Sparrow-hawke this may be spoken: It is
found written by Diodorus Sycula, entreating of these Diodorus Sycula.
beasts and birds, which in the days of the ancients were worshipped and
regarded as gods, that in those times a Sparrowhawke was seen in Thebes, a
City of Egypt, carrying in her mouth a book written with red letters, which
she delivered to the Priests and Churchmen there, containing in it in brief,
with what zeal and unfeigned veneration the gods ought to be worshipped and
adored, and how nearly now it concerned them to proceed with a heedfull and
due effectuating what was there proposed: Whereupon afterward it grew, that
their writers of sacred and holy books did wear always on their head a red
cap, with a wing of the same bird infixed thereunto. The ancients heretofore
did not only vnshadow the property of their gods, by beasts and living
creatures, but many times also by plants, flowers, and trees, which they
consecrated of purpose, and dedicated unto them: whereupon the laurel or Bay
was then appropriated unto Apollo, and therewith were made wreaths and
garlands, with which his temples were girt and redemyted in token (as some
think) of the ardent love and affection which he carried to Daphne the daughter
of Peneus, transformed into that tree by Neptune. The Egyptians, before the
use of letters and writing was found out, framed the shape of the sun by
composing a scepter, in the upper top whereof they insected an eye, very
curiously and with great industry of art engraven: and they called it The eye
of Jupiter, as that he beheld and ouer-viewed the large scope and compass of
the world, ruling it with great wisdom and due execution of rightful
justice, so intended by the scepter, signifying command and government. The
Lacedaemonians caused the Statue of Apollo to be cut out with four ears, and
with as many hands, the reason that they so shaped him as many think, was for
that he was seen to fight for them in that form and proportion: but others
take it to discover and show unto us the judgment and prudencie of that god,
as being slow to speak, and ready to hear, and thereupon it grew as a Prove
be among the Grecians, Hear him (say they) that has four ears: meaning
thereby the sound knowledge and understanding of him that hears much and
speaks little. Apulcius affirming, Apulcius.
That the sun with his deepe-searching rays beholds any thing whatsoever,
says, That in Thessalie were certain witches, which when they had with their
enchauntments and sorcerismes either bewitched any man, or theeuishly stolen
any thing away, would presently fly, and convey themselves into transfaced and
vpreared caves, and many times into graves where dead carcasses lay interred,
seeking by such means to shroud themselves from the view and sight of the sun,
thinking it almost impossible to keep any thing hid from the farre-reaching and
sin-discouering eye thereof. The Phenicians had the Statue of the sun framed of
black stone, large and spacious at the bottom, but very sharp and narrow at
the top, the which Herodotus reports, they boasted to have Herodotus.
received from heaven, and they solemnly affirmed that to be the true Image or
Idea of the sun, not made by any cunning of art, but so defigured by the divine
powers. Lactantius says, That in Persia the sun was Lactantius.
the principal and cheifest God they there adored, and him they worshipped in
a cave or den, and his Statue was framed in this manner: He had the head of
a Lion, and was habited according to the Persian custom, wearing on his head
such tires and ornaments as the women of Persia used to be intrested with, and
he seemed to hold by main force, a white cow by the horns. The head of the
Lion means, that the sun has greater virtue and domination in that sign then
in any other of all the Zodiake: or that he is of power and command among the
planets so mighty as the Lion is among beasts: the cave or den intends his
eclipse: the cow may seem to signify the moon, for those reasons which
hereafter in her description shall be discovered. The sun seeming to enforce
and constrain her, means, that he very oftentimes darkeneth her light, and
clean takes away her brightness, in that Nature (by her proposed laws)
commands her to obey and follow him. Pausanias writes, That Pausania.
in Patra, a city of Achaia, was found a Statue dedicated to Apollo. made of
strange stones and other very hard metals, and it seemed to have the frame and
proportion of an Ox or Cow, which beasts as they said, were grateful to
Apollo: and Homer speaking how Apollo Homer.
was hired to keep the heard of cattle for Laomedon, thus says, when he
reported the speech of Neptune:

When first I laid the sure foundation
Of those proud clouds aspiring walls of Troy,
Nere to brought by force to ruination,
Nor stooping her high looks to dire annoy,
Had she believed Cassandras divination,
Thou Phoebus, in thy shepherds weeds did keep
In pensive solitude thy wandering sheep.
Which shows, that besides the many names ascribed to Apollo, he was likewise
sometimes called a sheepeheard, from which it may be intended, that as from the
temperat heat and virtue of the sun al things here are nourished and increased,
so by the diligent care of the sheepeheard, his flock receives healthinesse,
soundness, and increase. Lucianus says, That Lucianus.
the Assyrians only defigured Apollo with a beard, reprehending all others for
shaping him otherwise, saying, that such youthfulness and greenenesse of
years, discovered a certain want and imperfection, which (say they) ought not
to be allowed in framing the Statues of their gods, and therefore they shaped
him with a reasonable long beard, as one attained to his true and perfect
virility: and upon his breast they placed a shield, holding in his right hand a
spear, on the top whereof was set forth a figurelet of Victoria: in his left
hand he seemed to hold a very rare flower: down from his shoulders depended a
vestement, wherein was curiously proportioned the head of Medusa, from which
dangled and pointed downwards infinite swarms of Snakes: on the one side of
him were placed certain Eagles volant: before his feet stood the lively
picture of a Nymph, which on either side of her likewise had two other Nimphs
placed, whose bodies a Serpent with her flexible and oftenturnings seemed to
annodate and conioine. This curious-composed Statue flowed with strange
varieties of eie-delighting and illustrious decoraments, that undoubtedly the
beholders ears asked as great satisfaction to understand the meaning, as their
eyes craved time to behold the matter. And for that Macrobius sets it so forth,
we will hear what expositiue interpretation he can deliver it. His beard
which from his chin hangs down very long, sharpening it self toward the
end, resembles (says he) the rays of the sun, which from the heavens reach
down unto the earth. The shield and spear intend the nature of Mars, for that
with some they are held to be all one. The figure of Victoria, shows us, that
all things whatsoever, are subject unto the sun, and have their beginning and
being from the virtues thereof. The flower signifies the beauties and
excellencies of those things, which the secret powers of the sun with the
life-giuing warmenesse of the same engenders, nourishes and maintains. The
Nymph which stands before his feet, represents the earth, the which the sun
from above, comfort with his moderat heat: The which also the Assyrians
themselves did seem to confirm (as says Macrobius) by the Image of their
god, which Macrobius:
they called Adad, unto whom they made subject and obedient the goddess
Adargate, and unto these two they believed all things to be tied in
subjection; and by the one they understood the sun, and by the other the earth.
The other two Nimphs which stand on both sides of him, signify the mould or
substance whereof things are made, and Nature which shapes them into
proportion. The Serpent with her often twining of her body, denotateth the
many crooked windings and turnings which the sun with his rays incircleth. The
Eagles in that by nature they are swift of wing, and covet always to fly very
high, are alluded unto the wonderful velocitie, and exceeding altitude of the
sun: or as the Eagle commands above all other birds, so the sun has his
absolute dominion over the Planets. The habit which he wore on his shoulders
with the head of Medusa, signifies Minerua, which is nothing else (as
Porphirius says) but Porphirius.
that pure virtue of the sun, which clears and refineth human intellect, and
infuseth ingenious conceits into the brains of men. The Egyptians composed
many Statues of the sun, and among the rest one was in the shape of a man, with
the head of it (as it might seem) half shaven, and the hair taken away, so
that on the right side only remained hairs, which (according to Macrobius)
means, that the sun is never absent Macrobius.
from Nature, but she continually feels the virtues and operations of his
rays. And that that part of the head that is shaven, signifies, that though
the sun for some time detain his glorious aspect from the world, yet that he
is to return and re-beautifie the same with as great brightness as at the
first, as those hairs so shaven will again spring forth and re-increase to
their true and full perfections. And in some parts of Egypt they infixed on
the Statue of the sun two feathers, the one of them black and of a duskie hue,
the other bright and shining: and the black they termed Penna infernale, and
the other Penna celeste, for that the sun keeps his abiding in the heavens
all those times when he passes through those six signs of the Zodiake, whose
virtues make the station of the parching summer, being called Segni superiori,
and they report him to descend down into the lower center of the earth (called
Tartarius) when he begins to take his circuit through the other six signs,
entearmed Segni inferiori. And for that they placed those feathers so upon him,
it signified (as Macrobius likewise says) his swiftness and fast-flying
circumference. It is read, that in one part of Egypt they understood the sun
by the name of Serapides (which name likewise is oftentimes taken for Jupiter)
and him they shaped in form of a man, holding in his left hand a bushel,
intending thereby that there ought to be a proportion and due measure among
men, observed with an equal and just distribution of all things necessary. And
this their god which they then termed Serapides, had a Statue in the temple of
Alexandria a city in Egypt dedicated unto him, compacted almost of all sorts
of strangest and unknown metals, and it was framed of so exceeding huge and
immeasurable extension, that his arms (being stretched forth) reached to both
sides of the temple, at the one side of which was made with subtle curiousness
of art a windolet or smallest prospectiue hole, into which the all-searching
radiance of the sun upon his first appearance (having vnbolted the purple
colored doors of the East) would penetrate and enter, glistering and shining
with a marvelous reflection on the well-hewen and finely-polish'd face of that
Colosse, in such a sort, that the foolish and faith-wanting vulgars in those
times, credibly believed, that the sun came every morning of duty to salute
Serapides, and to kiss his cheeks. This picture was there adored with all
reverence and humble veneration, being made with such incredible art and
workmanship, that the stones and other hardest metals thereof were so
collaterally couched, and with such privy conclansture, as it they had been
wax, or framed of other like flexible substance, being so exquisitely well
disposed, and with such commodulat order of discreet correspondencie. Martianus
Capella speaking of the marrying of Mercury, says, That Mercury Martianus
Capella.
and Virtue looking for Phoebus for his advise in some matters, found him
sitting gloriously in a regal and tribunal seat, having before his feet four
vessels of several metals, whose lids were closely shut and covered, and
these were made of diverse forms and substances, the first was framed of the
most hard and durable iron, from which there seemed to euacuate fresh-burning
and lively fires, and it was called, Capo di Vulcano: The next was of cleerest
and brightest silver, filled with the purity of well-tempred air, and this
was called Riso di Gioue: the third was compacted of solid and peizie lead,
implete with rain, hail, frost, and snow, called Morte di Saturno: the last
which stood near to Phoebus, was framed of the finest and transparent glass,
containing in it the invisible seed which the upper elements sprinckle on the
earth, and it had to name Poppa di Giunone. Out of these vessels, sometimes
from the one, and sometimes from the other, would he call out such working
virtues, as thereby men here below received their health and life, or their
diseases and death: so that when he intended to send unto the world a healthie
temperature, and lifepreseruing air, he would commixe some of that contained
in the silver vessel, with that enclosed in the vessel of glass: and when he
meant to plague the world with pestilences, infections, and mortalities, he
conioined the burning and ardorous flames of the iron vessel, with that
inteined in the other of Lead. Whereby it may directly appear, that the
diversities and contrarious effects of Times, proceed from the moderation of
the suns forcible radiance, or from the extremity of his fiery riscaldation:
and that as the one brings with it a general healthinesse and increase,
purging the air of gross and plagues-ingendring vapors, so the intemperature
and ouerscorching fury of the same, possessing the earth with a universal
ariditie, poysoneth the air with infectious humors, and distilleth down on
the middle region all kinds of noisome unsoundness and infirmities, by whose
ill-smelling odors and corruptions, the bodies of men and all other creatures,
become lame, sick, putrified, and diseasefull. Among the ancients, Esculapius
(as is already said) was held to be the son of Apollo, and he was said to
be the father of Higiea, which interpreted, signifies soundness of body, and
perfection of health. And Pausanias taking it from the Pausanias.
Phenicians, says, That Esculapius is nothing else but the air, which purged
of ill humors by the sun, brings vigor and lustiness to men on the earth:
whereupon also they called him many times god of Phisyke. But returning to the
Images of Apollo, there was found at Naples a Statue dedicated unto him, which
(besides many other curious ornaments and beauties it was decked with) had
depictured on one of the shoulders with greatest skill and disquitition of the,
inuenter, a lively and excellent-proportioned Dove: and there stood before the
Image a virgin, maruellously well cut forth, which seemed with wondrous
earnestness to behold, and as it appeared to reverence the bird: which virgin
among the ancients was said to be Parthenope, who in her travels from Greece to
Naples, was safely conducted by the good guidance and leading of a Dove,
perceiving by many manifest tokens coming from that bird, the good success
and effect of that her iourny. Martianus (oftentimes busy in the descriptions
of Phoebus) thus Martianus
sets himforth: Upon his head (says he) he wears a gorgeous and royal
crown, whereon were destinctly disperpled, and apactly inchased many most
precious, pricelesse, and corruscant gems, of such conspicuous and
bright-glittering luster, as dazelled any humane eyes to gaze thereon: of
which, three of them beautified his all glorious and far-shining forehead, and
these exceeded any of the rest in purity of glister and daintiness of color;
six other adorned his temples, three on the one side, and three on the other,
with rare perspicuitie and incredible cleerenes, whose virtues at certain
times of the year with diverse and several hues, compounding the pleasant and
perfect verdure of the spring with sundry-sorted colors of straungest
commixture, beautifies and depaints the earth. The other three which were
placed in the hindermost part of the crown, are of this nature, that they are
first engendered, and receive their true and full perfection in the most cold
snowie and yce-frozen Winters: his tresses of hair which hang down his
shoulders, look like the most pure and refined gold, his countenance seems
at the first view wholly flamigerous, and he has two wings infixed on his
heels, beset with sparkling and ardent Carbuncles, his upper vestment is
compacted of a wondrous thin and subtle substance, wouen and wrought in, as it
might seem, with finest purple and purest gold. In his left hand he holds a
bright shield composed of rich stones, and in his right hand a hasty and
furious-flaming firebrand: and thus far among other his descriptions,
Martianus depictures him. Eusebius likewise Eusebius.
writes, That in Elefantinopolis, a city in Egypt, the Image of Apollo was
framed to the due likeness of a man throughout the body, save only that he
had the head of a Ram with young and small horns, and his aspect was of a
cerulean and blewish-greene, not unlike that of the sea: which signifies (as
Eusebius interprets it) that the Moon conioined with the sun in the sign of
Aries, becomes more moist and humorous then at any other times, from whose
humiditie there fall on the earth watrish mists and thickened vapors. But
leaving these things to the Astrologers, I will impose an end to the Statues of
Apollo, concluding with that description of his and his sisters birth, which
Claudianus reports to be so curiously wrought in an upper garment which
belonged to Proserpina. And although in the Italian it carries a far more
pleasing grace than in the English, yet finding it there set down in verse, I
thought it not irrequisite so to discover it.

There might you see with greatest skill intexed,
The portraiture of Phoebus lively drawn,
And his fair sisters shape thereto annexed,
Whose beauteous parts seemed shadowed over with lawne:
And though with equal art both were explained,
And workmans care gave each of them their due,
Yet to the view great difference remained
In habit, shape, aspect, and in their hue:
For one of them must give the day his light,
And the other reign commandresse of the night.
Both twins even newly born the are here set down,
For so it pleased the workman to devise,
And Thetis ready, when she sees them frown,
With gently rocking them to still their cries:
There might you see the love of their fair mother,
Dandling the smiling babes within her arms,
Now kissith she the one, and now the other,
With careful study to prevent their harms,
And when she has removed all troublous noice,
She charms them fast asleep with heavenly voice.
Thus was great Phoebus in his tender years,
Strengthlesse his virtues, and his looks were mild,
Nor any fiery countenance appears,
More then is found in a quick-sprighted child.
Some blush-like tincture sometime died his face,
Much like a new-blowne red-leaud rose: his gesture
Such as beseemd one of so royal race:
More pallid-hu'd and wan looked his fair sister,
Whose pure-white yuorie forehead, there adornes
With wondrous grace, two new-sprung siluerie horns.
And thus far Claudianus touching the birth of Sol and Phoebe. In this
conclusion of the Statues and and Images of Sol, may also be inserted a brief
touch and description of Aurora, who although in the upper region of the higher
heavens, she goes as it were as herald and messenger of Phoebus, discovering to
the world his gladsome coming and return, yet I thought it fittest in this
treatise to postplace her, and to speak of her after his mention, and
succeeding him: for so much indeed, as she is wholly engendered, and receives
her being from the virtue of his beams, and is no other but that rubicund and
vermillion blush in the skies, which the fiery ardencie of the suns first
appearance works in the oriental parts of the heavens, and from thence
discending, beutifies with such resplendant guilture the forehead of our
hemysphere: neither do I find (although with the ancients she was held and
worshipped as a goddess) that she has any Statues, Images, or Altars
dedicated unto her. Homer Homer.
describes her of the aspect of a young virgin, having her hair disheueled,
and hanging loose about her shoulders, being of the color of the purest gold,
and that she sits in a glorious chair, compacted also of gold, with all the
rest of her vestures of that color, hue, and glister. Virgil says, That upon
the instant Virgil.
time of the sable-faced nights departure, she comes with one of her hands
full of roses, gilliflowers, and lillies, taken out of a little basket which
she carries in her other hand, and after that those twinkling candles of the
firmament are by her approach fled and vanished, she besprinkleth those flowers
on the marble pauement of the lower heavens, adorning the same with a wondrous
grace and unspeakable beauty. Others there are that describe her, holding in
one of her hands a flaming torch, and that she is drawn in a gorgeous and
starre-bespotted chariot by winged Pegasus, which favor she obtained of
Jupiter by many importunate requests, presently after the downfall of
Belleferon: and thus far touching the Statues of Phoebus, and descriptions of
Aurora.

Diana.
FOr so much as among the ancients the Moon was reverenced and adored under
diverse and several names, so likewise did they then erect and dedicat unto her
Statues, Altars, and Images of diverse and several forms, for that with some
she was called Diana, with others Proserpina, with others Hecate, with other
some Lucina, and in Egypt generally entearmed Isis. And according unto such
the property of her names they so ascribed unto her, would they express her
proportion of body, her habit, her natures, virtues, and effects. And
therefore according to the description of Propertius, she was depictured in
the Propertius.
shape and due resemblance of a young and pleasantlooking virgin of most
amourous and beauteous aspect, having on either side of her forehead two small
glistering horns, newly peeping forth: and that she is most gloriously drawn
through the air in a purple colored coach by two furious and swift-paced
horses, the one being of a sad and darkish color, the other beautiful and
white, which (according to Boccace) Boccace.
entendeth her powerful operations, as well in the day as in the night. Festus
Pompeius writes, That Festus Pompeius.
her chariot is drawn by a Mule, comparing her (being cold of nature) to the
barrenness and sterrillitie of that beast; and as her self gives no light or
splendor of her self, but borrows such her brightness of her brother
Phoebus, so the Mule never engenders by any of her own kind, but by asses,
horses, and other like beasts. There are also who depicture the chariot of the
Moon, drawn by two white bullockes (as Claudianus) when he speaks of that
great search and enquiry which Ceres made for the finding out of her ravished
daughter. It is read, that in many places of Egypt they reverenced the Image
of a bullock with wonderful zeal and veneration, which they cut out and
depainted of a sad color, having one of his flanckes bespotted with diverse
white stars, and on his head were placed two such sharp horns, as the Moon
seems to carry in her cheifest waine, and lights imperfection. And in those
places they offered great Sacrifices unto her upon the seventh day after any
child was born and brought into the world, as in token of their gratefulness
and thanksgiving for the safe delivery of such newborn infant: for from the
moisture and humiditie of the Moon (say they) the woman receives speedier
deliverance, and the child easier euacation. And for these causes would they
oftentimes inuoke her gracious assistance, entearming her the most mighty,
merciful, and most sacred Lucina. Marcus Tullius writing against Verres,
Marcus Tullius.
describes there a Statue or Picture of Diana, which he brought from out a
temple in Cicilia, and he says that it was of a wondrous height, and huge
demension, having the whole body circumcinct with a thin veil or couerture,
the face of it of a most youthful and virgineall aspect, holding in her right
hand a lively, burning torch, and in her left an yuorie bow, with a quiver of
siluer-headed arrows hanging at her back. The torch or firebrand (as Pausanias
says) signifies Pausanias.
that brightness and day-resembling splendour, which she so graciously
affords to the uncertain steps of forren-nationed pilgrims, and
disconsolate travelers: the sharp pointed arrows mean those dolourous fits
and passions that women feel at their child's deliverance, which in this point
is appropriated unto her as she is Lucina. Among the Poets Diana is called the
goddess of hunting, and imperial gouernesse of pleasant groves, shrub-bearing
hills, and christal-faced fountains: given unto her as some hold, for that in
the heavens she never keeps any direct course, but wanders and stragles from
that true and perfect circuit which the sun always observes, as likewise
hunters in the chase and pursuit of their game leave the most accustomed and
trodden paths, posting through uncouth thickets and way-lesse passage: and they
depicture her in the habit of a young nymph, with her bow ready bent in her
hand, a quiver of arrows hanging at one side of her, and to the other is fast
tied a most swiftfooted greyhound, with a collar about his neck set and
inchased with many rich stones of infinite value, and after her follow a troop
of siluan virgins and light-paced huntresses, whose habites and aspects I
remember to be by some thus described.

Early one morn old Tithons spouse arose,
And raisd young Phoebus from his quiet rest,
Drawing the certaines that did then disclose
Him fast twixt Thetis arms whom he loved best.
He when he heard the summons of the day,
After some sweet repast straight stole away.
Scarce was he mounted on his glorious car,
When thwart the ambitious hills and lowly plain,
Scouring a pace, you might perceive a far
A troop of Amazons to post amain,
But when they nearer came unto your view,
You might discern Diana and her crew.
A careless crew of young-year'd Nimphs, despising
The joyous pleasures and delights of love,
Wasting their days in rural sports devising,
Which know no other, nor will other prove.
Winged with desire to overtake the chase,
Away they fling with unresisted pace.
Some have their hair disheuel'd hanging down,
Like to the suns small streams, or new gold wires,
Some on their head do wear a flowery crown,
Gracing the same with many curious tires,
But in their hot pursuit they loose such graces,
Which makes more beauty beautify their faces.
Their necks, and purple-vained arms are bare,
And from their yuorie shoulders to the knee,
A silken vesture over their skin they wear,
Through which a greedy eye would quickly see.
Close to their bodies is the same ingerted
With girdles, in the which are flowers inserted.
Each in their hand a silver bow does hold,
With well-stor'd quiuers hanging at their backs,
Whose arrows being spent, they may be bold
To borrow freely, so that none ere lackes:
They never need be niggards of their store,
For at their idle times they make them more.
Sometimes when hottest they pursue their chases,
You may perceive how fast the sweat distilleth
In hasty-running streams adowne their faces,
Like seuen-fold Nilus when she prowdly swells:
For from the time that first Hyperion burns,
They cease not till the widowed night returns.
And in that swartish and estranged hue,
Causd by the abundance of such blubbred heat,
They look like youthful men at the first view,
So are their beauties ouer-drownd with sweat.
Thus are those nimble skipping Nimphs displaid
That use to attend that Goddess, Queen, and Maid.
And thus much touching the description of those virgins, which are said to
accompany that woods-delighting goddess in her sports of hunting. Pausanias
writes, That the bow in which Diana her Pausanias.
self uses to shoot, is made of the saddest colored Ebonie, clean contrary
to the opinion of Ovid, who Ovid.
directly describes it to be of the purest gold: and he further writes, that
her chariot is drawn by two white Hinds, (as Claudianus likewise affirms)
when Claudianus.
he says:

Down from the steepest clouds-o're-peering mountains,
Drawn in a chariot by two winged hinds,
Posts the commandresse of the groves and fountains
With greater speed than Eols angry winds,
Over hills and valleys, rocks, and roughest seas,
These golden-horned hinds go where they please.
It is read likewise with Pausanias, that in Arcadia was a Statue made of
Diana, all covered over with the skin of a Hind, and from her shoulders there
hung a quiver of arrows: in one hand she held a burning lamp, and the other
she leaned upon the heads of two gentle serpents, and before her feet there
stood a hound, cut out and proportioned with wondrous great art and industrious
labor of the workman. The ancients first began to consecrate Hinds unto
Diana, since that time that she sent such infectious plagues among the
Grecians, in token of her displeasure which she conceived against Agamemnon,
for killing a Hind. And afterward also among the Romans they did commonly
sacrifice a Hind unto her, adorning their holy sanctuaries and temples with the
horns thereof. And hitherto for the description of the Moon as she is Diana,
who was oftentimes also among the ancients called Triuia, and depictured with
three heads, which indeed rather belongs unto her as Hecate, and not as
Diana. This Hecate the ancients worshipped and adored, as she that had the
guard and keeping of all cross ways, and such lanes as in the end concurred
and conioined themselves in one, and for that cause they depictured her with
three heads, whereupon Ovid thus speaks:

If in thy travels thou do miss thy way,
Doubtful and wavering how to guide thy paces,
Enquire what Hecate to that will say,
Who for three several ways has several faces,
Inuoke her aid, and she will guide thy feet,
Which always after the true path shall keep.
From whence likewise it proceeded, that Virgil oftentimes calls her Trigemina,
Triuia, and Triforme. And it is said, that Orpheus ascribed unto her such
faces, meaning to declare thereby the diverse and sundry aspects which we
oftentimes may discern to be in the Moon, and that her virtues and effects
are powerful and working, not only in the heavens where she is called Luna,
and on the earth where she is known by the name of Diana, but also extend
down even to the bowels of Erebus, where she is called Hecate and Proserpina,
where it is supposed she remains during the time of her lights absence from
the worlds view and illustrement. And these things Eusebius thus expounds:
The Moon (says he) is Eusebius.
called Hecate and Triforme by reason of the many shapes and figures that
appear many times to be in her countenance, which proceeds from the
quantity of the light which she receaueth from the beams of Phoebus. The
ancients appropriated the Laurel unto her as due unto her from her brother
Apollo. And thus much as she is Hecate. The Egyptians (as I have already
said) worshipped the Moon under the name of Isis, and her they depictured
covered with a black and sable vesture, in token that of her self she gives
no light. And it is written by the Poets that she was the daughter of the flood
Inachus, and called by the name of lo, and after that she lost her virginity
to Jupiter, she traveled into Egypt, where among them she was so entearmed
by the name of Isis. And they framed her Statue, holding in one hand a Cymball,
and in the other an earthen vessel of water, whereupon (as Seruius says) many
supposed her to be the Seruius.
Genius of Egypt, in that through such her depicturance the nature of that
country was opened and discovered: understanding by the Cymball which she so
holds in one of her hands, that uncouth noise and farre-heard murmr which
Nilus roareth forth, when with her tumbling and furious billows she
ouer-washeth the spacious fields of Egypt: and by the other vessel of water,
the many Rivers, Pooles, and Lakes in which that Country excels. Apulcius
Apulcius.
reports, that after his recovery from his transmutation into the form of
an ass, be dreamed to have seen Isis appear one night before him in a
vision, and he there so describes her, as it may be easily gathered that she
was the very same as I have already set down Luna to be, and which the
Egyptians with so strange and newfound ceremonies so adored. Martianus
writes, That Philologia entering into that Martianus
sphere of the Moon, saw there many and diuers-framed Cymbals, and likewise
the torches of Ceres, the bow of Diana, the Timbrell of Cibele, and a kind of
shape also with three horns, which I have already said to be in the Moon: all
which things are appropriated and due unto Luna. But returning to the
description which Apuleius so makes of her in such his Apuleius.
vision, he says, That she then seemed unto him as it were all wet and new
come out of the sea, with her hair hanging loose about her shoulders, and upon
the crown of her head was mounted a most curious and delicate chaplet,
composed of diverse sweet smelling and sundry-sorted flowers, in the midst of
her shining forehead appeared a certain squared and quadrangulate circle,
glittering with wondrous luster and unspeakable corruscancie: on either side
of her stood certain young whelps of Serpents: her aparrell seemed to be of
diverse colors of a most subtle and thin substance, some part of it showing
white, and of an ashie hue, othersome darkish and sad, and in some other places
of it, it appeared reddish and high colored. And over this garment she wore
one other of all black, yet glistering in that kind, and of a most perfect
iettish hue, which was very thick bespotted and adulterated with true-shapt
stars of gold and silver, amidst the which was inserted a most glorious and
bright-shining Moon, formed out with inimitable art of the workman, and round
about the hem or skirt of this un matchable vesture was interposed a most
curious and delicate border of verdent foliature, intrauersed among the lively
depicturances of all kinds and sorts of fruits. In her right hand she held a
certain instrument made like a Cymball, which of it self would yield forth a
most shrill and loud report: from her left arm hung down a straunge-fashioned
vessel, compacted clean of gold, with the handle and foot of it proportioned
into the form of a lively serpent, which seemed mightily puffed up and swollen
with poison: and before her feet there was placed a certain ornament and
skillful devise, made of the leaves of palm. And thus far Apuleius describes
the appearance of Isis. The variety of such-her colors in her apparel, may
be drawn into these natural reasons: for that the Moon does oftentimes turn
her self into diverse aspects, which thereby denotate the diversities of the
natures of seasons succeeding, as her rednes and high color foretells the
approach of furious and blustering winds, her dark and muddy-hued look the
clustring together and conglomeration of watrie clouds from which issues over
abundance of rain and moisture, and her white and clear aspect pretokeneth
calmes and serenitie of weather: her upper garment being black, signifies as I
have said, that she has no light of her self. Some think, that the Cymball
which Apuleius describes so to be in one of her hands, discovered those old
vsances of the ancients, who in those times credibly supposed to have
infinitely pleased the Moon by making certain strange musical noices which
they caused by certain instruments then in request among them: others say,
that it intended that pleasant sound which the Moon in her revolution through
the upper heavens is heard to make, which is also the opinion of the
Platonicks, who affirm, that the stirring of the celestial orbs yields
forth a most harmonious and delightful music. Herodotus says, That in those
sacrifices which the Herodotus.
Egyptians used so to offer up to Isis, the women accustomed to play on
Cymbals, and the men on tabers, honoring such their feastiuals with infinite
sorts of rites and ceremonies of sole^nization. The vessel which hung down
from her left hand, signifies the lively motion and stirring of the waters,
caused by the operative humiditie of the Moon, whereupon it is supposed, that
according to her fullness or decreasing of her light, the sea receaueth that
proud and lofty carriage of her billows in her flowing, and that lowly and
dejected demeanure in her ebbing: and for that the often changes and
alterations of the Moon, may in some sort touch the unsteadfast and uncertain
remain of all things in man's life, it is not amiss to remember the sayings of
Ambrosius, who many times alludeth Ambrosius.
the goods, possessions, and pleasures, which here men do enjoy to the
inconstant and mutable changes of the Moons aspects, noting thereby, that
there is nothing on the earth firm, permanent, or ever during, but that all
the beauties and ornaments of the world are wasted and spoiled by the severe
tyranny of all-deuouring time: whereupon (according to the opinion of many)
the Romans afterward (such especially as were nobly descended, and of
ancient family) wore always on the tops of their shoes certain little Moons
curiously depainted, insomuch, as that they being of mighty revenues and of
powerful commands, might so be remembered and put in mind of the casualtie and
doubtful enjoying of such their world-bred felicities and terrene pleasures:
and that continually meditating on such the instabillitie of fortunes gifts and
favors, they should not grow insolent, proud, forgetful of their being, or
ouerhighly thoughted. And thus much concerning the Statues of Diana.

Jupiter.
THat euer-memorable and famoused preuailement which Jupiter so victoriously
carried over his father Saturn, in expelling him from the imperial
government of the heavens, with many other valerous and haughty performances
by him achieved, purchased and won unto him such wondrous reputation and
credit among the auntients, that they not only dignified him with all titles
and graces of warlike honor, but also deified him with such reverence and
adoration, as they ever afterward held him as a most mighty and powerful
God, exuperating any of the rest in the height of glory, state, and
magnificence, and so accordingly erected unto him most sumptuous temples and
costly altars, reputing him indeed to be the only and especial god that had
the power and authority to befriend or prosper the estates of men here below,
or to plague and scourge them with crosses, miseries, and mortalities, where
upon the Latins called him Jupiter a iuuando, for those many benefits and good
turns wherewith he possessed the people then living on the earth. The
Platonickes understand by Jupiter the soul of the world, and that divine
spirit, through whose mightiness all things whatsoever first received their
being, and still ioiously increase and flourish in their instant continuance:
and such powerful spirit and commander they entearmed by the name of god.
Orpheus (that farre-famed Orpheus.
Theologian among the Greeks) ascribed thus much unto Jove, that he was the
first before any thing in the world received form, and shall continue the last
after the consumation and dissolution thereof, and that he sits on the
highest part of it, whose feet reach down to the lowest and basest corner
thereof, within whom is contained earth, water, air, fire, day, and night:
whose Image he thus sets forth, his head (says he) with those his
golden-hued locks, is the beauteous firmament gloriously adorned with such
infinite armies of tralucent stars, and from each side of his temples peep
forth two young golden horns, signifying by the one the East and by the other
the West, his eyes are the Sun and the Moon, his shoulders and breast the
spacious compass of the air, and the wings thereon infixed, intend the
furious swiftness of the winds, his belly down to the knee, is the wide
earth circu^cinct with the waters of the sea, and his feet descend down through
the bowels of the lower center. This description of Jupiter made by Orpheus, is
not much unlike that of Pan, by whom the ancients also signify the universe,
and took him and Jupiter to be al one, as his Image or Statue in some sort
manifested, which was erected (as Iustine writes) in a temple in Iustine.
Rome hard by the hill Palatine, which appeared to the view almost all naked,
save that it was slightly enshadowed and covered with the skin of a goat. It is
read therefore that this Pan was reputed in those days among the ancients to
be one of those gods that remained and kept his habitation among the hills,
woods, and groves, for that all of such their gods as they then so worshipped,
could not possibly have room and several commands in the heavens, but that of
necessity some must be enforced to descend down and live below upon the
earth: among the which (as I have said) was Pan, who was indeed most of any,
adored and worshipped of the sheepeheards, as he that had the peculiar care
and government of their flocks, and of the increases thereof, whose shape
Siluius Italicus Siluius Italicus.
thus sets forth:

Upon the sheepeheards cheesest feastiuall,
When down the floure-imbroder'd lawnes they trace,
Playing on Oten pipes most musical,
To whose due steps they frame a true-kept pace,
In front of all the troop you there may see
Goat-eared Pan in this solemnity.
From out his head two small-tipt new-growne horns
Advance themselves, about whose either side
A flourie garland twines, and there adornes
His curled temples with a wondrous pride,
His face is of a reddish blush and fiery,
From which does hang a stiffe-rough beard and hairie.
And for his bodies vesture he does wear
The finest skin of the most spotted Do,
That ever any in those woods did bear,
Which from his shoulders loose hangs to his toe,
And when he walks, he carries in his hand
A sheepeheards hook made of a knotlesse wand.
After such his description he progresseth further, and says, That he is of
that marvelous firm footing, that he easily climeth up, and ascends the
most craggie and steep mountains that be, and is of a most wonderful speed
and swiftness in his running, alluded therein to the nature of the world,
which in his revolution and circumference turns about with a sudden and
quick dispatch of time Seruius says, Seruius.
That the ancients so shaped Pan with horns, as entending thereby the beams
of the sun, or those horns of the Moon, which she seems in her
imperfection and lights decreasing to carry. Boccace understands by such his
horns; newly sprung forth Boccace.
and reuersed toward the heavens, the celestial bodies which receive
knowledge and conceiuances by two manners; the one by art, through which by
Astrologicall skill and judgment, the course and extrauancie of the stars is
proportioned and known with their habitations, natures, and distances; the
other is that continual proof and efficient power which is employed here in
things below: The redness and high color of his face, signifies that pure
and lively fire, which above the rest of the elements is adioined next to the
heavenly spheres: his long beard hanging down over his breast, means the two
superior elements, Air and Fire, which are of nature, force, and operation,
masculine, and they infuse their workings and impressions in the two below,
which are feminine: The spotted vesture which he wears over his shoulders,
signifies the eight sphere, spotted and bespangled with so many glistering
stars, which cover all things belonging unto natural increases: The
Sheepeheards hook which he always carries in one of his hands, discovers
(according to Boccace) the rule and government which Nature bears over all
terrene things: And in that it is at one end somewhat crooked and retorted, it
vnshadoweth (as Seruius says the course of the year, which in it self
Seruius.
is circumfered and bended: And in the other hand some place a whistle or pipe
made of seven reeds, demonstrating thereby the celestial harmony above, which
has in it self seven several sounds, and seven differing voices, according
to the revolution and working of the seven spheres, from which they receive
such their musical motion. And this Macrobius understands Macrobius.
many times for Echo, whom the ancients report to be most entirely beloved
and endeared of Pan, of whom (besides that which Ovid speaks of her in the
transmutation of Narcissus) it is read, that she was a goddess, and the
daughter of Speech, and of the Air, and therefore invisible. Whereupon
Ausonius Gallus reports, That she has oftentimes disuaded and reprehended
him whosoever will undertake Ausonius Gallus.
to depicture her, and Ausonius repeats it there in an Epigram, whose sense is
thus reduced to a Sonnet.

Surcease thou meddling Artist thy endcuour,
Who for thy skill have reapt such long-liu'd fame,
Strive not to paint my bodies shape, for never
Did any humane eyes behold the same:
In concaue Cauernes of the earth I dwell,
Daughter of the air, and of each tailing voice,
In woods and hollow dales I build my cell,
Ioying to re-report the least-heard noice,
To greefe-opprest, and men disconsolate,
That tell each grove their souls vexation,
Their dying agonies Iaggrauate
By their plaints accentsiteration,
And he that will describe my form aright,
Must shape a formelesse sound, or airiespright.
But returning to Pan, I will proceed in his description, whose lower parts of
him are defigured, as it were over grown with marvelous rough and stubborn
hair, with the feet of a Goat: signifying hereby the nature of the earth,
which in some places is hard, craggie, bushie, and uneven, being beset with
plants, trees, and briars, and in some places champaine, in others full of
deepe-discented valleys, and other where very mountainous. Some also will have
Pans horns signify the effigies and aspect of the new-changed Moon, his
rubicund and fiery face the blushing countenance of the morning against the
approach of Phoebus, and likewise of the evening upon his tramontation and
descent to the antipodes, whose beams then seeming to reach down unto the
earth, are understood by his long and sharp-pointed beard. The spotted skin
over his shoulders, explicates (as has before been spoken of) the innumerable
companies of stars which presently show forth and advance themselves upon the
suns departure toward the kingdom of Oceanus. The rod or sheepehooke in his
hand, means the rule and government which he carries over all things. By the
pipe of seven reeds may be intended the musical melody of the heavens, caused
(as some hold) by the motion of the sun. And so diverse men vary and differ
in their descriptions, similes, and applications. Plato understands through
Plato.
Pan, Reason and Knowledge; and that it is of two sorts, the one of a man, the
other of a beast: And for that (says he) it is many times argued and reasoned
both truly and falsely between two parties, he entendeth by the upper part of
Pan the truth, accompanied with reason, which being of it self divine,
erecteth and lifts up it self always toward the heavens; and that part
below signifies the falsenesse of things, which being harsh, beastly and rude,
lives here in the world, and is only delighted with the pleasures and foolish
vanities thereof. But howsoever this description of Pan may be drawn into
several meanings, it pleased the ancients so to defigure him from the middle
upward (as I have said) they framed him to the proportion and similitude of a
man, with his face ruddie and sanguine, being very hairie, his shoulders and
breast covered with the skin of a spotted Do, Panther, or Leopard. In the one
hand he held a sheepehooke, and in the other a whistle, much used of
sheepeheards, when in their pleasant humors they carroll forth their rural
notes of mirth and iouisance: from the middle downwards he carried the
perfect shape of a Goat, both thighs, legs, and feet. After the same form and
portraiture also were the Faunes, Siluans, and Satyrs depictured and set
forth, having little short horns growing on their heads, with small ears, and
short tails. And it is read that among some people they are held in very great
regard and observance, and that they are crowned by them with lillies, and
other delicate flowers. They are of a most wonderful speed in running, and
inhabit among the steepest and highest hills of India, (according to Pliny)
being of that incredible Pliny.
footmanship, that they are never taken unless by extremity of old age, or
other impedimentall disease or sickness. Plutarch writes, That there
Plutarch.
was one of these brought and presented for a rare gift unto Sylla, returning
from the wars against Mithridates. But regressing to Pan, Herodotus writes,
That he Herodotus.
was one of those eight chief and principal gods which were so worshipped and
adored among the Egyptians, and among the Mendesians held in greatest regard
and reputation. And unto him there they dedicated and consecrated the Pine, of
whose leaves they composed many curious garlands, and encompassed his horns
therewith: the reason hereof (as some say) was for the love of a virgin called
Pitis, afterward metamorphised into that tree: as it is read also of Syrinx,
turned into a reed, whereof Panso frames his pipes and rural instruments. And
now to the finishing of the Statues of Jupiter, beginning with that which is
read with Porphirius, Eusebius, and Suida, who Porphirius. Eusebius. Suida.
depicture the Image of Jupiter as it were sitting upon a firm and irremouable
seat; to signify that that virtue which governs and preserves the world, is
firm, permanent, and continuing: the upper parts of the picture appear naked
and unclothed, the lower parts covered and invested: dishadowing thereby, that
the mercy and compassion of the divine powers is always manifest and apparent
to those that are possessed with an understanding spirit: the lower parts being
clothed, means, that all the while that we are here in the world delighted,
and as it were rockt asleep with the illecebrous blandishments thereof, we
cannot any way apprehend superior knowledges, but they are kept obscured, hid,
and unrevealed from us. In his left hand he held a scepter, for that (say they)
on that side of the body lies the principal part of man, being the heart,
from which are dispersed and sent out the vital spirits and powers of the
body: and as the king rules absolutely, and commands over his people at his
pleasure, so the world, and al things contained therein, are tied in subjection
and duty unto the will of the highest king. In his right hand they place a
mighty Eagle, joined with the portraiture of Victoria, meaning thereby as by
the other, that as the Eagle over all other birds whatsoever rules as cheef,
so all the men in this world, and all other things enclosed within her spacious
embracements, stand vassalized and subject to the all-commanding power of
Jupiter. And this picture was erected in Piraeus, a stately and magnifique gate
of Athens. The Egyptians framed unto themselves for the picture of Jupiter, a
piece of squared wood, wherein was proportioned two round circles, as it were
one over the other, through which there seemed to creep a Serpent, having the
head of a Sparrowhawke. The circles intended the wideness and rotunditie of
the world: the Serpent the great commander and conseruer of all things therein;
for among the Egyptians and Phenicians they held that Serpents were of a
divine and supernatural power, as having such speed and swiftness in their
going, without the supportation of any exterior lim, carried only by an
interior spirit and liveliness, which makes them so often wrest and retort
their bodies with so many flexuous and winding turnings, and that they live on
the earth a wonderful long time, as disburdening themselves of their years, by
dispoiling and uncasing them of their upper skins, and so instantly again
rebecome youthful and vigorous: the head of the Sparrowhawke signifies
nimblenesse, promptness, and agilitie. Martianus (when Martianus.
he writes how Jupiter summoned all the gods to the marriage of Mercury and
Philologia) depictures him there impalled with a regal crown, all adorned
with most precious and glittering stones, over his shoulders he wears a thin
veil, wouen and made up by Pallas own hands, which appears all white,
wherein are inserted diverse small pieces of glass, formed out into the due
proportion of the most resplendant stars: in his right hand he holds two
round bals, the one wholly of gold, the other half gold and half silver: in
the other hand an yuorie Harp with nine strings, his shoes are made of the
green Smarald, and he sits on a footcloth, wherein is wrought and intexed
diverse strange works, with the feathers of a Peacocke, and hard by his side
lies a tridentall gold-embossed mase. And so far Martianus among many other
his descriptions, sets him forth. In many Countries the Statues and Images of
Jupiter were so depictured, as they thereby discovered not only what he was,
and of what virtue, power, and command, but gave light as it were and
admonished Princes and Governors how to proceed in the execution of their rule
and authority, as being on earth the viceroyes and under kings unto Jupiter,
appointed and installed by him to see justice and equity truly and effectually
ministered and performed. And Plutarch writes, That in some places of Plutarch.
Crete were Statues erected of Jupiter, which had all the proportion and shape
of a humane body, save that they had no ears, signifying thereby, that he
that commands in superior authority above others, ought not to be persuaded
or carried away by any private conference, or glosing insinuation, but must
stand upright, firm, and steadfast, not leaning to one side more than to
another, whereby he may be known not to favor or partialize. And contrarily,
the Lacedaemonians framed his picture with four ears, as that Jupiter hears
and understands all things, alluded also to the wisdom of Princes and
Magistrates, which ought to have information of every cause or matter thoroughly
before they deliver out a definitive sentence or judgment: and likewise that
they receive and admit intelligences and notices how their laws, precepts, and
edicts, are kept and observed among their subjects. Pausanias reports, That
among the Argiues there was erected in the temple of Minerua, Pausanias.
the Statue of Jupiter made with three eyes; two of them seated in their right
places, and the other in the middle of his large forehead: understanding
thereby, that he has three kingdoms to govern and mainetaine: the one the
heavens, as that especially and entirely commanded by him: the other Hell,
which is there understood by the earth, which compared with the wondrous glory
and beauteous excellency of the heavens, may in that respect worthily merit
that name: and the third kingdom is the sea, for so much as Eschylus in many
places entitleth him with the name of the lord and commander of the watrie
government Eschylus.
and dominion. It is read also, that hard by the pictures of Jupiter, was
always placed the Image of Iustitia, as that kings and great potentates might
not commit any thing wherein justice and right were not administered. And much
to this purpose Plutarch writes, Plutarch.
That in Thebes were certain Statues and Images of Jupiter made without hands,
demonstrating thereby the duty of Iusticers, and authorized Officers, for that
indeed they ought to be as it were without hands; that is, that they should
not receive any kind of bribe or reward, nor be corrupted with the enticing
proffers of bounteous gifts, whereby they might become injurious to the true
deseruers of right and equity, and be drawn to give wrongful judgment upon
the truth-inferring pledant. Some there are also who have defigured him without
eyes, as by that means Iusticers, and men authorized for deciding lites and
controversies, might not see their dearest friends in such times of pleading,
and so not put in mind either of friendship, kindred, or other occasion to lead
them to partiality. And it is thought that this Jupiter with the Romans, was
the same which they then entearmed Deus Fidius, so reverenced and adored among
them, whose picture was always kept among their most sacred and regarded
relics, and it was thus composed: There stood in the midst of a Temple a
great Colosse of marble, out of which was framed and hewn with great
curiosity of art, a window, in which were insculped three figures, whereof one
of them which stood and was placed on the right hand, being in the form of a
well-yeard man, full of modesty and gravity, had these letters engraven upon
it, Honor: The other on the left hand, formed into the portraiture of a woman
in Matrone-like habit, carried these letters, Veritas. These two pictures
seemed to hold one another hand in hand, before whom there was placed the third
figure, of the proportion of a young man, of beauteous, yet sober aspect, on
whose head were infixed these words, Deus Fidius. And thus much touching that
note, taken from the writings of Pausanias. There have been few Statues
composed of Jupiter, to which has not been annexed the shape of an Eagle,
which bird of all others the Ancients have most often appropriated unto him,
by which (as it is poetised) his glorious chariot is swiftly drawn and
conveyed through the airie passages. Some hold, that Jupiter when he warred
and was conversant here below in many fights and skirmishes, was by many signs
and tokens given by an Eagle, assured of prosperous and fortunate success,
which afterward fell out true, he himself victoriously triumphing in those
wars: Or that as he is feared and adored among men, so the Eagle carries a
superiority, and reigns as Empress over all other birds. Among the Eleans
(a people in Greece) the Statue of Jupiter was compacted of gold and yuorie,
and himself sitting upon a regal and stately seat, was impalled with a
coronet, made with the leaves of an Olive. In his right hand he held the Image
of Victoria, crowned in the same manner: and in his left hand a scepter,
tempered of diverse and sundry metals, on the top whereof was mounted the
true portraiture of an Eagle: his shoes were all of gold, whereon was set forth
and depainted the forms of diverse strange beasts and of rarest flowers. The
seat it self was clean gold, in which was inchased with most excellent
embellishments and curious politure, the lively representation of many unknown
birds and fishes. And this Statue was vpheld and supported by four Images of
Victoria, hewn out and proportioned with inimitable skill of the art Topiaria.
And it is read, that in Caria (a region in the lesser Asia) was erected a
Statue of Jupiter, holding only in one of his hands a Poleaxe, and Plutarch
alleges this reason for it, saying, That Hercules after that he had
overthrown and slain Hippolita, Queen of the Amazones, took them from her
and carried away among other her arms, this poleaxe, which afterward he gave
to Omphale his wife, which by birth was of Lydia: and in this respect the kings
of Lydia always afterward used to carry with them in the wars such weapon,
and held and regarded it as a thing sacred, and of a wondrous respect. This
weapon through the succession of maniekings in the end came to Candaules, who
not vouching to carry it himself always, gave it in charge to one that
accompanied next unto him, who afterward with Candaules himself was slain by
Giges, then triumphant victor over those wars so undertaken: who among other
spoils and relics, carried and brought the same away into Caria, which first
the Amazonian commandresse so lost to Hercules. And this was now infixed in the
one hand of this Statue, which was dedicated unto Jupiter. And thus much
touching the Images, Statues, and Pictures consecrated unto him.

Juno.
THose that have written, that the Ancients under the names of diverse gods
have worshipped the four elements, have understood by Juno the Air, calling
her the sister of Jove, by whom is meant also that element of Fire. And as they
then adored and worshipped him as supreme governor of the heavens, so
likewise they entearmed and entitled her the Queen and Lady thereof, being
both indeed the superior elements, which in themselves have greater strength,
virtue, and operation in the creation and increase of things here below than
the other two: and oftentimes also they take I uno for the earth, and in that
respect acknowledged as the wife of Jupiter, in that (say they) there falls
from above a certain powerful and engendring seed on the earth, by whose
strength and virtue it receives means and ability to bring forth, maintain,
and nourish what we see here produced. There are many also who have worshipped
and taken this goddess the same as Luna, cognominating her by the name of
Luna, as it were signifying thereby, that she gives light and guidance to the
deliverance of the newborn infant. From whence it grew, that the ancients
parting (as it were) and dividing the parts of men severally and asunder,
giving unto every god some one part, some another, whereof they should take
charge and care, have dedicated the eyelids unto Juno, in that they are placed
and next adioined to our eyes, by which we receive our light and steps
direction, and that they seem to defend and protect the purity of their
virtues from any hurtful and offensive thing that might otherwise fall down,
and get in upon them. The Statue of Juno has been framed by the ancients into
the proportion of a woman of middle age, yet habited like a grave Matron,
holding in the one hand a silver vessel, and in the other a sharpe-pointed
spear: and although it may seem strange to place in the hand of Juno this
warlike weapon, she being of her self naturally mild, peaceful, and gentle,
yet the ancients have so defigured her, in that she is many times also fierce,
wrathful, and furious, as she showed her self when she conioined with the
Grecians to ouerturne the prosperous estates of the Phrygians, aduenturing her
self in person, accompanied with Minerua amidst the most perrillous and
desperate skirmishes of those wars: as Homer among those his notes Homer.
more copiously remembers it, where also he says, That her chariot (for in
those times the greatest Captains and especial commanders always fought in
chariots) glistered as it had been beset with purest carbuncles, the axletree
was of solid gold, the wheels of Ebonie, whose circulous plates with the
nails thereof were clean silver, the chains whereunto the horses were tied,
were gold, and the seat wherein she her self sat mounted, was of the most
refined silver, beautified, adorned, and bespotted round about with stars of
gold. And although at all other times almost she is depainted to be drawn in
her chariot by two gentle birds, yet at this approach she is reported to be
carried by two furious horses. And Virgil Virgil.
likewise describes her in such a chariot, when he says that she affected and
favored Carthage very much, as to leave there her chariot, horses, and
furniture thereof. Homer by the many and sundry colors which appear Homer.
to be depainted in that her chariot, understands and means the several
aspects of the air. And Boccace takes it otherways, saying, that she is so
gloriously Boccace.
set forth and adorned with colors, to signify that she is goddess of
riches, and such her weapons so belonging unto her do vnshadow, that for
riches, wealth, honor, and aduancements, men undertake arms, and are
conversant in the greatest dangers of the wars. And she is also oftentimes
pictured with a scepter in her hand, to show that she has the bestowing of
governments, authorities, and kingdoms: as likewise she promised Paris upon
such his censure of beauty between the three goddesses. Unto her also is
dedicated among the ancients, the Peacocke, as the bird chiefly appropriated
unto her, as that men are so drawn and allured with the desire of riches to
the possession and embracement thereof, as the diuerse-coloured feathers of
this bird, enticeth the beholders eyes more and more to view, and to gase upon
them. And Boccace (speaking of the progeny of the gods) says there, That men
of mighty revenues, Boccace,
treasures, and possessions, are alluded to this bird, as that they are proud,
insolent, desirous to overrule all men, and well pleased to be soothed up and
flattered in such their thrasonicall humors and ouer-arrogant haughtiness,
desirous to be praised and extolled, whether justly or undeservedly, it matters
not: of which sort of people, as in those times of Boccace, so I do not think
also, but in these days many of them may be easily found out. Among the
ancients it is delivered, that the messenger of Juno is called Iris, by which
name also the Rainebow many times is understood, and that she was the daughter
of Thaumante, which signifies admiration, insomuch as the strange variety of
the colors thereof, possesses the beholders minds, with a continuing wonder
and admiring continuation. And she is apparrelled in loose vestures for the
more nimblenesse and dispatch of the goddesses affairs and negotiations, who
besides this messenger had also fourteen other nimphs, continually awaiting
upon her, pressed and ready to perform all dutious services, and serviceable
duties: as Virgil Virgil.
affirms when he says, that she promised unto Eolus the fairest and most
beautiful of all her handmaids, if he would let loose his then imprisoned
winds to the dispersing and scattering of Aeneas fleet, then bound for the
coasts of Italy. And these are said to be the causes of the changes and
alterations of the air, making it sometimes fair, sometimes tempestuous,
rainie, and cloudie, and some other times sending down hail, snow, thunder,
and lightening. Martianus depainting Martianus
Juno sitting in a lower chair under Jupiter, thus describes her: She has her
head (says he) invested and covered with a thin white veil, on the top
whereof is seated a stately coronet, inchased and adorned with many most
precious and rare-found Jewels, as the Heliotrope, the Smarald, Iacynth, and
Scythis, with many other of more unknown virtues and wonder-worthie
operations: her inward vestures are composed of some marvelous subtle
substance, reflecting with a most starre-like glister, appearing as it had
been made of glassie tinsell: over it depended a mantle or upper couerture of
a sad and darkish color, yet yielding forth (as it were) a secret-shining
luster and beauty: her shoes were of a most obscure and gloomie color, as
signifying the sable countenance

which sudden wonder the afflicted and waue-tossed sea men took as an
assured token of ensuing safety, as it afterward fell out. Whereupon it came
to pass, that always afterward that star was inuocated and called upon by
distressed Mariners, as Seneca and Pliny Seneca. Pliny.
likewise report, That the appearance of that star foretells serenitie of
weather, and peaceable calmes. And because this star is seated in the air, and
so Juno her self many times taken for the air, it pleased Apuleius (as I have
already written) as he took it by tradition from the ancients to accompany
this goddess with those two brothers Castor and Pollux. It is found with
Pausanias, that in a certain place of Beotia Pausanias.
there was a temple dedicated unto Juno, in the which was erected her Statue,
of a wondrous height and extension, and it had to name as the Italian gives it
Giunone sposa. The reason of such name may be this: Juno on a certain time
upon some occasions displeased and discontented with Jupiter, in a great
choler and furious rage departed from him and went away even to the furthest
parts of Eubea, he willing to pacify and calm such the conceived anger of his
wife, asked advise of Citheron then lord of that Country, how she might be
won, called home, and reclaimed: he presently advised him, that he forthwith
should cause to be built an Image or picture of the wood of an Oak, in the due
likeness and proportion of a young virgin, and covering it over with some
nuptial vestments, should procure the same cunningly to be carried along with
him to the place where marriages were then used to be solemnised, that by such
means it might be blased abroad how a new marriage was intended, and the old
spouse for ever rejected and forsaken. Jupiter liking of this new-deuised plot,
instantly proceeded to the execution thereof. And in the end when all matters
were ready, and he himself going with this picture in great solemnity to
the accustomed place of marriages, Juno understanding thereof, suddenly
approached, and fearing indeed to be now cast off for ever, in great anger and
jealousy violently tore away the garments of the supposed bride, and finding
it to be a counterfeit Image, and a devise made only to reduce her to her old
husband, converted such her displeasure into new liking and fancy, and at this
conceited jest infinitely reioiced. Afterward among the ancients, this day
was (in remembrance of the reuniting of Jupiter and Juno) held and observed in
great solemnization. This fable Eusebius reports to be by Plutarch thus
vnclouded: The discord (says he) which so arose between Jupiter and Juno,
Plutarch.
is nothing else but the distemperature and struggling contention of the
elements, from whence issues the destruction, death, and overthrow of all
things whatsoever; as by their quietness, concordance, and agreement, they are
produced and conserved: if therefore Juno (which is as much as a watrish,
moist, and windy nature) in such their striving and disagreements ouermaister
and subject Jupiter, there ensue most wonderful floods and rainie wetnesse on
the earth, as once happened in the Country of Beotia, being all ouercouered
and drowned with the superabundance of such floods and waters, till by the
reuniting and knitting together of the old kindness between Jupiter and his
spouse, the waters decreased, shruncke away, and dissipated themselves into
several arms of the sea, which indeed fell out even upon that very instant
when Juno plucked away those cloths, so invested upon the Image, and discovered
the substance and body of an Oak: of which tree also it is written, that it
was the first of all others that sprouted forth of the earth after the
departure of the universal deluge and inundation of the whole world, and which
(as Hesiodus says) then brought unto mankind manifold and sundry profits and
conueniences, as that by the fruits thereof, men in those days lived and
received nutriment, and by the wood of it built and composed their mansions
houses and temples. The ancients heretofore have consecrated unto Juno the
Lilly, and thereof have framed for her diverse wreaths and garlands, and they
called it the Rose of Juno, because being besprinckled with her milk, they
turned and were presently made white, being before of a ruddie and sanguine
color, and it is thus fabulized: Jupiter (knowing of the old hatred, and
spightfull malice which his wife always carried toward Hercules) one day (as
she lay asleep) so devised and brought to pass, as he conveyed Hercules with
great secrecy to the paps of Juno, that thereby he might suck and draw from
her some of her milk, whose virtues should disanull and frustrate her old
conceived spite, and change the same into a new-made love and kindness. But
Hercules sucking ouergreedily, and belike pulling too hard upon her paps, Juno
suddenly awaked, and perceiving him so unexpectedly there, whom from her soul
she so much hated, distractedly as it were started from him, and by that means
of violence her milk spurting forth, and making through the element a certain
white list and streake, called by the Astrologers Via lactea descended down on
the earth, and fell upon those Lillies, then growing sanguine and reddish,
which afterward grew discolored, pale, and milkie white. Tertullian writes,
That in Argos a City of Tertullian.
Greece, was erected a Statue unto Juno, all covered over, and behung with the
bows of a Vine, and underneath the feet of it lay the skin of a Lion, which
discovered thereby the hatred and disdain she carried toward Bacchus and
Hercules, both which were highly seated in her greatest disfavor; much like
the kindness used of such in these our days, for it is poetised indeed, that
she was Stepmother unto them both. Some have depictured the Statue of Juno in
Matrones habit, holding in one hand the head of the flower Poppie, and at her
feet lying a yoke as it were, or a pair of fetters: by these was meant the
marriage knot and link which coupleth the man and wife together; and by the
Poppie the innumerable issue of children, which in the world are conceived and
brought forth, alluded to the numberless plenty of seed contained in the head
of that flower. And this was so appropriated unto her, for that with many she
is supposed and held to be the goddess of Marriage. And thus far concerning
the Images and Pictures dedicated unto her.

Terra, olagran Madre.
THe earth among the Ancients was taken and held to be the first, and of
greatest antiquity of all other their gods, and in that respect they termed
her to be the mother of them all. And as they perceived in her sundry natures,
and diverse properties, so they ascribed unto her diverse and several names, and
erected Statues and Altars unto her, according to those names, under which they
then so worshipped and adored her, who (as I have already written) was with
many taken and understood for Juno: and those statues and images which were
dedicated unto her, were made also many times of many other goddesses: whose
properties signified them to be in nature the same as the earth, as first
Lagran Madre, la Madre de i dei, Open, Rhea, Cibele, Vesta, Cerere, Proserpina,
anb many others which of their places and habitations where they then
remained, had their names accordingly, all signifying one and the same thing,
being as I have said, the Earth, from the which indeed, and from whose fruits,
all things here in the world seem to receive their life and being, and are
nourished and conserved by the fertilenesse thereof, and in this respect she
was called the mother of the gods, insomuch, as all those gods of the
Ancients, which were so supersticiously adored and held in that respective
regardance, lived here once on the earth, and were fed and maintained by the
increases, fruits, and suppeditaments thereof. But to return to speak of
those her several names, first she was called Open, (who also was the wife of
Saturn) for that it signifies assistance, aid, and adiuuament, in that there
is nothing so commodious, helping, or available to the preservation of human
life, as the earth with her increases: whereupon Homer calls her the giver of
life, because by her Homer.
means all living things do breath and enjoy vitalitie. And Martianus
describing her says, That she is Martianus.
enaged, and of many years, and grown up to a great bigness and corpulencie,
and says, that notwithstanding that she is old, she continually brings forth
issue from her womb, being as it were encompassed and set round about with her
sons and daughters: she goes for the most part in green vestures, with her
upper veil over her body, bespotted with diverse and sundry colors, wherein
is wrought and set forth infinite curious knots, among which are inserted all
those things which with mortal men are most esteemed, as precious jems,
stones, pearls, and other most rare metals of unknown, and therefore
unspeakable values. Varro (as S. Augustine reports in his book Varro.
call de Ciuitate dei) says, that the earth is called Ops, because by man's
help, industry, and labor, it becomes more rich, fertile, and
increasefull, and that the oftener it is wrought upon, tilled, and manured, it
reaches still to more plenty, perfection, and fecunditie. She is called
Proserpina (according to the opinion of many) in that the blades and stalks of
corn spring forth and grow with such stealing and unseen progression and
fashion of increase, as the Serpent in her sliding paces smoothly creeps, and
snekingly conueyeth her self away. She is entearmed Vesta; because she
sits always clothed and invested. And Varro describes the picture of Ops,
(as it is taken out Varro.
of Boccace) to be thus, and he thus expounds it: On her head (says he) she
wears a stately crown, made in the form of many towers and castles, in that
the circuit and compass of the earth is round, like the shape of a crown, and
is replenished and filled with Cities, Castles, and Villages: her apparel is
wouen and composed of green herbs, all ouershadowed with frondiferous
boughs, discovering thereby the infinite numbers of trees, plants, and
flowers, growing on the earth. In one of her hands she holds a Scepter,
which signifies, that in the world are many riches, kingdoms, and
gouernements, as also the powerful commands and mightiness of terrene Lords
and Potentates. By the ball which she holds in her other hand, is meant the
roundnesse of the earth, divided into two spheres: and hard by her is placed a
chariot with four wheels, which discovers, that although she her self
remains for ever firm and irremoueable, yet the works and negotiations of
the world are continually altering, changing, and unstable, according to the
natures and powers of the four stations of the year. This chariot is drawn
by four Lions, which enucleateth either the subtlety which husbandmen use
over their ground, to cover and hide the seed so soon as it is sown, from the
greediness and narrow search of the birds: as Lions (according as Solynus
reports) are accustomed, when they are chased and hunted by woodmen to sweep
and disperse Solinus.
the dust with their tails, that so the print and impression of their footing,
might not detect their course of escape, or else to show, that there is no
ground so barren, stubborn, and fruitless, but may in time by often
cultiuation, and industrious manuring, be made a plenteous and fertile soil,
as the Lions themselves in the end become gentle, tame, and tractable. The
empty and void seats which are placed round about the picture, do import,
that there is no country so populous and abounding in people, but are by
pestilences, infections, dissentions, and wars, wasted, spoiled, and
depopulated; or to show that in many places of the earth are diverse countries
unpeopled and desolate. And thus far Varro in his description of Ops. It is
read with Isiodorus, that the Image of this goddess, Isiodorus.
called Lagran Madre, is framed holding in one of her hands a key, signifying
thereby, that the earth in the time of Winter and cold season, is locked up (as
it were) and incloseth within it the seed which is dispersed and thrown down
into it, which at the approach of the Spring and Summer does peep forth, and
show it self again, at which time it is said, that the earth is again
unlocked, and opens her bosom. Cornelius Tacitus reports, That certain
people of Cornelius Tacitus.
Germany worshipped and adored this goddess, as she that of all other was the
most friendly and helping to mankind, supplying their wants and necessities
with her manifold fruits and increases. And in that they erected not unto her
(as I have in some places already written) any Statues, Images, or Pictures,
they performed such their adoration in consecrated groves, wherein they placed
a chariot or coach, covered all over with sacred vestures, unto which no man
might be suffered to approach and touch, but only a certain Priest appointed to
speak to her, as he only that knew the goddess to be there, and was further
acquainted with all her unrevealed matters of secrecy, and in this respect
they all gave him pre-eminence, place, and dignity. And this chariot was
drawn very solemnly (and with all obseruancie of reverence done unto it by
the people) by two white Cowes. It is to be pre-intended, that the world in
those days was not afflicted with wars, stratagemes, contentions, intestine
broiles, and fatal massacres, neither knew it the use of iron or steel, the
days and years were then circumfered in joy, tranquillity, and hearts
content, all places were free, peaceful, secure, and quiet, and unto this
sight and solemnity the people came flocking in, with great humility deuoting
unto her their poor services, with many gifts, presents, and oblation. And
after that this goddess afterward intended to end such her progress, and to
abide no longer below in the world, the chariot with the cloths thereof, was
suddenly by some sleightfull art thrown violently into a Lake or River, with
the picture of the goddess in it, and the servants so appointed for this
devise, all overwhelmed and drowned in the water. And it is thought, that this
fond ceremony increased mightily their opinion and belief of such their
religion, and caused that she was always among them adored and worshipped as a
mighty goddess. And this goddess was also called (as I have already
written) Cibele, which name (according to the opinions of many) came of a
certain mount so entearmed. But Festus Pompeius gives her the same nature and
virtues, Festus Pompeius.
and the same Statues, Images, and Pictures as she has being Ops, with her
chariot likewise drawn by two furious Lions: which Aristotle likewise
affirms, when writing of many wonders and miraculous Aristotle.
things in the world, he remembers in such his description a certain stone
which grows on the hill Sipilus in Phrygia, the which who so had found and
carried away any part of it into the Temple of Cibele, he should become
instantly most dutiful obedidient and regardant unto his parents, although he
had before infinitely hated, despised, and by violent and impious hands beaten
them: and under her picture there in that temple, were placed with great
curiosity of art, two stately and maiestical Lions. But Diodorus Diodorus.
and many others are of opinion, that the Lions so dedicated unto her,
signified, that she was once fed and nourished by them on that Mountain
Sipilus, as it is read also of many others that have been kept alive and
preserved by Wolves, Hearts, Bears, and Serpents. The Naturalists, and such as
have labored for the virtue and nature of things produced, say that the
elements admit in themselves such a coherence, communencie, and conjunction,
that the one is easily changed into the nature of another, according as the
air becomes indensate and gross, or pure and rarefied. And in that regard
there ought to follow less admiration among us of such intricate names,
effects and properties of the gods of the ancients, as the one sometimes
understood for one thing, and sometimes for another, and yet all signifying
under several names and titles one and the same thing: as Jupiter oftentimes
is taken for the element of Fire, sometimes for the air, and so likewise the
Sun and the Moon in many places taken for the same, and yet exposed under
diverse names. The waters also had diverse gods, showing forth their sundry
qualities and effects in the same manner, as the earth, from whose bosom
ascend up mistie and vapourous exhalations, and are settled and remain in the
lower part of the air, composing there thick and conglomerated clouds, from
whose moistness afterward issue down on the earth great vents and abundance
of rain. And for this cause (according to Fornutus) the earth is called Rhea,
as it were guilty, and being the cause and occasion of such Fornutus.
showers and rainie moistures. And the Image of this goddess was set forth
with many Cymbals and vessels of water, as also torches, lamps, and
firebrands, meaning thereby the many lightenings and sudden flashes which
immediately precede the approches of violent and tempestuous showers. The
Statue of the earth (as she is Vesta) is proportioned in the shape of a young
virgin, with her apparel beautified and bedecked with many curious
ornaments, and attires of sundry and diverse colors, as we see the earth
upon the coming of the Summer to be so gloriously bespotted with
seuerall-sorted flowers. But it is to be observed, that among the ancients
was also another Vesta, which as the first (as I have said) signified the
earth, this intended the fire, that is, that lively and nourishing heat, from
which (being dispersed into the bowels of the earth) every thing therein
contained, receives his being and increase, and of this the ancients shaped
not any Image or Statue, in that it could not be discerned by any outward eyes,
but with divine and contemplative thoughts, being of it self wholly
celestial. And besides these names of the earth, it was called also, when of
it self it proved not fertile, but industriously manured by the labors of
man, by the name of Ceres, and her Statue was framed to the assimilitude of an
aged Matron, having her head circumcinct and redemyted with ears of corn,
holding in her hand the stalk of a Poppie, in that this flower signifies
fertility and great increase. And Orpheus Orpheus.
writes, That her chariot is drawn by two furious Dragons of most fierce and
indomitable nature. And the reason of it as Hesiodus reports is, in that in
the Hesiodus.
Island Salamina, seated by the Euboicke sea, there lived a most powerful,
angry, and devouring Serpent, of a most admirable, strange, and uncouth
hugeness, by which indeed all that Country became wasted, spoiled, and
depopulated, until afterward by the valerous prowess of Euricolus it was
ouermatched, chased, and expelled the Country, which upon that fled into the
next Province called Elousis, where at that time Ceres remained, as hoping by
her to be protected and safe guarded. And from that time it long after
continued there in the temple of Ceres, as her attendant servant and minister.
Many also have depictured Ceres with many torches, lights, and firebrands in
her hands, as in the same manner in a temple seated upon a promontarie of
Attica was a Statue so depainted by Praxitiles. The reason was, as some hold,
in that she had been so seen raging up and down in the search and inquiry of
her daughter Proserpina, ravished and stolen away by Pluto. And hitherto
concerning such Statues, Altars, and Depicturances.

Neptune.
AMong the ancients Neptune was held and supposed to be him of the three
brothers to whose share the kingdom of the waters fell and was allotted, and
therefore and in that respect they entearmed him god of the sea, depainting him
with diverse and several countenances, setting him forth sometimes with mild
and pleasant looks, at other times louring and sad, and at other times with a
mad, furious, and angry aspect: which is given him (according to Virgil and
Homer) in that the sea it self at sundry times, so shows her self. And
they describe him many times to be naked, holding in his hand a silver
Trident, or forked Mace, and standing upright, as carried in the conceauitie of
a huge marine shell, which in steed of a Chariot, is forciblie drawn by two
monstrous horses, which from the middle downward have the due proportion and
shape of Fishes, as Statius at large describes them. Sometimes they depaint
him with a thin veil hanging over one of his shoulders of a cerulean or
bluish color. Lucianus (speaking of certain sacrifices offered by certain
people of Greece unto Neptune) sets Lucianus.
him down there with marvelous long hair, hanging down over his shoulders,
being of a very sad and darkish color. And yet Seruius and many other writers
do Seruius
affirm, that among the ancients all their gods of the sea were for the most
part depainted in shape of old men with white and hoarie hairs, as that their
heads were so died with the froth and spume of the sea. Whereupon Philostratus
(describing Glaucus being Philostratus.
a god also of the sea) says, That he had a long white beard which was very
supple, gentle, and soft, and that the hair of his head was also very white,
and hung down wet and dropping about his shoulders, his eyes to be green, and
maruellously glistering, being hollow, and set far into his head, his brow
full of furrows, wrinckles, and green spots, his breast all ouergrowne also
with a greenish colored sea weed or moss, something like that which hangs to
the bottomes of ships after long voyages, his belly, and from thence downward
both thighs, legs, and feet, became fish-like full of fynnes and scaly, and
that he had a wonderful long tail, all glistering with scales, which he
always lifted up and advanced above the waters. The three-forked Trident so
given to Neptune, signifies the three gulfes of the Mediteranean sea, which
from the head thereof mainely tumbleth down into the Ocean. Others allude it
to the three several natures of the waters, as that those of Rivers and
Fountains are in the taste sweet and pleasant, those of the sea saltish,
sharp, and hard, and those of lakes, pooles, and standing meres are neither
bitter nor salt, nor yet pleasing, sweet, or grateful to the taste. Unto
Neptune also the ancients gave the Trumpet or horn, as belonging unto him,
which they devised in respect of that shrill and loud-noised shell which the
Tritons used always to carry and sound before him: which Tritons were supposed
also to be gods of the sea (according as Solinus delivers) but most writers
entearme Solinus.
them the sea-trumpeters, or else the Heralds of the great Emperor Neptune.
Higinus writes, That when the Giants warred and contended with the gods of the
heavens, Jupiter in great earnestness sent down unto Neptune for some of
those his Tritons, which being come, made forthwith such a horrible and
fearful noise with such their crooked and retorted shells, as the Giants never
before hearing any such like noise, all astonished and amassed, not being able to
endure the terrible and affrighting sound thereof, instantly retraited, fled
away, and departed. Solinus reports, That on the top of a certain Temple
dedicated unto Saturn, the people of Lydia erected and placed one of these
Tritons, sounding forth with with his Trumpet: vnshadowing thereby (as
Macrobius expounds it) that from the times of Saturn, history Macrobius.
and letters began first to speak (as it were) sound forth and to be heard,
which until those days slept dumb unrevealed, mute, and speechless. These
Tritons as some affirm, were not altogether fained and devised by Poets, for
that (as it is credibly written) there now remain in the sea, fishes which
have the due proportion and shape of men from the middle upwards. Plynie
writes, That in the time of Tiberius the Emperor, Pliny.
there arrived at Rome certain Ambassadors, sent from the City of Lisbona
in Portugal, concerning some private negotiations of their estate, who there
credibly reported, that they themselves had beard such Tritons so to sound
their crooked shells, hard by the shore where they dwelt. Alexander
Neapolitanus Alexander Neapolitanus.
reports, That a certain Gentleman a near neighbor of his, and a man of
worth and credit, constantly affirmed, that he had seen a seaman taken by
certain fishers, which at that time being dead, was all covered over and
seasoned with honny, to the end it might last, and continue sweet: and that he
saw it then in Spain, being sent thither from the furthermost parts of
Africa, as a present of great wonder and admiration, and much after this
manner he describes it: It had the face of an aged man (says he) with the
hair of his beard and head wondrous rough, stubborn, and long, of a cerulean
or azure color, his stature exceeded the proportion of a man, upon his
shoulders grew two wings, such as upon many other fishes are now commonly
known, and his skin, though wondrous tough, and of great thickness, yet
shined and glistered very brightly. The same Author adioyneth, That Theodorus
Gaza likewise affirmed, that he had seen a sea-nimph or water-maid (one of
those which we call Nereides) by great fortune cast a shore on the coast where
he inhabited, which says he, had the true aspect and countenance of a woman
of a most pleasing and beauteous face, but from her neck to her thighs she
was covered all over with scales, and so downward became wholly like a fish:
whereupon it grew, that the Poets fained such Nereides to be most beautiful
and gracious Nimphs, attending the gods and goddesses of the sea, as Oceanus,
Nereus, Neptune, Thetis, Dorida, Galatea, and others, which Galatea as Hesiodus
writes, is so entearmed by reason of the whiteness of her skin, who also
describes her hair to be milk white. Ovid says, That Polifemus being
bewitched with her incomparable beauty, describes her to be more clear and
fair than the purest Lilly. Philostratus in a certain tablet which he
makes Philostratus.
of the Cyclops, depictureth Galatea drawn in a straunge-framed chariot by two
mighty Dolphins, on a quiet and gentle sea, which Dolphins were guided by two
silver raines, held in the hands of old Tritons daughters, over her head was
carried a Canope made of Purple silk, and Silver, to enshadow her delicious
face from the beautie-scorching fury of the suns irradiance: her hair hung
dispersed over her shoulders, which with the reflection of Phoebus beams
seemed like small wires of gold, with the favorable and gentle breath of
Zephirus dissipated and spread abroad. The prescribed Alexander Neapolitanus,
credibly delivers, that one of those Tritons which before we spoke of (or as
we may term them) marigenous men, having by chance from a little cave or
hollownesse of a rock where he lay, espied a young woman fetching water from a
fountain there hard by, upon a sudden leapt out of his watery den, set upon
her, and forced her violently with him into the sea, notwithstanding her
vehement shrikes, and all-endeuoured resistance: which being by some of the
inhabitants thereabouts perceived, though a far off, they laid plots, and
consulted among themselves, how they might again entice him to the land by any
means whatsoever: which afterward they accomplished by sending another maid to
that fountain, and spreading that place all over with subtle nets, in the end
they ensnared him therein, and so brought him alive into the Town; which
within three days, not being able so long to endure the land died. Not
altogether unlike to these Tritons (in respect of human shape) but more nearly
indeed resembling those Nereides, are those which we entearme by the names of
Sirens, in that (as it is poetised) they have also the face and countenance of
a woman, and so the rest of their bodies above unto the middle, from which
downward they become fishes. And it is written with some, that these have
wings, and that their feet are like those of a Cock. Seruius describes that
lower part of them to be in the shape of a bird: as Ovid also remembers, when
he Ovid.
says, That those were the companions of Proserpina, which after that she was
ravished by Pluto, were metamorphised into such forms, being half women, and
half birds. But howsoever the Poets vary in their opinions, they generally
understand by those Sirens the delicate pureness of beauty, wantonness,
pleasure, and enticing allurements to the daliancie of amorous embracements.
And it is read, that they sing so melodiously, and with such a sence-besotting
sweetness, that the suspectlesly inchaunted sea-trauellers are infinitely
beguiled and lulled asleep with the harmony and pleasing blandishment thereof,
and by that means are murdered and devoured by them, as indeed it often times
befalls unto those miserable and unfortunate men, who bewitched with the
illecebrous and honny-dewed tongues of harlots, suffer themselves to be (as it
were) cast into a sleep, shutting the eyes of understanding and reason, and by
that means are made a prey to those devouring and greedy vulturs, and in the
end utterly eaten up, wasted, and consumed. Whereupon Boccace reports, That
the Boccace,
Ancients heretofore depictured the Sirens dancing and sporting in a green
meade, which was all over spread and strewed with bones and carcasses of dead
men: vnclouding thereby the assuredness of ruin, decay, and perishment to
those that so voluptuously addict themselves to the unbridled affection of such
lascivious and soule-hazarding concupiscence. As there are many most ouglie
monsters and strangeformed creatures in the sea (thought indeed to be much
more then on the land) so Homer also makes especial mention of one, which he
calls by the Homer.
name of Scilla, which (says he) lives in a fearful dark and secret
cauerne hid in the sea, in the nature of some huge rock, and who with her
uncouth and loud barking and howling, make the waters thereabout mightily
resound with an incredible report and echo of such her strange violations. And
this monster says he, has twelve feet, six necks, and six heads, and in
every mouth are placed three ranckes of most wonderful huge teeth, from whence
continually issues and gusheth forth a most deadly venomous foam: her heads
are always peeping forth with greedy vigilancie to see if any ship do pass
by that way, that thereby she might make a prey of the poor, miserable, and
distrust less passengers, as once happened to the most afflicted and
hard-fortuned companions of Ulysses.

Of the beforementioned Nereides, Plato writes, Plato.
that there are supposed to be a hundred, maiestically riding on Dolphins, and
always attending on Neptune, which number of them he also remembers, when he
describes that stately and magnifique temple which the Atlantickes dedicated
unto Neptune, where he himself was depictured, seated in a sumptuous chariot,
holding the raines of the bridle in one hand, and a whip in the other, and his
sea-horses galloping with incredible swiftness and celeritie of pace: and this
Statue was made with such immeasurable extensure and height, being also adorned
with many pillars round about, that it seemed a most wonder-worthie and huge
piramides, the top whereof reached up even to the uppermost roof of the temple.

Martianus (when he speaks of the concouation of the gods to the marriage of
Philologia) describes Neptune of a greenish complexion, wearing on his head a
white crown: signifying thereby, the spumie froth of the sea, being troubled
and boisterously tossed with the ouer-furious blasts of Boreas. Among the
Ancients also the picture and portraiture of Neptune was shaped out, not much
unlike that of Oceanus, whom they called and held as the father of the watrie
gods, and understanding by him all the whole powers, natures, and effects of
the sea. Thales Milesius judged to be the first and chief producer of all
things whatsoever, and which opinion Thales Milesius.
the Poets afterward embracing, supposed Oceanus as I have already said, to
be the father of all such their gods: whom they depaint riding on the sea,
drawn in a glorious Car, accompanied and attended upon with a mighty troop
of Nimphs, and those before-specified Tritons, joyfully sounding forth their
shrill-voiced Trumpets: after these do follow a wonderful heard of marine
beasts, commanded and kept together by Proteus; for it is read, that in the
Carpathian sea are found great numbers of beasts, which for the most part have
the upper part of them like calves, and the rest like fishes, which with us are
called sea-calues. Of these and many other such semi-fishes, the Poets ascribe
the charge and government to Proteus. The chariot in which Oceanus is so
decribed to ride, signifies the compass which the sea makes about the body
of the earth, the rotunditie of which, is represented by the wheels of that
chariot. By these nimphs is meant the property and nature of the waters, and
the diverse and several operations and effects thereof, the which by the
Ancients were understood, not only under the name of Oceanus, Neptunus,
Thetis, Dorida, and Amphitrio, but also many times under the title and name of
Achelous, Alpheus, and diverse others: for by the first is intended only the
nature of the salt waters, and by these, that of Fountains, Springs, and
Rivers, which likewise by the Ancients in those days were formed and
depictured in humane shapes. But before I proceed any further concerning the
waters, I will here somewhat touch the description of the winds, because having
spoken of the sea, I think it not here incongruent to insert them, for that
upon the waters they commonly show forth their force and power more than on the
land. And although I might have before among the treatises of Juno conveniently
remembered them, in that (according to the opinion of the Naturalists) the air
it self being moved and troubled, is the very wind, and that Juno is
oftentimes also taken for the Air, yet it shall not be overmuch digression
in this place to capitulate some opinions, as they are delivered unto us by the
writings of others.

The winds therefore among the Ancients, were held and worshipped as gods, and
Sacrifices and oblations offered unto them accordingly, with great zeal, and
many rites and ceremonious obseruances, for so much as they reputed and judged
all prosperous and successful voyages of navigations to proceed by the
favorable quietness and gentle disposition of the winds, which they
depictured with two small wings infixed on their shoulders, and with a fiery
and high-colored countenance, with their cheeks puffed up and swollen like one
that with maine force strives to send forth some forcible blast, their natures
and qualities are discrepant, in that some engender and thicken clouds, some
again with their breath expel and chase them away, othersome occasion the
fall and sprouting forth of great abundance of rain, and others again dry up
the air, making it thin, subtle, and clear. And as in diverse manners they
show forth their properties, natures and powers, so are they of the Poets
diversely described and set down, of whom it is written, that four only are
the chief and principal which blow from the four quarters of the world,
every one severally from his own seat and quarter, as they are touched by Ovid
in his division and partition of the universal frame of the world. And yet
(according as Strabo reports) with many there are acknowledged only two: the
one called Aquilo Strabo.
or Boreas, being the wind that blows from the Septentrionall, which also (as
Pausanias writes) had a most stately and excellent Statue curiously cut out
and engraven in the Temple of Juno in Greece, frequented by the Eleans: and the
other is called Auster or Notus, predominating the Southern region of the
air, and because commonly proceed from his blasts dark showers and stormy
tempests, he is thus, or to the like effect described:

All gloomie-faced, looks the stormy South,
Whose euer-weeping eye, drop showers of rain,
Who with his strong-breath'd allore-turning mouth,
Kings stone-built temples tumbles down amain,
Whose furious blasts the waue-tost seaman feels,
When up aloft his ship is hoisd to heaven,
Whose storme-cras'd sides each churlish wave so reeleth,
That her right course she never keeps even.
He never looks with any clear aspect,
His temples are adorned with clouds, his seat
Of terrifying thunderbolts compact,
Which when he sends, he denotates huge heat.
He never breaths or sighs with any pain,
But from the same do issue showers of rain.
Of these winds, the third is called Eurus, whose blasts proceed from the
Oriental parts. And the fourth, whose mild and gentle breath procures so
temperate and pleasing air, is called Zephirus, who (for that his warm
calmness and moderate blowing, is the cause of the flowers and herbs better
increases) is supposed by the Ancients to be the husband of Flora, the
goddess and lady of all sweet smelling flowers. And this shall be sufficient
for the winds in this place, returning now to the finishing of those
descriptions of the floods and rivers, which according to the Ancients, were
framed in the shape of a man, wearing long hair, and with a long milk white
beard, and leaning upon one arm, (as Philostratus remembers) when he says,
that rivers are never straight, or run out right: and as Statius likewise
depictureth the flood Statius.
Inachus, which passes through the continent of Greece, saying thus:

Amidst a fertile flowre-adorned Dale,
Wal'd round about with banckes of sedge and willow,
Lies horned Inachus, dreirie and pale,
Leaning his head and arm (as on a pillow)
Upon a vessel full of water filled,
Which through fertile Grecia is distilled.
The Rivers (according to Seruius) are framed with horns, either because the
murmr and noise of the waters, something resemble the soft bellowing of bulls,
or else because we always see, the banks and sides of rivers to be retorted
(as it were) winding and crooked like horns: whereupon Virgil, where he
calls Virgil.
Tiber the king of all the floods and rivers of Italy, calls him there
cornuted (as it were) having horns. And with some also the river Po is
fashioned into the shape of a bull, for those reasons belike before spoken of
and mentioned. And hitherto in this treatise it shall be sufficient to have
proceeded.

Pluto.
THe ancients hereto fore allotted unto every several place a particular king,
governor, or co^mander, who of that place so committed unto him, should take
upon him an especial care and charge, who there commanded and ruled as an
absolute lord, as it is poetised of the kingdoms of the heavens, the waters,
and the earth: in the partition of which, it fell out, that the government of
the lower center which is under us, happened and was allotted unto Pluto, which
also with us is called Erebus. He therefore was amongst them then accounted the
king and lord of the dead, and that he according to the laws of Justice gave
them their punishments and torments according as they had deserved, when they
lived upon the earth. Yet many writers do affirm, that unto that office were
appointed, and did belong the three just judges, Eacus, Rhadamantus, and Minos,
of which three, some little here in this place shall be commemorated.

Plato therefore says, that in the times of Saturn Plato.
those laws and orders were in practice and exercised which also in the first
days of Pluto were held and observed, and his words are these: There was a law
(says he) in those times, that those men which in their life time had lived
well, and according to the rules of virtue and her commandments, should after
they were dead be sent and transported unto the Island of the fortunate: and
that those which had lived viciously and lewdly, should be conveyed to the
place of horror, there to receive condign punishments, according to their
merits and qualities of offenses. And in those times (says he) when also
Jupiter began to reign with usurped authority, all men were adjudged to
punishments, pains, or else to happy pleasures, even the very day before the
parties died. By means whereof many were wrongfully condemned, and some also
sent to the blessed Island, that had deserved intolerable pains and tortures.
The which thing Jupiter understanding by the information of Pluto, who
complained of that abuse, thus answered. Well (says he) I will find out a
remedy for this inconvenience presently, and therewith seemed to be wondrous
angry. This proceeds (says he) in that men are adjudged, being then living,
and who knows not that this man, or that man has friends and great alliances,
who will not stick to bribe and corrupt the Judge for favor and partiality,
and that this other man has deadly enemies and ill-wishers, who continually
are aggravating the offense, and provoke by unlawful means some wrongful
sentence to be denounced. As for great men's faults, they are covered and hid
with glorious abillements, with wealth, authority, noble descent, gentry, and
parentage, And then the Judges themselves being earthly, (and therefore
imperfect) must needs give wrongful judgment and verdict. We must therefore
take some such order, that in these cases mortals must not be pre-acquainted
with the times when they must die, as now they do, and thereupon commanded
Prometheus to perform it accordingly: for after that (says he) they shall be
thus despoiled of their earthly robes, riches, and power, and being dead and
naked, shall appear before Judges likewise dead and naked, (which then shall
be void of friendship, partiality, or favor) it shall be an easy matter in
this case to give true and rightful judgment, according to the quality and
height of their offenses. For the confirmation of which my purpose and intended
decree (which I have now resoluedly concluded within my self) my pleasure is,
that my three sons, two of them borne in Asia, being Minos and Rhadamantus,
and another in Europe, which is Eacus, standing in a certain green meade, out
of which do part and are divided two several ways, the one into Hell, and
the other into Elisum (for so we may now call them) shall be appointed there
as Judges of the souls of mortals, Rhadamante judging those of Asia, and Eacus
those of Europe. And that, if it fortune that any doubt or undecided scruple,
shall arise between them, that then the same be referred presently unto
Minos, that thereby he may give his censure and opinion of it: for so much as
we intend to deal and proceed uprightly in these cases, and that there be not
admitted therein any favor, cousenage, or deceit. This (says Plato) was the
order and decree of Jupiter, which afterward was presently effected and put in
execution. First upon the examination of their sins, Rhadamantus and Eacus sat
together in two iron chaires, holding in either of their hands a white rod.
And Minos (divided from them both) was seated all alone, holding in his hand a
golden scepter, who seemed to meditate and ponder with a musing and sad
countenance upon the punishments, torments, or pleasures, to be denounced and
due to the offenders. As Ulysses (according as Homer reports) gave out that
at his being in that infernal kingdom, he there saw the three Judges in such
manner so to doom the souls of men: and thus far are the words of Plato.
Martianus writes, (where he speaks of the lower Martianus.
region) that Pluto himself sits most maiestically in a mighty ebon
chair, holding in one of his hands a black imperial scepter, and on his head
seated a stately and sumptuous crown. At this left hand sits his Lady
Proserpina, attended with many furies and ugly spirits, at whose feet lies
chained the dog Cerberus. And further the same Author proceeds not. Unto
Pluto also the Ancients have given a triumphant chariot, drawn with four
furious black horses, from out whose fiery nosthrils proceeds wondrous
thick and ill favored smoakes: which is also the opinion of Claudianus.
Although Boccace speaks Boccace.
only of three horses, and that his chariot has but three wheels. Some write
also, that Pluto has his head redemited and compassed about with a garland or
wreath made of the leaves of Cipres trees, which signify sadness and horror,
and which are used in burials, massacres, and about dead carcasses. Others
affirm, that the same garland is made of the Narcissus leaves, for those also
are held grateful, and are employed about dead bodies, in memory of the
untimely death of that youth, afterward transformed into that flower. And the
like garlands also did those furies wear which were attending on Pluto, and
which were appointed by him to afflict the souls of men with such measure of
torments and pains, as their vicious and leaud life had merited and worthily
deserved, their names were Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megaera: who in stead of
hair to adorn their heads, had venomous Snakes and Adders encompassing the
same, whose winding and crooked tails hang down dissipated and disparckled
all about their shoulders, faces, and breasts. Some writers do allege a
fourth fury, adioined to these three, which they entearme by the name of
Lissa, which is as much to say as madness, and therefore they hold, that from
her proceed all lunacies, distractnesse of sense, and forgetfulness of
understanding and reason. Whereupon Euripides reports, Euripides.
that Iris (commanded by Inno) brought this fury to her son in law Hercules,
because she intended to bewitch him with a brain distempering passion of
madness, fury, and rage. And this Lissa is always depictured with an iron
stringed whip in her hand. Poets also have in some sort annexed unto these
furies, as partaking something of their natures, those monsters which are
called Harpiae, for that the Ancients believed, that these also were employed
by the gods in punishing the sins of mortal men, who are said also to
remain and inhabit in the infernal kingdom: although Virgil reports, that
they dwell in the Isla^ds Virgil.
called Strophades, enuironned with the Ionian sea, and are described to have
the face and countenance of beauteous and fair women, yet lean and something
meagre, the rest of their bodies framed in the due proportion and shape of
birds, with mighty broad wings, and crooked and sharp talents, for so Virgil
describes them, which afterward was most excellently imitated by Ariosto. Of
these Harpiae are engendered those birds which are called Striges, which always
fly in the night, and (as it is written) in the dead of silence get into men's
houses where young children are, and privily suck their blood, whereby
oftentimes by loss of too much blood, they miserably pine away and perish.
Statius says, That these have also the face of women, and do remain and breed
in the infernal region. Some also have writ, that those spirits which are
called Lamiae, with the Grecians are held to be the very same as the other,
which they called by the names of inchantresses or deuillish old women, always
practicing mischief, hurt, and villainy. Philostratus says, That they are ill
spirits, or wicked devils, cruel, bloody, and luxurious without measure, and
most hungry and greedy after human flesh. Suida and Fauorinus report of one
Lamia, who was a Suida and Fauorinus.
most lovely and beauteous woman, on whom Jupiter became exceedingly enamoured,
who had also one goodly and fair child, at whose delicate feature and
well-shaped lineaments, Juno exceedingly repined, and in the end by her infinite
spite and jealousy, caused it to be by such night spirits most cruelly
murdered: upon which unexpected and unlucky accident, the woe-afflicted
mother became almost frantike and distracted of her wits, who since in that
miserable passion of frenzy uses to wander up and down, working and
contriuing all the mischief, hurt, and despite to all other young children
whatsoever. Others write, that these Lamiae had the faces of women, and the
feet of horses. But Dyon the historian describes Dyon.
them in another sort, which also with many is held to be the most probable.

It is read therefore with him, that in certain deserts and uninhabited places of
Lybia, are certain most fierce ravening, and most furious beasts, which (says
he) have the face, neck, and breast of a woman of the most loue-alluring
fair and delicate hue, that any art of man for a most perfect color can any
way invent, who in their countenance and eyes do retain so pleasing a grace,
and such attractiue and enticing smiles, that they do enwrap and overcome (as
it were) the beholders senses even with an entranced wonderment, and amassed
admiration. The rest of their body is all covered over with most hard
glistering and bright scales, whose form downward is of the shape of a most
ugly serpent, fearful and terrible. They have not any wings, nor have they
any voice, only like snakes they do hiss, and make some soft noice with
their lips: they are so infinite swift and nimble in running, that no other
beast is thought able to overtake them, they make their prey of wild men, by
laying open, and discovering their delicious snow-white breasts, which who so
sees, becomes instantly so besotted with the beauty thereof, that he
presently desires the taste of those pleasures which are promised by so fair
outward shows, and in coming to embrace them, they themselves altar not in
any point their countenance, unless by seeming to be bashful, modest, and
shamefast, they six their eyes downward on the earth, always keeping hid and
secret their sharp talents and serpent-shaped tails, until by such their
inueagling and deceitful demeanures, they fully are possessed of the prey
between their embracements, which presently they impoysen to death with the
venom of their sting, and afterward do eat and devour them most greedily,
whose man's flesh-coueting maw is never filled or satisfied. Homer speaks of
Homer.
a certain beast which was called Chimaera, which was described to have the
head of a Lion, the belly or middle part of a Goat, and the tail and feet of
a Dragon, and from whose mouth issued forth fiery sparckles, which also Virgil
affirms in more large allowance. The nearer conjectures are, that this
Chimaera was not a beast, but a certain high mountain in Licia, from whose
top seemed to ascend and mount flames of lively fire (not unlike the nature and
quality of those of the hill Mongibell) in the upper parts of this mountain,
in certain hollow caves and dens lived many Lions of an extraordinary,
furious, and cruel kind: toward the bottom of it, which was encompassed
about with many high trees, bushes, and thickets, were found infinite numbers
of Snakes, Serpents, and Dragons, in that abundance, as the Country therabouts
was altogether unfrequented and disinhabited of any human dwellers. For which
inconvenience (proceeding from the number of those ravenous beasts) it is
written, that Belleferon found out a remedy, and endeavored so far, as he
drove all those beasts clean out of that country: for which cause (it should
seem) the Poets afterward supposed, that the beast Chimaera was slain by
Belleferon.

Concerning the sisters, which we call Parcae, and which are said to attend on
Pluto, there are also three, whose names are Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,
whereof the first (according to the opinion of the ancients) takes charge of
the birth and natiuities of mortal men: the second, of all the rest of their
life: and the last, of their instant deaths, and departure out of this world:
all which three are depictured sitting on a row, busily employed in their
several offices, the youngest sister drawing out of a distaffe a reasonable big
thread, the second winding it about a wheel, and turning the same till it
became little and slender, and the eldest, which seemed decrepit and far in
years, stood ready with her knife, (when it should be spun) to cut it off:
and they are described to be invested with white vailes, and with little
coronets on their heads, wreathed about with garlands, composed of the flowers
of Narcissus. And now to conclude with these descriptions of the Inferi, we
will end with that of Charon, supposed to be the ferry man of Acheron, with the
explication thereof, as both Boccace and Seruius have delivered, as also Virgil
and Homer, and diverse others affirming the same.

By Charon therefore is understood Time, which Boccace.
Time (according to some opinions) is the son of Erebus, (which is taken for
the divine and celestial counsel, held privately before the world began) and
from which, since, all things have been produced: and as the Ancients (as I
have said) supposed it to be the father of Time, so likewise they held the
Night to be the mother thereof, insomuch, as before time there was never any
matter whatsoever, nor any light or appearance of day could be discerned, and
therefore this Erebus by the Ancients is placed now in darkness, which is the
infernal region. And whereas Charon is supposed to have the transportation and
passing over of the souls of mortal men from the one side of the river
Acheron, or (as some call it) Stix unto the other, it is enucleated (as it
were) and vnclouded thereby, that Time so soon as we are borne and brought
forth into the world, does carry us along by little and little unto our
deaths, and sets us over the river of Acheron, which word interpreted,
signifies sorrowfulnes, for that indeed we pass this life with miseries,
adversities, and laments. He is described old, and yet exceeding strong, for
that Time never loses his strength or virtue by the ouer-ruuning of years,
and he is apparrelled with a black and most noisome stinking mantle, which
hangs loosely over his shoulders, whose smell nothing is almost able to
endure, al which signifies; that while men are here in this world subject to
time, we never respect the glory of the celestial habitations, only deuoting
our selves to the riches, wealth, and pleasures of this world, which indeed are
most vile, filthy, and stinking, compared to those ioious and happy
blessings of heaven, whereunto we should wholly addict our selves, and direct
our studies, endeavoring by all endeavors to acquire and purchase the same unto
us: but we are so covered over and invested with this cloak and veil of
mortality and mundane affections, that we are carried away blindfolded into a
thousand miserable and disordinate desires. For the canckred rust of effeminate
desires has so deeply eaten into this our iron age, as notwithstanding the
infinite labourious endeauours of many artificial workmen, have most largely
extended, yet est tali rubigine tincta vt oleu^ and opera perdiderunt, Who ever
assaied the varnishing thereof. For such an irradicable habit has it attained
unto, that as the pestiferous shirt, wherein the treble nighted brood was
enwrapped, effused a venomous contagion, which did incorporate it self into
the flesh, fretted the sinnewes, and festered into the marrow, so this
en-eating iron mole, wherewith the insensate os-pring of this time is
attainted, admits a remediless infection, that staineth the christalline
purify of our minds, and does eneruate the contexed ground of our senses:
only we herein differ from him, that the poison wherewith he was infected,
wrought in him such torment, as he instantly sought a remedy: but perceauing
it so deeply rooted, that otherwise he could not be thereof dispatched, he
sacrificed himself in a fire, whose ascending flames mounted him up to the
heavens: whereas contrariwise we (as entoxicat with Circaean drugs, and lulled
asleep by the villainous deceits of the sweet-seeming delights wherewith we
are besotted) seek by all means possible to pamper and feed up our humourous
conceits, and loath death, for nothing so much as we thereby are deprived and
dispossessed of our pleasures, which we willingly would never forsake, from
whence while we draw backward, with all our forces still clinging to our
foul desires, we are by the weight of wickedness thrown down headlong, and
precipitated into hell. And thus much shall suffice for the descriptions and
expositions necessary in this Treatise.

Mercury.
IT has been already largely declared, that among the Ancients many, yea
infinite numbers of gods were held and worshipped in most strange and
supersticious adoration, of which, as many of them had many places and charges
to take care of, protect, and govern, so likewise they were to undertake many
functions, offices, and duties. By reason whereof, it proceeded, that also they
had so many names, titles, and degrees appropriated unto them, which is the
cause, that the Ancients oftentimes shape forth and engraue the effigies and
form of one god in diverse and several fashions, according as they were at
that time to show forth the quality, nature, and condition of such their then
presented deity and working virtue. By means whereof, because unto Mercury
(of whom we now entreat) they attributed these natures, as that he sometimes
was taken to be the god and patron of gain and profit, sometime of eloquence,
and sometime also of theft, subtlety, and deceit, they have depainted him now
in this shape and now in that form, and always diversely: but the truest
draught and similitude of his portraiture is, wherein he is depictured and set
forth as the messenger of the gods: of which office also there were two sorts
held and observed among the gods, the one was executed by Mercury, and the
other by Iris, between both which, all the embassages and errants dispatched
wheresoever, were done and performed: only this difference there was, that
Iris more particularly attended upon Juno, and was for the most part commanded
by her only, unless when the gods among themselves had intended to afflict
mortals with pestilences, wars, or some other all ruinating mischeefes, then
was Iris commonly employed in these fatal messages. And about other matters of
sports, meetings, marriages, or pleasant affairs, Mercury was solelie used
and commaun-

The Ancients therefore depictured his form in she likeness and shape of a
young man without a beard, with two small wings infixed on the tops of his
ears, his body almost all naked, save that from his shoulpers depended a
thin veil, which winded and compassed about all his body: in his right hand
he held a golden purse, and in his left his Caducaeus or Snakie staff: behind
him was depictured a lively Cock, and with wings also on his heels: with the
Egyptians his staff was thus described, He has (say they) in one of his
hands a slender white wand, about the which two serpents do annodate and
entwine themselves, whose heads do meet together even just at the top thereof,
as their tails also do meet at the lower end, and the one of them is a male,
and the other female. And this depicturance with them was called Concordia, or
Signum pacis. Whereupon afterward it grew, that Ambassadors and great
parsonages (employed in matters of state) carried always in their hands such
like staff, and were also called Caduceators. Many who would have depictured
the portraiture of Peace, have taken and set down this for the very same,
adioining unto it some certain branches of the Olive tree. Whereupon it is
written by Virgil, Virgil.
that Aeneas sending certain Ambassadors to the king of the Latins, caused
them all to be crowned with green Olive branches. Statius also says, That
when Statius.
Tidaeus went to demand of Etheocles the kingdom of Thebes in the name of
Polinices, he held in his hand an Olive branch, as a token of a peaceful
Ambassador. And that (when he could not obtain his request and demand) he
violently threw it from him on the ground, and in a furious manner stamped upon
it with his feet, as the sign of a most fatal and bloody war, which
afterward was prosecuted accordingly. But now, having taken this occasion to
speak of the Olive branch, it shall not be much digression somewhat to touch the
Statues of Concordia or Peace, who (according as Aristofanes delivers) was
framed in the shape of a Aristofanes.
young woman, holding between her arms the infant Pluto, taken sometimes for
the god of Riches, in that by Peace they are acquired and conserved, and by
wars wasted and consumed. And this Peace was by the Ancients held to be a
very special and loving friend to the goddess Ceres, from which two proceed
the increases of fruits and corn, and all other nutriments whatsoever. And
Tibullus thus speaking of her says: Tibullus.


All-plenteous, fair, and well-disposed Peace,
In whom all learning finds eternal spring,
Through whom Bellonaes stratagems do cease,
Thou wast the first of all that ere did bring
The stiffeneckt bull unto the crooked yoke,
Making the fields yield plenty every where,
Who with thy gentle mildly-gouern'd stroke
Exempteth all the world from further fear.
By thee, all prospers well consern'd, and cherisht,
By furious war, all is lost, consumed, and perished.
Whereupon Claudianus reports, that Ceres by no entreaties would marry her
daughter either to Mars or Phoebus, being importunately sued unto by both of
them: in that she held Mars as her professed and open enemy, and excepted
also against Phoebus, for that with his ouer-ardent and fiery beams, her
increases were parched, burned, and consumed. But returning to our first
intended treatise, it has been already spoken, that Mercury was depictured and
drawn forth with two wings on the top of his ears, and also (as some hold) two
lesser infixed on his heels, and with his white rod or wand in his hand, as
Homer alleges when he says: that Jupiter sent him to Calipso to release
Ulysses and others of his company from these mischeeuous and devilish
enchauntments, and when he was sent also at another time to conduct Priamus
through the Grecian camp to demand the body of his slain son Hector. And at
another time when he was dispatched to Aeneas, then remaining and soiourning
with Dido the Carthaginean Queen. And indeed generally of all writers he was
described in that form: unto those feathers or wings so placed upon Mercury
(who as I have said, is oftentimes taken for learning and eloquence) is
compared and alluded the nature of speech, discourse, and words; in that they
are no sooner pronounced and delivered from the prison: like mansion of the
mouth, but they do as it were fly away, and are so sudainely vanished and
departed, as if they had wings (as a man may say) to carry them away both out
of sight and hearing. And in that regard Homer oftentimes calls them winged
or Homes.
feathered words. Almost all writers agree, that Mercury was depictured with
very long hair on his head, and that it hung down about his shoulders:
whereunto also some hold, that his wings were fastened, yet Apulcius describes
it otherwise, (when he writes of Apuleius.
the Comedy of the goddesses, striving for the golden ball) where he says,
that Mercury was sent unto them by Jupiter, and that he appeared there like a
very youth, hardly attained to full virillitie, and that he had very short
hair on his head, which looked like the color of amber, and was curled, and
that for his vestures he had only a subtle and thin veil, composed of purple
silk. Martianus Capella describes him to be young also, but of a marvelous
strong and Martianus Capella.
active constitution, and of a well disposed body, of well-knit artures,
ioints, and sinews, and on his chin says he, begin to sprout forth and show
themselves, certain young hairs of a yellowish color. According to his
opinion is Statius. But Lucianus describes him without either his Caduceas, or
any such wings Lucianus.
so infixed upon him, or that he had any such yellow hair, but says, that
he looked like a lusty young man, powerful and vigorous, and that he was very
skillful and well exercised in running, wrestling, and actiuitie Philostratus.
Whereof likewise Philostratus speaks when he says, that Palestra was the
daughter of Mercury (which since we have entearmed by the name of wrestling)
and that she was so indifferently formed, that it was very hard to judge her
either for a man or woman: for says he, her countenance seemed both youthful
and maidenly, her hair not altogether so long as a woman's, nor so short as a
man's, her breasts were delicate and white, and yet small and slender, her
general proportion every way pleasing, and yet nothing effeminate, and he
describes her there, sitting in a green meade, holding between her naked
breasts an Olive branch, grateful and acceptable unto her, in that the
wrastlers (called also Palestrians, which did customably use those kind of
exercises) used to anoint their bodies before they attempted their sports,
with the oil of Olives. And thus Philostratus depainteth her, saying, that she
was the daughter of Mercury, because it is read indeed, that he was the first
inuenter and setter up of those exercises of wrestling, leaping, and other
active and agile performances. And for this and other causes the Ancients
worshipped and adored as a god, Mercury, unto whom also, they attribute the
first devising and finding out of Letters, Music, and Geometry. He was
taken also for the god of Traffic and Marchandises, as that unto those kind
of professors it is fit and necessary to have eloquence, knowledge, and
subtiletie of wit for the better managing and handling their deceitful
affairs, whereupon Fulgentius Fulgentius.
says, That the wings so depictured on the heels of Mercury, signify the
course of those that do traffic, which (says he) is always uncertain and
full of doubt, now prosperous, and anon unfortunate, and that they themselves
are carried up and lifted up (as it were) with the wings of hope, and assurance
of good success, and many times also despairing, and that they are continually
vexed with vn-assured thoughts, and disquieting vigilancie; the which thing the
Cock, placed behind this god, does signify and disclose, although with some it
is held, that this Cock rather means the watchfulness and waking studies of
learned men, for so much as for those kind of men that professed letters, it
was held an odious thing in those days to spend the whole night in sleep and
drowsy cogitations. And therefore Mercury was often taken for that light of
knowledge, and spirit of understanding, which guides men to the true
conceauement of dark and enigmaticall sentences. And yet notwithstanding,
natural and seasonable rest and repose was altogether also in those times
allowed as the refresher of men's wits. Pausanias writes (speaking of the
Country Pausanias.
of Corinth) that with the Trezemyans there was erected an altar, on which were
performed and offered certain Sacrifices and oblations to the Muses, and unto
Sleep, as ioining them both together, and accounting Sleep to be a greater
friend, and more agreeable to the Muses than unto any other god or goddess
whatsoever, unto which Sleep also they erected Statues, Images, and Pictures,
adoring him with great zeal, reverence, and veneration, as supposing him to be
a great god, and the giver of ease and quiet, and the mittigater and allaier of
great and heavy labors. According to Homer and Hesiodus, Sleep was accounted
the brother of death, the which thing also the Images insculped in the
curiously-engraued chest of Cipselus, lively explained, wherein was inchased
and set forth the true resemblance and portraiture of a woman, of a most sour,
louring, and sad aspect, something grown in years and elderly, who in her
left hand held a young child, of a reasonable and ordinary beauty, and in her
right arm another child of a most swartish, black, and dull complexion, having
his legs and arms growing marvelous crooked; both these children were cut out
and fashioned with their eyes shut, the first was Sleep, and the other Death,
being both brothers and twins: the woman that held them so in her arms, was
Night, and mother unto them both. This Night also has been defigured by the
Ancients in form of an old woman, having two great wings growing on her
shoulders, all coleblacke and spread abroad, as if they seemed to offer a
flight, and that she is drawn also in a chariot, whose four wheels are made
of Ebonie. Boccace says, That the wheels thereof signify the four parts of
the night so divided and distinguished by Martiners, as also of soldiers upon
their guards. And he there also affirms, that she looks with a very
heavy and sad countenance, but her upper garment or veil being of a black
substance is notwithstanding depainted and adulterated with sundry spots of
silver, made to the true assimilitude and shape of stars, which (says he)
is alluded to the beauteous ornament of the heavens. Tibullus says, That the
Night like a grave Matron is always attended and waited upon with all her
children, which are said to be, Death, Sleep, the Stars, Melancholy, and
many others. Philostratus in a Tablet (which he Philostratus.
made for Amphiarus) depainteth there the portraiture of Sleep in the shape of
an aged woman, all lazy, slothful, and sluggish, and that she was habited
with two several vestments; that above was white, and the other under that,
all black, by the one is understood the day, and the other the night: and she
held in one of her hands a horn, from which she seemed to pour forth upon
mortal men the seed of rest, ease, and quiet. Ovid describing her place of her
habitation, Ovid.
says, That she dwells with the Cimerians (people which by reason of the
absence of the suns illumination) have continual darkness. Homer setreth
Homer.
down her dwelling place to be in Lemnos, an Island embraced by the Egean
sea. Statius says, That she Statius.
abides with the people of Ethiopia. And Ariosto writes of her abode to be
in the furthermost nooke or corner of Arabia. But Ovid (as I have said)
speaking of her habitation to be with the Cimerians, says also, That the bed
she rests upon, is made of the hardest and blackest Ebonie, covered all over
with black vestures or attillatures, and that on the top of the bedstead are
framed forth in most excellent and curious manner, an infinite multitude of
dreams, of diverse and several natures figured out and exposed. But of this
it shall be sufficient to have said thus much, reuerting my pen to the
perfecting of our former matter of Mercury.

It is read therefore, that unto the Statues and Images dedicated unto Mercury
(those especially which were erected in public streets and high ways) it was
the use and custom for every passenger that passed by, to throw stones,
sticks, or other such like, according as upon the first veiw, or by chance
they happened upon them, by reason whereof, about those Statues in very short
time, were raised very great hills only of stones: by which is either signified,
that the gods (so adored in those days) were to be reverenced and worshipped
with all those things, which at the first sight presented themselves, thereby
offering them up (as it were) as an oblation unto them; or else it did mean,
that Learning, Discourse, and Knowledge, is compacted and made of little
parcels and pieces of phrases, figures, and sentences, as that hill was grown
to mightiness and huge proportion, by heaping and entermingling of those
little stones so particularly gathered together, and accumulated by the
passengers.

The Ancients also have ascribed unto Mercury the charge, care, and
protection of sheepheards, which Homer likewise seems to confirm, when he
says, that Phorbus was the richest in cattle and herds of beasts of all the
Trojans whatsoever, whom Mercury (says he) favoring and affecting, had
raised and advanced to that wealth and happiness. Pausanias Pausanias.
writes, That in a certain Prouine of Corinth in a high way, was erected an
Image or Statue of Mercury, wholly composed of brass, at whose right side was
depictured forth a Lamb, lying on the ground. The same Author also says, That
there was another of the like held in great reverence among the Tanagreans,
people of Beotia, on the shoulders of which picture was drawn forth, sitting,
the portraiture of a Ram with golden horns, and the reason of it was, in that
(as they held) Mercury was seen to go in such sort with a Ram on his
shoulders, round about the walls of a City in Beotia, when he caused a most
grievous and infectious pestilence to cease, which had almost perished and
consumed all the inhabitants of that city. Whereupon it was always afterward
obscrued, that upon the celebration and solemnizing of the feast of Mercury,
there was appointed a beautiful young man, who should that day three times go
round about the walls of the city, with a Ram on his shoulders. Pausanias
speaks also of another kind of Pausanias.
Statue, which was brought from Arcadia unto Rome, and there erected in the
temple of Jupiter Olympicus, which on his head had a helmet of engraven Steel,
and over his shoulders was cast a Soldiers coat, who held also under his arm
the shape of a Ram.

Macrobius, who is of opinion, That by all the gods of the Ancients were
understood the several virtues Macrobius.
of the Sun, says, that the wings so given to Mercury (as is before
touched) do signify the swiftness and velocitie of the Suns expedition in
the Zodiake. And that whereas it is written, that he slew Argos the guardian
and keeper of the daughter of Inachus, transformed afterward into a Cow, he
says, that that Argos supposed to have so many eyes, is nothing else but the
heavens, beautified with so many stars, which beholds and governs the
earth: which earth also the Egyptians in their sacred letters framed in the
likeness of a Cow, so that Mercury (who is also oftentimes taken for the
sun) thus killing Argus, is only the banishing, vanquishing, or putting to
flight of the stars in the firmament, which (as it were) hide themselves upon
the first appropinquation of the suns all glorious resplendencie. Martianus
says, That Philologia entering into the second heavens, saw there coming
toward her a Virgin, Martianus
holding in one of her hands a certain tablet, wherein were intersected many
descriptions, properties, conditions, and figures of Mercury. In the midst of
which was lively proportioned a certain Bird of Egypt like unto a Storke,
which with them was called lbis, and also the head of a young man with long
yellow hair, and round about it seemed to twine two young Serpents. Under that
was drawn a white wand all gilded at the top, in the midst of it of a greenish
color, and toward the end coal black. On the right hand of it was
depictured a great shel of some strange fish, and also a Scorpion: and on the
left side was depainted a Goat, and a little bird, much like unto a
Sparrow-hawke: all which depicturances contain within themselves the mysteries
and dark meanings of the Egyptians, with whom Mercury was worshipped and
adored under the name of that god, which with them was called Anubis, and was
depictured also with his Caduceus, as Apuleius likewise (where he writes of
Apuleius.
certain tales of those people which traveled with Isis) depainteth him. And
says, that Anubis (which the Egyptians called Mercury) was setforth and
depictured sometimes of a black and swartish complexion, sometimes also very
beautiful, and of a fair aspect. And among some of them also they framed his
Image, as having the head of a Dog, in his right hand holding a Snakie wand,
and with his left shaking a greenebough of Palm. By the head of the Dog was
understood the subtiletie and craftiness which proceeded from Mercury, for so
much as there is thought no beast to be so wise, capable, and wily as the Dog:
Or else they so shaped him with the head of a Dog, for that (as it is written
by Diodorus Siculus) this Anubis Diodorus Siculus.
was the son of Osiris, who long before that following his father in the
wars, showed himself so valerous and approved hardy, as that indeed after
he was dead, he was worshipped and honored as a god. And for that in his life
time, he always carried depainted in his shield the portraiture of a Dog,
defiguring the same also upon all his other arms, his Image or Statue was
afterward in that manner drawn and set forth with a Dogs head, demonstrating
also thereby, that he was loving, faithful, and obedient to his father,
defending him always from all dangers, abuses, and perrillous accidents, which
also is commonly seen in that beast toward his master or keeper.

There be some have written, that Mercury was taken and held for the very same
as Hercules, or not much different from him, as his Image or Picture held among
the French men manifested, which people likewise adored him as the god of
Wisdom and Eloquence, and his Statue was thus composed:

There was hewn and cut out with most exquisite skill and care of the workmen,
an excelently well-proportioned Image, in the similitude and shape of a very
aged man, even decrepit as it should seem, and in the extremity of years,
his head almost bald, saving that on the sides remained some few hairs, short,
and curled, his countenance severe, grim, and sour, his complexion of a tawnie
and time-worne hue, his upper vesture was the skin of a Lion, and in his right
hand he held an unwieldy and huge poleaxe, in his left hand an iron bow, and at
his back hung a quiver of steeleheaded arrows, to the end of his tongue were
fastened and annexed many small chains and linkes of gold, with which he
seemed to pull and draw unto him infinite multitudes of men of sundry Nations,
which were also tied and fastened to those chains, and yet of themselves
seemed voluntarily to follow him, the picture looking always backward to
behold such innumerable troops flocking toward him. And this piece of work
was framed with inexplicable and rare perfection of knowledge, beautified and
adorned with delicate politure and true couching and conclausture of those hard
and almost impenetrable stones. By the description and setting forth of which,
is discovered and vnript (as it were) the all-drawing force, and attractiue
power of eloquence, so attributed and ascribed by these people unto Hercules.
In framing him old and in years, is understood, that in men of experience and
long studies, eloquence is of more virtue and power, as attained unto naturitie
of perfection, being indeed raw (and therefore not well digested) in younger
years which of necessity must want judgment and a settled experience to
adioine unto it, by which it is made more forcible, prevailing, and gracious,
as Homer at large and copiously speaks thereof in his commends and praises of
Nestor. From whose mouth (says he) most fluently rushed forth streams of
dulcet honny, and whose pen distilled sugared drops of delicious sweetness,
and whose works and fruits so complete and adorned with golden sentences,
assuageth the malice of time, and mittigateth and allaieth her spite of
forgetfulness, whose perpetuity is engraven in the brasse-leaued books of
neuer-dying memory. And thus much concerning the Statues, Images, Pictures,
and Descriptions made of Mercury, held among the Ancients to be the god of
craft and eloquence.

Minerua.
IT is manifest, that the knowledge of never so many things without either a
grace, or a certain kind of pleasing delivery of the same, is not absolutely
exquisite in praise; yet merritting due commends, though not in the excellency
or height thereof: so likewise to speak much, and to enter into the handling
or discourse of many matters for one that knows little, and is but slightly
traveled in the truly-conceaued paths of literature; not only discouers an
ineducated rudeness, and lame ignorance of letters, but oftentimes induces
unto himself danger, and may offend very highly, as Marcus Tullius at large
and learnedly has written. As therefore among the Ancients Mercury was taken
and held (in respect of his mellisluous and honny-dewed tongue of delivery)
for the god of eloquence: so likewise was Minerua reverenced and adored amongst
them, for the Queen and Goddess of Wisdom, Learning, and Knowledge. And to
let us understand, that it is requisite (as before is something touched) to
know very well what we undertake to speak and discourse of, and to apprehend a
right conceauement what we suppose we know indeed, to argue with short and
pithie disputes, thereby to pull on attention, and avoid the misery of being
thought to be tedious; to contend mildly, and lastly, to write methodically,
and with a good grace, (being indeed a special introducement of a reading
spirit) the Ancients have thought fit to conioine the Statues of this god and
goddess together, as between whom rested a kind of Sympathy and concordance
of dispositions, and they called it by a Greek name, Hermathena, for that the
Grecians entearmed Mercury Hermes, and Minerua they called Athena. And they
used to erect this Picture or Image, always in schools, intending thereby to
put scholars in mind, that they ought to embrace knowledge with eloquence,
making thereof a composed meddling and entermixing, as that by the one, the
other received far greater virtue, grace, and perfection by the combination
of both their powers together.

And it was held among the Ancients, that Wisdom and Knowledge was not only
necessary, and to be acquired solely in Cities, and in private and
domestical gouernements, but also to be entertained and embraced abroad in the
wars, among Generals, Captains, and all sorts of commanders: therefore they
attribute unto Minerua the care and charge of the wars, and depicture her in
her Statue all armed like a valiant commandresse, as it is recorded that she
showed her self very gallant, valerous, and forward in the wars, held
between the gods and the Giants, wherein (as it is written with some) she hand
to hand slew Pallantes the most fierce, terrible, and mightiest of them all.
Whereupon she afterward got the name of Pallas, and was so entearmed. But
other writers affirm, that she was called Pallas, for some other reasons,
whereof it shall be now needless to speak, only it is sufficient, that they
all agree, that Minerua and Pallas were all one and the same.

Many have written also, that Bellona was goddess of the wars, and the same
as Minerua, but by their Statues and Images dedicated unto them, these
differences do appear: By Minerua was understood and intended the wise
councels and advised prudencie of Captains and Officers, in managing their
military affairs: and by Bellona were meant all bloody stratagems,
massacres, surprises, executions, and fatal meetings of the enemy whatsoever,
and therefore she was depictured to hold in one of her hands a whip of
redhotyron strings, and in her other hand a great earthen basen, filled up with
coniealed blood, she was held also to be the goddess of wrath, fury, and
anger, and many times depainted with a trumpet at her mouth, as she that gave
the sign of battle, and of general encounters. But most writers do agree,
that she was most commonly depictured with a flaming firebrand in her hand,
for that the Ancients (as it is read with Licofrones) before the use of the
Trumpets was found Licofrones.
out, when they intended to give a signal or token of battle, accustomed to
send a slave before the camp of the enemy with a flaming torch or firebrand
in his hand, the which after that he had shaken three times in his hand, would
throw it down toward the face of the enemy, and presently after begun their
battle and furious encounters on both sides. Claudianus and Statius do
report, that this Bellona was the first that was seen to carry in her hands
this fiery token of fight. And thus much shall suffice for her description as
she is taken for Bellona.

Minerua by most writers was depictured in the shape of a young woman, of a
lively and fresh countenance, yet something threatening and angry in her
looks, her eyes were very fix, assured, and steadfast, and much like the
color of a bluish green, or that of a troubled sea, and she was armed
complete at all pieces, with a long spear in one hand, and on her other arm a
shield or target, made of the purest Crystal, on the top of her helmet was
placed a garland, made of Olive branches, and hard by her side were drawn
forth, and portraied two young children with naked knives in their hands,
seeming (as it might appear by their looks) to menace one another, the one
was called Fear, the other Horror, as that those two always waited, and were
conversant in wars and bloody controversies. Whereupon Statius (writing that
Mars Statius.
commanded by Jupiter to set wars and quarrels between the Argiues and
Thebans) says there, that Mars sent before him those two, Fear, and Horror.
Pausanias writes, that the picture of Fear was shaped forth in several
forms by the Ancients, as that Pausanias.
sometimes it was made with the head of a Lion, terrible and furious; which
manner was used much by the Grecians, and which form was engraven on the
shield of Agamemnon: with some other it was framed with the face and body of a
woman, but of so ugly and deformed countenance as is possible to imagine. The
Corinthians dedicated this picture so made, unto the sons of Medea, slain
and murdered for bringing such fatal gifts to the daughter of old Creon,
whereby she and all that regal family perished, and were for ever extinct.

The Olive tree was consecrated to Minerua, for that (as Virgil says) the
Athenians used to crown the Virgil.
heads of Conquerors and triumphant commanders, with garlands thereof. Many
writers do disagree in the description of Minerua, and especially those of
Greece. Touching the birth of her, it is written, that she was borne without a
mother, and that she issued and came forth into the world out of the head of
Jupiter (according to the opinion of all fantastic Poets.) By which is meant
and understood, that all human knowledge and understanding proceeds from the
superior and divine guidance above, whereby these intellectual parts become
celestial, and despisers of terrene delights. But Martianus interpretes it to
the disgrace of women, (being indeed a great and sore enemy unto all that
sex) but (his exposition being too severe and rigorous in that behalf) it
shall not be pertinent further to declare it. Whose opinion also Aristotle
himself something embraced, affirming (being too much opinionated therein)
that as Minerua Aristotle.
was borne without a mother, so all women generally are of themselves without
wit, knowledge, secrecy, or assured constancy: but such invention proceeds
only of malice, and some other seed of rancour, which was indeed irradicated
in his breast against that praise-worthie sex. Wherein I dare in some sort
contradict Aristotle, in that (it is apparent) that there are in the world
women of as great spirit, wit, capacity, and settled resolutions as most men
are, and are as eloquent in delivery of their thoughts, and as scholler-like in
choosing fit and significant words, in composing and annexing their pithie,
sententious, and well-placed phrases, as most men are whatsoever (exempting
some famous professed Doctors, and daily Students.) But returning to Minerua,
the Ancients (as I have said) framed her Statue to be all armed throughout, in
the fashion of a most valerous and hardy warrior: and she wore on her head a
wonderful rich helmet, all made and hammered of massy gold, which with the
beauty thereof shined most gloriously, sending forth a most excellent luster,
and delicate transparencie. Homer Homer.
says, That by this helmet so infixed on her head, is signified, that the wit
and policy of man (which always rests in the brain of the head) is (as a
man may say) so armed, and at all times provided and ready, that it desendeth
the body from all eminent dangers, mischeefes, and inconveniences, and that it
does shine, and is made beautiful with virtuous and worthy works, studies of
contemplation, and divine meditations. The same Homer says, That the excellent
wit of man Homer.
does never discover all that it knows, nor yet leaves all that it
discourses of, easily to be understood and conceived: wherein such words are
compared to the doubtful answers of an Oracle, or the dark and intricate
speeches of Sphinx: whereby belike it came, that in a certain part of Egypt,
they placed in the temple of Minerua, the Statue and portraiture of this
Sphinx, which the people there reverenced and adored, believing it to be the
goddess Isis.

Pausanias (speaking of the Athenians) says, That Pausanias.
there was in that country a very stately, and curiously built Image of
Minerua, which had engraven on the top of the helmet the shape and form of
Sphinx, and on both sides of it were cut out and carved the portraitures of two
Griffins, which are held indeed to be neither beasts nor birds, but do equally
partake of both kinds, for they have the upper part (as the head, neck and
wings) of an Eagle, and the rest of their bodies shaped to the true similitude
of Lions. These strange formed beasts are found to remain (though Pliny sets
them down as fabulous) in the furthermost parts of Scythia, where (as it is
written) are certain mines of gold and silver, which these Griffins do
continually guard and keep, so that the people of that Country, being called
Arimaspes (which as many writers affirm have but one eye in their forehead)
cannot without great danger and hazard of their lives dig or seach for any of
that gold.

On the top also of that helmet so made for Minerua, someimes they placed the
form of a Cock, as in one part of Greece (inhabited by the Eleans) there was
such a Statue erected and made by Phidias, which was wholly framed of gold and
yuorie, which was so consecrated and dedicated unto Minerua, because that bird
of all others is most fierce, bold, and hardy in his fight, as likewise in
Captains and men of war, is requisite and required: or else it did demonstrat
thereby the vigilancie and wakefull cogitations of great commanders and wise
Governors, in whom is required great foresight, watchfulness, and care. And
herein I must somewhat digress from this treatise of Minerua, to observe my
Author, who in this place has inserted some few capitulations of other
abstracts, the first beginning with the descriptions of Veritas, or Truth, with
the explications thereof.

It is written with many Authors, and especially with Hippocrates, that the
effigies and portraiture of Truth Hipocrates.
was framed in the due similitude and likeness of a beauteous young woman,
attired with very grave and modest abillements, and yet for that kind of
elderly habit, very rich and costly. And the same Author also depainteth
there the shape of Opinion, likewise resembling a young woman, not altogether
so fair and lovely, and yet not deformed or ill proportioned: who (says he)
seemed rather impudent than modestly bold, in all her demeanures, with her
hands reaching forth to take and receive whatsoever is offered and presented.

Philostratus (speaking of Truth) says, that she remains in the cave of
Amphiarus, clothed all in white garments, glistering, and of a beautiful hue,
where also she was taken and supposed to be the mother of Virtue, which
Virtue, the Ancients reverenced and worshipped as a sacred Goddess, and
consecrated many Temples, Statues, and Altars unto her, whose Image they
erected directly before the Temple which was dedicated unto Honor, meaning
thereby, that none could enter or have access thereunto, but by means of the
other, and that there was no way or means to get true honor, but by the way
and line of virtue, as that honor, dignity, and advancement were the rewards
and recompenses of virtuous and well-gouerned actions: and this picture of
Honor also (as diverse write) was oftentimes set forth with two wings on the
shoulders thereof, intending and vnshadowing thereby, that honor and glory
do as it were lend wings unto men of virtue and merit, to lift up and advance
themselves above the ordinary pitch and seat of vulgar and desertlesse people,
even to the wonder and admiration of all men.

Lucianus speaking of a certain Temple dedicated Lucianus.
unto Truth, says, that in the midst thereof was erected her Image or Statue
in the form of a young woman, all sorrowful, sad, and discontent, habited in
unseemly rags and base attire, and (as it should seem by certain
superscriptions over the head) she complained, that she was ill-intreated,
abused, and wronged by Fortune.

In many places (especially in Greece) Virtue has been shaped forth in form
of a Pilgrim or traveler, in that she finds no resting place, secure abode,
or certain habitation, being sometimes vexed and oppressed by the government of
Tyrants, sometimes of Usurers, and auaricious commanders, sometimes by
luxurious Rulers, and sometimes also by the fury and chances of wars,
intestine seditions, and civil broiles. Sometimes she is defigured forth like a
grave and austere Matrone, sitting upon a foure-squared stone, all solitary,
pensive, and melancholy, and leaning her head upon her knees, as though she
seemed weary of her life, being so full of crosses, miseries, and
perturbations.

It is written with Zenophon and Marcus Tullius, that Hercules when he was in
his adolescencie, and Zenophon.
prime of his blooming days, wandering by chance in a desert and unfrequented
wood, came where two several ways divided themselves in two contrary
courses, the one leading directly into the wood, and the other enclining on the
one side thereof: Hercules as uncertain which of these two he should take,
stood pondering and considering of the choice, he had not long stood thus
reuoluing within himself, but there appeared before him (all on the sudaine)
two women, the one of which was called Pleasure, who indeed was wondrous
beautiful to the eye, and of a lovely aspect, wanton in her demeanure, and
exceeding pleasing in all her gestures, and she was apparrelled with very
glorious and gorgeous abillements, whose eyedazeling brightness amassed
Hercules with huge admiration thereof, she was so adorned and decked with
resplendant jewels, and glistering stones, and this woman seemed to persuade
him to take the way of sensuality and delights, which at the first entrance
appeared unto him very large, fair, and easy, beset with very pleasant and
green herbs, and diuers-coloured flowers, but toward the end it grew very
streit, stony, rough, and full of sharpe-pricking thorns: the other woman
(somewhat more grave and settled in her countenance) was called Virtue, who was
clothed with very simple and mean garments, and she with her finger pointed
unto that way which she would wish Hercules to take, which indeed at the
beginning showed it self very narrow, full of rocks, and steepe-ascending
banckes, very crooked, and almost in-accessable; but after toward the midst
it showed very pleasant, and at the very end of it was a most delicat green
mead, all beset and enwalled with trees of the rarest and daintiest fruits that
could be wished for, the vale it self all bespangled (as it were) with
field-flowers of sundry sorts and colors, entermixed with the odoriferous
rose, gillowflower, marigold, and pinke: through the midst of this green plot,
glided and stole along a soft-murmuring crystal spring, through the purity
of whose cleerenesse (by means of the reflection of the suns beams) an
infinite number of golden hewed peble stones, daunced as it were, and leaped on
the sands, as moved and stirred with the swift-paced current of that
faire-running water: and unto this path Hercules betook himself, laboring
and striving very eagerly to pass in at the first entrance, which at the
length, with continuing and laborious endeauours, he recovered, and so attained
to that delicious and beautiful meadow, which his choice so elected, afterward
purchased unto him everliving fame and glory, registered by time in the
brasse-leaued book of endless perpetuity.

The Ancients also made and dedicated Images and Statues for the adoration and
worship of Honor, which (as Alciatus gives us to understand) they framed
Alciatus.
in the shape of a little child, clothed and apparelled with a purple garment,
having a garland of Laurel, wreathed about his head: with whom was depainted
to hold hand in hand the god Cupid, who seemed to lead and guide the child unto
the goddess Virtue, which was depictured right over against it, hewn forth
and engraued with exquisite and rare intaliature.

Among the Ancients likewise was reverenced and adored as a great goddess,
the Lady Volupia, Volupia the goddess of pleasures.
which they held to be the goddess of pleasures and delights: and her Statue
was depainted, as having a pallid and lean countenance, yet sitting in a
pontifical and maiestike chair, all embrodered and embossed with stars of
refined gold. And under her feet was drawn out the picture of Virtue, looking
as though she had been dejected, trodden down, and despised by her.

It is written with Pliny (as also Solinus and Macrobius Pliny.
affirm the same) that in a certain temple dedicated unto this goddess
Volupia, was cut out with egregious skill of the workman (as sitting upon an
Altar) the goddess Angerona, looking with a heavy and sad countenance, which
also was framed with her lips tied together, and fast conioined, to show us
thereby, that in all pleasures or other mattets whatsoever, it behooves us to
hold our peace, and to keep silence. Macrobius expounds it thus, that
whosoever knows how to use secrecy, silence, and to dissemble his greefes,
and discontents, shall in the end overcome them, and shall lead a most
pleasant, easefull, and quiet life.

The Egyptians did much reverence and worship their god of Silence, which with
them was called Harpocrates, and according to the Greeks, Sigaleon: whose
Statue and Image (as Martianus and Apuleius Martianus.
record) was made in the likeness of a young child, who close to his lips held
one of his fingers, as a sign of secrecy. Whereupon it comes, that the same
fashion is now also observed when men would signify by signs, that a thing
should not be unrevealed or spoken of. Sometimes the portraiture of this God is
drawn without any face at all, all covered over with the skin of a Wolf, on
which were depainted as many eyes and ears as could be inserted thereon:
signifying thereby, that it was needful to see and hear much, and to speak
little, in that he that speaks not, offends not. By the Wolves skin is
understood the property of that beast, who when it has stolen any prey,
presently conueyeth himself away, and runs with such heed, fear, and
quietness, that he dares not in all that time so much as draw his breath, or
pant, with such sly secrecy does he escape and steal away.

But now it is time to return to our first entreaty of Minerua, whom (as I
have already said) the Ancients all armed, with a Spear or Dart in one hand,
and a Crystal shield in the other. By the shield (in that Minerua is taken
for Wisdom and Knowledge) is understood the roundnesse and compass of the
world, governed with wise decrees, politic laws, and discreet commandments.
By the Dart or Spear, is vnshadowed the force, virtue, and power of wisdom,
and that the words and speeches of a learned man do prevail, and are effectual
throughout the whole world: or that the sharpness and vigor of an excellent
wit, and allapprehending capacity, is able to penetrate and make entrance into
the hardest and obscurest enigma whatsoever; as the Dart being furiously
delivered from the hands of a powerful body, pierces very deep into any
hard ground or other metal of good proof or resistance.

Pausanias writes, that in a certain place of Greece was erected a most huge
and great Colossus, out of which was cut forth and carved the picture of
Minerua, sitting as it were on a little stool, and drawing forth small threads
from a distaffe: for that the Ancients supposed her to be the first
inuentresse and deviser of spinning, as also of weauing in silk, and other
like inventions.

They attribute also unto her the first finding out of almost all kind of Arts
and Sciences: understanding thereby, that the wit and invention of man (for
which Minerua, as I have said, is taken) is the beginner and discouerer of all
sorts of trades, fashions, sciences, or professions whatsoever: touching which
the Poets do feign, that Prometheus with the help of Minerua went up to the
higher heavens, and stealing away some part of the fiery chariot of the Sun,
gave and bestowed it on men below, whereby afterward they contrived new arts,
and mechanical tricks of cunning and skill, every one after his own manner,
devise, and humor: in working of which arts (as Pliny writes) is required two
things, the first is Wit, and Conceit, and the other, Heed, Care, and true
effecting of what is proposed: the first is meant by Minerua, the last by
Vulcan (which is as much to say as fire) for under the name of Vulcan, we
oftentimes read the nature of fire to be understood, being the instrument and
means to form and fashion almost all things whatsoever.

Many writers have described the portraitures of Vulcan and Minerua both in one
Statue and Image, as Plato in one place says, That these two were equally
supposed to be the gods and protectors of Athens, Plato.
for so much indeed as in those times the study and practice of Sciences, was
no less used and followed than the profession and inward exercises of letters
and learning.

Others write, that Neptune and Minerua were the ioint-protecters of Athens, so
appointed by the order and decree of Jupiter, whereupon the Athenians stamped
and imprinted upon their coin the picture of Neptunes Trident, and on the
other side the portraiture of Minerua.

But (as I said before) Vulcan was many times understood for fire, or at the
least for the force, property, and nature thereof, as Eusebius in many places
allows. Alexander Neapolitanus reports, that in one place of Egypt was
erected the Statue of Vulcan, Alexander Neapolitanus.
which held in one of his hands the true and lively proportion of a certain
beast, which we call a Mole, and in his other hand a thunderbolt: and the
Egyptians so placed a Mole in his hand, for that they supposed that Vulcan had
sent into one part of Egypt infinite and unspeakable numbers of Moles of
purpose to eat, gnaw, and destroy the sadles, bridles, targets, and such like
furniture made of Leather, belonging to the Arabians their enemies, who then
were entered into their Country with huge armies of soldiers, to ouerrun and
depopulate the Country, which notwithstanding afterward by the innumerable
swarms as it were of these Moles, (so noisome and offensive unto them) were
constrained to retire, leave, and abandon the country: which thing is not
altogether unlikely, for so much as many autentike and approved Authors have
verified the like.

Elianus reports, that the roots of trees and Elianus.
herbs in certain parts of Italy, were eaten and destroyed in such sort
with multitudes of Rats, that the inhabitants in the end (although they daily
endeavored to kill them) were notwithstanding for penury, feign to leave and
forsake their Country. Marcus Marcus Varro.
Varro writes, That there was a Town in Spain situated on a sandy ground,
which was so undermined by Connies, that in short time it sunk, and was
utterly decayed. Neither have these chances happened only in wild Countries and
many continents, but in places also enuironned with the sea, as that it is
written, that one of the Isles Cyclades, called Giare, was by the
ouer-abundance and multitudes of Rats and Mice, left void and destitute of
inhabitants, being so tormented and annoied with them, that very necessity
caused them to forgo their Country. It is also reported, that in France a
very famous town was by the said vermin (so abounding therein) left void and
unfrequented of any Inhabitants. The like chance also (as it is written)
happened in a certain country of Africa by the swarms of Locusts and
Grasshoppers. Pliny reports, That in a certain Province adioining to the
confines of Aethiopia, Ants, and other small vermin, exiled thence all the
inhabitants thereabout. The people of Megaris in Greece, were constrained by
bees to leave and forsake the country. Theophrastus speaks of another
Country, which was destroyed by Palmers, which are little worms, long and
rough, having many legs, and in Latin may be called Bruchi, Camp, or
Multipede. Antenor writing also of the Isle of Crete, says, That a certain
multitude of Bees, chased out of a great City all the inhabitants thereof,
using their houses in the stead of hiues.

But returning to our former matter, which was, that the people of Egypt
verily believed, that those Moles were sent by Vulcan into their Country to
destroy and drive away their enemies the Arabians, then entered into the land:
It is credibly written by Plutarch and others, that the people of Arabia do at
Plutarch.
this time infinitely abhor and hate those kind of beasts, and do lay all
plots and devises to kill and destroy them wheresoever they hear them to
remain, which kind of vermin also the Ethiopians, and especially the
coniurers of Persia hold an opinion to be very odious and displeasing to their
gods. But it is not written, that the Egyptians believed that Vulcan should
send them those Moles, nor what reason moved them unto that conceit in the
embracing of such opinion: but it is so recited as is before spoken of by that
Author Alexander Neapolitanus, without any further explication of it. Although
with some writers it is thus expounded: By Vulcan (say they) is meant the
dryness and extreme heat of that season, which was summer: or else indeed the
natural dryness and warmth of that Country of Aethiopia. And Pliny writing
of those vermin says, they do increase and multiply in most abundant
manner, always coveting those places, which by the ardent fury of the suns
virtue, become dry, sandy, and crased, as likewise most of the country of
Aethiopia is, and further expositions are not found to be delivered by any
Writers, touching that opinion and conceit of the Egyptians.

The opinions and writings which the Ancients have made of Vulcan, remain
diverse and many, and in that respect he is shaped forth sometimes in this
form, and sometimes in another: with some he is depictured, standing,
working, and hammering in a Smiths forge on the hill Etna in Sicilia, framing
thunderbolts for Jupiter, and fashioning arrows for the god of love and was
taken to be the rarest workman that ever lived, unto whom when the gods had
any occasion to use such manner of weapons, they presently repaired: as Thetis
went unto him to desire him to forge an armor for her son Achilles, and Venus
for her son Aeneas.

Some depicture him lame of one leg, and of a very black and swart complexion,
as one all smokie, and of a general ill-shaped proportion of all his
lineaments. It is not read, that unto Vulcan were appropriated any beasts,
plants, or trees, as unto all other of their gods, only Elianus writes, that
the Egyptians consecrated Elianus.
unto him the Lions, in that those beasts of all other are most hot, dry, and
fiery by nature, by which abundance of heat within their bodies, it comes to
pass, that they do so exceedingly fear and are astonished at the sight of
fire, which they can by no means endure, but run from it with great
affrightment. It is read also, that on the hill Mongibell in Sicillia there are
certain great dogs, which do there guard and keep the Temple of Vulcan, which
is seated hard by a woods side, adjoining to that Mountain, and the people
thereabouts do worship and adore Vulcan in that Temple, and in those
consecrated woods and bushes.

It is written by the Poets, that Vulcan was the husband of Venus, as lawfully
married unto her, and that they are always depictured together, as
accompanying one the other. By which is understood, that the generation and
birth of creatures (meant by Venus) cannot be effectual without a moderate
heat and warmenesse (which is also understood by Vulcan.) Some also do adioine
Mars as the companion to Venus, meaning by him the heat of the Sun, whereupon
the Alcitans (people inhabiting the furthermost parts of Spain, as Macrobius
reports) made the Statue and Image of Mars, so adorned and beautified with
the beams of the sun, in as lively manner as could be devised; which
picture was there reverenced with wondrous zeal and adoration. Macrobius also
says, That the gods (being the substance of the celestial fire) were only
different in name, and not otherwise: and that Mars was generally taken for
that heat and warmenesse which proceeded from the virtue of the Sun. By reason
whereof, the lively heat and blood which is within us, is easily set on fire
and enflamed with anger, fury, and desire of war: of which things Mars also
is held and supposed to be the god. And after that fashion the Ancients
worshipped and adored him, dedicating unto him many sumptuous Statues, Images,
and Pictures, and they shaped him of aspect, most fierce, terrible, and
wrathful, with hollow red eyes, very speedy and quick in their reuolutions,
his face all hairie, with long curled locks on his head, depending even to his
shoulders, of a coaleblacke color, he stood all armed throughout, with a
spear in one hand, and in the other a whip, and sometimes they depicture him
riding on a horse, sometimes drawn in a chariot, whose horses were called
Fear and Horror: And some other say, that his chariot was drawn with two men,
which always accompanied him wheresoever he went, and they were called Fury
and Violence. The which thing Statius imitateth when Statius.
he says. That Jupiter sent for Mars, and commanded him to raise and stir up
bloody wars and quarrels between the Argiues and Thebans. And in this place
Statius describes the arms of this god to be these: He wore (says he) on
his head a helmet most bright and shining, and of so fiery a hue and glister,
as it seemed there issued out of it great flashes of lightning, his breastplate
was of solid gold, reflecting with a most glorious and eye-delighting luster,
and there was insculpt thereon many figures and shapes of most fierce and ugly
monsters, his shield was depainted all over with a red or bloody color,
inchased also with most strange-shaped and deformed beasts, cut out and
engraven with rare invention, and purity of workmanship, excelling in the
topiarie art. And thus he rode with aspeare and scourge in either of his
hands, in a most costly and gold-embossed Chariot, whose horses (called Fury
and Violence) were guided by the two churlish coachmen, Wrath and Destruction:
directly before this chariot was depainted the portraiture of Fame, stretching
abroad her wings, and seeming to proffer a flight, which at the first view,
seemed to mount, and afterward to roue abroad, and search into all corners of
the earth, and this picture appeared (a little off from it) to be very small,
but coming near unto it, it was of a great bigness, which workmanship was
performed with great cunning and precise curiousness of art. The Ancients
also pictured this Fame in the form of a woman, apparelled with a thin and
sleightly-wouen mantle of purple silk, which was close girted about her body,
that she might with more swiftness run and scour through the Countries of
the world, in both her hands she seemed to hold a crooked shell, long and
hollow like to an instrument, which we call a Cornet, which she held to her
mouth. With some she is depainted with two wings on her shoulders, and her face
beset full of eyes, and over all her body were infinite numbers of ears, and
tongues lively set forth and depictured, as Virgil most excellently has
delivered, who also says, Virgil.
that she flies always in the night without taking sleep or repose at any
time, and that she commonly seateth her self on the top of a high turret,
where she utters and babbleth forth all that either her eyes have seen, or
her ears have heard, being indeed so many, that nothing can escape them,
whereby she was entearmed the tatling Lady, and mistress of news. But
touching the former descriptions of Mars: It is written with some, that such
his glorious and sumptuous chariot whereon he used to ride in the wanres, was
commonly drawn with four mighty strong horses, which were so furious, hot,
and proud, that even very fiery sparkles seemed to issue forth from their
nosthrils Isiodorus says, That the picture of Mars was Isiodorus.
oftentimes set forth and depainted, with the breast of it all naked and
unclothed, to vnshadow thereby, that in the wars and chances of danger, men
ought not to be timorous, but should expose themselves to all hazardous and
uncertain adventures whatsoever. Herodotus writes, that the people of Scithia
hung up Herodotus.
a sword in the middle of a temple, and worshipped it as the Image of Mars, as
people ignorant, how to represent the god of war otherwise. Statius
describing Statius,
the house of Mars says, That it is built in an obscure corner of Thracia,
where the people wholly give and addict themselves to wars and stratagemicall
policies, and that it was wholly made and composed of iron, all rustie, black,
and foul, and that the porters there which kept the gates, were called Horror
and Madness, within the house inhabited Fury, Wrath, Impiety, Fear,
Treason, and Violence, of all which, the gouernesse and commandresse was
Discord, who there was seated in a regal and princely throne, holding in one
of her hands a bright shining sword, and in her other a great iron basen full
of humane blood. Of this Discord it is written, that she was the overthrow and
ruin of that famous town of Phrygia in Asia Minor, called Troy, and the
reason (as some write) was, in that she was not invited to a certain great
feast made on the Mountain Pelion by Jupiter for the solemnizing and
celebrating of the nuptials between Peleus and Thetis, where almost all gods
and goddesses whatsoever, were conuented; and where also she appeared, but
notwithstanding was commanded by Jupiter to depart from that marriage, and not
allowed to be at the solemnization thereof: and this great meeting was not ten
days before the contention between the three goddesses for the golden ball,
ended and decided by Paris, which proved the destruction of all the house of
Priamus, and flaughter of the Trojans; for of this marriage was begotten that
euer-famed knight Achilles: but as I told you, because Discord could not be
admitted to this feast, prepared only for merry, pleasant, and for familiar
agreements, she afterward raised such mischeeuous occasion, and so labored day
and night in her devilish plots, that by her means grew that long-continuing
war and enmity between the Phrygians and Pelasgians, prosecuted,
maintained, and ended, by the prowess of this newborn child Achilles. Virgil
says, That this Discord was by many writers framed and set forth in the
likeness of one of the furies of hell: as likewise Petronius and Aristides
affirm, saying, That she has the aspect and look of an infernal hag, with
hollow Petronius.
and bleared eyes, far sunk into her head, from which evermore distilled down
many watrie drops, her lips are pale and dry, her teeth all furd with loathsome
corruption, her breath all-infected, ill-sauoured, and thick, her cheeks
discolored, wan, and thin, and that she stretched forth her long and lean
hands, as ready to catch and take hold of any occasion proffered, in her breast
she carried a naked knife with a sharp point, her legs were wondrous crooked,
and little, as scarce able to support the burden of her withered body, for
her garment she wore a mantle made of black rug; and thus Petronius describes
her leaning upon a staff. Pausanias writes, that in a lid of a chest given to
Cipselus, was engraued and carved the combat of Ajax and Hector, performed in
the presence of Discord, which (says he) was an old and hard-fauoured woman.

Ariosto upon some occasion speaking of Mars (from Ariosto.
whom now we have a little wandered describes there his palace or court where
he used to abide, saying, that through every part and corner of the same, were
heard strange echoes, resounding most perfectly, which of themselves without
any former speech, would yield forth voices most plainly and distinctly,
which commonly were fearful shrikes, threatenings, and dismal cries: in the
midst of this palace was erected the Image of Virtue, whose looks seemed to
be sad and pensive, and her soul all sorrow-beaten, discontented, and
melancholy, and she stood leaning her head on her arm in most distressefull
manner: hard by her was seated in a chair the picture of Fury, triumphing in
joy, pleasure, and delight, and seeming proud with good fortunes, and happy
successes. Not far from her sat Death, with a bloody and stearne
countenance, whose face was ouerwasht with blood, and hackt with many and
cruel slashes, where upon a stately altar, he was offering sacrifices in
goblets made with the skuls of men, and filled up even to the brim with humane
blood; which oblation was consecrated to god Mars, with coals of fire (which
set on flame the sacrifice) fetched from many Cities, Towns, and Holds, burnt
and ruinated by tyranny of the Wars: round about the Court were hanged up
(as pictures to beautify the same) many famous spoils and glorious ensigns of
victory, brought from all the parts and corners of the world: In his bed
chamber were depainted forth with wondrous curious workmanship, fatal
massacres, burning of towns, dismal slaughters of men, castles won by
treason, murder, and villainy, with many such like all in row conioined and
set together.

Unto Mars was consecrated by the Ancients, as grateful unto him, a Cock,
either to show thereby the vigilancie and careful watch which should be in
soldiers, or else (as Lucianus writes) because that Alectrio (a soldier
entirely beloved and endeared of Mars) was by the gods transformed and changed
into this bird. Some also have appropriated unto him the wolf, being a most
ravenous and devouring beast, and therefore attributed unto him; in that all
soldiers and men of war, upon their first fury and heat are given much to
spoiling and consuming of goods, ruinating and overthrowing all things
whatsoever, that happen unto them in the pride of their choler, and first
inflammation of their blood: or else because this beast (as I have in other
places remembered) sees most perfectly in the darkest night, as wise and
provident captains and commanders ought to do, that is, that they with an
all-foreseeing aduisednesse and circumspection, prevent and frustrate the
secret, dark, and hidden plots, and close-contriued stratagemes of the enemy
whatsoever, for by the sharpe-sighted eyes of this beast is understood the
farre-reaching capacity and witty brain of a politic commander, in
discovering and seeing through the secret and concealed intendemennts of his
adversary. And thus much shall suffice for the natures and properties of Mars,
imposing also an end to the Statues, Images, and Pictures dedicated, erected,
and consecrated to him, as also to Minerua, so taken by the Ancients to be
the goddess of Wisdom, Learning, and of Wars.

Bacchus.
HIstories do deliver unto us, that this Bacchus (of whom we now entreat)
was held among the Ancients in great repute and esteem for a most valerous,
hardy, and well-approued Captain, performing in those his times many worthy,
haughty, and gallant services, which gained unto him the report and title of a
victorious and all-conquering commander: as Diodorus Siculus, and many other
autentike Authors have written. But in the end, whether in regard of such his
valiancie, or other particular property and knowledge, he was amongst others
of their supersticious errors, cannonized and worshipped as a god, dedicating
temples, and erecting Altars and Statues unto him: among whom also he was
known and called by diverse and several names, as sometimes Bacchus,
sometimes Dionisius, and at other times Liber pater, and many other, and by
reason thereof was sometimes depictured in this form, and sometimes in that
shape, according to the several opinion of the people with whom he was so
worshipped. Philostratus says, That his Statue was framed in the likeness of
a young man without a beard, of a corpulent and gross body, his face of a
high color, and very big, and about his head was wreathed a garland of yuie
leaves, from his temples seemed to peep forth two small horns, and close by
his side lay a certain beast, called a Panther. The which description made by
Philostratus, is in some sort drawn from the Philostratus.
nature and quality of Wine, of which indeed, the Poets feign that Bacchus is
the god, for so much as he (as it is written) was the first that ever found out
the commodity thereof, and discovered unto men (then abiding in ignorance
thereof) the manner of gathering grapes from the vinetree, and to press and
bruise them together, of whose juice and licour afterward Wine was made. But
some affirm, that Icarus the father of Erigonus, first invented the making of
Wine, and that it was first of all drunk in Athens, where he himself being
drunk with the force thereof, was miserably slain by the people. And it is
also written that in Italy Saturn was the first that ever instructed them in
the true use of the grape, which he before had practiced and learned in Crete.
Plutarch says, That in France one Arras an Etruscian was the first that caused
it to be used. But concerning the truth of the first invention thereof, it is
infallibly certain, that it was found out by Noe, which Lactantius and
Josephus affirm, besides, that place also in the nineteenth of Genesis
approoues it, which is sufficient warrant against all allegations whatsoever.
Jacques de Bergamus in his Jacques de Bergamus.
second book of the Chronicles of the world, says, That Noe by this means
found out the nature of the grape: Noe (says he) on a certain day viewing
and marking the feeding of beasts on a mountain of Armenia called Coricus,
among the rest espied a young bull brousing on the berries of a wild vine, of
which he had not long fed, but that he became exceeding wild, furious, and
mad. Noe wondering at the force and effect of those berries, planted them
afterward on better grafts, and so had the experiment and trial of the virtue
and property of them, of which presently after he caused Wine to be made, and
for that cause, was among the Scythians called Ianus, which signifies in that
language, the giver of Wine.

But proceeding with the depicturances of Bacchus, Claudianus says, that his
Image or Statue is made and set forth (as it were) all naked and without
clothes, meaning thereby, that the fury and working power of wine
ouer-abundantly taken, causes a man to discover, lay open, and (as it were)
make naked, any seceret or concealed thing whatsoever, which before that time
with never so much labor, industry, and care, was kept private, close, and
unrevealed: with some Bacchus is depictured in the similitude of a very aged
man, anatomising and vnshadowing thereby, that the excess taking of wine,
hasteneth on, and is the cause of the sudaine and untimely approach of old age,
as debillitating and eneruating the contexed ground of our senses and sinnewes,
with the sucking up and drying of the humiditie and natural moisture of
youth-maintaining humors: for so much as it is manifest, that the unexpected
failing, and weakness of our senses, (by that means admitting a more feeble
estate of our bodies) being old age, is nothing else but the absence and utter
decay of a natural moistnes within us, and a general siccitude throughout the
whole composition of our bodies; which we seeking to recover and re-possesse,
accept no means so fit, nor think any prescription so available, as the
usual drinking of wine, wherein indeed men are infinitely deceived, and
inuelloped (as it were) with clouds and mists of blindness, and of error: for
so much as though wine be in the first taste and receipt thereof into our
bodies, something moist and engendring rume and raw humors, yet it is in the
operative virtue and power so marvelous hot and fiery, that it dries up, and
concocteth all the moistness and humiditie whatsoever, before ingendered and
bred: for Galen (that euer-famous Doctor) says, That the greatest Galen.
drinkers of Wine, the more they drink, the more dry and thirsty do they
find themselves, and by how much the more they think and do believe to quench
and allay their thirst by drinking more Wine, so much do they increase and
augment their dryness and desire thereof.

Not much unlike that former description of Bacchus, was that depicturance
which we read to be made of one Comus, held and reputed among the Ancients
to be the god of Feasts, Banquets, and mirth-ministring co^uenticles: whose
Statue or Image was likewise drawn forth and framed in the resemblance and
likeness of a very young man, whose face seemed to thrust out a few small
hairs, his countenance pleasant, gracious, and smiling, and his complexion
rubicund and high colored. And Philostratus describes him standing at the door
of agreat chamber full of guests, invited to a most sumptuous banquet, wherein
was much drinking and feasting, with great excess, and too much superfluity,
as solemnising and celebrating the espousals of a new-married virgin: and
says, that he stood there leaning on a staff, with his eyes half shut, and
half open, so that by little and little his head declined toward his bosom,
and his bosom toward his arm, then resting on the staff, which was indeed
very uncertainly placed: and thus between falling, and a weak supporting of
himself, he reelingly wauered and moved to and fro: about his head (says
he) was wreathed a garland of smeet-smelling flowers, and also over most part
of his body, at the one side of him was placed a great goblet of wine, and
hard by that a musical instrument like to a Cymball: the flowers so redemiting
his temples, signify joy, mirth, and pleasance, and the instrument the
lightness of heart, and contempt of sadness and melancholic cogitations: his
pleasant, fresh, and lively countenance shows, that by the operation and
stirring virtue of wine, men's spirits are awaked and made ioifull, as without
doubt a moderat and temperate receipt thereof, quickens and reuiueth drousie
and drooping senses, infusing into their spirits a more lofty and aspiring
thought. Pliny writes, Pliny.
that discreet taking of wine, increases and contexeth a man's forces and
sinews, purifies the blood from coniealed corruption, sharpens the sight,
comfort the stomach, procures appetite, provoke urine, nourishes sleep,
forces vomites, purges melancholy, expels sorrowfulness of heart, and to
conclude, exceedingly reioiceth and does letificate the spirits of men. Plato
says, That as rain temperately affoorded, nutrifieth and gives increase to
all kind Plato.
of herbage whatsoever, and that overmuch abundance thereof, and
extraordinary inundations, destroys, drowneth, and spoileth them: even so
wine taken with moderation, and discreetly, comfort the heart and spirits,
whereas overmuch used, it scorcheth, inflameth, and consumes it: Apuleius
Paniasis Apuleius Paniasis.
(that writ of the diverse operations of meats) says, That one cup of wine a
man may drink after meals with health, and the preservative means thereof,
but the second quickens and provoke venerous lusts, and the third brings
shame, dishonor, and infamy. The Grecians never put any water into wine, but
caused a little wine to be meddled with a great quantity of water, Hesiodus
commands, that one cup of wine be intermingled with three of water. The
ancient Romans absolutely forbad the use of Wine to any women or children,
as Valerius reports.

Pliny writes, That wine was so highly forbidden in Rome, and with such
severe penalties imposed on Pliny.
the breakers of such law, that on a time a certain maid having stolen the
keys of her masters wineseller, privily to have drunk and tasted thereof,
(or perhaps a desire only to infringe the commandment, according to the
humors of many of that sex) was for the same (without any further intent
therein meant by her) adjudged by famine to loose her life, and that also not
without the consent and well-liking of many of her friends, kinsfolks, and
parents.

It is written of Romulus, that when he had made any great feast or banquet,
and invited many guests thereunto, would have great plenty of wine at the
table, but would never himself so much as taste thereof, saying, that to morrow
he was to determine of weighty affairs.

It is read, that Julius Caesar never drunk wine: and yet that famous
Alexander, that true subject of warshystorians, almost never abstained it, but
in the end it overthrew him, and deprived him of further use thereof.

Anachrases says, That Wine presents unto Anachrases.
us three grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of drunkenness, and the
last of tears, sorrow, and disgrace.

Diodorus Siculus says, That Bacchus was depictured among the Grecians in two
several forms, the one of a very aged man with a very long beard, growing
stiff and thick, the other of youthful years, of a pleasant and amorous
aspect: by the first is unfolded the nature of wine, being immeasureablie
taken, which makes men look furious, wild, and of a stern countenance, and
by the second (as when wine is moderately and temperately taken) is meant, that
it makes men pleasant, discoursiue, and full of merry pastimes. Macrobius, who
(as I have already many times Macrobius.
remembered) always understood by the nature of such their gods, the several
properties and virtues of the Sun, says, That Bacchus was framed sometimes
in the likeness of a young child, sometimes of a youth, sometimes at the full
age and growth of a man, and sometimes in the form of one very aged and
decrepit, with a long white beard, to signify that all these several ages and
increases are seen to be in the sun, for in the time of the winter
Solstitium, when the days do then newly begin to lengthen and grow longer, it
may be said, that he is then a young child, daily increasing and growing.
And that at the Equinoctial of the Spring he has attained to the years of
adolescencie, and may be called a young man. Then afterward at the Solstitium
of the Summer, when days are fully at the longest, and can lengthen no more,
he is said to be at the estate of entire virilitie and manly growth, and has
then a full beard, without further increasing or growing. But because after
that time the days begin again to shorten, by reason of the suns
withdrawing himself from our horison, and obscuring his bright irradiance and
glory from the world, he may be called an oldman, as shortening and lessening
his days declining and drawing to an absolute obscurity and departure from
this life, and thus Macrobius has expounded his application.

Diodorus Siculus describes Bacchus with two horns on his head, which (says
Macrobius) signify Diodorus Siculus.
the rays and beams of the sun, but Diodorus says, That by them rather is
vnshadowed and intended, that Bacchus was the first that instructed and taught
men how to till their grounds, by subiugating and coupling their Oxen for the
performance thereof. Some writers understand by those horns so infixed on
Bacchus, audacitie, impudency, boldness, and fierceness, approved by the
overmuch taking of wine, which makes men hardy and aduenturous, as also
impudent and shameless, as is generally affirmed by Philostratus, Festus
Pompeius, Porphirio, Persius, and others that have writ thereof. Musonius a
Greek writer Musonius.
says, That unto Bacchus were not only horns given, but that he was of many
Poets described and defigured in the shape and likeness of a bull, the reason
was, for that (as Poets deliver) Jove (transformed into a serpent) lay carnally
with his own daughter Proserpina, the which by him being great, brought forth
Bacchus in the form of a young bull, whereupon with the Cizenians (people
inhabiting the further parts of Persia) his Image and Picture was framed to the
true similitude and likeness of a bull. But Theopompus and other writers say,
that they gave those horns so unto Bacchus, in that in Epirus and Theopompus.
many places thereabouts, were bulls of that hugenes and mighty bodies, that
with their horns (being answerable also in bigness) the people there made
them their great vessels to drink in, which there was a general cup or
vessel throughout all those Countries thereabouts, and which fashion also
spread it self afterward into many other Countries round about them, among
which they always used and accustomed to drink out of horns. The Athenians
afterward taking hold of that custom and manner, framed their silver vessels
and bowls wherein they used to drink, in the fashion and proportion of
crooked and retorted horns.

But it is understood with some, that such horns on Bacchus, signified
certain few hairs, which from either side of the head were left growing in
those days, which likewise now at this time the Priests and holy men of
Armenia (and in many places of India) do use to wear, and observe, which do
shave all the upper part and top of their heads, and also behind in their
necks, (reserving only two mighty long locks, growing on either side
before, toward their temples) which they used to bind with a fillet or lace
very hard, and so made them to stand of themselves erect and out right. For
which cause and fashion also Moses was said among the Hebrews to have had
horns, and so was King Lisimachus with the Persians.

Philostratus writes, That Bacchus was oftentimes depictured and drawn forth
in his Statues and Images, clothed with women's garments, and in effeminate
habit, when he reports, that he went in such manner apparrelled, with a
long purple robe, beautifully set forth and adorned with tires of silk, unto
his love Ariadne, and that then he wore on his head a coronet of roses,
curiously composed and made, his companions and followers also were all in like
wanton and loose abillements, fashioning themselves some like rural Nimphs, as
the Driades, Oriades, and such like; some like the sea Nimphs, as the Nereides,
Sirens, and others; and some also in the shape of Satires, Faunes, and Siluans,
and all these attended him, going to his amorous delights, and sports with
Ariadne. The clothes and garments of women, so said to be on Bacchus,
signify, that the inordinate taking of wine weakeneth and debillitateth the
natural forces and powers of a man, making him feeble, unconstant, and
strengthlesse, like a woman: or that (as some hold) he was so depictured,
because on certain days of the year he accustomed so to habit himself,
when those great feasts, which were called Bacchanalia, were solemnised and
kept, at which almost all the women thereabout would meet, drinking and
carousing in that abundance and immoderate excess, as they would become with
the force thereof even furiously mad, brainesicke, and wild, with dancing and
leaping, singing loud canticles, beating one another, running among the woods,
valleys, and mountains, and using all strange and rude gestures, and
behauiours, worse than people extremely mad and lunatike. And in this manner
almost all the hither part of Thessalie for the space of ten days used to
banquet and riot, delighting in their barbarous customs, and uncivil
obseruances.

Pausanias writes, that among the Eleans the picture of Bacchus was there cut
out, as having a long Pausanias.
beard, with a garment or gown covering all his body even to the feet, and
that he held in one hand a hook or sharp sithe, and in the other a goblet or
bowl of wine, and round about him were depainted forth many vinetrees, and
other fruitful and commodious plants. And with some he was called Bacchus
Bassareus, by reason of that long garment which usually he wore, and which was
called Bassara, so named of a certain place in Lidia, where those kind of
cloths were made, or else it was so called of the skins of wolves, which those
women in their Bacchinall feasts used to wear about their shoulders, for that
in the Thracian language a wolf is called Bassara. Neither did those women use
only the skins of Wolves, but of Panthers and Tygres also, which they
carelessly would hang about their shoulders in their fits of drunkenness and
fury, tearing up the grass and herbs with their nails as they went along,
their hair hanging over their faces, which they set forth with diverse and
sundrie-coloured flowers; over one of their arms they wore a garland made of
yuie leaves, or the white Poppie, for that this Poppie was supposed to be an
infernal flower, and growing on the banckes of Acheron, and therefore the
Ancients appropriated it unto the companions and followers of Bacchus, for that
among some he was held also and taken to be the god of the infernal region,
whereupon (as I have already very lately delivered) the Poets do affirm that
he was borne of Proserpina, which was Queen of the lower kingdom, wife to
Pluto, and daughter to Jupiter and Ceres.

It is written with Diodorus Siculus, that Bacchus was not always conversant
and merry in drinking Diodoros Siculus,
and in feasts, but says, that he showed himself in many services a very
valerous and courageous captain, and followed the wars with great fortunes
many years together, in which time, he would commonly wear for his upper
garment the skins of Panthers, and such like beasts. He victoriously overcame
in battle (says Diodorus) many kings and great commanders, as Licurgus
Pentheus, and others, and also subiugated and reduced unto his command all the
hither India, returning from thence with mighty triumph and victory, carried
on the back of a huge Elephant, with all his whole army celebrating and
extolling the praises and worthy exploits of their lord and commander. Neither
is it read, that before his time there was ever any king or Prefect that ever
triumphed in the wars, or was led home with such ceremonious signs and
testimonies of victorious preuailement over his enemies. And therefore unto
Bacchus, as unto the first triumpher, was consecrated the bird Pica, being a
bird full of prattle, and apt to speak any familiar language, for that in
those triumphs it was lawful for any one to reprove another vices with any
dispightfull terms, or disgrace whatsoever, every one crying out, and
obiecting what might be said to the defense or denial thereof.

The Ancients also have attributed unto this god the first innention and
making of garlands, who also was the first that did wear any, and for himself
he made them of yuie leaves, which afterward was consecrated also unto him:
whereupon Alexander the great minding to imitate him therein, caused all his
army in his return from the conquest of India, to make them garlands and
wreaths thereof. This plant or tree was for diverse reasons attributed unto
Bacchus. Plutarch says, That it has in it self such a hidden Plutarch.
and secret power and virtue, that being applied in a certain fashion,
observed by the Physicians, it causes men without either beer or wine to be
exceeding drunk and giddie in the brains. Eustathius writes, That yuie
according to the Greek word Eustathius.
thereof, which is Lisso, signifies lust, or desire of carnal
voluptuousness, and in that respect was given unto Bacchus, for that men being
drunk and overcome with the braine-distempering fury thereof, are sooner
drawn and inclined to those desires, than at other times.

The Statues of Bacchus also was sometimes (as some writers report) set forth
and adorned with coronets made of the leaves of a Fig tree, in memory (as some
hold) of a Nymph which was called Syca, which word with the Greeks signifies
as much as Fico in Italian: which Nymph was entirely beloved of Bacchus, and
metamorphised by the gods into that plant. As it is read also of Staphilis, a
Nymph on whom Bacchus was likewise exceedingly enamoured, and who afterward
was transformed into a vine tree: so that it should seem from thence it comes,
that these plants are so pleasing and grateful unto Bacchus. With some also he
is crowned with the leaves of the flower Narcissus, and many other fragrant and
sweet smelling flowers. Whereupon Statius says, That his Chariot wherein he
was used to be drawn, was all adorned and beautified with flowers, herbs,
and young plants. Boccace (by the Chariot which is so given unto him)
expounds, that by the extreme taking of Wine, men's heads, and also their
bodies go tumbling and reeling up and down like the wheels of a chariot:
which says he) being drawn with Panthers and Tygres, signifies, that the
working power of Wine makes men seem furious, cruel, and terrible in their
looks, and wild behauiours, according to the qualities of those beasts so
appropriated unto him. Philostratus says, That those Panthers are so given
Philostratus.
unto Bacchus, for that they are of amost hot and dry constitution, (as
commonly the drinkers of wine are) and that they are light and speedy either
in leaping or running, as men likewise find them more nimble and light when
they are drunk and have somewhat ouergone themselves in too much wine, than
they do at any other time. The same Author also says (in a certain place
where he depainteth the ship of Bacchus) that the prow or forepart thereof was
framed in the likeness and proportion of a Panther, round abound which were
Cymbals and Shalmes depainted, and played upon by many young men: in the midst
of the ship was placed a long and straight tree, on the top of which were hung
purple garments, wouen with pure gold of Triolus, which the frantike women in
the Bacchinall feasts used to wear, which also were depictured there with rare
perfection of true cunning and workmanship: on both sides of the ship were set
forth with great life many yuie trees full of berries, as also many vines,
whose very branches with plenty of fruit, seemed to crase and break off
from the stock, whose green leaves and new ripened grapes were depainted
forth with unspeakable curiousness and labor. Toward the bottom of the
ship was hewn and cut out a most lively and perfect fountain, flowing and
streaming with pure Wine, whose sweetness certain men (most exactly drawn
forth underneath it) seemed to taste, and eagerly receive, wherein was
discovered by admirable skill of the workman, a most lively representation of
an exceeding thirst and desire of drink: and thus Phtlostratus describes the
ship of Bacchus, whose very like by all descriptions and particular
resemblances, was long time kept and preserved in Rome, in the temple there
called La chiesa di Santa Agnese, and afterward called the temple of Bacchus.

It is written of Bacchus by ancient Authors, that when he was a young child,
the three fatal sisters compassed him about as he lay in his cradle, and cast
over his face two most venomous and ugly serpents, which as histories mention,
never offended him: from whence it afterward grew, that the bacchinall women,
in celebrating their rites and ceremonies, used to eat and devour young Snakes.
And Catullus says, that those frantike women in performing and executing
Catullus.
the ceremonious obseruances of their feast, used to carry in one of their
hands some member and part of a young heyfar, all mingled and cut in pieces:
and the reason was for that (as it is read) Pantheus king of Thebes (being a
great enemy to all those customs and fashions) despised and set at naught all
such honors so dedicated unto Bacchus, neither would he admit by any means
any such ceremony to be performed within his rule and government, who to
derogate the more from Bacchus, and disgrace his obseruances, one day as they
were busily employed in great reverence and zeal amidst their cheifest
oblations, caused a mad heyfar (or as Ovid reporeth, a wild Bear) to be
driven in amongst the thickest troop of them, so to disturb and affright them
in their ceremonious intendements, who at the first being somewhat suddenly
surprised, sat astonished, but remembering themselves, and being also half
drunk, they furiously set upon the beast, and with short bills and knives, and
other such like weapons as they had, hewed and cut it into a thousand little
pieces, and every one ioying and reioicing in their victory and triumph, fell
presently again to drinking, of which being overcome and subdued, in great
fury they ran up and down, carrying in their hands some piece or other of
the slaughtered beast, with making strange shrikes, shouts, and uncouth noise
for the victory thereof, and thus through the woods, bushes, hills, or valleys
would they in an extreme fury, and forgetfulness of sense, confusedly and
out of order run galloping together. And ever afterward to eternise this their
preuaileme^t over that beast, would they in their bacchinall feasts and
drinking, carry in one of their hands some joint or other of a new killed
heyfar. And thus much shall suffice for the Statues, Pictures, and Descriptions
that ancient writers have made and delivered of Bacchus.

Fortune.
LActantius writes, that this Fortune is nothing else but a vain, idle, and
senseless name, which shows forth the shallowness and weakness of man's
wisdom, in attributing the success or event of any thing whatsoever, to her
virtue, power, or pleasure. Which opinion also Marcus Tullius confirms,
saying, that this name of Fortune was first brought in and used to cover and
shadow the ignorance of man, who (says he) gives the success of all haps
and accidents unto her, of which he himself by natural judgment can show no
reason: which only proceeds from the barrenness and dullness of wits and
capacities, for so much as those things and events, whereof he could give any
likely reason or conjecture of probability for the effect thereof, he never
ascribed unto this goddess Fortune. But the Ancients were no more deceived in
this, than in other the gods and goddesses, and therefore consecrated and
dedicated unto her many Statues, Altars, Temples, and Pictures, adoring her as
the absolute disposer and dispensatrix of mundane affairs and businesses. And
they supposed, that as well all evil, and bad mischeefes and inconveniences,
as good and happy prosperities proceeded from her. By reason whereof, there was
held to be two Fortunes, the one good, the other bad, and from the one came
riches, happiness, quiet, content, and pleasures: from the other all misery,
war, affliction, crosses, and disaster calamities whatsoever. Whereupon she was
depictured with some, as having two faces, the one white and well-fauoured, the
other black and disproportioned. Alexander Neapolitanus Alexander Neapolitanus.
reports, That at Prenestes was a temple dedicated unto Fortune, wherein was
drawn out and portrayed a Picture or Image in the shape and form of two
Sisters, both conioined together in the same Statue, and that it was there held
and worshipped in high reverence and adoration: And it was taken for the
representation of Fortune. But yet amongst most people, and according to most
writers, there is acknowledged but one Fortune. Pausanias says (writing of the
monuments Pausanias.
of antiquity) that the most ancient Statue and Image of Fortune was that
which Bupalus (that farre-famed Architector and Ingrauer) composed and made in
Greece, which picture afterward the Smyrneans (people also of that Country)
bought with a great sum of money. And the same was cut out and proportioned
in the shape and likeness of a woman, on whose head was infixed a round and
circular ball, and in one of her hands she held the horn of plenty and
abundance, called Cornucopia: by which depicturance is plainly understood the
office and property of that goddess, which is to have the bestowing and
giving of great riches, wealth, and treasures, the which notwithstanding she
bestows on men with such uncertainty, that they never remain long with
them, but are unsettled, unsure, and quickly rolled from them again, as the
heavens are tossed and circumfered by the two poles, resembled thereunto by the
ball so placed upon her head. Lactantius says, Lactantius.
that unto Fortune was given the stern or rudder of a ship, to signify, that
she does rule, command, and govern all humane things whatsoever, as the ship
is governed by the rudder: and says, that she is unconstant in all her gifts,
mutable, and never assured, favoring and affecting for the most part wicked and
irreligious persons, and advancing men of mean worth, virtue, and learning,
deiecting and oppressing the true children, and rightly begotten of the muses,
and those in whom perfection of merit abides. And she is oftentimes also
called the blind goddess, and the uncertain and partial Lady, and that she
is humourous, and must be pleased by submission and acknowledgement of her
power and superiority, as certain verses much to the same effect, do
demonstrate and testify, which englished are these, or much agreeing with the
true meaning of the Author:

Imperious ruler of the worlds desseignes,
Lady of sollace, pleasure, and of pains,
Who in thy well-pleasd humors, kings erecteth,
And when thou list, them down again deiecteth:
Powerful in all, in few things constant, alluring
Base men to greatness, though nothing assuring:
Those which true virtue truly do embrace,
Not subject to the smiles of beauties face,
Nor seating vaine-built hopes on glassie frame,
Of big-swolne titles of thy glorious name,
Thou do severely scourge with unjust rigor,
Showing in their afflicts thy powerful vigor.
Like tennis-bals thou beat'st us to and fro,
From favors to disgrace, from joy to woe,
From wars to peace, from rule to be commanded,
Till at the length clean out of sight w' are banded:
When straight fresh bals (called Fauorits) come in place,
Which (being new) look with a smooth-white face,
And for a while are pleasing and well-liking,
And gently tossed with mild and easy striking,
Till in some humor (wearied with that play)
Some stiffer racket bandies them away,
O Fortune, that thy sacred deity,
Should so consist in such variety.
And in another place a discontented person railing against her cruelty, thus
says:

How long shall these my soule-bred sorrows last
Which hourly thus increase and multiply?
Tell me (proud Fortune) shall they never wast?
Is there no date of this my misery?
Will thou needs show ensample of thy pride
On my o're-burdened wo-possessed heart,
Which thousand times far better might abide
Deaths all-concluding momentanie dart.
But yet if in the end thou show me grace
(As thou delight'st in instabillitie)
And look on my deuoires with smiling face,
Changing these greeses to ioies tranquillity,
O then how gladly would I these endure,
If of thy favor I might so be sure.
Forced by vile Fortune, I seek out new ways,
And range in uncouth corners of each wood,
Where darkness, and sad silence spend their days,
And melancholy lives in angry mood,
There sit I penning Satyrs against these times,
Railing against Fortunes malice in my wrongs,
Composing Odes, and rage-expressing rimes,
Sad madrigals, and heart-vnburdening songs:
There as a man all dead with discontent,
I feed on sighs, and drink mine own salt tears,
When senseless trees shed sap, and do relent,
And flowers do hang their heads, as though they had ears
To hear my plaints, and all do seem to say,
We wail thy hap thou Image of decay.
The christalline and siluer-faced Brooks
Their soft-toucht music to the dancing stones
Do cease, they wonder so at my sad looks,
Each savage Beast does bellow sorth my mones,
The vales-delighting Nimphs, and hill-borne Faunes
That wonted were to leap and lead the hay,
Crossing the flourie verdure of the lawnes
To hearken to my mones would rest that day,
The shrill-voic'd Birds sing forth a doleful ditty,
And warble out some dreirie note of mourning
To show how much my greefes they all did pity,
As one in fires of woes for ever burning,
The woods grow weary of my wretchedness,
Nimphs, Brooks, Beasts, Birds, admire my heaviness.
By all which we may evidently perceive what sway and power over humane
affairs, is ascribed unto Fortune. And in another place a certain in amoretto
passion-rent (as a man may say) and full of melancholy, partly complaining of
his mistress, but especially inueighing against the foolish partiality of
Fortune, in aduauncing the desertlesse and illiterates, leaving and forsaking
the virtuous and learned to miseries, and all-despised pouerties, (as also
accusing the world and the children thereof with two much forgetfulness of
themselves, in regarding so dearly the fruition of many riches and pleasures,
wholly neglecting, or rather scorning the embracement of virtue, letters, or
knowledge) thus says. But first the Poet sets down the place where this
discontented lover vnbowelled (as it were) and anatomised his hearts
oppressions.

Down by that proud ambicious Rivers side,
On whose enameld banks were wont to lie
The weeping sisters of that daring guide, The daughters of Clymene, and
sisters of Phaeton.

That needs would rule the chariot of the sky,
Under the shade of a frondiferous beech,
Sits greefefull Dolio breathing out this speech:
Sleep Phoebus, sleep, rest in thy watrie bed,
Look on us this black and dismal day,
Where at he paused, and hanging down his head,
Grief stopped the passage of his speeches way.
All sorrow-wounded thus, he looked like one,
Whom heavens had metamorphiz'd to a stone.
Such stone, within whose concaue bosom dwells,
Some thin-cheekt Fountain, lean and hollow-eyed,
From out whose loins spring forth a thousand wels,
Which closely sneke away for being spide,
So stealingly there creepes Down Dolios face
Two small divided streams with silent pace.
At last, when inward greefes had almost slain him,
(For vn-reuealed woes soon kill the heart)
Viewing the blushing East, he thus began plain him,
O thus he waild, as though his life should part:
Sleep Phoebus, sleep, rest in thy watrie bed,
O rest in Thetis lap thy drowsy head.
And thus he often wooed, and still entreated
The sun to hide the glory of his face,
Which words he iterated and repeated,
To show the black disasters of his case,
Sad night (he knew) best fit a his dull spright,
The wo-tormented soul does hate the light.
O cruel Fortune, stepdame to my ioies,
That dishinherits them from sweet content,
Plunging their hopes in seas of dire annoies,
Depriving them of gifts which Nature lent,
When will thy proud insulting humor cease,
That freed frrom cares, my scule may live in peace.
But why do I entreat thy ruthlesse heart,
That knows thy greatest pleasure, thy delights,
Censists in aggravating my souls smart,
Poysen'd with woe by venom of thy spite?
No, let me rather curse thy bloody mind,
Which executes the wrath of one so blind.
So blind as will advance each low-bred groom,
To haughty titles of a glorious place,
Lifting him up from nothing, to the room
Where those of honors, and of virtues race
Should seated be, and not th'illiterate:
Learning, not place, does men nobillitate.
But what thou will, must stand, the rest must fall,
All human kings pay tribute to thy might,
And this must rise, when pleases thee to call,
This other perrish in a woeful plight:
Thy courses are irregular, thy kindness
Misplaced, thy will lawless, all is blindness.
Thou filst the world with hell-bred villainies,
Dis arming virtue of all true desence,
Leaving her naked midst her enemies,
That are both void of learning, wit, and sense:
Only this sense they have, for e're to hold
Their high-pil'd heaps of all-preuailing gold.
And that is it that chokes true virtues breath,
Making it die, though she immortal be,
Fruitless it makes it, subject unto Death,
That Is want: or else it lives eternally,
But men do count of virtue as a dream,
Only they study on some golden theme.
Never was any thing so pricelesse deemed,
So lovingly embosom'd in man's thought,
No not religious rites are so esteemed
As gold, for which both earth and hell are sought,
All pains are ease, so we may it obtain,
All ease is pain, when we should virtue gain.
Where have you seen one of the Muses train,
Whose mind is impleat with virtues seed,
Scorning this worldly soule-polluting gain,
But that he lives in everlasting need,
And yet not basely, though in mean estate,
For virtue scorns base means with deadly hate.
But there is no thought of virtue, no regard,
Whereas this gilded idol bears the sway,
Men of desert from favors are debard,
And churlishly thrust from preferments way,
When some base Gnatoes sleep in Fortunes lap,
Whose wealth, not wit, procures such fools such hap.
Then come you wounded souls, conioine with me,
In some obumbrate thicket let us dwell,
Some place which heavens fair eye did never see,
There let us build some sorrow-framed cell,
Where we will cast our sighs and sum our cares,
Penning them sadly down with sea salt tears.
Wearying the lowd-toungd daughter of the air, Echo.

Infusing trembling horrors in each beast
With suddein-broken accents of despair,
With deepe-fetcht groans, as signs of our unrest:
And if the Satyrs ask why we complain,
Fortune commands, and virtue now is slain.
Thus in these raging fits of true-felt passion,
This melancholic lover vsd to cry,
Railing against Love and Fortune in suoh fashion,
As if twixt both there were one simpathie
Of natures and of humors all one kind,
Both being false, mutable, and both blind.
And in this inuectiue and selfe-afflicting vain, the same Lover in another
place further complains of the overmuch rigor of his Lady, preserving and
continuing in hate and scorn of his love: which words reduced to a Sonnet, are
these, or to the like effect.

Hard is his hap who never finds content,
But still must dwell with heauy-thoughted sadness,
Harder that heart that never will relent,
That may, and will not turn these woes to gladness,
Then ioies-adue, comfort and mirth, farewell,
For I must now exile me from all pleasure,
Seeking some uncouth cave where I may dwell,
Pensive and solitary without measure,
There to bewail my such untimely fortune,
That in my April days I thus should perish,
And there that steele-hard heart still still t'importune,
That it at last my bleeding soul would cherish,
If not, with greedy longing to attend,
Tillpitty-moued Death my woes shall end.
And thus far have I continued the exclamations of an unhappy lover, who in
the same place also writ many other inuectiues againg Fortune and Love, ioining
them both together, which I will here pretermit, having already too much
digressed from our chief intendement: reuerting therefore from whence we left
you, it is written, that the Thebans in a certain statue which they dedicated
unto Fortune (being also in the shape and similitude of a woman) placing in one
of her hands a young child, which they termed by the name of Pluto, which with
many is taken to be the god of riches: so that is discovered, by representing
Pluto in the form of a child, that in the hands of Fortune was the bestowing
and disposing of wealth, riches, possessions, and aduancements, commanding the^
and having that absolute authority and rule over them, as mothers govern and
rule their children. Martianus thus describes her to appear at the marriage of
Philologia. Martianus.
There was (says he) among the rest a young and beautiful woman, more talking
and more abounding in idle discourse and words then any of the rest, who seemed
to be full of gestures and of fantastike carriage of her body, and always
moving and stirring up and down, her upper garment was of the thinnest silk,
whose lightness the least breath of wind would puff up, her steps and paces
as she went, were very uncertain, and she never would abide long in one
place, or in one company, and he says, that her name was Chance, which also
is the same in sense as Fortune, and which likewise with some is called
Nemesis: she carried in her lap (which was very spacious and wide) almost all
the sundry kinds and sorts of all the beauties, ornaments, riches, and graces
of the world, of which, some she seemed to offer with her hand to some that
stood by, but in so hasty manner, and so suddenly as was possible, as that if
they did not instantly take hold and accept of her courtesy, all what was
offered was lost, to some she seemed very familiar and kind, dallying with them
and playing with their locks, and using many other such wanton and alluring
behauiours: but to some others again she would seem marvelous angry and
displeased, striking them over the faces and heads with a white wand, which she
held in her hand, and with such sign and token of revenge, as if she had been
highly provoked and incensed, and would assuredly acquit her self on the
offenders whosoever.

In a temple in Greece was erected a Statue of Fortune, which was made in the
sorme and similitude of a grave Matrone, habited and clothed in garments
suitable to the desires and fashions of elder years, and in her countenance she
seemed very sad and pensive: a little before her was placed the Image and
portraiture of a young virgin, amourous in aspect and pleasant, which seemed
to give and offer her hand to the picture of the other: behind these (even hard
at their heels) was engraven forth another Image in the likeness of a young
child, which with one of her arms seemed to lean on the picture of the sad
Matrone, which looking so doleful and heavy, signifies her self to be that
Fortune which is already past and slipped by, and therefore she sits lamenting
and bewailing the departure thereof. The other which seemed so pleasant and
offered her hand, is the present Fortune, and the young infant behind them both,
is that which is to come and succeeds.

Among the Ancients and among the old writers, Fortuna and Nemesis were
oftentimes taken to be all one, yet at other times they made this difference
and several natures to appear for Nemesis: as Amianus Marcellinus says) was
held and taken to be the Amianus Marcellinus
goddess, to whom only it belonged to punish and castigate the offenses of the
wicked and male act is, afflicting them with pains and torments, according to
the quality of their sins; and also rewarded the virtuous and well-liuers with
aduancements, honor, and titles of place and dignity: and that she did know
and see all things even into the darkest and most private corner of the world,
and thereupon was by the Ancients supposed to be the daughter of Iustitia, who
(say they) dwelt and inhabited in a very secret corner, within the house of
Eternity, where she noted down in her books of memory, the offenses and
wicked deeds of the evil. Macrobius says, this Nemesis was adored Macrobius.
and worshipped among the Egyptians as the revenger and chief enemy of
pride, insolency, and haughtiness, and that she was also with many called
Rhamnusia, so termed of a certain place among the Athenians; where also was
erected and dedicated unto her a most stately and magnifique Statue of marble,
and that she was also sometimes known by the name of Adrastia, of king
Adrastus, for that he was the first that ever caused her to be held in that
worship and reverenced regard, and that ever consecrated any altars or temples
unto her.

The same Author also describes her, saying, that her picture was depainted
and set forth with wings on her shoulders, to signify, that she was always
ready and at hand amongst men: hard by her side was placed the rudder of a
ship, and she her self stood upon a round wheel, holding in her right hand a
golden ball, and in the other a whip, manifesting thereby, that where she
favored or disliked, either aduancements, wealth and honor, or miseries,
crosses, and afflictions followed and ensued.

She is oftentimes also depainted, as holding the bridle of a horse in one of
her hands, and in the other a small and long piece of wood of a certain
measure, which we call an ell or a yard: vnshadowing thereby, that men ought to
rule and restrain their tongues from evil and corrupting speeches, and that
they should administer justice and true measures with whom they deal or do
converse.

It is written with Pausanias, that Nemesis was the Pausanias.
most severe and cruel punisher of arrogancy and vainglory of all others, and
says, that she abased and brought down the insolency and ouer-weening
boldness of the northern barbarous people, who with an assured conquest and
victory (as they thought) entered into the countries of the Athenians, and
there (scorning as it should seem) their small forces and resistances, fell to
spoil and rifeling, and presently set up and erected their huge Colossus, or
pillar of marble, which they of purpose brought with them to ingraue and set
forth their victories, trophies, and spoils that they should make of their
enemies: but being afterward overcome themselves, and beaten back into their
countries, the same stone the Athenians caused to be consecrated unto Nemesis,
whose picture and counter fet by the incomparable skill of Phidias, was most
curiously and exactly engraven thereon, to show thereby, that she only was the
cause of the clean subuerting and expelling their fatal enemies out of their
Country, and that she therein extended her power and office to the revenging
and abolishing the ouerhaughtie attempts of pride, and foole-hardie
presumption. And in that she was thus held to be punisher of vain humors, and
proud demeanures of mortals, the Ancients also held and supposed her to be the
very same in nature and property as the goddess Iustitia, whose description
(as Aulus Gellius affirms) was by Chrisippus thus set forth and composed.
Aulus Gellius.


Her Statue (says he) was framed out in the due proportion and similitude of
a beauteous young virgin, who was not of any proud, lofty, or disdaineful
countenance, nor base or dejected in her look or carriage, but carrying so
settled and modest demeanures, as seemed worthy of all reverence, love, and due
commendation, her eyes seemed most quick in their circumference, clear and
lively, which she often turned this way, and that way, looking and prying into
every place round about her, and for that cause the Ancients entearmed her the
all-discerning Lady. Apulcius oftentimes used to swear and take his oath by
the light of Phoebus, and eye of Iustitia, adioining them both together in
equality of cleerenesse. By which may be understood, that there ought to be in
Judges and administers of justice, a sharp and clear eye to find out and
inuestigat the truth, and as it were to see into (with the sight of capacity)
any offense or crime perpetrated whatsoever: whose cleerenesse and far-piercing
manner of examination, discouers and lays open what before has been long kept
hid, and in dark and obscure couertures. And inframing her like a virgin, is
also meant, that such officers, and men authorized for execution of justice,
ought to resemble a virgins chastity, by not suffering themselves to be
tempted and so led away by corruption of bribes, by partiality, flattery, or
insinuation, but to remain unmoved, constant, and steadfast in sincerity of
conscience, proceeding in their profession according to right, equity, and
reasons Pausanias writes, that in a certain place in Egypt Pausanias.
was portraied forth the Image of Iustitia, in resemblance also of a fair
young virgin, which seemed to draw after her with her left hand, another black
and hard favored woman, which she haled and pulled forward, even by maine force,
and striking her many times over the face and head in most despightfull and
severe manner, seeming therein (as it were) to revenge some wrong or injury
offered unto her. The young virgin was Iustitia, and the other Iniuria: which
intellecteth us thereby, that Judges and such like officers for civil and
domestike governments, ought continually strive by all endeavors to suppress
wrongs, injuries, and misdemeanures, and that no man receive molestations,
violence, ot hard vsages of the stronger party. And that they also carry an
equal hand over all matters and complaints exposed unto them, and not to give
forth and denounce sentence, till both sides may be produced to plead for
themselves, alleging lawful reasons for their innocence, and purgation of
those crimes objected against them: unless they will rese^ble that Judge which
Apelles drew forth in a certain piece of work of his, which (according to
Lucianus) is thus described, with the occasion and reason Lucianus.
of the depainting and setting out thereof:

After that Ptolomie king of Egypt had delivered Apelles out of prison, and
restored him to liberty, when indeed he had once thought to have punished him
with severe tortures of death (having ouerlightly believed the unjust
information of Antiphilus, who merely of malice had accused him of a certain
rebellion and insurrection in that Country) and after that in lieu of such his
wrong of opprobrie and false imprisonment, he had given him a hundred talents,
as part of amends for such his trouble, and had commanded that Antiphilus
should always afterward be his slave and bondsman: for requital of such his
injurious practices, and slandering his integrity of life, he in a
fantastical humor, betook himself to his art, intending by some curious
devise thereof to show forth the depicturance of the danger and peril of his
life, which at the time of such his accusation he then stood in, which was in
this manner with incomparable knowledge of skill performed, being called
Calu^nia di Apelle:

There was placed in a judicial and high seat, made (as it were) for the
determining and deciding of civil causes and affairs, the Statue of a man,
with marvelous long ears, such as Midas is reported to have had, who there
represented the presence of a grave and reverend Judge. Unto this Judge two
women (one of the one side, and the other on the other side) seemed to whisper
some matter or other in his ears, the one of them was called Ignorance, the
other Suspicion, and he held forth his hand toward another woman, called
Calumnia, being of the shape of a beautiful, rich, and young woman, then
coming and approaching toward him, she was marvelous gorgeous in her habit,
and of a passing fair aspect, saving that at that instant she seemed somewhat
angry, disdainefull, and discontented, insomuch, as her eyes looked very red
and fiery: In her left hand she held a flaming torch, and with her right she
seemed forcibly to draw and pluck after her a young man by the hairs of his
head in most tyrannical sort, who miserably and dolefully with both his hands
erected toward the heavens, bemoned and lamented his woe afflicted condition
and state: a little before her approached Envy, which was in the form of a
wondrous lean old man, with pallid and meagre face, on whose withered cheeks
it should seem Time with the all cutting plow-share of his remorse-lesse
cruelty had wrought deep furrows, and inuolued wrinkles. And immediately
after her (Envy vshering them all) came two young women more, which seemed to
flatter and gloss with her with persuasiue and insinuating phrases, extolling
her beauty, and (as it were, forcing her to assume a strong opinion of her
own incomparable fairness, and seemed also to adore and deck her
abillements and cloths with many conceited and curious toies of fantasy and
delight: and the one was called Deceit, and the other Treachery, both sisters,
and of one humor. After all these followed also another woman (whose name was
Penitence) habited with vild ragged and base attirements, who infinitely
deploring her being, seemed to crucify her self with strange impassionated
fits beyond all measure, who looking back, and seeing another poor woman
making have to overtake her (called Truth) even for very sorrow shame and
grief, fell into diverse sounds, and was ready to die and depart from the
world. And thus Lucianus describes that picture, which was called Calumnia di
Apelle. By which this little may be observed, that the meaning of it is
nothing else but a false and malicious accusation, entertained and supported by
the Judge of one, that is not there himself in presence to purge and clear
himself of that which is objected against him, whose accuser is oftentimes
Envy: seconded and coadiuted by Deceit and Treachery: the cause of the Judges
rash sentence, is Ignorance, together with Suspicion, and the embracing of
calumniation or slander of the innocent: the bewailing and tears of Penitence
at the discovery of Truth, shows the grief and shame that the guiltless and
true persons receive by bringing their reputation in question of villainy and
dishonesty. And this shall suffice for the description of this Picture of
Apelles, with the explication thereof, returning to the finishing and
concluding of the Statues and Images dedicated unto Fortune.

Quintus Curtius says, That Fortune was depictured among the people of
Scythia, in the form of a woman without feet, and that there was placed round
about at her right hand a number of little wings, first to signify, that she
cannot stand fast or firm, and that her gifts and favors are no sooner given,
but are presently lost, and do (as it were) sudainely fly from a man before
they be fully entertained or possessed. Alexander Alexander Neapolitanus.
Neapolitanus writes, That with certain people of Greece her Picture or
Statue was wholly framed and compacted of glass, as showing thereby, that upon
every small occasion, riches, and happiness are decayed, consumed, and
perished. And yet all the Ancients for the most part so absolutely relied and
confided upon her power and virtue, that they referred and attributed all
luckie successes of battles and other pleasures also unto her favor, kindness,
and good liking. In Rome (as Liuie reports) was erected a very sumptuous temple
Liuie.
by Camillus, which he dedicated unto Fortune after the victorious overthrow
he gave unto the Hetruscians.

Plutarch also speaks of another Temple which was dedicated unto Fortune,
which was built two miles out of Rome in that very place, where Coriolanus,
approaching like a gallant captain in arms (though then against his country) met
with his own mother, and others of his kindred, at whose urgent entreaties and
prayers, he surceased to proceed in his (till then) implacable fury and
wrath, and so that glorious Metropolitan of the world, was no doubt preserved
from saccage and ruin at that time, for that before he had resolutely vowed to
burn and consume it to ashes. And in this place (as I have said) was erected a
temple unto Fortune, where she was portraied forth in brass to the resemblance
and true proportion of a woman, which afterward (some Devil hanting the same)
was taken and held by those faith-wanting Idolaters in great reverence and
adoration, as a most infallible and true Oracle.

It is written of Galba, that when he had taken away a certain chain or
bracelet of gold from this Image of Fortune (which was then hung about her
neck) and had placed it on the Statue of Venus, that she (that same very
night following) appeared unto him in his sleep with threatening means and
words of revenge, which so appalled and confounded his senses, that not many
days after in a great affrightment and terror, he departed from this life
speechless and dumb many hours before he died.

With many Authors it is written, that in a certain country of Egypt Fortune
is depictured, as turning round a great wheel made of glass, on the top
whereof are set forth the pictures of many men playing ioifully, and in the
pride of mirth and iolitie some others also climing and endeavoring to ascend
to the top thereof, and others having newly attained it, precipitating and
tumbling down back again.

Spartianus writes, that almost all the Roman Emperors were so addicted to
an opinion, which they Spartianus.
embraced of the powerful mightiness of this Fortune, that they kept evermore
her picture or Image in their bed-chambers, and other private places of retrait,
and that when any of them died, the same Image was presently carried into the
lodging of the known successor.

The first (as Liuie affirms) that caused in Rome any temples to be erected
unto Fortune, was Seruius Liuie.
Tallius, the sixth king of the Romans. And yet Plutarch Plutarch.
says in his books entitled (The fortune of the Romans) that Marcius, which
was the fourth king (after their computation) was the first that dedicated or
built any Statues or temples unto this goddess; and that as this Empire
attained higher and higher unto her puissance and glory, so the superstitious
devotion of these people, increased for the reuerencing and worshipping of
Fortune, which afterward spread it self throughout all Italy, though it
continued no long time.

The Philosopher Cebes resembled Fortune very fitly Cebes.
unto a Comedy, in which many actors appear, oftentimes in likeness and
similitude of kings and great monarchs, and presently after perform the part
of some rogue or villan, and are become poor fishermen, slaves, and bondmen,
and such like. Socrates compared Socrates.
her also unto a common place of meeting, conuenticle, or theater, where
without all order or observation as they come, men are placed and have their
seats; nothing respecting the worthiness or dignity of any among them
whatsoever, all being intermingled, and confusedly thronged together: showing
thereby, that Fortune without either respect of gentry, worthiness, or merit,
but all unadvisedly, and without order or reason bestows her favors, riches,
and felicities.

It is read, that Vupal was the first that in all Greece caused any Statues,
altars, or temples to be consecrated unto this goddess Fortune, and that in
the town of Smyrna he erected one most stately temple, in the midst whereof,
the portraiture of Fortune was placed; which picture was cut out and carved
with incredible curiousness of the workman, and beautified and graced with
diverse delicat embellishments, and almost art-exceeding politures.

In Egira a city of Achaia, the Image of Fortune was drawn forth in the shape
of a marvelous fair woman, who held in one of her hands the horn of abundance,
called Cornucopia, and in the other the boy Cupid: all which (as Pausanias
interpretes it) signifies, that it little avails any woman to be of a
beautiful, amorous, and well-composed feature, if fortune in that body be
wanting and absent: meaning that beauty without riches or honor, loses partly
her value and esteem among men, which riches are intended by that Cornucopia,
signifying abundance of wealth, and enjoying of much treasure. And indeed he is
very fortunate and happy, that in his love shall find beauty to be counterpoisd
with riches, and that the fruition of that shall be accompanied with the graces
of Venus, and those all-ouercomming accomplements.

Giraldus (writing of the gods of the ancients) says, that with some Fortune
is depictured riding on a Giraldus.
horse, who with his wonderful and strange swiftnes of gallop, caries her away
almost invisible: and after her posteth Destiny, with great fury and exceeding
celerity, holding in her hand an iron bow ready bent, and aiming to strike
Fortune even at the very heart. This brief depicturance may unfold unto us the
unstaid and changing mutabilitie of Fortune, and her sudain and most swift
departure from those whom even now she favored and highly advanced: or that it
signifies, that she is always flying from destiny, seeking all means to avoid
her company, for that indeed these two can never accord or agree together; for
so much as where Destiny sets her foot, Fortune is there as itwere enchanted
and coniured, as having no power, efficacy, or virtue. And thus much shall
suffice for the depicturances and descriptions, with the several explications
adioined, which are read in autenticke writers to be made and devised by the
Ancients of this their goddess Fortune.

Venus.
BEfore it be descended to the descriptions of the images and statues
dedicated unto this gods Venus, it shall not be impertinent somewhat to touch
the seueralnatures and conditions understood and signified by her, as being a
furtherance and light to conceive the reasons why so many diverse statues and
pictures were so diversely fashioned and composed of her. According therefore to
the opinion of the Poets, Venus was taken to be the goddess of wantonness and
amorous delights, as that she inspired into the minds of men, libidinous
desires, and lustful appetites, and with whose power and assistance they
attained the effect of their lose concupiscence: whereupon also they entermed
her the mother of love, because that without a certain love and simpathie of
affections, those desires are sildome accomplished. And unto her they ascribe
the care and charge of marriages and holy wedlockes, of which likewise it is
written, that Himeneus and Juno are the protectors and rulers. But according to
the works of nature, which under this name, are indeed diversely understood,
Venus does signify that secret and hidden virtue by which all creatures
whatsoever are drawn with association, effectuating thereby the art of
generation: whereupon Macrobius says, that from Venus is brought the desire
Macrobius.
and humor of carnal lusts and voluptuousnes, which afterward taking root more
deeply, conduces unto a true accomplishment thereof. Some that have written of
these natural causes, have affirmed, that Venus, Juno, Luna, and Proserpina
have been al one, retaining only different names and titles, in that many
effects and issues proceeding from them, have been diverse and several. But
leaving these opinions, let us now enter into the Images and Pictures made and
composed of her.

It is written with Philo (an Hebrew author of great antiquity) that this
Venus was born and engendered of the froth of the sea, taking force and virtue
of the priuities of Celum, which his son Saturn cut off and threw down therein:
and her statue is framed in the shape of a most beautiful and amorous young
woman, which seemed also to stand upright in the midst of a huge shell of a
fish, which was drawn by two other most ugly and strange fishes, (as Ovid at
large notes it) who also says, Ovid.
that unto her was consecrated the Island of Ciprus, and especially in it the
city of Paphos, standing by the sea side, for that she was seen and discovered
upon her first appearance out of the sea, to go on land on that part of the
country: by reason whereof, the people therabouts adore and worship her with
great zeal and veneration, and erected and dedicated unto her a most rich and
stately temple very gorgeous and costly.

Pausanias says, that Venus is drawn in a coach through the airie passages,
with two white Doves (as Apuleius also affirms) being birds of all others
most agreeable and pleasing unto her, and are called the birds of Venus: for it
is written indeed, that they are most abundantly inclined to procreation, and
that almost at all times of the year, they engender, increase, and bring forth
their young, of whom it is observed, that upon their first association and
coupling together, they do kiss one another, and as it were embrace, and
friendly intertain their acquaintance and friendship; alluded to the fashions
and customs of amorous lovers, in their first salutes, and times of daliance.
Eleanus writes, that Eleanus.
these birds are so consecrated unto Venus, for that (says he) it is read,
that on a certain mountain of Sicilia, called Erice, were kept and observed
certain days as holy days and times of pastime and disport, the which the
Sicilians terms The days of passage; insomuch (as the Indians report) that
Venus passed and took her journey in those days from thence into Libia, at
which time not one dove was seen to remain behind in the country, as attending
and accompanying the goddess in her voyage, which being performed and ended,
they al returned and came back again unto their old haunts and accustomed
places as before: whereupon after that, certain solemnities and rites were on
that mountain kept and celebrated.

Horace and Virgil affirm, that the chariot of Venus is drawn by two white
Swans, whereof Statius also makes mention, saying, that those kind of birds are
most mild, innocent, and harmless and therefore given unto Venus: or that
their harmonious and pleasant notes, which they sing a little before the approach
of death, are compared to the amorous and delightful discourses and conferences
of lovers, which commonly afterward prove and turn into sorrow, misery, or
death. With the Grecians the image and picture of this goddess was set forth
naked and without cloths, as Praxitiles also an excellent ingrauer in the
Island of Guidos composed it: meaning thereby, that al venerous and licentious
people are by such their inordinat lust, like beasts, deprived of sense, and
left as it were naked and despoiled of reason and the cloths and garments of
understanding; and oftentimes also stripped and wasted of their pristine and
former riches, and goods. And this picture there framed in that Isle of Guidos,
was wrought and cut out by the same Praxitiles with such exquisit art and
deepe-knowledged skill, that the desire of the veiw and sight thereof drew and
allured many passengers and voiagers by sea to sail to Ciprus to satisfy
their eyes of what their ears so highly had heard commended.

The ancients used to dedicat unto this goddess many plants and flowers, among
the which, specially were the roses, whose fragrant and sweet odor is resembled
unto the pleasing delights and outward fair shows and colors of love, and in
that they are of that blushing and rubicund color, and that they can hardly
be plucked without their pricks, and molesting men's fingers: they are likened
unto luxurious people, and such as give themselves over to the unbridled
affections of carnality, for that such unlawful and foul desires are sildome
effectuated without shame and blushing, and that there accompanies and
conioineth with them, dolors, afflictions, pains, greefes, horrors, and a
polluted conscience, or else they are so compared, for that the color and
delicat hue of these roses is soon faded, perished, and dccaied, as the beuties
of women, as also the delights and pleasures thereof sudainly fall away and are
consumed. But concerning these roses, the Poets do inue^t, that at the first
they were of a milk white color, and grew very pale and discolored: until
Venus on a certain time having intelligence that Mars (for some jealousy
conceived) had complotted and determined a devise to have murdered her
sweethart Adonis, and she in great have and rage running to prevent and
disanull the intended mischeef, grievously pricked her foot on the stalks of
these flowers, of which wound (sending forth abundance of blood) they were
presently turned into that fresh color which now at this time they do retain.

It is read with Pausanias, that Marcellus erected and Pausanias.
dedicated a most sumptuous temple unto this gods Venus: which he caused to
be built two miles off from Rome, that those kind of humors and wanton
pleasures ought to be remoted a far off from the minds and thoughts of all
chaste virgins of Rome.

Lactantius writes, that the Lacedaemonians framed Lactantius.
and composed the Image of Venus all armed like a warrior, holding in one hand
a spear, and in the other a shield or target, which depicturance they devised
in regard of a certain overthrow which the women of that country gave unto
their enemy the people of Messenia, and with success they supposed to have
proceeded from the power and assistance of Venus, as inspiring into those
woman's hearts manly courages, stontnesse, and resolutions. In memory whereof,
they always afterward reputed Venus to be of most forcible power and
mightiness in arms, and after that belief reverenced, adored, and worshipped
her. Concerning which depicturance and setting forth of the statue of Venus,
Ausonius in a certain Epigram made by him to that purpose, says, that Pallas
was most wonderfully Ausonius.
incenst, and mightily stomacked such description set out in that manner, and
that she presently fell into great contention and quarrel with Venus, for
allowing it so to be done, that she of her self any way should seem thereby to
take upon her any martial performances or exploits, derogating and detracting
from her honor, dignity, and worthiness. In which Epigram also Ausonius
declares how prowdly and gallantly Venus answered her thereunto: as that she
wondered and stood amassed how Pallas durst now be so rash, bold and ouerhardie,
as to accuse or brave her therein, considering that she stood then all armed,
and had much more advantage against her, than she had upon the mountain Ida,
wherein likewise by the verdict of Paris, she utterly then confounded and
overthrew her mightiness, and made her depart away ashamed, angry and
discontented. All which argumentation and striving controversies, the same
author most exquisitely there has set down and depainted. And thus far only
in this treatise shall be progressed, as not aduenturing to displease the modest
in capitulating such ouer-wanton and too lascious expositions and meanings
which the Ancients made and understood of the natures, qualities, properties,
and conditions, of this their goddess Venus.

FINIS.

