SCHELOMONOCHAM, OR King SOLOMON his Solace. Containing (among many things of
right worthy request) King Solomon his Polity, his true Repentance, and
finally his Salvation,

First Presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty, and afterward published.

1 King. 10.6. It was a true word which I heard in mine own Land of thy
sayings, and of thy wisdom.

Ecclesi. 12.10. The Preacher was yet more wise, and taught the people
knowledge.

LONDON Imprinted by John Windet 1606.

THE Price and estimation OF Solomon's Solace.
He that comes to buy, will peradventure, say to him which would sell it: It
is naught: It is naught. Howbeit when he has bought it, and brought it home,
then he boasts of his good peny-worth as Pro. 20.14.

(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



(...)
(...)
Salva Deo Regis sit magno vita IACOBI,
Vt servet charos divino iure Britannos.
Vincenti Maximo De Rege nostro Serenissimo, eiusque pro genie clarissima poema
(...).
A A great red Dragon, with 7. heads and 10. hornd power,
D: Designed of late a sovereign Queen quite to devour:
I Intending eke, that Son to strike, for whom she gron'd
A Affright whereat, to her good God, she timely mon'd.
C Conspecting then Jehovah this his handmaides grief
O Omitted not with ready hand, to grant relief.
B But first, her sweet Soul he convaighd (as seemed him best)
V Unto his princely palace there in peace to rest.
M: Moreover, then he Michael with army stout,
M Maugre the foe, sent forth in field, and cast him out.
A And so, that when the tragedy should be effected,
G God it withstood, and those complots in time detected.
N Now since the Dragon saw his purpose thus prevented,
A And quaild himself, he might have coucht and so repented.
E: Expecting pardon: but no less he erst revived,
B Brute stratagems, and quaint designs by him co^triv'd
R Recounting, that loud lowing Bulls might pierce deep lorne
I In royal Lions heart, and princely Unicorn
T That so, the seed right sovereign (amongst the rest)
A And all the flowers of this field should be suppressed:
N Not by the lore of sacred laws, or justice right:
N Nor with the dinte of valiant sword, or open fight
I In manly wise: but savadgely, with stygian flame
A And hellish hounds, attempted how to forge the same
E Enlarging so his beastly bent, God him there staid,
R Restraining him unto the snare, himself had laid:
E Establishing for aie, the scepters dignity
G Given rightfully to James and his posterity.
E Enrich therefore with peace power worship and renown
M Most mighty God, his grace, his progeny and crown.
(...). TO THE MOST Mighty most gracious and most Christian Prince JAMES, by
the divine Grace, King of great Britain, France and Ireland defendour of the
faith etc.
Most mighty and most gracious Sovereign Lord
IT is certain, that neither King Solomon so passing wise and famous, nor any
his words recorded in Canonical Scripture, so prudent, pithie and full of
piety, need the help of humane hand, much less of my poor pen, for the
defense of the one or the authority of the other, having so long sithence (by
the best judgment) purchased that credit and approbation, which neither the
serpents envy, nor ma^s malignity has or shall be able to anihilate or empeach.
Howbeit, seeing that some (...) partly of malice, partly of ignorance, blush not
to object and except against either, condemning the one, as profane and damned,
and contemning the other as polluted and perilous. Whereat many remain
suspensive of both, and others (with my self) woeful for both, as that so
sovereign a tree should be blasted and her wholesome fruit rejected: I thought
it good, and my duty, as well for the stopping of those mouths, as for the
better resolution of the doubtful, the solace of the pensive, the instruction
of the ignorant, the honor of the worthy and the glory of the Almighty, to
adve^ture the framing of this Apologetical Dialogue or conference, entitled
Schelomonocham, or K. Solomon's solace, and the same under the divine fear and
your Graces pardon, to dedicate to your sacred Majesty. Howbeit, this my rash
enterprise (most gracious Sovereign) first in attemting a work so weighty:
then in addressing it to a personage so mighty, convinces me (in some
censures) of audacious arrogancy: when being far poorer then Gedeon, and
much slower tongued then Moses without comparison, I should with the former
have acknowledged my great impotence, and with the latter have distrusted my
small eloquence, but with neither of them both have presumed on your
Maiesticall presence. At the least I should have followed that counsel of
Aesope to Solon approaching before Craesus King of Lydia to speak (...). Those
conceits (indeed) might have daunted me, had I not found strong reasons to
persuade me. For first being a Minister of Gods truth (which as I reverence:
I should also defend to my power) and hearing those and other like obloquies
divulged not only in common conferences, but in public Sermones, I should
with them have consented, and so sinned had I longer pawzed, expecting from
others the miraculous birth of those great bellied Mountains. Secondly, having
accomplished the work, and perpending (as the usual manner is) to whose
worthiness it should of right be commended, I remembered that saying of King
Alexander when a little before his death, being asked, to whom the Empire
should remain after him? he answered: (...) To the worthiest: yea I gladly
recorded that ready resolution of our late right Christian Queen of blessed
memory, concerning the success of this most famous Monarchy; which she said
should in right descend and come to King James then of Scotland; her natural
and lawful successor, and the most worthy. Wherein I also resolved and
presumed, knowing well that as your princely power is best able to protect: so
your royal person is most meet to enjoy King Solomon's Solace: for that (not
only after the philosophers) rule, and your Kingly advise in that learned,
Arist lib. Mor. 8. Plato. de Leg. 8.
godly and sententious (...) but after the Axioms of divinity, (...) as is the
person, so should be the present: the Argument so properly fits the same,
having for the principal subject, that most wise, most divine, most
maiesticall, and most famous King Solomon the son of King David, the same
whom Jehovah his God had both promised, nominated and appointed to the
kingdom of Israel before that he was conceived and borne, made most prudent,
royal and glorious in his throne, and set forth in all things as a meet
figure of the true Melchisedek, and Melchisalem, many years ere he came into
this world. Neither might this prerogative be well transferred to any other
(in regard of the subject) without some injury to your highness, disgrace to
the thing, and blame to my self. Thirdly, as I was very willing in this sort
to manifest the acknowledgement of my deepest debt; namely dutiful love and
true allegiance, to your high Soveraignety: so was I no less encouraged, when
I considered that I should present my self and these my labors, not before an
Egyptian Pharao, as did Moses, nor before a Lydian Craesus, as did Solon but
(which I utter with a most joyful heart) before the Lords anointed, a right
Christian King, who with King David (a man after Gods own heart) vouchsaveth
sweet audience to the prophet Nathan, though he speak without a parable for the
preferment of young Solomon, and for Isreal's common good, who al so with K.
Iehosophat is desirous to know the will of God, though by the simple ministry of
poor Micheas, and finally which with K. Solomon is contented to hear in his
own royal person, the pleading of 2. women, though of base condition. But now
because that godly modesty (though in the habit of princely magnanimity)
admits not in presence any speeches displaying such your apparent worthiness,
I lay my hand on my mouth yielding many things to unwilling silence, the which
nevertheless, the most loving affections of all your true-hearted subjects
cannot but acknowledge, and willingly proclaim. For we are truly persuaded,
that as Jehovah graced Noah the righteous with many perfections, wonderfully
blessed David his anointed with an excellent spirit and adorned K. Solomon
with manifold graces, as whereby (changed into other men) the first was
miraculously preserved in the great deluge, which drowned the old world, that
he might be made the happy original of the new: the second powerfully rescued
from the Lion, the Bear and the hurtful sword, that he might feed the Lords
people and Jacob his inheritance: the 3. beautified and blessed with an
admirable peace that he might build the L. house, keep the Lords watch, and do
equity and righteousness in the midst of his people: so has your high
excellency found and enjoyed the like from the L. that being protected and
preserved by his holy Angels and established on the Throne of your kingdom, ye
are with that provident Ianus who beheld all things (...) made worthy the
original of a new and prosperous peace, with the sweet Psalmist, ordained a
feeder of the L. inheritance after the discretion of your hands; and with that
lovely Laemuel, appointed a builder of that holy house, a keeper of the watch,
and the Executioner of righteousness and judgment in the midst of your
people. And as this is the end of your advancement the Glory of your Throne,
the peace of your kingdom, and the joy of your people: so in the same, shall
ye truly confirm the love of GOD to your self, declare your thankfulness
to his Almightines, perform the duty of a most Christian Governor, assure your
good Subjects of your unfeigned amity, embrace their love, retain their
loialty, and publicly express your right Princely Piety, for the honor of
God, the comfort of his Church, the joy of your people, the peace of your
heart, the safety of your place, the praise of your virtue, and the salvation
of your soul: for this is that which (as says the Apostle) has all the
promises both of this life, and of the life to come. All the which therefore,
we daily desire of God in our hearty prayers to be confirmed, increased,
established and continued in your sacred Majesty, with the abundance of
blessings so long as the Sun and the Moon endures. Thus far therefore have
I adventured on your high person and presence! Moreover, seeing your Majesty
is not wont to blame your obsequious servant for profering the stay of your
stirrup, although ye are well able and willing to mount your fair Palfray
without any his help, I hope that ye will not much blame me, if in this
happy access to your royal presence (after the example of wise Zorobabel
speaking before King Darius and the three Princes of Persia (according to my
bounden duty) I only remember you of that promise and vow made to the King of
heaven in the day of your Coronation, concerning the building of Jerusalem, and
the reparation of the Temple. It is well known that our late deceased
Noursemother, so well learned and approved in all princely piety, did not only
repair and garnish the Lords house, which before her time lay ruinous and
defaced (as King Hezekiah and other ancient benefactors had don in their days)
but having a right good opinion of the faithful Pastors and painful
Ministers of the word, as sometimes the noble Sunemitish Lady had of Elisha
the man of God, she was wonderful careful that they should be enhabled to
live of the Gospel, which they preached in their due honor, and therefore
she builte (or at the least repaired and appointed) not only one little
Chamber, but many large houses for them to turn into, compassed with strong
walls to be secured in, and furnished with beds to rest on, Tables to eat
on, stools to sit on and Candlestickes to put light on, with all other meet
provision and furniture for their studies, functions and fare: the which also
had happily continued without great breaches until the day of her death, (...).

Plat. lib. 1. Aristoph. apud Suid.


had not some (more expert in Simonides Songs, then in David's Psalms)
deceived her trust. But as devouring time decays houses most strongly built,
and both estates in all ages, by occasions, wax blunt: so the Lords house
which should first be respected, and those Chambers in the next place which
should not be neglected, were so empaired, that as the former needed the
regard of the right owner to support it: so the latter the wisdom of the
cunning Artificer to edge it. Now, for that the highest Power has not only
appointed your royal Majesty next himself (...) the principal overseer and
chief Artificer of this great work: But also has already moved your
sanctified mind to consider so religiously of the same: we cannot but
acknowledge this divine and gracious benefit, with thankefulnes to his high
Majesty, and a faithful hope in holy invocation, that your Majesty may not
only continue zealous and regardfull of that house, but also vouchsafe, that
those chambers may from time to time be truly survaighed, kept and repaired
with the preservation of their pristine and laudable rightes (according to the
purporte of your mind of piety therein well declared) not for Gehezi the
Seller, nor for Simon the Buyer, nor for the unworthy hireling: But for Elisha
that holy man of GOD that so the glory of the LORD may fill this house, 2.
Chro. 7.1.3.
and that the people may bow down their faces and praise the God of Israel.

* Finally, for as much as with the regard of the former, the true (...) and
man of mercy forgets not the Poor, Neh. 5. Isa. 57. Act. 4.35. Genesis 1.8.
let not my LORD be angry if after Abraham's example (pleading before the Judge
of all the world) I speak yet this once, supplicating for the Poor, first
for the Poor neglected: Secondly for the Poor oppressed. Among the former it
may please your highness with Elisha's heart to think on the honest Widows,
the fatherless Sons, 1. King. 41.2.
and virgin daughters of the deceased poor Pastors, who in their life time
applying their functions and studies in Divinity, might not so conveniently
provide for their own families, as other men accustom to do: that thereby,
the first of them by some christian contribution may be relieved, the second in
Schools of learning preferred: and the third for meet Marriages endowed: the
which in every part may easily by your Princely providence be timely
compassed. Among the latter, those your poor Subjects may be considered, who
are injuriously beaten by them which make your public authority in their
hands a staff of private revenge: that those poor may yet freely plead for
themselves with meet audience (especially then when the case touches their
life, their lands, their gooddes, or good names that so King Solomon's
complaint Eccles. 4.1. may not justly be renewed: but in regard of your Kingly
piety, so well approved in things past, apparent in the present, and hoped for
in the future (as a right imitator of the King of Glory) King David's sweet
Song may be daily modulated: He delivers the Poor, when he cries: the
needy also, and him that has no helper. Psalm. 72.12. These things being
remembered, the King of mercy shall respect and think on your Noble Grace in
goodness.

Thus, most humbly acknowledging mine own audacious attempt, I here prostrate
my self with my labors at your highness feet, imploring and craving your most
gracious pardon and princely protection, that, for my self this, for my
present: that in regard of my faithful good meaning and dutiful allegiance,
this, for the honor of the Subject so worthy estimate: and both this, and
that of your heroical Spirit and godly good nature. And I daily pray unto the
Almighty in the name of his holy Messiah, by the sweet influence of his
Spirit, bountifully to bless, graciously to preserve, powerfully to defend,
and mercifully to maintain your royal majesty, together with your most
lovely (our Sovereign Lady) Queen Anna, the most noble Prince Henry of
excellent hope, and all your most Honorable Progeny, to live, reign,
flourish, and prosper in the fear of the Highest, and in the highest felicity
for ever more. Amen.

Your Majesty's right humble and faithful Subject in all obedience. JOHN
CARPENTER, Minister of Gods Word.

A PREFACE to the Reader.
Diverse men, diversely affected (as we may see in the sundry examples of all
ages and persons) have sought diversely to solace themselves in this life. To
pass over the manifold delights wherewith a man is naturally recreated in the
sundry changes and chances of his time: some have been well pleased in the
remembrance of their own pristine adventures, whereof they have made use for
the better Instruction of themselves: some, in the reading, hearing, or
rehearsing of the Acts and Histories of Antiquity: some in often conference
and talk with other men touching the vsages, customs, and affairs of diverse
persons, places, and things: some, in the holy meditation of heavenly, and
spiritual matters: some in the glorious cross of Martyrdo^: to be short, some
in the timely agnizing of their own sins and infirmities, in the declaration
of man's vanities, in helping the weak, in defending the oppressed, in teaching
the ignorant, in correcting the faulty, and performing the duties of
Christianity, to the praise of God and the benefit of men. Yea, and as times
and seasons alter, and men (changed in those times) often vary opinions: so in
the selfsame persons are not always found the same delights: but that which
has been highly requested, has at other times been all so much loathed: and
that which was before abandoned, is afterward eagerly pursued. Among others,
the valiant Trojan, who was sometimes much delighted in the right princely
prowess and the remembrance of his martial exploytes, did nevertheless,
after his desperate adventures on the wrathful Seas, persuade, that this also
should in the time future be a profitable solace for him, and his Companions,
saying unto them, Haec olim meminisse iuvabit. And that happy Fortunatus (whom
the Poet brings in talking with his fellow Faustus) willing to recreate
himself after some extraordinary labors, said: -- Antiquos paulum recitemus
Amores.

But more worthily that holy Spowsesse whom King Solomon mentions, as one
enamored on him whom her soul loved, is very much solaced, not only with the
zealous meditation and condign commendation of him and his sovereign graces:
but (after that she found and enjoyed him) in the glad report and declaration
of the manner and method, how she fought him, how she was hindered, how she
found and apprehended him, and whatsoever else betided her, in those her
careful and fearful affairs. The sweet Psalmist could sometimes comfort
himself with holy hymns, godly psalms and ghostly songs: sometimes in
fighting the Lords battles, sometimes in the noble duties of his royal
place: sometimes in the deep consideration of his troubles and afflictions the
which he framed as documentes of godly discipline and simboles of divine
graces, whereof he gladly confessed: Before I was troubled I went wrong: Psalm.
1 19.3.7.
but now have I kept thy word. Again. It is good for me that I have been in
trouble: that I may learn thy statutes. Thus the Apostle was often solaced to
tell not only of the Lords graces and mercies toward him with
thankfulness: but also to declare openly his own former ignorances,
infirmities and sins, wherein he had been before time delighted (as zealous
for the law) and now to report of his travailes, his troubles, his afflictions,
his persecutions, his crosses etc. for his masters cause, in the which he
gloried and took no mean delight. There was a time when K. Solomon was
wonderfully pleased in the exercises of holy princely virtues in the building
of magnificent houses, especially that which he dedicated to the L. his God.
Again, there was a time when the same Solomon (being carried away of his own
concupisce^ce and be sotted with the pernicious love of strange women) was
delighted in the lewd lusts of men: But yet there was an other time, when as
the same Solomon (after the full experience of those delights wherein he had
wearied himself under the Sun and the sense of both the divine judgments
and mercies) thought that the house of mourning yielded him a sweeter Solace,
then the banqueting house.

Moreover, after this, he much eased his afflicted spirit not only in
declaring what a flourishing and happy Commonwealth he would have established
in Israel, if all things had answered (ad amussim) to his request and daily
endevor: but also by many heavenly doctrines, learned Orations, wise sentences,
parables, and arguments, to display and set forth the manifold vanities of
wordly-men: and there-withall (as the wise Preacher) to study and endevor on
the one side to dissuade and hallow them from the same being replenished with
so many miseries: and on the other side, to allure and draw them on toward
the chief good and highest felicity, where only is found the true sacietie
and best solace, after all the confused troubles of this life. Truly this is
the very Argument, Sum, or chief matter of his Book, entitled the
Ecclesiastes or the Preacher, from whence as from the head-spring of many both
pleasant and profitable streams, this present Solace is chiefly derived: In
the which (besides the view of Solomon's Commonwealth, and many other matters
of right worthy request) is contained his true Repentance and Pardon after his
sins, displayed in a certain Dialogue or conference of his Princes, and
chief Lords. A work both godly, pleasant, and profitable, as well for Princes
and noble personages, as for all others which have any desire to walk (in this
life) toward the highest object of our hope. But here I thought it good to
admonish thee (gentle Reader) that as the work chiefly regards those
matters of Antiquity, and namely, such as were either heard of, scene,
understood, or in action within the compass of that time, wherein that most
famous King both reigned and lived, and of the which his Princes, Lords, and
servantes could (as auriti, or oculati testes) both take and give true
testimonies: or the which they could readily cite, gather, observe, remember,
consider and reason of, in and among themselves: so have I therein (for the
most part) taken, applied, and used those testimonies, examples, and Arguments,
the which either that time, or the times then fore-past could happily afford
me: for those persons from whose words, reports and disputations this
Dialogue is deduced, could not possibly deliver unto us, the things which as
yet were neither in action, or motion among men, seeing themselves knew not (as
they were men) what should follow or come to pass after them under the
Sun: Eccle. 3.22.
but as they might conclude effects from the causes in natural things.
Therefore, I have been careful that therewith I might intermixe any of those
which succeeded in the ages, times and persons following, the which
nevertheless being extant may be neither rejected nor abandoned: but rather as
they stand, to be taken and collected, in and from the words, writings and
works of others, which though far latter, have yet been both godly,
faithful, well learned, and of no less credit and authority in the Church.
Howbeit, because I would not; that any thing, which is either worthy thy
knowledge, or here in request with any of them that stand in doubt of the
holiness of King Solomon and the authority of his words and Books, should
be cowched in silence or buried in obscurity, I purpose (and God will, though
very briefly) to supply even here, that which might seem to be wanting there:
that so, the latter compared with the former, and one thing considered rightly
with another they may from either gather a meet harmony and consent to
conclude both for the holiness of the one, and for the sufficiency of the other.
But here I find them that demand, how the knowledge of this disputation and
conference should be brought unto mine understanding? and from whence this
princely dialogue could be either gathered or presumed? To whom I might
answer: that howsoever it be, that either this or the semblable matter may be
hidden from the knowledge and understanding of the simple, and ignorant or how
hardly it may be conceived of some wise and learned persons: yea, and
howsoever this present dialogue shall be censured and esteemed in a great part,
as prosopopoicall, or imagined, yet it is true and sure enough (as it is
hereafter declared and proved) that those godly, wise, well learned and noble
personages which were and lived in the time of Solomon, heard of his wisdom
and saw his glory, never doubted of his holiness and true repentance, and so
neither of his remission and salvation with the Lord. And as in those things
they were not doubtful: so were they neither so negligent, nor careless of
the Kings health and prosperity, and of the Common-good of the Lords people:
but that they (as most noble Princes and wise and grave Counsailors) entered
into a deep consideration of the royal estate and of the common wealth of
Israel, reasoned and argued the case in and between themselves concerning the
causes of the kings great heavines and sorrow: and therein did not only
think honorably and constre charitably and reverently of the kings dealinges
and words (as it well became them): but also endeavored by their wisdom
counsel and authority to remove away all the causes, that the unhappy effects
thereof might cease and to withstand the remediless inconveniences of such
desperate mischiefs in time convenient, and that in such sort in effect, as it
is reported in this Solace. And to the end that no man might either make
question of the holiness of their sovereign Lord, or doubt of his remission
and salvation, they argue for him, and above all the rest of that most
honorable society, the most reverend father in God, namely Zadok the Lords
high priest, to whose grave and learned judgment they all most gladly
condiscended, spoke and proved first, that king Solomon was, by the providence
of the highest, provided and made a lively figure of the most holy Messiah whom
they faithfully expected to come into the world, and that it was necessary that
the figure should answer to the thing figured. Therefore the Messiah being
most holy, it must follow that King Solomon should be also holy, alluding to
those equal proportions in the law between the Seed of the Woman and the
types, shadows and figures of the same. * Next to that, they argue his Pardon
partly from Gods own promise of mercy to him, and the continuance of his
divine Graces 2. Sam. 7.15. partly from his Repentance, the which (besides
other places) is worthily gathered of his Ecclesiastes or Preacher, being (as
the Hebrews say) the book of his repentance. * Thirdly they argue his
Salvation with the Lord from the consideration of his pardon as that which
necessarily follows the same, after this and like Testimonies and examples:
Blessed is that man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered: blessed is he, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. And as they never
doubted of the holiness, pardon and salvation of the person: so neither called
they into question any his books, proverbs, words, songs, se^tences, but
honored, reverenced and esteemed them, as wise and grave sayings, divine
prophesies, and matters right holy and profitable for the Lords congregation
and for the instruction of his people. Therefore they thought it good, and no
less their duties, not only to collect and preserve them; but to commit and
commend them with the like authority to the holy Church. Now it remains,
that we also hear and consider what has been else resolved, concluded and
testified by the godly learned and wise men as well hebrews as others,
succeeding them of that age and that not only before, but also sithence the
birth, death and ascension of the most holy Messiah concerning King Solomon and
those his words. First the ancient hebrews and Rabins of the Jews have
delivered that Solomon did so much dislike his lustful delights and chiefly
that sin of Idolatry impu^ed to him, Jn vita pat. lib. 7. and in prologo:
and in Cap. 1.
in that he tolerated and maintained his strange wives in their abominations,
that he willingly exposed himself in person a public example of repentance
throughout the streets of Jerusalem, and would also have been whipped with
seven rods in that Temple which himself had builded, had not the learned
doctors of the law withstood it, holding it unlawful for them or any others
to lay their hands on the Lords Anointed as David had taught: esteeming him
not only their true King; but a divine Prophet and holy man of GOD, and at
this time a person truly repentant for his sins, whereof they presumed of his
pardon and eternal health. Next we find it testified by the Author of the
latter book of the Chronicles of the kings of Israel and Judah, Chap. 11.
verse 17. that after king Solomon was laid to his fathers, Judah for the time
of three years following pleased GOD, walking in the ways of David and
Solomon: not only of David, but also of Solomon: noting that although king
Solomon walked not perfectly with the Lord in the time of his trespasses as
David walked when he pleased GOD, yet nevertheless in his latter time he was
reclaimed and walked again with David as himself did in his youth, when they
both together pleased the Lord GOD; and so in the end resigned both himself
repentant and holy unto God, Nota.
and the kingdom in the same estate wholly to his son Rehoboam: for neither
was the kingdom as yet divided, nor the state of religion altered, during the
days of Solomo^s government, according as the L. had de creed and promised 1.
King. 11.12. saying: I will not do it in thy days. Therefore not only Solomon
is combined with good David touching the state of religion, and the manner of
his walking, but also it is testified that Rehoboam, his son followed the L.
also together with the^ of Judah that scared the L. in the same way full 3.
years after Solomon's death, within the which time it pleased God to fortify
the kingdom of Judah and therein to make Rehoboam strong. After this, the wise
Syracides chap. 47.12. (among others in his time) conceiving well of this
excellent person (who^ he esteemed an excellent saint of the L. and from whose
wise sayings his gra^dfather Jesus had collected many his sentences:) has
carefully and reverently named and numbered him among those holy Patriarchs and
fathers of the old testament, so worthy of praise: wherewithal, although (as a
true historiographer in that part) he has laid open his sins, which else
were so apparent, as they could not be covered: yet he extolleth him with many
admirable co^me^dations, and in right consideration gives not so much as the
least aim to any doubtfulnes of either his holiness, or salvation, yea rather,
he omitted not to say and protest, that God forsook not his mercy (meaning
that which was promised to David concerning Solomon and confirmed to Solomon
accordingly as 1. King. 11.39.) Neither that he was utterly destroyed, because
of his works, that he should leave him no posterity. Fourthly Saint Matthew
the Evangelist brings in King Solomon in the genealogy of Christ our Savior
together with his mother among those holy fathers of the old Testament, Matt.
1.6. But chiefly, the Lord Jesus himself in his profound doctrines and
sermons, has not disdained this person: but vouchsafed to name him, and
there-withall to remember not only the wisdom of King Solomon: but also that
holy House which he built to the Name of the Lord. And to declare how well he
liked the same house, he daily taught the people therein and showed them the
right use thereof: yea, he much disliked, that the same should be profaned by
ungodly and sinful men, and therefore assayed to reduce it to his pristin
purity, when with a whip he drove out both the buyers and sellers, saying, My
house, is the house of Prayer for all Nations: and it was indeed all unmeet
that the thing which was ordained for a figure of his Church, and prepared to
so holy an use, should be stained with men's prophanitie, so long as the use of
the figure endured, which was until the time of the coming of the holy Ghost
unto the Apostles, after Christ's ascension into the heavens. After this, that
holy Protomartyr Steven in his answer to the high Priest. Acts 7. speaks
right reverently both of Solomon and of his work: and to testify, that the
same had yet a further aim, then to the ordinary personage, or to the work of
other men, he adds: But he that is the highest of all dwells not in the
Temples made with men's hands: alluding to Solomon's words in the dedication of
that house 2. Chro. 6.18. For right well is it said, that the very person whom
that holy king prefigured, dwelt not in that house made with hands: howbeit as
concerning his power and th'excellent graces of his spirit, he is ever present
in and with that holy church which Solomon's Temple has prefigured and
expressed. After all this (to pass over the Apostles and their worthy
estimation of this person and his works, from the which they have taken and
cited arguments to confirm their doctrins) all the ancient fathers of the
Nicen Council, Aug. in lib. 17 de civit. dei cap. 20. Idem in 2. lib. de doct.
Christian.

Ioh. Driedo. de Catalo. sacr. script. lib. 2. vide.

Hieron. in extrema visione Ezechiel. Ambros. super Ecclesiast. et in Apolog.
David.


and others both holy and learned in the church: have not only gathered and
received as well from hence, as from others momuments of their elders, Solomon's
holiness and true repentance: but also have esteemed him for a Prophet, and in
their writings have called him the most wise and holy Solomon. But were it so,
that those things did not so plainly appear in the holy scriptures* nor could
it be found in any word or writing of antiquity that Solomon, after his
transgressio^, did repent and co^vert himself to the L. what reason, what
charity, or what wisdom would yet cast into suspe^se the holiness and salvation
of so rare and excellent a person, when there is not exta^t any sufficient
scripture or warrant to prove his final prophanity and eternal perdition, or
that he continued irrepentant until his death? Nay we ought not to be such
sharp ce^sorers as either to deny, or to bring into doubt the salvation of all
the^ whose sins have bin made manifest in the holy scriptures, albeit of their
final repentance we find no mention in plain form of words. If it were not
so, what should we judge of Adam and Hevah, which hearkened to the Serpent
and fell from their obedience? of Noah which being drunken with wine lay
uncovered? of Lot, which was overcome and committed incest? of Judah which lay
with Thamar his daughter in law; of Sampson the Nazarite, who dallied with
Dalila and slew himself with the Philistines? of Josiah which attempted an
unnecessary battle against Neko the K. of Egypt and died in the same? of the
man of God, which contrary to the L. commandment did eat bread in the old
Prophets house and was slain of a Lion, and of many such others both before
and sithence the time of Christ, of whose salvation there is no doubt or
question? Neither may we think, howsoever Solomon offended (as he did offend,
and that hainously) that yet his sins were irremissible and not to be pardoned,
or by nature such as passed the sins of those others of who^ we read and
believe, that God pardoned them. Amongst others, look on David the King, look
on Manasses: look on Paul, and consider Peter. Was not David both an adulterer
and a murderer? for he took Bethsabe, and caused Vriah her husband for her
sake to be slain, howbeit he was not shut out from repentance, and so neither
from remission, as the scriptures testify. What was Manasses? the scriptures
report, that he did evil in the sight of the L. even after the abhominatio^s of
the heathe^s who^ the L. cast out before the children of Israel, for he built
up all the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed and he reared up
altars for Baal and made groaves, as did Achab K. of Israel, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served the^ and he built altars for all the host of
heaven, he offered his own Son in the sier, and gave heed unto witchcraft and
sorcery and maintained workers with spirits and tellers of fortunes, and
wrought much wickedness in the sight of the L. to anger him, Again, he led the
people out of the way to do more wickedly the^ did the heathen people. And he
(slew Isaiah the L. prophet and) shed much innocent blood, till he replenished
Jerusalem from corner to corner, besides his sin, wherewith he made Judah to
sin and to do evil in the sight of the Lord. Lo! such an one was Manasses:
and such were his sins, far beyond that we read of Solomon! Further,
what was Paul? was he not a Saul, a blasphemer, a persecutor of Christ and his
Saints? and finally did not Peter 3. times not only deny his Master Christ
after he had believed and confessed him: but also did swear that he knew him
not? yet, lo, Manasses is witnessed to repent, and to find mercy: Peter goes
out and weepeth, and the Lord looks on him and shows him mercy: Paul has
also obtained mercy, (as himself testifies) and such (indeed) is the mercy
of our good God to penitent sinners! Note this.
Now let no man think, that this has bin spoken to encourage men in their
sins; God forbid; Nay rather let men by these fearful examples fear to sin
and not presume on Gods mercy, knowing that presumptuous sins shall not be
freed of plagues when even those sins which are done of ignorance, of fear,
of frailty, or natures imperfections are not left without some measure of
punishments: But this has bin said, partly to arm all men against despair:
but chiefly to banish out of men's hearts that deep suspicion of Solomon's final
Repentance, and the doubtfulnes of his eternal health with that holy Messiah
whom he so worthily prefigured in his life. Secondly, as we have said of
Solomon's person: so may we say and resolve of his Books, Sermons and Songs:
chiefly of his Proverbes, his Preacher and his Song of Songs, as of perfect
verity consonant in all things to the legal, prophetical and Apostolical
Scriptures. And therefore howsoever some persons either malicious or ignorant,
would object and except against any of those by reason of the persons
transgression, or of his strange phrases far passing the vulgar and
ordinary manner of speech, or the reach of their knowledge, or otherwise: we
find nevertheless, that as both the author and his works and words have
been reverently esteemed and worthily admired of those wise and honorable
personages who lived in his time, and so near him, that they both beheld him
with their eyes and heard him with their ears, and from his wisdom collected
and preserved that which they esteem worthy the holy register, as most divine
Oracles, prophesies, sentences and doctrines so necessary and profitable for
the Church: so also have those wise and learned Hebrews and others of regard
which succeeded them, resolved of the same, which therefore they have likewise
esteemed and embraced accordingly. Pro. 25.1. Aug. de civ. dei lib. 17.20.

Io. Driedo in Catalog. sacr. script.


Therefore the godly affected Servantes of the right worthy King Hezekiah,
admiring the one, and well affecting the other, did carefully copy out for
their better solace and instruction, many of his wise parables and grave
sayings. Therefore also Esra the right learned Scribe, who collected and
restored the written law and sacred prophesies; dispersed in the unhappy time
of the Babylonicall captivity, gathered and placed those 3. former Books in
the Canon of the holy Scriptures. Therefore the Synagogue of the Jews after
him, and that as well before, as sithence the time of the Lords nativitie,
accepted and received those his Books in the number of the 22. which they
proportioned to the letters of the holy tongue. Therefore the Chaldean
translators of the holy scriptures have both regarded and entitled his sayings
and songs, Prophesies: Therefore Jesus or Joshua the high priest being in Egypt,
Eccles. 1. in Prolog. August. de civit. deilib. 17. cap. 20. Et lib. retract.
1. cap. 4. Hieron. in lib. de viris illustrad Chromat. Hag. 1.1. Zach. 3.1. Io.
Driedo in Catalog. sacr. script. Damas. lib. 4. cap. 18.
and finding there many Books written in the hebrew tongue, left there of the
Jews, among them all copied out, collected and comprised in a book many of
Solomon's wise words, sentences and divine prophesies, the which afterward, that
is to say, in the reign of Ptolomy Euergetes the Aegytian K. (a little before
the days of Judas Macchabeus, and about 200. years before the birth of
Messiah) one Jesus the son of Sirach which was the son of the same Iosuah,
affecting that which his grandfather had collected, did interpret or translate
the same from the hebrew into the Greek tongue: acknowledging himself therein
to be not the Author, but the translator. Therefore Philo the learned Jew who
lived in the time of Onias the high priest (being about an hundred and
threescore years before the birth of the most holy Messiah) gathered of his
words, doctrines and prayers and comprised them in a Book, the which he
entitled Solomon's wisdom, therein confessing from whence he had taken them,
namely from Solomon: Albeit there be, which attribute this collection to one
Philo, who lived and wrote in the time of C. Caligula the roman Emperor about
the 38. year after the nativity of our Lord Christ: yet, which of either of
them collected, the learned Fathers have taken and esteemed, for the very
Author thereof, Solomon the King of Israel who (as they considered) has
therein spoken and delivered not only many wise and godly precepts and
doctrines for the institution of a godly man: but also diverse singular
prophesies, as of the coming and crosses of Messiah: of the tyranny and
Apostasy of the Jews, of the pains of the reprobates in hell, and of the
joys of the elect in heaven. Lastly he has remembered for all posterities,
that most excellent prayer which Solomon made and used to the Lord to get
wisdom, the which is begun at the beginning of the ninth chapter, and
continued even unto the end of that book. And although this book is not found
written in the hebrew tongue: yet shall not that withstand the opinion of the
ancient fathers, seeing it may be, the right hebrew Coppie perished (among
some other of Solomon's books) in the unhappy captivity of Israel and Judah,
and that this notwithstanding, might be preserved and kept, as before that
time taken and copied out by those strangers which either came to him, heard
his wisdom and laid up all things in their heart: or the which, having
affinity and amity with him (as had Pharao King of Egypt, and Hyram King of
Tyrus) procured that those his words and wise sentences should be copied out,
interpreted and translated into their several languages, as we see the like
to be wrought for us in this time. Aug. de civ. dei lib. 17. cap. 20. Hier.
lib de vir. illustr. Cypr. in suis epist. passim
Therefore not only the ancient Nicen Council (wherein were assembled no
less in number then 318 Bishops in the reign of blessed Constantine) but
also the semblable Fathers of the Church after that, as they thought honorably
of the person, have not only accepted

(...) SCHELOMONOCHAM. OR KING SOLOMON His Solace.
CHAP I.
Of King Solomon his glorious Estate, his Transgression and his Affliction.
ABout the three thousand, Annal. sac^ Script. Codaman Fol. 21.21.
one hundred and tenth year after the creation of the world, that right noble
and most famous King Solomon, the best beloved son of King David, (that man
of Gods pleasure and sweet Psalmist of Israel) lived and reigned over Israel,
the Lords chosen people, in the most renowned city Jerusalem. As this
Solomon was both chosen and nominated by the Lord his God, ere that he was
borne, by his grace appointed to succeed his Father King David in the throne
of that happy Kingdom, and by his singular wisdom to go in and out before
his people: so also, in process of time, it came to pass, that by the
direction of divine providence, the means of his right prudent Mother, the
willing consent and word of his kingly father, and the faithful ministry of
Zadock the Priest and Nathan the prophet he was anointed, crowned and
proclaimed king over Israel, even in the lifetime of King David, who thereupon
gave him the charge of the regal Scepter, praised Jehovah his God with joy and
gladness, and prayed heartily unto his supreme grace, for the future peace and
prosperity of his Son Solomon, as wherein he might build an house to his most
excellent Majesty the God of Israel, and prepare the Sanctuary for ever.
Whereupon Solomon sat on the seat of the Lord, and was king in the steed of
David, and God prospered and increased him in dignity, and gave him so
glorious a kingdom as the like no king ever had before him in Israel. This was
that Solomon to whom the Lord appeared in Gibeon, and willed him to ask
whatsoever he would, that it might be given unto him, and (being yet but a
child in years) he prayed to God for an understanding heart, to judge the
Lords people: with the which prayer of his, the Lord being right well pleased,
filled him with understanding as with a flood that his mind covered the whole
earth, and replenished it with profound and grave sentences, his name went
abroad in the Isles, and for his peace he was beloved: the countries meruailed
at him for his Songs, Proverbs, similitudes and Interpretations. Moreover by
the name of the Lord God, the God of Israel, he gathered Gold as Tin, and heaps
of Silver as Lead whereby he became famous before all the kings of the earth,
to the joy of his people, the wonder of the nations, and the glory of his God.
This was that Solomon, who in the time of his peace and prosperity, and
namely about four hundredth and fourscore years after that the children of
Israel, (by the conduct of Moses) came forth of the land of Egypt, built unto
the name of Jehovah his God, a magnifice^t house, an house of exceeding great
glory, namely that most beautiful Temple of God in Jerusalem, according to
the purpose of the Lord and that just rule, which David his father receiving
from the Lord gave unto him, before his death. In the end this admirable work
perfectly finished with all things both necessary and convenient, king
Solomon, as he was of an heroical spirit and no less glory, so being
thankful, he blessed and magnified Jehovah his God, from whose grace he
acknowledged this honor to be given him, he adored his eternal majesty with
fervent zeal, he prayed unto him in spirit and with understanding, and offered
up many great, sweet and pleasing sacrifices unto his supreme power, who then
again right well pleased with him* with his works, with his adorations, with
his sacrifices and prayers, appeared to him the second time, saying, 1. King 4.
that he had both heard his prayer and intercession which he had made before
him, and had hallowed the house which he had built to put his name there
forever, and that his heart should be there perpetually. Furthermore, this
magnanimious King for the better maintenance and preservation of his royal
estate provided himself twelve certain Officers according to the number, as
well of the twelve months in the year, as of the twelve tribes of Israel
appointed and authorized every of them in his turn, to levy, collect,
receive and provide from those places and persons, which were within their
several divisions, all such victuals and other necessaries as might be
requisite for the kings person and family. The which Officers were these viz.
K. Solomon's 12. Officers.
The son of Hur, the son of Dekar, the son of Chesed, the son of
Abinadab, Baana the son of Ahilud, the son of Gaber, Ahinadab the son of
Iddo: Ahimaaz: Baana the son of Husai, Iehosophat the son of Paruah: Semei
the son of Ela: Gaber the son of Vri. These Officers being elected with
discretion, and so approved, were not the children of Belial, as proud,
covetous, luxurious, extortioners, bribers, oppressors, fighters, brawlers, or
such as were either noted or suspected of any wicked vice, but of a goodly
constitution, prudent, ingenious, of good capacity, gentle courteous, of good
conscience, obedient to the laws, honest and faithful in their places,
therein aunswering to the interpretations of their several names either proper
or appellatiue. Whereby king Solomon was not only most royally served with all
kind of princly provision of houshoulde, but had his storehouses replete with
that which was timely reposed therein for the same, and like uses. Howbeit
Solomon being most prudent did ever esteem his people and subiectts for his
best storehouse, Kings storehouse.
so well semblant, (I say not to the open fields, but) to that good Orchard or
Gardine, well set with diverse kinds of trees, which have in them not only
many branches, boughs, leaves and stems erected, but abundance of fruit,
wholesome and profitable for man's use, especially then, when the same is
welhusbandred, necessities respected, injuries salued and particular causes well
waighed. And truly, to and for this end had king Solomon those prudent and
meet prepositours, knowing that by such persons the affairs, are commonly
well managed and performed: but on the contrary the subjects occasioned justly
to murmr, will be easily persuaded to rebel against the king and his
government and men's cogitations, erst pure, may be sorely corrupted, especially
if they perceive, that they which stand in place of authority shall not observe
that which themselves bid and command, which both defaceth their authority and
destroieth the good nature of many a man. Solomon's servants in house.
* Also the king for his private servants in house had them which were of
especial choice, as who for their wisdom, strength, agilitie, actiuitie,
industry, good disposition, manners humanity, patience, docilitie, constancy,
trust, fidelity and the fear of the Lord, were not only best fit to stand
before him, to guard him, to serve him, to attend his royal presence and
person, but also to hear his wisdom, to apprehend his judgments, to note
his behavior, to imitate his graces, and to be interpreters of his will and
word unto others And indeed these and such are worthy so noble a master, and
well it becomes a king of that puissance and magnanimity to be served and
attended on by such chosen servants. K. Solomon's principal Lords.
But above all the rest the king had certain principal and princely Lords,
by whose grave counsel, judgment, prudence, good advise and providence both
the king himself was assisted, consolated and preserved in government, and the
affairs of the whole kingdom of Israel the better disposed, ordered and
performed, 1. King 4.2, 1. Chro. 28. Exodus 18.20.
that according to the defier and charge of his father King David who was not
unmindful of that prudent counsel which sometimes wise Iethro gane Moses in
the right use whereof, himself was eased and aided, and the people timely
judged and well governed. And these are the names, of those principal Lords.
viz. 1. Azariah. 2. Helioreph. 3. Ahiah. 4. Iehosophat. 5. Benaiah. 6. Zadock.
7. Abiathar. 8. Azariah. 9. Zabud. 10. Ahishar. 11. Adoniram. Azariah the first
of that name, was an especial Lord, attending and assisting the kings person.
Helioreph and Ahiah were the kings wise Secretaries, Scribes, ornotaries.
Iehosophat was the kings Recorder of the gestes, or Chronicles. Benaiah was the
general Captain over the kings hosts, in the which office his succeeded
Captain Ioab. Zadocke was the chief Priest preferred to that function and
place after that Abiathar was degraded and put away for his confederacy with
Adoniah against King Solomon. Abiathar (the same before named among the Lords)
was a priest who sometimes ministered and attended in the steed and place of
Zadock. Azariah the second of that name, was a prudent Lord whom the King had
placed over those twelve Purueyors or officers before named. Zabud was the
son of Nathan, a Priest, and the Kings friend and familiar companion.
Ahishar was set over the Kings Palace: and Adoniram had the authority for the
Tributes, as high Treasurer of the kingdom. A description of King Solomon's
Counselors.
As all and every of those Lords were of no mean choice, but some of them such
as were commended and left unto him by his Father David for wise and grave
Counsaylors, and the Sons of Nobles: so were they most exquisitely qualified
and adorned with such princely virtues, as appertain to personages of that
rank. As first, they were adorned with that perfection of their members, as
best fitted those affairs to and for the which they were elected and put in
place. Next they wanted not the goodness of apprehension to understand
whatsoever was spoken worthy audience. Thirdly they were graced with an
excellent memory, to retain things heard and apprehended, yielding nothing,
necessary the remembrance, to thriftles oblivion. 4. they possessed a profound
consideration and deep conceit concerning such difficulties as occurred. 5. A
courteous affability, pleasing speech and ready eloquence, but so, as therein
their tongues concorded with their hearts. 6. A learned skill in the liberal
sciences. 7. They were in word faithful lovers of the truth, contemners of
lies, composite in manners, pleasant, gentle, tractable and well complexioned.
8. Also free and without any just suspicion of ebrietie, luxury, carnal
lusts, and notorious offenses. 9. Men right magnanimious in their purposes, and
affecting the true honor. 10. Not covetous minded but contemning Gold, Silver
and other accidental things of the world, in regard of their duty to God, to
their king and the commonwealth, wherein they had and retained a most
faithful love, as well of strangers as of their neighbors. 11. As they had a
love both to the just, and to justice: so also hated they alkind of injuries,
and odious offenses, yielding every one his right, aiding the oppressed and
those which sustained wrong, not making at any time the strength of their
authority, their rod of revenge to beat them, whom they affected not in good
will, but removing away all injustice and show of oppression, they set no
difference between persons and degrees of men, but only between causes, as
equity required. 12. They had likewise a strong and perseuering purpose in
the execution of things meet the performance, audacious, deuoid of pusillanimity
or fear. 13. They knew well the issues of all expenses, nor were they ignorant
of any utility appertinent to good government, as whereby the poor subjects
might not be justly occasioned to exclame or complain of hard or cruel
dealings. 14. They were neither worders, or given to high laughters, nor
gamesters, nor common players, or such like, but grave, modest, silent,
temperate and courteous: 15. ready to hear such as came to seek justice, as
whereby the king might be eased of that burden and poor men satisfied in
their just requests. 16. They had the ingenie and virtue to inuestigate,
understand and make known to the king the whole estate, and principal
affairs of his kingdom. 17. They were both able and willing to cheer the
subjects, to correct their acttions, to salve their sores, to consolate the
afflicted, to tolerate the simplicity of the ignorant by a fatherly
connivance, and to govern not only the whole, but every particular member of
the common wealth. 18. Lastly, they had a chief regard of their oath to God
and the king, as Solomon himself, advised them, fearing God and keeping his
commandments, wherein the whole duty not only of every man, but especially of
such princely personages consists. And this Solomon well observing, as he
had an heroical spirit, so proceeded he to consider of, and to reward their
good deserts according to their services done, and after the term of the
imposition of his will, that they might further be encouraged in their places
of government: but those placed he in the highest grade of remuneration, whose
good service he had approved most profitable: and so orderly every one of the
rest after his place had both his qualification and reward of the same; for
the king being conversant with those his princes, he honored the honor
worthy, and held every one in his sort, he invited to his own Table this day
one, the next day another, adorning this man now, and that man then, according
to his degree: Neither was any one of them neglected or left without some taste
of his bounty: yea his clemency, liberality and grace was apparent to all, for
he was never of the mind or semblance, to be covetous toward his subjects,
whiles he was bountiful to himself, but as I said, bountiful to all, but
especially to those his princes and them which had best deserved in their
faithful services. Now, by this the sooner, the true religion flourished, the
commonwealth of Israel prospered, and the highest of all was wonderful well
pleased with the king, with his Nobles and with the people in those his happy
days, wherein as he was not inferior to any Prince in the whole world: so
neither was the kingdom of Israel thereby less prosperous then any kingdom
on the earth: yea, this nation and their policy was to all others (by many
degrees) preferred through this grace and blessing of the Lord both on them and
their king. Truly these be the things which the noble Counsaylors of kings and
Princes most respect, according to the right of their degrees, the dignities of
their functions, the duties of their places and the divine prescription,
knowing this to be the very end of their preferments, and the same which
finally crowns them that are worthy with the highest honor, as we have
seen it verified in the examples of Abraham, Moses Iehosuah, Joseph, Samuel,
and David the Kings Father. Whereas the neglect, or abuse of this princely
duty (which is often found in them which ambitiously aspire for their proper
pleasures, vain glory or filthy lucre) has occasioned even mighty men in the
world shamefully to couch and fall down under ignomy and finally to dye
without any honor, as we may behold in the fearful examples of Cain, Nimrod,
Achitophel Ioab, Shimei, Adonia, Doeg and many such like.

But yet behold: After many prosperous and flourishing days of peace and
pleasing tranquillity, this wise king, even Solomon began more and more to
decipher his infirmities and to manifest himself (as indeed he was) a
mortal, yea, a sinful man. For as Satan, who had long time envied his happy
state and royal dignity, suggested evil in his heart, and tempted him, to
sin against Jehovah his God, thereby entending to ouerwhelme him and his
kingdom, as sometimes he assayed to effect against righteous Job: whereon the
Lord, who had thus long staide him up with his divine power, permitted him (at
the length) to fall, that for some good causes to himself well known, howbeit
within the compass of such a limit and measure, as he should not defect and
fall away from him for ever. But King Solomon was (as it were) for a time
committed, I say not to Satan, but to himself, who being so left,
notwithstanding his exceeding great wisdom and sovereign dexterity in
judgment, soon forgot himself, his condition, his duty, and the law of his
God: and following after the sensual humor of a humain mind and prave
affection, he bowed his loins unto Women, yea to many outlandish and strange
Women, contrary to th'xpresse commandment of Jehovah his God: whereby in his
elder days, being quite overcome in his body, turning away his heart from the
Lord, and affecting those vain Gods, which his wives worshipped, he wrought
wickedness before Jehovah his God, and walked not uprightly in his law: by doing
whereof, he stained his honor, defiled his posterity, brought wrath on his
children, and felt sorrow for his folly. For the Lord who had before graced and
magnified him, being justly provoked, was very angry with him and in his fierce
(yet just) wrath not only minaced the division of his kingdom in the days of
his Successor, namely Rehoboam, but stirred up against him to that end, even in
his latter time, sundry Satan's or adversaries, who ever crossing and thwarting
his peace and purposes, drenched him with many bitter potions, to the noisome
disturbance of that blessed tranquillity which his name imported, th'exeeding
sorrow of his people daily vexed with incursions of enemies, and the continual
agony of his oppressed soul, which both day and night felt the gnawing of a
restles worm within his conscience. And here we observe two memorable things
for admonition and instruction to all posterities, first, what is the nature of
man with his condition, when he is left or committed to himself, not stayed
or assisted by the divine grace. Next how little the Lord God regards them
that turn their hearts from him, how wise or magnificent soever they be in
their places before men. We know, how true and too often that is verified which
King David said in his godly meditations: that man being in honor has none
understanding, and therefore is compared to that Beast which perishes. For
thus Adam the Lord of the whole earth, being left unto himself with Lady
Hevah his wife (though in the most blessed Palace of pleasant Paradise) within
short time transgressed the commandment, and expressed folly. Thus Prince
Noah, after his laborious trauails on the huge deluge, at length being at ease,
and (as it were) committed to himself, was made drunken with wine, and lay
uncovered before his children. Thus good Lot, after that Sodom was burned and
himself but a little refreshed, fell into both the sin of drunkenness and
inceste. Thus Israel both in the wilderness, and in the land of Canaan, franked
and pampered with prosperity, wherein they too much admired their own valor
forgot the Lord, went a whoaring after strange Gods and fell to ruin. Saul the
late king played a plain rebel against the Lord (as Samuel told him) in the
height of his wealth. Yea, thus David the father of K. Solomon, being a whiles
permitted to try himself and his might, transgressed and confessed his folly.
Lo such is man's nature and prave inclination, semblant to the ponderous lead or
Iron, which declineth to the bottom of the water whereon it is cast, when as it
is not by some art or means staid from sinking: or as the vine which grows
proud and out of course without timely pruning: yea, they be not unlike
(touching their misfortunes) those little Chickens, which run forth to the
Vultures; and the sily Lambs which offer themselves a pray to the Foxes,
without regard of their proper da^s to keep or draw them away. Men therefore,
yea the best and most strong men should fear, and not desire to be left unto
their own wills, wisdom, power and ability: but pray and desire to be
continually protected, governed and directed by the divine counsayles and
providence, knowing that God being their Father does evermore care and provide
for them, which being humbled in his fear depend on his will and direction.
Next yt, we see that the Lord neither blesses nor graceth the^ which leave him
and his service, how mighty, wise, rich or glorious soever they be: but in this
he esteems the king as a Caytiffe, the Emperor as a wretch, the rich as a
beggar, the wise as a fool: nor will he vouchsafe them honor, who dishonor
him. Nor indeed has he freed his own from the touch of misery in measure,
when they transgressed. Adam and Hevah were exiled Paradise: Noah was wade
ashamed: David mas floysed with many afflictions. So neither will the Lord that
any person of whatsoever estate or condition, should assure himself of peace
and prosperity longer, then whiles he lives in peace with his maker, King
Solomon began now to know his transgression, and to return.
depends on him by faith in Messiah and serves him in singleness of heart.
All this the King at length wisely considering (by the blessed motion of the
divine Spirit, which now began to reclaim, and call him home again:)
suddenly altered the constitution of mind and changed his behavior (as David
did, after that the Lord created a new heart, and renewed the right spirit,
within him) And thereupon he became even as another man. For now, knowing both
his heinous transgression, and the danger of his own poor soul: foreseeing
the imminent alteration of his high estate, and the great peril of his people:
and feeling the heavy singer of that just God, and his dreadful wrath already
burning as a consuming fire in his conscience; he was as a man stricken with a
deadly arrow, he waxed both pale and wan in the fearful agonies of his most
sorry soul, that face which shined sometimes as a bright Angel, was deformed
with the abundance of his watery tears: and whereas he used to sit royally on
his stately Throne, he did now choose to lie all alone on the cold earth: he
wayled all the day, and watched every night, rent his kingly clothes and cast
ashes on his head: mingled his drink with his tears, and watered hid cowch
with the same, sighed sorily, and lamented woefully: abandoned as donge all his
former pleasures and contemned as vanity the delights of men. Moreover all his
words, which were before so pleasant and honey sweet to the hearing, now
sauoured of mortification and sorrow, expressing the unmeasurable torment of
his woeful soul. Alas! The frail condition of man's nature.
who would have thought, that such a noble person could have been so suddenly
turned about and altered? Who could believe, that such passing great pleasures
should be determined in pains? such comfortatiues converted into corasiues:
such gladness into griefs: such prosperity into adversity: such felicity
into misery, in so short a time, in so noble a personage? But yet we may
marvel the less, if we duly consider not only that the King (though so
Wise, Rich, and Glorious) is yet but a Man, to whom are incident both sins,
slydings and falls: but also that such are the miseries, infirmities,
afflictions and conditions of this life: And that whenever the Lord God in
his just judgments either openly or secretly beats and punishes a man for
his faults, that man is all unable either to withstand those scourges, or to
abide in his honor or prosperous estate, to retain his health or welfare
either of body or mind, being worthyly constrained to cowch and give place to
him which is much stronger then he, and to yield to him with whom no man can
plead, nor answer one for a thousand, (as Job said in the like
consideration.) With this I call to mind that which the Kings Father was wont
to modulate, singing unto the Lord his God: When thou for sin a mortal man
do beat,
He waves away, and waxes woe, and wan: Psalm. 39.12.

Much like the garment, which the moath does freate:
So vain a thing (indeed) is mortal man.


Lo, here may we see the fickle condition of man, and the nature of his
prosperity in this life! Well may he be compared therein to the flower of the
field (as both Job, A similitude which sets forth man's condition. Job. 14.1.
and David faith:) for like as the flower is not only sed and refreshed with
the pleasant showers of rain, and the comfortable beams of the Sun, and
grows and shines in the beauty of diverse colors, but also, within a very
short time, is annoyed altered, and deformed now with the pearching heat of the
Canicular Star, then with the pinching frosts of Boreas winds: Even so is
man: for he comes up, he florisheth, he shines, he is glorious in his place,
so long as it pleases God to give him the sweet beams of prosperity and
honor in this world: but this is not permanent: for as man will not abide in
honor, so neither is it meet he should be still fostred and lulled here in the
cradle of felicity: for by this, he forgets himself and his estate: yea, he
forgets God that made him, and forsakes the same which redeemed him:
Therefore the Lord is best pleased, that he should be exercised with those
afflictions which commonly follow after worldly pleasure and prosperity, being
indeed as a common pronostication of sorrow and adversity. Neither is there
any thing to be looked for in this life, as both the sayings of the wise, the
ancient histories, the proper similitudes of things, and the present examples
of such events do plainly teach and instruct us. In the sense and experience
therefore of these things, what is there found of any constancy, or of any
stability, or of any continuance in man's life? As man himself is frail, so
are all those accidents appertenant to his humane nature, transitory.
Therefore, not only the poor man, but also the rich man: yea, not only the
beggars, but the most Royal Princes are subject to this alterations and
vanities. In the due consideration whereof, Good counsel for them that live in
this world.
men should not so much marvel at the sudden chaunges of others, and at the
inconstancy of these worldly things, as they should endeavor to learn to
beware that they depend not on the deceaveable vanities of this life: and to
take heed, that they wax not proud, nor forgetful of their maker, and of
their own estate and condition, in the fond abuse of the things which are not
their own, but as lent unto them to be used to the honor of God and their own
necessities. Lastly, seeing that these things be so uncertain they should in
time provide to lay up for themselves those treasures which are permanent and
many steed them to their highest content, in the fear and love of him that
blesses and prospers all them that never turn their faith from him.

The second Chapter.
King Solomon's Lords, perceiving the strange alteration of their Sovereign,
wax very sorrowful: they enquire for the cause, and endeavor to prevent the
future inconveniences.
Whilst all those things were in action, apparent even before Strangers,
talked of openly, and laid in the common balance to be peazed and censured of
every man, King Solomon's noble Princes and chief Lords were assembled in the
Council Chamber, there partly to confer of the affairs of the kingdom, for
the high glory of Jehovah their God, the benefit of the commonwealth and the
right honor of their Sovereign Lord: partly to inuestigate and search for the
causes of this the kings sorrow and sudden alteration: the which they would
assay to remove or mitigate, according to their wisdom, knowledge and best
ability. Wherein, they manifested themselves dutiful to their God,
profitable to the weale-publique and regardfull of their kings health and
prosperity, The duty of noble Counsailors to their King.
which are the principal things that noble Counsaylors and the worthy servants
of such Sovereigns, should in their supreme places respect with all
fidelity. Now upon a sudden Zabud the priest, the son of Nathan, and the
kings familiar friend (who had been with his highness for his better comfort in
affliction, all that night before) issued forth of his privy Chamber, entered
the assembly of those Lords, and (although with an heavy heart mestiue mind
and sad countenance, by reason of the Kings great perplexity and troubles)
he saluted them in these words: Jehovah our God save you (my Lords all, both
Honorable and Reverend) the right happy princes of king Solomon! To whom they
all (as with one mouth resaluting him) answered, and the same Power bless,
prosper and preserve you, Reverend Zabud, the right trusty Secretary and
familiar good friend of our Sovereign Lord King Solomon! And whence come ye
now (my Lord) an what is the cause (if it please you) that ye be so pensive and
heavy to day? Is all thing well? To his Zabud replied: My Lords all: I am
presently come forth of the Kings privy Chamber, where I have been all this
last night, watching and attending on his most royal person: the Lord God save
and keep his grace: howbeit, there have I found little or no comfort, as God
knows: for much grief and sorrow has betided the king, which increases
yet more and more without mitigation: and the like acreweth toward us, and
the whole kingdom, as far as I can gather by that which I have both heard
with mine ears, and seen with mine eyes of and in him. Upon this saying, in
this manner delivered before them, such a strange terror and dread assailed the
hearts of those Lords, that being thoroughly astonished, they neither were able
to answer him, The trouble of the King is a grief to his Subjects.
nor wist they what to say. For there can be no greater grief and discomfort to
true hearted subjects, especially to the faithful Counsaylors of happy kings,
then when they shall either see or hear of the hurt, sorrow or discontent of
their Sovereign Lord, at the alteration of whose prosperous estate, both
Nobles and the Commons are suddenly moved and much disquieted, as that body
which feels the distemperature of his proper head, fearing the ensewing of
such plagues, troubles and vexations, as are wont to follow and succeed the
sudden loss and departure of such heroical persons by whose good government
and valor their Realms and Commonweals have bin right happily maintained in
peace and tranquillity. Neither (at the least) should either the Nobles, or
the common people be merry or pleased in the sadness, trouble or vexation of
their Sovereign Lord, knowing well that natures of that grade and
apprehension, will not show themselves heavy hearted and mestive for any light
or mean causes. At the length after long expectation, silence, pawzes and
eagre looking one on another of them, with deppe sighs, pitiful groans and
cheeks watered with weeping eyes, a principal Lord, Azariah shows the good
opinion, love, and affection of a good Subject.
whose name was Azariah though scarcely able for sorrow of mind to utter with
his trembling tongue his hearts conceit, spoke thus in effect. Alas, alas! and
how fares then his most royal person? how does our good Lord king Solomon,
the most famoust, most wise, and most glorious King in all the world? The God
of heaven grant his most princely grace both along life and a wished
prosperity to live and reign over us and this people! For I assure you (my
Lords as ye will know and must in equity confess) that next and immediately
unto Jehovah our God, he is the approved stay of our house: the lightsome eye
of our body, the resplendent glory of our kingdom, the happy peace of our
people, the comfortable joy of our hearts, the glad solace of our souls, the
right guide of our government, the divine wisdom of our nation, the manifest
majesty of our God, and the blessed preservation of Israel. But how fares the
Kings most sacred person? In all this, and other his speeches and gestures,
did this noble Azariah express the good opinion conceived, the right love, the
godly zeal, the faithful mind, the true affection and right worthy nature of
a wise, faithful and obedient Subject to his most gracious Sovereign. I will
now tell you my good Lords (said Zabud) how the king fares: I am well
assured,, zabud shows the Kings alteration and present estate, as aiming to
his Repentance.
there is not any one of you all, but has plainly perceived, that his Grace
is most strangely and suddenly altered of late from both his wonted
constitution of mind, and his common order of life: and that his words also
savor now much other wise then they have sometimes heretofore savored, to our
audience and understanding. For behold, whereas he used to be gladsome and
merrily conceited: now is he ravished with heavy dumpes, and oppressed with
lad^es: whereas heretofore he accustomed to talk with a right lovely and lively
voice: now, we hear nothing besides a voice of lamentation from him, tending
to mortification: and whereas we hoped for some consolatory refrigeration and
ease, by the mitigation of those extraordinary passions: we see him yet hardly
perplexed and vexed out of measure with far greater and more torments. For
why? the Sun so brightsome is shadowed, the joyful light is covered, the
fair Moon is obscured, the shining stars be dazeled, Eccle. 12.13.
and the palpable clouds return after the late rain. Neither (indeed) have
I any hope of the recovery of his former constitution of mind and health of
body, (although I heartily wish it, and desire it every minute of an hour) he
accustomed to sit often in his kingly Throane, most royally amiddes his
Princes: but now he prostrates himself on the most lumpish earth, and reposeth
him self most solitary as one forlorn. He was wont to feed on the most
dainty delicates: but now, he is replete with bitter worme-wood and loathsome
gall: he sometimes solaced his sweet soul with the cheerful delights of
the happy; but now, he laments his hard lot with the wringing corasiues of the
wretched. Whereas for his recreation he used Harps, Shalms, Psalteries,
Dulcimers and other musical instruments of pleasing sound, now are they all
set aside and neglected yea, he does utterly distaste those and such delights.
Moreover whereas he daily accustomed for the better health of his body which
he was careful to preserve, to exercise himself before his meats, and to
rest himself sometimes after, toward his better digestion, and that in his
bed, he would first repose himself on his right side, wherein is the greater
heat of nature, to further the same, with the due observation of such and
other good physical Diets: now he is as another man, he does all contrary, he
observes no diet profitable to health, neither can he rest in his bed any
while, but tossing and turning hither and thither, he declares his anguishes,
and powers out his heart in sorrowful complaints. The very remembrance of his
former pleasures grieve his very soul, he utterly abandoneth that he before
much affected, and though a most glorious king in his estate, he yet abaseth
himself beyond all measure, his eyes gush out streams, the tears run down
his cheeks, with the which he has all watered his bed in the night, 2. Sam. 12.
right semblant therein to David his Father, after that the prophet Nathan had
brought him a message from the Lord his God: yea, he seems not most weary of
his present life; and death is wished for, being more acceptable to him in
these his agonies of soul: and semblably, his Words, Sentences, and sayings
(upon whatsoever occasion he utters them) argue a very deep mortification of
the flesh, a vehement contempt of the world, and a plain condemnation of all
the delights of the Sons of men. Whereby, in heavy sighs and groans he
drives this mestiue myll: Vanity of Vanities: and all is nothing but mere
Vanity. Eccl. 1.1.2.
Lo! thus fares the king! neither can my great familiarity with his Grace, or
any word or gesture of mine, now prevail with him (as in times past) to remove
this dangerous humor from his heart: but as soon as I put him in mind of
those his pristine delights, he cries out most woefully: The person truly
repentant is not soon drawn again to follow his former lusts. Io^. 27.2.3.
Vanity of Vanities, as though God had taken away his judgment, and the
Almighty troubled his mind. But howsoever it be, I tell you here in Council,
that the King is in a very desperate agony of mind, then the which nothing can
be more noisome to his health. For as the tree cannot prosper whose root is
annoied: so neither can that person receive health, which has a pensive soul.
I am very fearful to think whereunto this will come: and doubtless the kings
enemies, hearing hereof, they will clap their hands hissing and wagging their
heads upon him, as the base abiects sometimes did on holy Job with this bitter
taunt: Is this that man whom all the world admire, for wisdom, wealth, glory
and fame? But on the other side the kings people shall have little cause to
eat, drink and to rejoice under their vines and fig trees, as they have
done in those days forepast, under our Kings happy Reign. This being spoken,
and heard with consideration of every of these Lords: Zadock the high Priest
stood forth and with a mighty sigh from the root of his troubled heart, zadock
expresses the wisdo^e function and afection of a good Bishop and Counsaylor.
he lifted up both his eyes and hands toward the heavens, uttering these
words. Oh good God help us! he said again. The peace, prosperity and
welfare of all Israel, does depend, (next to our God) on the peace,
prosperity and welfare of our most gracious King Solomon, whom Jehovah his
God has chosen and appointed to represent his own glorious person in our happy
Commonwealth, in his wisdom, his justice, his equity, his benignity, his
fortitude, his magnanimity, his piety and all other his princely virtues: no
less then the fair and bright Sun resembles his Majesty in the high
Heavens, to the joy and comfort of the Creatures: or, as does the head on the
natural body to the beauty, life and government of the same: or as the wise
Governor of a Ship in the Sea to the direction and safety both of it, and of
all those embarked therein. Therefore I say, if the Lord of heaven in his
displeasure, should take away our shadow, or abridge our king and his
honorable prosperity for transgression and sin, who, from thencefoorth,
shall have peace? who shall fare well? who shall prosper? how can that body
prosper whose head aketh and languisheth with pain? and how can those
creatures rejoice, from the which the light, comfort and commodity of the Sun
is removed and detayned? The people ought to pray for the good estate of their
Prince.

Psalm. 20.1.2.


Then worthily are the people occasioned and obliged in their solemn prayers
and services, to lift up their minds to the Lord God: and above all other
things (next to the glory of God) to pray for the good health, comfort,
welfare and prosperity of our gracious Sovereign Lord: as my Lord Azariah
has well before advised and wished it. For I know, that the king is not only
much agonized in mind and afflicted in heart: but that he is much weakened and
worn away: neither think I that without some present remedy or mitigatio^ of
this his grief, can his weak body long retain his sorrowful Soul. The good
consent of the princes for the safety of their king.
This being said, the Princes with one consent answered. In truth it is no
less needful then it is godly, that all the kings majesty's Subjects, both in
general and particular should pray unto God for the life and welfare of the
kings Grace: for as this duty of subjects toward their lawful Princes is
comprised within that honor which children are to yield to their parents and
taught them by many divine testimonies and godly examples, Exodus, 20.
forasmuch as those are as fathers unto their people: so (as far as we can
perceive) it is a thing most requisite and needful to be done in this time,
partly in respect of the king himself: partly in regard of us his princes and
of his people. Indeed (said Zadock) it may be the King himself knows that
he has faulted and provoked the Lord to wrath in some one offense or other
committed against the divine majesty: for there is no man but he sometimes
sins. Every man is a sinner.
A man though never so wise, holy and righteous cannot live in this world
without some kind of sin: for all his thoughts are evil, and all his works,
yet his good works are imperfect and defective, if they be compared and
weighed with the divine thoughts, works and judgments of God. God punishes
his own children when they offend his Majesty.
Howbeit God permits not his holy elect to sin with out some measure of
punishment, but, as a father, he corrects and chastises his children to
amend them, and is willing to be reconciled with them that return home and
humbly pray before him and thereto in the midst of their troubles he gives
them power and ability to bear those afflictions with patient minds
(howsoever the flesh would rebel) and he keeps them in his hand, that the
fury of the ungodly may not be further extended nor fearcer executed toward
them, then it pleases him to suffer it for his own honor, the benefit of his
chosen, and the instruction of his Church. And here the good prayers and
repentance of the people for and with the king may (peradventure) please God
and somewhat appeaze this high anger. Again, it may be that there is some
displeasure conceived against us and the kings people, for some unthankfulness
of us, or of them, the which the king (being wise) does perceive, but cannot
redress and amend according to the desire of his heart. Howsoever it be, The
taking away of a good prince is a plague to the people.
as the disquietnes of the king must needs discomfort his people (as the
ecclipsing of the Sun oppresses the earth:) so whenever he shall be taken
from us, it will come to pass, that much wisdom will also depart with him:
for the king is passing wise, and his wisdom is beneficial both to the
Church and commonwealth of Israel: for by the same the one is divinely
instructed, and the other prudently governed: the which therefore if we should
want by this the kings disgrace and departure, we shall be covered with ignorance
and swallowed up with confusion: besides all this, if the king should be
deprived of that divine wisdom, or constrained (by an unhappy occasion) to
live and continue in care and misery amongst us (the which the most holy
forbid) it cannot otherwise be, but that many mighty troubles, afflictions, and
inconveniences will soon overtake us and the whole land, wherein that will be
verified, which the King has lately said in the agony of his soul. Woe be to
thee, O land, whose King is but a child, Eccles. 10.15.
and whose Princes are early at their Banquets. But this we of Israel little
mind or consider, as yet, because we know our King to be the Son of Nobles,
and his Princes and Lords have been more regardfull of his high honor and of
the government of his people; then for their own glory, gain, or commodity:
whereby the Subjects have been the sooner lulled a sleep in the sweet cradle
of ease, peace and tranquillity and thereby satisfying their appetites in
pleasures, are waxen even secure and careless under the happy reign of a most
wise, prudent, and gentle King. But too morrow is not yet come on them and us,
and the time of our pleasant peace is not yet determined: but when, or how
soon those vnlucklie days which engender and bring forth our heavy calamities
and woe (in the reign of a most childish and unhappy King) shall invade both
them and us, we are yet uncertain. Howbeit, we may worthily dread (as the King
himself also dreadeth) that those unthrifty days approach too near us.
Surely, surely, now of late as we have plainly perceived a strange alteration
and wonderful change in the Kings person, who appears as most loathsome to
himself, weary of his own life, negligent of his own health, careless of
his royal glory, and hateful of the world, as drooping toward the end of his
days (for this may any one discern in him, which shall either hear him to
speak, or see him to go:) so the high renown and bright beawtie of our time
and nation begins to vale the bonnet, and to decline, as from the highest to
the lowest, and will (indeed) yer long be shadowed and disgraced with ougly
deformity, without speedy prevention: Let us therefore consider of our present
time, When men be in the greatest danger they strive with the more carefulnes
to wind out
the condition of our estate and the dangers which are imminent, and in regard
thereof, not disdain nor omit to imitate and follow the examples not only
of men, but also the brute creatures in this case: for behold; they and every
of them in their kind and nature commonly struggle and strive with the more
diligence and careful regard, when they be in hazard of hurt, then when they
be free from all peril. If any fall into the fire, the water, or into some
lethall or deadly sickness or other mischief, first of all he is made
afraid, then he is pained, then he looks about him, then he groaneth, then
he labors to escape, this if he cannot do, then he cries, then he craves
the counsel and aid of others whersoeuer and whence soever he may get it: in
the end, he greedily catches hold of whatsoever help is proffered him. And
we have seen, that many by such means have escaped great dangers and losses:
On the contrary, we have known many to perish and decay, which have been
either so foolish as that they have not seen their own danger, or so
negligent as they would not labor and strive to wind out, or so proud, as
they would not vouchsafe to desire aid of others, or so perverse as they
disdained or denied their willing assent unto others that might any way help
or comfort them in their distress. Genesis 14, 21.
The time was that Bera the King of Sodom hearkened to Abraham who recovered
his people from the captivity of Codorlaomor and the other Kings of the
nations, whereby not only the King of Zodom, but also his people were freed
from that heavy yoke whereunto they had been subdued tweleue years before.
And it is happily remembered, Genesis 20.17.
how that Abimelech the King of Gerar was most willing (at Gods commandment)
to request Abraham to pray unto God for him, that he might he delivered from
the death which was threatened him, and be healed, by the which he escaped both
death and displeasure. Thus also Baruch the noble Captain harkened to wise
Deborah, and gat the victory over Gods enemies. Thus Pharao (though a tyrant)
craved aid of Moses and Aaron to be delivered from those plagues of Egypt, and
K. Saul permitted little David to enter the field against huge Goliath, for
Isreal's glory. On the otherside, the reprobate Cain would neither know his
danger, nor be restrained of his purpose, and being in distress, would not
vouchsafe to crave or seek for aid, whereby he perished, a vagabond and exile
from the Lord of heaven, who cast him off from his grace and mercy. Thus the
filthy Sodomits stricken with blindness would neither think of their
destruction, nor crave, nor admit the advice and aid of righteous Lot, who had
vexed his soul among them, nor any thing regarded the prayer and means of
faithful Abraham for their safety: to be short, Saul the King disdained David
and his comfort notwithstanding he had taken so good experience of his
integrity and the power of God in him, therefore rather then he would seem to
embrace him and his power, he chose to kill himself with his own sword to the
danger of his soul and decay of his glory. These be examples to teach and
admonish us. Therefore now following those which have in their choice declared
wisdom to the preservation and comfort of their souls. Let us withal regard
both of the Kings health, and of the good of his people both seek for, and
embrace those things that may either help or comfort both. And because the God
of heaven is the same from whom, and by whom all good things descend and
come unto his children, and which both comfortes and helps them indeed in all
their afflictions and dangers, let us (as I said before) lift up unto him both
our hearts and eyes, and thus let us pray and say as the kings father has
taught us in the like case. Psalm. 20.
The Lord God of heaven hear our Lord the King in the day of his trouble: The
name of the God of Jacob defend him. Send him help from the Sanctuary, and
strengthen him out of Zyon. Let the Lord God remember all his offeringes and
accept his burnt sacrifices Selah. The Lord God grant him according to his
heart and fulfill all his purpose: that we may rejoice in his saving health and
set up the ba^ner in the Name of our God, when the Lord shall perform all his
petitions. Now we know this, that the Lord will help his Anointed, and will
hear him from his sanctuary by the mighty help of his right hand. O Lord most
holy, save our Lord King Solomon, let him prosper and thereby be able to help
us by his wisdom and power when in thy name we seek unto him for succor. O
Lord in love hear our prayers, be gracious unto thy King, and merciful unto
us and all thy people, for thy holy Names sake: Amen: Amen.

CHAP. 3.
Iehosophat and the other Princes and Lords call to mind and report in order
what they have noted and observed in Solomon's gesture behavior and words, as
arguments of his troubled mind and misery.
THe former words being spoken, the prayer ended and a pauze again taken
whiles the Lords looked one on another with heavy hearts and sad faces, musing
much of the kings woeful case: at length, Iehosophat the Recorder opened his
mouth and said: Ah las I have known (and that not long sithence) when at any
time the kings grace sat at his table to eat and to drink among his Princes
and Lords, he would wonderfully be solaced and delighted with sweet harmonies
of Men-singers and Women-singers, (whereof he had right many in his Court) and
would be exceeding merry and glad in the midst of them all: saying, A merry
heart is the life of the body, prouer. 14.30.
but envy consumes away the bones: But now, sitting at his table (in
whatsoever company, and howsoever he be served and attended on) he seems
marvelous sad and woeful, he museth, he studieth, he looks heuelie, he
distasteth all things, and gives not so much as any sparkle or show of a
merry conceit, yea, he is wholly overcome with deep displeasure, which argues
an unmeasurable grief of heart and a strange affection of the soul: for the
face and external behavior of a man (which is not hypocritical) does
commonly express and declare the thought and heart. And although the King well
knows, that he which being diseased in the body and distempred in his health,
when he shall be recreated with the joy of his mind does easily recover, if his
sickness be not incurable, and that the most natural cure of the diseased is to
procure or occasion him some joy or mirth of the mind, for often times the
sick man by the comfort of gladness is eased, yet to them which now laugh and
would assay to provoke the king to laughter, for the same cause he says, ye
are mere mad persons; Eccles. 2.1. The true understanding of these the kings
words is afterward declared by Zadok in his Apology for Solomon.
and to them which proffer him mirth to recreate his mind, he says Sirs what
is it which ye do? When any man willing to put him out of this conceit inuiteth
him to a feast or banquet, he denies to come, being unwilling to enter into
such houses: saying It is better to go into the house of mourning then into
the house of feasting. Moreover of all those pleasant pastimes and delights of
the sons of men, the which sometimes he so much affected, and of all their
pleasures, counselles, studies, labors, devises, policies, works, and
wisdom, under the Sun, (seem they never so laudable in the eyes and
estimation of worldly men) he says: Eccles. Cap. 1.2.3.
Vanity, vanity of vanities, and all is mere vanity: For what else does a
man get profitable for himself of all those trauails which he takes under the
Sun? wherefore travail men in the wynd? and what good thing is there to be
found or enjoyed or tasted of by men under the Sun? *This being said, Azariah
rose up, Azariah
stood forth and spoke again. The same thing (said he) have I also lately
noted in my Lord the King. He was wont to walk forth into his garding, Eccl.
2.4.5.6.
to view his Orchardes, his Pondes, and his fishing pooles: to behold with
delight his fair houses and beautiful buildings, and to take great pleasure
in all the delights of the sons of men at all times: but now (alas) he
rather conteyneth himself solitarilie within his Chamber pensive and sad: and
now all the works which his hand has made, and all the things under the Sun
(wherein heretofore he took such passing great pleasure, to the wonder of all
his Princes) seem vain and loathsome unto his soul. Solomon loatheth his
labors and delights.
And as I saw him of late to pass by, and to behold them all I heard him
(with these ears) suddenly to sigh most grievously, and pointing at them to
say with a very woeful voice: Yet Lo! all this is but vanity, and vexation of
the spirit. And there comes no profit at all of all these things unto him
that has labored therein: whereby I am weary not only of those my labors,
but also of my life: neither can I digest any thing that is under the Sun. I
much mused thereon, as also what should be the cause of such the kings
condition, and of his so sudden metamorphosis. Truly sithence that time I
heard and perceived thus, I have much pondered thereof in my mestiue mind, and
have been, and yet continue right sorry for the kings trouble. *Then answered
Helioreph the Secretary, Helioreph.
and said, that he had likewise not only seen and observed such an
alteration in the kings majesty, and heard many such tragecall gestures and
pathetical words of the king himself: but also that he had some times enquired
of him wherefore he so did and had so said? to whom, his majesty answered
because that there is not any thing of value under the Sun: The vanity of
worldly things Eccles, 1.4.
and that a man by his own labors finds nothing else. And therewith he spoke
much of the generations: as that One passes and another succeeded, and that
Earth only remains. Besides these, I have heard him to utter many things
strange and wonderful: yea, such as without a good interpreter are able to
astonish and confound both the reason and judgment of any man. Ahiah.
* It is very true (said Ahiah the other secretary) and as I have seen and
heard: so have I noted much of the kings behavior and words. And here I
remember that he said of late, that All things are so hard that a man is not
able to expres them A saying which much daunteth the wise men of the world, All
things are too hard for man's wit. Cap. 1.8.
that undertake, in the search of Nature and her works, to find out and to
declare not only the things, but also the causes of al natural things with
the events: yea, he has said also, that The thing which is now in action, has
been done heretofore, There is nothing new under the Sun.
and the thing that has been done, and is now in action, shall be done again
hereafter, and that there is no new thing wrought or to be done under the
Sun. Howbeit, we see and know well that many new things are wrought and done
in the world every day: and yet notwithstanding, he said also, that The thing
which is past is out of remembrance, and that the things to come shall no more
be thought on: and considering all the things which are done under the Sun.
He found them all vanity and vexation of the spirit. Strange words yea, high
mysteries! howbeit I doubt not but that the King is well able to give reason of
those his words, and to confirm the same with sufficient arguments, howsoever
the wisdom of every man can neither reconcile them, nor on a sudden
comprehend or conceive the kings meaning. And I also (said Abiather the
priest) have both heard and seen the same in my Lord King Solomon. Moreover
I heard him say, Abiather.
that (though many things be bowed and by man's art, cunning and industrye
perfected and framed to request.) The crooked cannot be made straight, nor the
imperfection of things can be numbered: and that whereas he endeavored to
attain to the perfection of wisdom and knowledge, he found in the end,
that All was but vain, and where much wisdom was, there was also much
travail and disquietnes and The more knowledge a man has the more is his
care. Benaiah.
* After this Benaiah Captain of the Kings Host, standing forth, said,
that he also had heard the same words uttered, and that besides, he heard
the King to say, that whereas he had sought to content his Soul with the
pleasures and delights of the sons of men, he in the end (afer long search
and study) found therein nothing of ability to content his mind: but this
he found, that all those his studies and endeavors were mere vain and
grievous to his soul: and so much the sooner for that he considered* that the
wise shall be no more in remembrance then the fool: and that it happens to the
wise as to the fool: The wise man is forgotten in the world.
therefore what encouragement has a man to seek for wisdom? Moreover I
perceive him to wax weary of his labors: and the rather (as he says)
because he shall be feign to leave all to one, whom he knows not whether he
will be a wiseman or a fool, yea, to him which never sweat for them in his life.
No man knows who shall enjoy his labors after him.
And that seeing a man gets no profit of all the trauails he takes under
the Sun, he holds it best, for a man, to eat and to drink and to refresh
himself in his labors which yet a man cannot do, and so neither be pleased
in his labors, without the grace of God whose gift it is: and therefore he
sometimes expostuleth thereof thus And is it then good for a man to eat and
drink, and to seek to refresh him self in those his labors? as if he should
answer, No: But being comforted by them that stood before him and heard his
words and by them wished to prevent times and seasons: he answered, A time for
every person and to every thing.

Eccles. 3.1.


that he could not, nor would assay to do it, although he should redeem the
time seeing the iniquity of those days: for why, as men have their appointed
time and times in this world and as every thing has his proper opportunitye in
the same: so also has he had his time, and the time which he has ouerpassed
he cannot recall, nor the times to him allotted be they good or evil, is he
able to prevent: nor may those things in any other time be effected which are
to this time by the divine providence properly appointed. Men may labor
without the consideration of this time, but what gain they? nothing besides
wearines and trouble, which are the common rewards of men's toils in this
life, for God has framed his works in such order and measure, as they are not
to be altered nor corrected by man, not able to comprehend them. The King
complains of this also, that Ungodliness is found in the place of Judgment,
and iniquity in the place of Righteousness. Yea, The injustice and impiety of
Magistrates
even in this time of his happy government, notwithstanding the core and regard
not only of his grace: but of all us his Lords and chief counsaylors, who (I
am assured) have taken as great heed with diligence, as any Prince in the
world with his nobles could possibly take for the rule of the realm and
ordering of the Commonwealth. But (ah las) men are diversely affected, of
sundry opinions, and variable dispositions, in all ages, the which to meet
with in all points, it is for any prince or magistrate impossible: the which
therefore may be lamented, but never thoroughly corrected or amended. Howbeit
he thought (as he says) that the cure of this malady being beyond man's power
and wisdom, God would in the due time take on himself and separate the
righteous from the ungodly, and then shall be the time and judgment of all
counsels and works. He also much museth, how God (though he had chosen of the
children of men) should never the less permit them to appear, God
suffers men to appear as the beasts.
as though they were but Beasts: and as somewhat doubtful of the eternal
being of man's soul (which is that spiritual substance, which God has made
afer his own likeness, and powered into the humane body, and joined to the
body does animate and guide it, but being separated from the body, dies not,
The fleshly man's judgment of the soul.
but lives immortal for ever) he says: Who is he which knows the spirit of
man that goes upward: and the breath of a beast that goes down to the
earth? And is not this the judgment of worldely and carnal men, which
perceive not the things which are of the holy spirit? Indeed (being as the
beasts in their nature) they consider nothing more. And albeit the King has
said, that it is best for a man to be joyful in his labor, No man knows
what will com on him or his posterity after him.
which is his portion in this life: yet to daunt him again, who (says he)
will bring him to behold what shall come (on him or his posterity) after him?
And truly, this may easily discourage any man to provide for his wife, his
children, his family, and for the times to come, when as without hope of
future prosperities, he shall travail for them in the wind. * These and such
like passions of mind I have perceived in the king. The great oppression in
the world.
But yet beyond many others, he complained of all the wrong that is done under
the Sun, the which (as appears by his words and lamentation) is both
unmeasurable and unspeakable: and the more for that the poor oppressed persons
have wept and shed abundance of tears, and yet have not found any in place
ready to comfort them or to deliver them from the violence of their oppressors.
And here as in regard thereof He much commended the dead before the living, The
dead co^me^ded before the living.
(because they are freed from those miseries) yea, He commends him which is
not yet borne, to be happier then any of those because he sees not (nor has
had experience of) those wretched toils of men under the Sun. *Here he
likewise complains of the Envy, Idleness, Envy, idleness, covetousness,
solitarines.
and covetous minds of men in this world, he disliketh singularity and
solitariness of life, in the which having too much presumed, he has been
wonderfully deceived and much annoyed in his life, wherein he soroweth for the
abuse of his own estate, to the which (inlieu thereof) he prefers the
condition of A poor child that is wise. A foolish king a poor child.
*Further, in his wisdom he prognosticateth the foolishnes and future misery
of Rhehoboam his Son and heir apparante: and yet he has both well nurtoured
him, Rhehoboam.
and understands that most men have their eyes fixed on him with great
delight, and hope of his happy success and prosperity in time to come: and
some what the more he is troubled, because that men in regard of his young
prince and his succession, do somewhat neglect the present care and reverence
they should have of his majesty: For they look after the second man. And
(indeed) such is man's folly: he looks always further, and affects the
times, persons and things either past or future before those which be present.
Some say the times and persons which have been of yore have been better then
these which be present: others say, the best are not yet come, but we hope for
them to be hereafter: the whiles, they esteem not, yea, they loath and
contemn the good things which they have and may use at their pleasure: and so
in regard thereof do often loss both the commodity of the one and comfort of
the other to their remediless misery, and continual grief, And this (says
he) is a vain thing and vexation of the mind. Cap. 4.17.
Moreover the king has highly reprehended and blamed many of them which enter
into the holy house, which he has made for the service of God: saying: that
their offerings are the offerings of fools, and they know not what evil they
do therein. The which words (being not well understood) will occasion the
ignorant either to contemn the said house, and the service of God therein, or
to forbear to come into the same to show their devotion, and religion to God,
as they are bound to do.

CHAP. IV.
Zabud speaks again, reporting some other emphatical speeches of King
Solomon.
Solomon's Lords having thus far proceeded in order to report, what words
they remembered, uttered by the King in his affliction: Zabud the Kings
familiar spoke again and said: Well remembered (my Lords) And now besides the
former, I call to mind, what the king has said concerning those Rich men of
the world, The Rich men of the world.
whom the most part of all men do esteem happy in this life He says, that
there is no man rich under the sun: for where much riches appears to be,
there be also many ready to spend and consume the same: He that has much
riches cannot rest or sleep in the night: he that has riches, is oftentimes
hurt and annoyed therewith: and at length those which have riches depart hence
with sore anguish and sorrow of mind: (for there is no man, but at length he
must yield to death) and shall carry away none of these things, but are
constrained to leave all behind them: that so they depart hence, One man
gets, another spends the riches of the world, Cap. 6.1.
as naked and bare as they came into this world, notwithstanding their great
travels and long labors for their riches in all their life.

And this he esteems as a mighty misery, (which is so often seen under the
Sun,) that God gives a man riches and goods and honor: so that he wants
nothing of all that his heart can desire, Cap. 6.1.
and yet God gives him not leave to enjoy them, but another man spends them.
The which (as it seems) he applies to himself, whom it chiefly concerns.
In conclusion, he sees that many things increase vanity, and that a man under
the Sun finds nothing else as long as he lives.

Cap. 7.
Furthermore, the king (though so wise) did complain that he could not yet get
wisdom, but that the more he sought after it, Solomon acknowledged his own
imperfection.
the farther it went from him, yea, and so far, that he might not reatch unto
her. In this sort, whiles he would express the profoundnes of wisdom, he
abased himself beyond all men's expectation: for there is no man which knows
the king, but esteems him most wise. I have also lately heard him to speak
much against Women, so far, that whiles he found the wisemen to be so rare,
Scarcity of wisemen and wise women.
as one to a thousand in comparison: He found not so much as one woman among
them al. Further, he speaks much of this, that every thing will have an
opportunity and judgment, Every thing will have his judgment.
which causes me to dread, what he thereby entendeth toward any of us: and
the sooner, because he added; That one man has lordship or rule over another
man to his own hurt; which seems to touch us, and others, which are placed
in authority, There be which justify the ungodly which are dead before any of
them which are yet living.
and the more, because he says, that some are contented to commend them which
are dead, and gone, before them which be yet living: Yea, they praise such as
were in their lives distained with ungodliness and sin, for the which they
were worthily condemned and executed accordingly, being such as justify
Adoniah and his cause, Shemei and his cause, and Ioab and his cause against the
king, notwithstanding, that every one of them, were both execrable wicked, and
their works abominable before the Lord and his holy anointed, for the which
they were justly brought into judgment, and died without honor.

* But after that Zabud had a little paused, and none of the rest had
interrupted him, he proceeded and showed, that the King declared the occasion
of such rash Censores, and the boldness of malepert persons: Because that evil
works are not speedily punished, the heart of man gives over himself unto
wickedness. And yet it cannot be denied, but that there be some just, to whom
it befalls, as unto the wicked in this life, The confusion of worldly things.
in the which many things be carried confusedly to man's understanding, (for
he cannot comprehend either the things themselves, or the causes and
occasions of them by any his wit, wisdom, study or endeavors) and therefore
by any thing which is done under the Sun, and so in the kingdom of vanity,
No man knows whether he be beloved or hated of God: for it often happens to
one man as it does unto another, yea to the good as to the evil: to the
righteous as to the ungodly, to the clean as to the polluted, to him that
offers as to him that offers not, to the virtuous as to the sinner, to the
perjured, as to him that is afraid of an oath: whereof there arises great envy
of one against another, that the hearts of men are full of wickedness and mad
foolishnes, as long as they live, until they die. I have heard him also to
say, that it helps not to the swift in running, nor to the strong in battle,
Things happen to men by chance, as touching their foreknowledge or forecast*
therefore men should be ever provident and prepared.

Man's ingratitude. Cap. 10.

Ignorance of princes.


nor to the wise in feeding, nor to the understanding man in enriching: nor in
finding favor to be cunning; but that all lies in time and fortune. And that
a man knows not his time, but he is taken in the perilous season: as the
fishes are taken with the angle, and the birds in the snare. But he
complains much, and that daily of the great ingratitude of worldly men, which
do not only not care to requite, but also do forget the greatest benefits of
their bountiful benefactors. Yea, they cease not maliciously to slander and
defame them, that have worthily merited honor in their lives, he greatly
lamenteth the palpable ignorance of Princes, which before all others, should
be wise, learned, and well nurtured, thereby the better able to perform their
duties in their places: he yerneth in his bowels, to behold how servants ride
on horses, and Princes go on their feet, princes abased servants exalted.
as it were servants. And that whoseeuer assaieth to redress this monstrous
abuse of the world, is hurted and annoyed by them that strive to maintain
such abuses: he has uttered, and daily utters many parabolicall sayings
and dark sentences, and I have much pondered of the sense thereof, Cast forth
thy bread, (says he) on the face of the running waters: Cap 11.
Give a part seven days, when the clouds be full, they power down rain,
where the tree falls there it lies: he that regards the wind sows not:
he that respects the clouds reapeth not. These and many such other things
have I heard the kings Grace to utter in this time of his contrition and
sorrow. Cap. 12.
Above all, he has exhorted men to remember God in the days of their youth,
before the times of affliction overtake them, and therein has made a right
excellent description of man's Old age, with all man's infirmities, being as
preambles to his natural death: Here he tells of the A description of man's
old age, miseries and death.
days of adversity, of the years of displeasure, of the darkening of the
sun, the moon and the stars, of the turning again of the clouds after
the rain: of the Hands and arms.
trembling of the housekeepers: of the bowing of the The legs.
strong men: of the standing still of the The teeth.
grinders: The eyes,
of the dimnesse of the windows: of the shutting of the The mouth.
street doors: of the silence of the The great chaw teeth.
Milner: of the waking up at the Watchfulnes in old men
Cocke-crowing: of the abasing of the The clear voice or throat, and the
hearing
Musical daughters: of the dread of high Fearing to climb or stooping, as if
they fear.
climbing: of the flourishing of the gray hairs
Almond tree: of the Grasshoppers Sharp shoulders in age and unable to bear.
loading: of the passing away of The heat or the strength of nature.
Concupiscence: of man's travail toward his The pit or grave.
long home: of the Lamentatio^ over the dead.
Mourners which go about the streets: of the taking away of the The marrow of
the back bone, or vital spirit.
silver lace: of the breaking of the The brain enclosed in a yellow skin.
golden Ewer: of the breaking of the the veins.
pitcher at the the liver.
well: of the renting of the Head.
wheel upon the Heart.
Cisterne: of the turning of the natural death.
dust into dust from whence it came: and of the the immortality of the soul.

Every man in such cases, should first examine himself and his own ways.


Ascension of the Soul to God who gave it. All these, and many other such like
are the ordinary words and speeches of the king, the which are intermixed with
many deep motions of the Spirit, and divine doctrines to draw men from the
vanities of the world, and to persuade them to the fear of God, and the
observation of his laws. Surely, I have much mused thereof in my mind, yea, I
have many times examined mine own conscience, and ways, whether there rested
or appeared any thing in me, whereof the king might take any offense: for I
have verily thought, that either the whole cause, (or at the least) some part
of the cause of the kings sorrow and trouble has risen, or been taken from
some of us, that have been and are daily so near and about his royal
person. Therefore it shall not be amiss (in my judgment) that we first
examine our own words, works and dealinges, and with an upright conscience,
try and judge our selves secretly with our selves, and finding with us any
part of the cause, or the occasion of this displeasure, that we endeavor
speedily, and seek how to recure or mitigate the same: lest whiles we delay,
the king be so overcome in those his perilous passions, that he may be hardly
recovered.

After that those forenamed Lords had thus spoken, every of them in his turn,
zadock.
Zadock the Priest opened his mouth again, and with great gravity uttered
these words in effect. And my self (also my Lords) have with these mine
ears, heard those and others the like words to be spoken by our most
Sovereign Lord: But yet (as I have conceived and thereof duly pondered) the
King in such his words by you before remembered and recorded, has not spoken
of vanity, Solomon has not used any vain talk.
that is, he has not uttered any vain or idle thing, nor has his tongue
talked of deceit, but he has well refrained that, and will do (as he has
protested with patient Job) as long as his breath is in his body: for, as the
King is of al other the wisest, so has he had (especially since the time
that those passions afflicted him) a due regard both of his place and calling.
And truly (in my judgment) he has made, and yet daily makes and augmenteth,
A Catologue of man's vanities under the Sun, right worthy to be lamented and
abandoned. And by this he would that men should learn to contemn the wicked
world, with the pomp and vanities thereof: The deceit and vanity of the world.
for why? he has found, and yet perceives the world to be very deceitful,
the event horrible, and the pain thereof intolerable, wherein not to fear,
not to lament, not to be afflicted, not to be in peril, not to be tormented,
it is most impossible. Surely, as the King could not find, so neither can I
report any good or profitable thing of the World. Therefore, O ye lovers of the
world, for whose sake ye strive and make wars, your hope can be no greater,
then that ye shall be made the friends of the world: and what gain ye by
that? surely, ye shall find therein, that the flesh will infect you, Satan
will deceive you, and the world herself will daunt you: besides that, the
world passes away with her lusts: and if ye love those things that be hers,
ye shall pass away with her and her lusts, and through many perils ye shall
fall at length into eternal torments. Therefore would our king, that ye should
leave and contemn all those vain things of the world which perish, as that
whereof ye can gather no profit at all in the end, but pain and sorrows
unspeakable. And surely, neither has the king spoken or done this without the
arguments of many godly and divine motions of mind, from whence, as from the
treasure-house of a godly wise man, he has brought forth many heavenly
Oracles and sweet Sermons tending to the highest honor of the everlasting God,
and the chief felicity of man: being worthily esteemed the two principal
ends of man's election and creation, the which is to be inquired, sought after,
and effected in the fear of God, and the observation and performance of his
commandments, according to that saying of the Lord, which David the Kings
father received from his spirit, and committed unto Asaph that excellent
singer: psalm. 50.23.
He does me glorify indeed, that praises yeeldes to me,
And he that leads a godly life, my saving health shall see.
I think (undoubtedly) that this sudden Metamorphosis of the king, The former
good counsel approved by zadock.
is not occasioned by any of us here present. Nevertheless, I dislike not your
advise (right noble Zabud) that every one of us should enter into himself, and
duly examine and try his words and actions, especially those which in any
sort may touch our Lord the King and endeavor with speed to redress and
amend that whatsoever we shall find, or at the least suspect to be faulty or
amiss. Nor may this be disliked of any man living: nay rather it is to be
highly commended in every man, It is profitable for men to examine their own
ways.
as a virtue whereby he may the better know himself, of the which, whiles
many men (though otherwise wise in this world) have remained ignorant, or at
the least forgetful, they have not only neglected the duties of their
vocations, but missed the right scope of their life, and so the highest
happiness. But would to God, that the king were now, as he was sometimes in
those months past, Job, 29.2.
and in the days when God prospered him! when his light shined upon his head,
when he went forth after the same light and shining, even through the darkness,
as it stood with him, when he was young, when God prospered his house, and
when the Almighty was yet with him, and when he had, joy and gladness in that
his prosperity amongst us and his people! Then should not sorrow oppress his
heart, nor dread of future dangers daunt our hope. But let the Lord be true (as
he is) and every man a liar: that so he may worthily be extolled in his
judgments, and praised in his mercies: which doubtless is not the least
cause, that God in his wisdom has suffered many of his Saints (which have
been and may stand for singular examples of piety and godly virtues unto us)
not only to show forth their human imperfection and infirmity by some
certain slidinges and blemishes, but also to taste of afflictions cup,
as well for a correction of their faults, as for an exercise of their spirits,
no less necessary unto man, then his daily food in this wretched world.

CAP. V.
Solomon's Lords examining themselves and their dealinges one by one, are in
their own consciences cleared of any cause of his affliction. Zabud and
Azariah are justified.
AS the sudden alteration of King Solomon (after that he came to himself
again upon the sense of his sin) was very maruailous, and his words
aunswerable to his deep conceit: and that every one, as well his howshold
servants, as his Princes and Lords, were ready to note, observe and record
both the one and the other: so also were they most willing to inuestigate and
seek for the cause of these things: yea, every of them, was almost ready,
(according to that sentence of Zabud, with the assent of Zadock) to enter into
him self with a due examination, to search and enquire whether any just cause
or any occasion whatsoever might arise from any thing in them, or of any their
words or actions to trouble his Highness mind, and so to clear himself in
presence, by declaring his integrity without all hypocrisy or vain glory. And
so it is to be esteemed, that although a man's own mouth should not praise
himself, Note.
but rather another, yet these Lords uttered nothing of themselves, as to
blase in the pride of their hearts, In what mind and sort the Lords cleared
themselves.
the honor of their own demerites: but as within the bounds of modesty, they
might excuse and clear themselves of whatsoever might be objected to them. In
this sort the holy man Job, and the holy Patriarch Abraham and Moses and
Samuel, and Sampson, and David the King were not only constrained, but well
contented to do, as in their several histories plainly appears. And herein
they show forth not only their great grief conceived for the kings trouble,
but also the desire they have to ease and remedy the same to their power.

But now, as he is faithful which performs that in deed, which in word he
has protested and promised: Zabud his Apology.
so reverend Zabud (who first spoke thereof) began in this sort to perform
it accordingly. And thus he said: As the Heaven is high, and the earth deep,
Pro. 25.2.
so is the kings heart unsearchable. I have heard him thus to say: therefore
omitting (as yet) the search of his reins, (as Subjects should) I have
entered into mine own heart, and have examined and tried mine own thoughts,
words and ways, especially, The godly man rather judges himself then others.
such as concern his Highness. I have not cast mine eyes on others, and
censured them and their doings and sayings: but I have (I say) observed, tried
and judged mine own: fearing greatly, whether at any time the King, as he is
passing wise, has noted any point of folly or lightness in me, whom his grace
has vouchsafed to embrace, and to use as his dear and familiar friend. In the
which point it were an ungrateful part in me, and nothing beseeming the
worthiness and honor of my place, if I should in such sort behave my self,
especially toward him or them by whose rich bounty I have been preferred,
advanced, and am daily benefited and favored: yea, I confess, I might well
be numbered up among those fools, that have crooked souls in upright
bodies, for whom worship is so unseemly, as the snow for the Summer, and
rain for the harvest: whom, whosoever shall place in high dignity, shall
bind a stone in a sling to hurt himself. And in my judgment, as those young
Pellicans are worthily loathed, rejected and abandoned of their Dams, which
neither feed them, nor comfort them, nor regard them, Ungrateful persons.
after the time they have weakened their bodies by shedding forth of their
precious blood to cure and recover them of the biting of the venomous serpents:
so also those persons do not only deserve to be expelled and cast out of this
honorable society, but to be esteemed not worthy to live, much less to live
in honor that recompense their most gracious Princes and bountiful
benefactors, with such monstrous ingratitude, as will not only not assay to
requite, or that do forget good turns: but also yield hatred and displeasures
for that their loving demerites. Surely, these be the persons, in whom is
plainly seen the enemy of the soul, the quencher out of merits, the
dispearcer of virtues, the destroyer of benefits, the consumer of pieties
fountain, the dryer up of mercies deaw, the stopper of graces stream, the
shutter out of Sons from their Fathers blessings, and the same to the which
the Almighty that formed all things, and both commends and commands
gratitude to his Saints, shall add the transgressors reward in the end. I am
set in an high place, and enjoy therein like favor of my Lord the King. This I
confess, I do praise God for the same, and ambolden to be right thankful to
my Sovereign. God forbid, I should in the same wax proud, arrogant,
disdainefull, How zabud behaved himself in the K. Court.
envious, or seek to revenge private injuries on the^ which in times past have
abused me, although I be in place, either to hurt or profit them at my
pleasure. I have not (as being familiar with his Grace) suggested and ungodly
thing, nor flattered, nor dissembled with the King, nor played the sycophant in
accusing others in his presence. I have not (though preferred and familiarly
esteemed of the Kings Majesty) either contemned or neglected the duty of my
Priesthood, to the which I was called, nor the holy service and Religion: but
deuoutely attended the same, and withal waited on the King and followed him,
neither have I abandoned the cry of the poor with their petitions to the king,
when they have been oppressed: but I have been right glad to hear them, and
to further their suites, yea, and to defend and help the oppressed, and them
which had none helper, against the proud faces of their oppressors. I have been
(as holy Job has taught me) an eye to the blind, a staff to the lame, an
ear to the deaf, a mouth to the dumb, and a father to the fatherless. I
have taken on me to further the honest suites of all the kings people that come
to the Court for justice: howbeit not in that mind which Absolon had under
David, as the Lord is my witness (for he thought by this devise to aspire to the
kingdom) but in the same spirit which my Lord the King had under his father
by the good counsel of his mother, Pro. 31.8.9.
who thus taught him: Be thou an Advocate for the dumb to speak in the cause
of all such as be succourlesse in this transitory world. Open thy mouth,
defend the thing that is lawful and right, and the cause of the poor and
helpelesse. Neither have I in this respect taken any man's ox or ass, or any
thing else for a bribe or reward, or a Fee, as such often accustom to do
which stand in high places, yea rather I have been of Samuels spirit, and
glad withal mine heart, that such an occasion was offered me to express my
love to the Lords poor people: and therefore I have paid forth of mine
own, and bestowed largely both to the need of the oppressed, and the
punishment of those proud persons, which (knowing not their duties) have both
abused the King and his liege people. To be short, I have as much (as lay in
me) endeavored in my place to discharge my duty, to benefit my Country to
serve my King, and to glorify the Lord of heaven. Therefore I persuade, that
the Kings Grace is not grieved or offended through me. Lo (my Lords all) this
have I said for my self: of any of you can justly accuse me of any thing
offensive in this matter, say on, and let me not be holden guiltless. *

Zabud had scarcely uttered those words in such his honest and lawful excuse:
Azariah examineth and excuses him self.
but Azariah (who thought it very long, yer he could likewise enter into his
own Apology) to declare his innocence, spoke and protested, saying: And I
(for mine own part) seeing the King in this kind of displeasure, I have also
many times suspected, whether his Excellency, who has exalted me, of his own
grations heart without any my demerites to this honorable place, has observed
or noted, or suspected in me any touch of covetousness, ambition, pride, vain
glory, or any kind of teacherie, or disloialtie toward his Highness: or any
kind of injustice done or offered to his people: whereof I here openly protest
before thee Jehovah our God and you al, that I am as guiltless (in mine own
conscience) as the innocent child that lies in the cradle: for thus (indeed)
I should declare my self to be esteemed worthy this place and office. For I
persuade, that as those props and stays in an house, which are either noisome,
rotten, or unprofitable, should of necessity be removed, that some stronger
and more commodious might be placed in the same: so al such persons which stand
in place, What persons are most meet for authority.
as to support, stay up and maintain the estate and honor of their Prince and
common wealth be removed and excluded both from his favor and al authority,
which want the fear of the Lord, and those heroical virtues which are so
needful and commendable in such persons, which extend not their forces to the
due service and honor of the one and benefit of the other, and such other to be
preferred and set in their places and best favored, which are both well
qualified, and ready to perform their right offices in either, as such, whereof
the king at all times, and upon all occasions, may happily take and receive
counsel and comfort, and the common wealth safety and utility. *Therefore among
(many other things) as the king has not only placed me in office over all his
purveyours and Cators for his house, and sworn me to do and observe my duty
trustily therein, The office of the Purueyor.
with this especial charge, that neither they, nor any other his servants
should oppress, wring or wrong his subjects under color of taking or making
provision for his house, Knowing how soon a Prince by such means may become
hateful to his Subjects: I have provided charged and regarded, that both the
said Purueyors and their servants be men of good report, and faithful and
true dealing persons, and that they be duly sworn to respect the kings
commandment, and to execute their offices accordingly. Next I have regarded,
that none of the^ should presume to go forth with out his lawful warrant or
commission sealed with the Kings seal, to ye end, that both themselves might
know and remember their charge therein, and the people might neither suspect
their authority nor fear of the manner of their dealings. Thirdly, I have
straitely charged the^ in the kings name, that they exact not, nor wrest any
thing from the Commons but upon agreement at a reasonable price between the^,
and the owner of the things to be taken up. And that if any thing be taken on
credit for the king to be paid for at a day appointed, that ye perueiors having
received those moneys out of the kings Exchequer do neither convert the money
to their own use, nor deteyne it from the Creditors, nor delay to satisfy
them at the said days. And because all places of the Country are not stored
with victuals and such other things alike, I have provided and charged that
provision for the kings house be made in such places where the most plenty of
those things are, and that at meets and convenient times, and at such
reasonable rates and prices, as the seller may well afoord the same, without
threats or violent speeches. Also, that the purueiors shall not for favor, fine
or bribe, forbear to take of one man more then of another, whose goods are
liable to their authority at meet prices: nor shall charge or exact of one
man more then of another, for any malice, euil-will or suggestion of friends
or acquaintances. To be short, as they are sworn to observe and perform the
kings commandment and their duty therein: so have I duly examined them and
their dealings from time to time. And if any have been found faultye or
offensive in this case, I have not only abhorred and banished them the Court,
but severely punished them, as capital enemies to the king and his people.
Moreover, as touching the provision of mine own house, I have had no less
regard, that none of my Cators or Officers should at any time exact of the
kings subjects and kind of victuals, Corn, Cloth, Cariages or whatsoever else
without the good wills and consent of them whose the things be, and without
making a lawful bargain between them for the same, nor yet without present
pay according to their agreements, and that whenever I found any of my
servants or officers, whether for their filthy lucre, or mine own commodity,
to offend in their dealings, I have neither defended them, nor favored them,
nor wincked at their faults, but I have reproved them, cast them out of fauaur,
deprived them of their offices and severely punished them yea, I have compelled
them to restore and yield again to the true owners the treble value of such
goods so taken up with like costs of suite, besides their amerciame^ts to the
kings Majesty at his pleasure. Truly, this should be the desire of the
Nobles, and so much the sooner, that the commons might not be moved to murmr,
but to commend their dealings that their own consciences, might neither accuse
nor condemn, but excuse and clear them: the poor people might not curse, but
bless them: the kings grace might not be offended but well pleased with them:
and the Lord of heaven might not in justice plague, but in mercy prosper them
in their honor. Thus have I done and duly regarded, and for my part, I would
not wish to live, much less to live in this honor, longer then I am able, or
at the least have a faithful desire both to advance the true honor of the
eternal God, preserve and maintain the most worthy Majesty of my Soueraign
Lord, benefit the commonwealth and discharge my duty in my place. *

CAP. VI.
Ahishar the Master of the Kings Palace, Iehosophat the Recorder and Helioreph
and Ahiah the Secretaries examine and clear themselves.
Ahishar the M. of the Palace and his office.
AS soon as Azariah had ended his Apology, and so cleared himself of all just
offense offered the king: Ahishar the master of the kings Palace, stood
forth and said: The Kings Majesty has of his gracious favor ordained me
the Master of his Royal Palace and therein, what he has conceived of me in
any thing disliking his mind, pro. 19.12.
I know not: nor would I wish to incur his displeasure, which is as
fearful as the roaring of a Lion: when as his favor is like the pleasant dew
upon the grass, and as the rain in the time of dries. But this I know, that
to the uttermost of my power, wisdom and discretion, I have done my duetye
as well touching the preservation of the good orders of the kings house as in my
behavior toward his highness; and this I protest for my self not vain
gloriously to boast of mine integrity, and demerites (for therein I confess, I
have done but as I should, and am bound to do) but to express my loyal
heart, and to excuse my self of all such suspected crime, as might justly move
the kings mind to this high sorrow, the which I would not (for all that I am
worth in worldly wealth) should be occasioned through me. And therefore, as
touching mine office, I have been right careful and diligent that the kings
palace might be cleansed and cleared of all such vain persons as having
neither the fear of God, nor any honor of the king, do commonly disturb and
break all good orders in houses, in cities, in Co^monwealths: What kind of
persons are unfit for the Kings Court.
I have not only abandoned, but also caused the Court gates to be shut and
barred against all Caynes, Hagars, Ismaels, Esaus, Chams, Dalilaes,
Achitophels, Doegs, Shimeis, Nabals, Zibaes, Adoniahs, Ioabs, Ieroboams, as
such as are known to be proud, headdy, high minded, ambitious, treacherous,
covetous envious, malicious, together with all fornicators, murderers,
swearers, liars, whisperers, backbyters, boasters, fighters, brawlers: Al
profane, idle, ireful, slothful, and discourteous persons, haters of God,
unnatural, unmerciful, such as say in their hearts that God is not, and such
as knowing God, honor him not as God: but give themselves over unto al
ungodliness, These are they which disturb the tranquillity of brotherly
fellowship and all good order* and therefore are worthily expelled and kept out.

* On the other side, I have gladly admitted, entertained, retained and embraced
righteous and godly, Abel, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Sarah, Anna, Ruth, Shem,
Lot, What persons should be welcome to the Court.
Joseph, Sampson, Gedeon, Iosuah, Aaron, Nathan, Gad, Samuel, Abigail as such
both men and women as are holy, just, wise, faithful, obedient, gentle,
loving, docile, affable, diligent, courageous, industrious, grateful,
beneficial, religious, godly, chaste and virtuous: These I say, I have gladly
welcomed and admitted whether they were poor or rich: knowing well, it is the
Kings will (...) good pleasure I should so do; that so his palace should not
only be an house of Noblemen, but a receptable to receive and intertaine the
holy and just, such as might become not only the kings Court, but the mount
Zion, and that holy house which he has built for the name of the Lord. Now,
to this is added a special care, The exercises and the orders of the palace.
first, that the Lord of heaven be served, and then the house ordered and
disposed in other things convenient: Monarchical government.
for where there is not in government one principal person, by whom the others
are to be directed, there confusion marreth all The kings household servants
It is therefore required, that they be faithful, that they deceive not the
King, and that they be wise and prudent, not to be decieued by others. Moreover
that they be docile, industrious, courteous, gentle and virtuous. These and
many such be the orders and servants of the kings house, instituted by his
most wise disposition, the which also I have withal diligence endeavored to
maintain to my power, according to his will: This the noble Queen of Saba at
her being here, observed and commended with high praises to the honor of the
king, the joy of his people, and the glory of the everlasting God. These words
(among others) spoke Ahishar, the which being ended, Iehosophat speaks to
excuse himself
Iehosophat the Recorder put forth also his Apology. And whether in the
Records or gestes (said he) which are written, remembered or confirmed by me,
the king has espied or been certified of any error or fault displeasing his
conceit, I also rest doubtful. Indeed all things cannot be so carried or
written by any Scribe or Recorder whatsoever, but that imperfections or faults
may be made and. found therein; as there is no man so perfect, but he may have
a fault, and no man so wise but he may by an occasion slide, and by want of
heed pass over a fault in his time, a thing sone done, especially in them
that write or record much or have many and sundry matters occurring,
molesting, The Recorder his office.
and distracting the mind. Notwithstanding I hold it not only for a fault, but
a fault intolerable that a Recorder either for favor, love, or affection to
one: or for malice, envy, hatred or dislike of another, should falsefie a
Record, or willingly write or consent to the writing or recording of that which
is false; or should raze or blot out that which is true. This is a sin
against God, an offense to the King, the perishing of a good conscience, the
decay of a good name, the subuerting of men's rites the cause of contentions,
and an occasion of great inconveniences even in those matters and causes which
concern man and man; how much more then are such ungodly practizes both
heinous and hurtful in the things which concern the Lord of heaven and his
truth, to the which to add any thing, or from the which to take away, deserves
an extirpation and loss both of body and soul. The consideration hereof (my
Lords) and the danger not forgotten, will make a man heedie and careful, that
in this office, he neither err nor do amiss, amiss, much more that he
offend not of set purpose. But to speak for my self, I have adue^tured to
record nothing besides the truth, and that also which is not only lawful and
honest, but right worthy the kings Annals, and very profitable to be
remembered in the posterity, as such whereof the kings father spoke saying This
shall be written and recorded for them that come after. The truth of the thing,
and mine own conscience shall always testify for me both before God and man,
the one is strong and prevails, and ye other is to me as a thousand
witnesses, either to acquit me of guilt, or to justify my doings in this case
Moreover ye shall find (my Lord) if it please you to turn over, peruse and
consider the Records, that there is nothing contained therein, recorded or
confirmed by me, besides that which has been well considered of and weighed
with deliberation and judgment in this place and society, and by the consent
of your honors decreed to be committed to my Record. I fit be found otherwise,
and the fault proved to rest in me, (especially if any such fault be wilinglie
done) let me bear the blame thereof: yea let me (as well worthy) be deprived
of the honor of my place, let me be punished as a perjured and faithless
wretch, and let me utterly be discreited and made ashamed, to the terror and
example of all others. But I trust in God, that howsoever some have taken
offenses before they be given, who therein resemble children of variable
affections, the Kings Grace, being most wise, is not offended at me, seeing I
have not offered him any abuse or just cause or occasion of any such matter:
And that those things which have been recorded by me in the kings Annals,
cheifely such as concern God and the king shall be believed, as the most
certain truth, shall be received into the holy church and esteemed and
canonized for authority with them that come after us, Helioreph and Ahiah the
Secretaries excuse and justify themselves.
even unto the end of days. This being spoken the two Secretaries stood forth,
namely Helioreph and Ahiah: And we also (said Helioreph) have been much
troubled with the like fear, whether his excellent Majesty has holden either
of us or our dealings suspensiue, as towching either the reueling of any his
secrets committed to either of us, or concerning any commandeme^tes Precepts,
Patents, warrants, or letters, that have been written and set forth by us, or
either of us in His highness Name without his express commandment, will or
knowledge first had and obtained therein. But truly, as this were a note of
much malepartnesse in us, and (is indeed) a dangerous kind of Treason, so
should we thereby occasion the kings people and subjects not only to murmr
against us and our dealings, but to condemn the king of great simplicity and
weakness, permitting or neglecting such our bold presumption: yea, and they may
thereon much dread, what we may peradventure do and execute against them in the
kings name, contrary to the laws, and the good pleasure of the king, who being
(as they know) most wise, prudent and filled with divine graces, neither
wills, nor executes willingly any thing in the government of his people, but
that which stands with righteousness and equity, and therein shows great
magnanimity and kingly virtues toward them all, whether they be poor or
rich. Number. 32.23.
Neither I think but that, as they which sin against the Lord of heaven, are
found out of their own sins, 1. Sam. 22.5.
when he goes about to judge and punish them, as Moses said: nor shall there
be found a dayse-man: between God and the^, as in matters of trespass betwixt
man and man, as father Eli the high Priest in his time said: so, such as vsurp,
presume and sin aganst the kings honor shall neither be hidden,
notwithstanding their great hypocrisy and dissimulation: nor be holden guiltles
in the day when he shall come to visit them in his fierce wrath. But concerning
any such matter doubted of me, I here testify from my clear conscience, that
if such a question were proposed, I would gladly and that safely swear, and
take the living God to record for me, that as I have been ever secret to his
grace in matters of secrecy to me committed with all fidelity: so has there
not any thing so passed mine hands to be sent forth to his subjects touching
any the kings affairs, without his graces will or prescript co^ma^dement: or
at the least without his certain knowledge, and that I have, to the uttermost
of my skill and ability, behaved my self faithfully in this respect both
toward my Lord the king and his liege people. *And the same may be said also
for me (said the other secretary) in all points as I likewise here protest for
myself with integrity of mind. Neither, besides the danger that of such a
fault might ensew, I promise you faithfully I durst not adventure to attempt
that which I know would much empaire and hurt that credit and good name, pro.
12.1.
the which (as the King has said) is better then the sweet smelling
ointment, and worth the preferring, before Silver, Gold, and precious stones.
It is true that the sweet sauoure of filthy lucre both disswadeth and
persuades many a thing: The covetous mind of officers.
and the most part of all persons care very little how, or by what means they
come by wealth, when as wealthy they would be: and therefore oftentimes such
as be preferred to offices by his royal grace esteeming their private gain
and honor for the right end of their functions and callings, deal therein, I
say not, with great partiality, but with deep iniquity, whiles serving
rather Mammon then the true God, they say in their heart, if not with their
mouth, what will ye give me? What shall I have? What reward will ye bestow?
and so fill their cofers with the treasures of ungodliness and sin, which do
yet but wait the opportune time, wherein they may be called forth not only to
testify, but also cry and call for vengeance against them. And then they shall
confess and say: we have indeed wearied our selves in the way of wickedness
and destruction, what good has this ungodly gain and the pomp of riches
brought us? But I hope that the kings grace is not offended at me to whom to
my knowledge, I have not given (as touching my duty in my place) any occasion
of offense. The Lord save his noble Grace, and grant that he may think and
resolve of me but as in equity I have deserved, then, as mine own integrity
of conscience does clear me: so shall not his noble Grace be persuaded to
suspect me: But as I am well resolved in the one, he shall be satisfied in the
other: and so neither shall I fear the terror of his face, nor his grace be
either grieved or offended at any fault of mine.

CHAP. 7.
Adoniram the Treasurer, Azariah the chief Collector and Benaiah the Captain
over the Kings hoastes are justified concerning the cause of the Kings
affliction.
AS the former Lords had spoken in the clearing of themselves of all offense
offered to the King, Adoniram the Lord Treasurer his integrity in his office.
which might occasion his affliction and trouble of mind: So also Adoniram the
Lord Treasurer, Azariah the chief Collector, and Benaiah the Captain of the
kings hoastes endeavored the like. And first Adoniram spoke to this effect. It
may be that the Kings Majesty has conceived against me some matter in
mind to the disquiet of the same. But truly (my Lords) as ye have said and
done: so may I also boldly say and avouch for mine own sincerity and upright
dealinges as touching the things in the which it has pleased his Highness to
put me in trust. I have not been of that covetous mind, and of that base and
corrupt nature to conueigh the Kings Treasure into mine own chestes for any my
private uses: the which yet, is the only end for the which some men hunt after
and seek for such Offices, little caring how the king or the commons do either
prosper or decay: Nor have I wasted, spoiled or ryotously spent or consumed the
royal wealth: as some have done, respecting rather their own pleasures, then
the kings profit, to the abuse of this authority: nor have I purchased in
large lands, builte up sumptuous houses, endowed my wife, exalted my sons,
married my daughters, or otherwise provided for mine house and posterity, with
that which I have received for the King, and the which (without his especial
warrant to the contrary) is only to be employed, or kept and preserved to and
for his Majesty's use and the affairs of his kingdom, I have neither detained
nor withholden that, which I have been willed or commanded by the King to
disburse and payfoorth, as if the things were mine own to be used and
commanded, nor under color of mine office and authority, have I extorted,
exacted, or encroched that of the kings people, which was neither due to his
Majesty, nor liable in right to my commission or authority. But why should I
be prolixe and tedious in declaring further what I have not been, and what I
have not done, that might breed offense? It is enough for me to tell you that
I have executed mine office, and done my duty faithfully to the uttermost of
my power. I have kept and preserved the Royal treasures for the honor of his
Majesty, the weal of his Realm, and the daunting of the enemy, with a good
conscience: and as there was never king more rich: so was there never any more
careful in preserving and more heedefull in well employing the wealth of the
same. It is wonderful to reckon up what has been received, and again, to
tell what has been paid out, in and about the kings buildinges of his
Temple, of his houses, of his Cities, of his Towns, of his walls, and about
many other things. The dealers in and about these great matters may neither be
ignorant, nor inexpert, nor negligent. In all the which (I say) I have dealt yet
as justly, and as carefully as I might: howbeit not without great toil,
travel, and weakening both of mind and body. But yet I have been glad and
ready thus to employ my self, so far forth as therein I might please my Lord
the king, and discharge my duty toward him in this service. And truly in
all these great dealinges, as I have been faithful, and therein discharged
mine oath and conscience both to God and the king: So did I never (as yet)
either hear, or observe in the king, that he was displeased with me for any
mine actions or doings therein. Neither believe I, that at this present he
has taken any just conceit against me in any thing that offends his kingly
mind. Azariah the L. Collector acquiteth himself in his office.
*This being said, Adoniram pauzed. At the which Azariah the Collector stood
forth, and spoke in his own defense, and thus he said: Although so it be,
that the kings trouble may not spring from any of us all, (my Lords) yet, as
this one thing has worthily touched the conceits of others, by the which they
have been right willing for the better satisfaction of others, and for the
ease and clearing of their own consciences to examine and judge themselves and
their dealinges: so am I also moved and ready with the rest to examine and
judge my self, with all mine actions and dealinges in the kings affairs: for
he that is silent in such a time of trial, may be judged guilty, and worthy
blame, how free and clear soever he be. And again, A guilty person is
fearful.
how willing soever the innocent person be to abide the trial of justice, the
guilty and faulty person will ever shun, or seek to shift from himself the
right trial and the censure of law: for he that does evil hates the truth:
nor will he come to the light, that his wickedness might not appear. Therefore
knowing mine vprightnes, I stand to be tried, and speaking for my self, thus I
protest: howsoever it be, that I be holden faulty, or suspected, of any
indirect courses and proceedinges in my survey of his Majesty's Collectors,
Receyuers, Auditors, or of any kind of wrongful exaction, extortion
oppression, or unjust impositions of taxes, tributes or tolles on his liege
people, or of any kind of misdemeanour or lawles behavior toward his Grace
and them: I am able here with an upright heart to justify my self and my
doings: albeit, I do not thoroughly know what every particular mean officer
in his place has done, either good or evil. But for that (as occasion may
require) let every one of them plead and answer for himself, and let the
guilty person bear the blame of his own guiltines, A fault in the meaner
officers
as well worthy. And it may be (for it is a thing too too common with officers)
that many love to lick their own fingers in their offices, howsoever they be
sworn to do and deal justly: whereof the Proverb is, that it is a good
thing for a man to have an office. Hereof it is (indeed) that many ichinges are
purloined, and much of the Kings treasure mscarrieth in the way: neither can a
great part of that either come home to the kings coffer, or be brought to
light, which is either paid or received to and for the kings use, such is the
fault of Officers. But to speak of my self, I have done that which I have
been able to do in mine office, as mine own conscience testifies for me be
fore God and the king. I have taken the Accounts, viewed the Audictes, reckoned
the Receites, received in the moneis and duties; I have again disbursed,
allowed and paid out yt wc I have or might have received, faithfully to the
kings use: that which remains is made known, and I am always ready both
to yield an account of those things and of my dealinges therein. I have cleared
my fingers, and am ready to clear my conscience, I doubt not therefore, but
that as the king is wise, and has two ears in his head: so he has not opened
them both unto him which has sinistrelie accused or slaundered me before his
royal presence: but has yet reserved the one of his ears for me, Solomon's
discretion in judgment.
when I shall come forth to be heard in my honest and just defense, for this
princely virtue has been ever apparent and shining in the king, from the time
that he began to go out and in before us and the people. Such words spoke
Azariah the Collector, and then gave palce of speech unto Benaiah the Captain,
who had expected, Benaiah the captain declares his integrity for his own
discharge in his office.
as yet, when he might have the like opportunity to speak for himself amongst
the rest * And thus he prostested with great boldness: Being placed over the
kings hoastes, I have been also ready for my part in all points to do my
duty, and to eschew and abandon the contrary, as any other whatsoever. I know
how ready some are to leauie wars, and to wage battles, without the Princes
authority: how hasty some are to join their authority to old soars when they
would be revenged: how some have upon displeasure, pressed forth the unworthy
to serve in the Kings wars, and again for money have released and sent them
home again which were meetest for the service: how some have retained to
themselves the poor Soldiers pay, and others have received from the kings
Treasure, pay for many more then they have had in their Bands. And to pass
over other particular faults, committed by them whom the king has authorized
to deal in his wars) many have dealt most ungodly, respecting neither the
cause nor the kings commandment, nor the defense of the innocent, nor the
safety of their Country, nor the overthrow or weakening of the enemy, nor any
thing else besides the spoil for their own lucre, or the victory for their
own glory.

For mine own part, I know just wars are not unlawful nor unmeet for a
godly man to fight in: The honor of a good Soldier and the duty of a Captain.
and the office of a Captain therein is an honorable calling, and therefore
ought to be used and esteemed accordingly. I have not been ignorant what thing
this profession is: what is the right end and use of the same: what is the
duty and office of a Captain: who ought to be chosen for Soldiers, and what
they be: what things are to be considered in them: what things are
necessary: how to place the companies and bands: what directions to give:
what caueats, how to encounter with the enemy: how to fight, how to triumph
after victory, and such like. The whole estate of a kingdom is contained in
two parts, whereof the one is Judicial, the other Military: and this Military
part is even a kind of prudence ordained for the common good. There is prudence
singular, prudence oeconomicall, prudence royal, prudence, political,
prudence in five points.
and prudence military: By the first a man governs himself; by the second,
he governs his household: by the third a kingdom: by the fourth, a City: by
the fifth, he defends and maintains the common good. And here I have
considered this end: that as laws do chiefly respect the common good: so is
warfare instituted for the defense and maintenance of that common good, either
of the kingdom, or City. And for this purpose I have considered from whence
disturbances have come to the common peace, which might hinder that good:
whether by the sedition of Citizens: or by the oppression of innocents: or by
incursions or invasions of foreign enemies: and thereupon (by the kings
commandment and warrant) I have suppressed the one and defended the other. I
have thereto made choice of meet and able persons for my soldiers, as namely
strong, manly, bold, nimble, well set, and of sufficient years: above all, I
have regarded such as fear the Lord, and love the Kings Majesty, and the
commonwealth of the Country: Judge. 7.3.4.
remembering what the Lord charged to Gedeon for the choice of his Soldiers, of
the which sort I esteem ten, before an hundred of all others. Furthermore,
to every one I have caused such meet weapons and furniture to be committed, as
best fitteth their strength, knowledge and constitution of body: That now they
might know that they ought to be as Doctors in their faculty. Moreover their
apparel, their diet, their pay, and their provision in all parts have also
(by my careful prospection and direction) been duly proportioned and
appointed unto them without denial, diminution, tasking, telling, wringing,
polling, delay or any other inconvenience, which might any way hinder or
discourage them. And I have caused mine under Captains to do the like. After
this I have considered of the number, of the daily practices, of the
constitution, of the strength, of the industry, of the virilitie of the
enemies: I have also considered of the armor, the victuals, the places, the
times, the aides of either party. I have weighed, where should be placed the
horsemen, where the footmen: How many should be under the conduct of one
Captain, how many under another: I have caused them to have directions of
their ways in writing, I have placed in the Camps prudent Counselors for
advise and direction to the Captains, I have advised that they conioyne and
hold their forces together, and not to be dispersed, that they keep their
purposes secret, especially from the enemy, I have willed them to encounter
with the enemy in the name and fear of God (as Gedeon and David and Abraham,
and as Barach and Moses, and Joshua, and as Iepthe and such other noble
Captains have done) and therein not to fear. And lastly, having stricken down
or dispersed the enemy. I have charged them to consider from whom the victory
comes, as namely, from the Lord of hosts, who is the chief warrior, mighty
and glorious in battle (as David the king says:) and then not to forget, nor
neglect to give and ascribe unto his high Majesty the honor, the glory and
the praise for ever: As Moses and Barach* and David have worthily taught by
their holy examples, in the like case. These be the things (my Lords) which
in my duty (among others) I have duly regarded to be performed. Besides this,
I have had a care neither to wrong or oppress any man, nor to be revenged on
any man under color of mine authority, as my predecessor Ioab has oftentimes
done, to the great affliction of David the kings father, wherewith being much
grieved, he could often complain and lament with tears: as then, when Ioab
had killed the noble Captain Abner, David's friend. But some peradventure
scarcely will believe this, secing they have neither been companions of my
trauelles in those affairs, nor been acquainted with my manner of dealing for
the king: howbeit I persuade that the King knows all this to be true which I
have said: for he has been certified from time to time, not only by my
self, but by others about me, which accustom not to glory of the truth of al
things: If the King knew it not, nor could be persuaded to believe me, yet I
am sure, that the Lord of heaven knows it, and with the same mine own pure
conscience testifies in me and for me. Although I have been a Soldier (my
Lords) and now a Captain, and man of war appointed over the Kings hosts:
yet I praise God for this that I have always feared God, and observed a good
conscience, the which whosoever respects not nor regards, may happily be as
strong in body as Goliath, but he shall never prevail with David: he may
peradventure go forth with Gedeon, but he shall be as fit for Gedeons war,
as were those doggish lappers, and those faint hearted dastardes, whom he
sent back again. Whatsoever some say, which neither know the one, nor regard
in their dealinges to express the other. I know it is a fearful thing to go
forth to the wars without God, and a miserable thing to want a good
conscience in the wars. This regarded Abraham and Moses and Iosuah, and
Othoniel and Sampson and Gedeon, and Iepthe and David, and therefore have been
noble warriors and happy in battles. And this I would advise all them that go
forth to the wars to respect, as they would tender their own welfare and
prosperity in the same: But to be brief, I esteem my self free from all
offense justly offered to the kings Grace in this case. And now (my Lords) I
think verily, The cause of the k. affliction supposed not to rise from any of
the Lords.
that we need to look further then into any of our selves here assembled, if
we shall find the cause of the kings affliction. Neither ought this to be
procrastinated, lest by our delay the king perish under our hands, and all
things grow out of order to the grief of the kings friends and dutiful
Subjects, and to the glory of his Enemies: Nor may we think, but that though
the king have many friends which are right glad to hear of his prosperity:
yet he is not quite free from such enemies, as envy and hate both him and his
felicity. These be they which can very hardly be persuaded to think or speak
well of his majesty: but to do, and to utter out that which may any way hurt
or blemish his royal honor, they are always ready and wait for their
occasions. Besides that, we may with others persuade, and be thereof grieved
in our hearts, that the king being in this time troubled in mind and
disquietted in his soul, cannot well use the faculty of reason, albeit he be
so wise a man: as neither the eye in the head, nor any member in the human
body is well able to execute his proper function, when the same shall be molested
or blemished: And therefore it cannot be that he shall well govern and judge
his people after the discretion and wisdom of a Prince, except that speedy
means be found and applied to withstand this dangerous inconveniences.

CAP. VIII.
Zadok the high Priest, and Abiather the priest disdain not to examine
themselves, and are clear in judgment, with the rest.
King Solomon's Princes and Lords having thus far pleaded for themselves in
the audience of Zadok and Abiather, who, until now, had holden themselves
silent, listening and pondring of that which had been spoken: in the end, they
both also vouchsafed the like. But first Abiather by Zadoks leave began in this
sort. Why should I be silent in this examination, Abiather the Priest here
clereth himself in his function.
seeing that every one of you (my Lords) has declared his integrity, and
cleared himself in judgment against the King? In what soever his Grace be
displeased, I know for my part, that I have not faulted, as that other Abiather
faulted, whom therefore the king worthily deprived of his place and dignity:
for albeit I have the like name: yet God forbid, I should be of the like nature
and quality: nor have I ever minded to work treachery (as he did) against my
Lord the king: nor do I know, that in any part of my ministry, I have so
offended, as whereof his Majesty might justly conceive any such displeasure or
sorrow of mind. Howsoever others in this function have been approved: how they
have entered, how they have behaved themselves and neglected or transgressed
their duties, I hope, that shall not be laid to my charge: Ye know well,
that according to the election of such as I am, what view, examination, The
election and entrance of priests. Leuit. 2^
trial and approbation has been made of me, the law ordained in that
respect, has been sufficiently respected, exacted and performed, that so I
might be made fit for the place for the better service of the Lord: knowing
well, that none of them which were either halt or blind, might be permitted to
dwell within ye gates of the tower of Zion, but were by the kings father
expelled and kept out, yt the place being of such purged, 2. Sam. 5.8.
they which retained the right vrim and thu^mim, might enter and remain therein
for the service of God, and honor of the king. Neither used I any ungodly or
indirect means for mine entrance: I came not in by the windows or by the
clifts of the walls, as thieves and murderers accustom to do, but by the gates,
the doors being set open, as right lawful it was for me to do, yea, and they
which were both of authority and of a fellowship in the house of ye Lord, were
as willing and glad to receive and entertain me therein, as I was willing and
ready to enter. Having thus entered, I have bin as careful to perform and
observe my duty, I have sacrificed, prayed, taught and ministered in my due
course, according to the order and effect of the priests office, with all
diligence to my power: and knowing that it is no small danger and no less
disgrace to a man of my profession, to express one thing in habit, and
another thing in life and behavior, and not to be perfect within, as to make
show without and not to be in either conformable to the office and place: I
have especially regarded the manner of my walking, that it might be honest,
worthy and wise: that so I might teach both in doctrine and life, and not
destroy in the one, Psalm. 109.7.
whiles I would seem to build in the other, accounting them that offend herein
worthy of that censure which David gave on such, saying: His office let another
take.

Moreover whereas it was the good pleasure of my Lord the King, and the will
of my Lord Zadoke, that I should at times minister for my Lord Zadoke in the
service of God and the King: It is well known that I have not presumptuously
usurped, nor intruded, nor thrust my self into presence, but being called and
commanded, being well mindful of the kings words written among his wise
proverbs. pro. 25.5.6.
Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King, and prease not into the
place of great men: for better it is, that it be said to thee, come up higher,
then that thou should be placed lower in the presence of the Prince, whom
thou see with thine eyes. Therefore, I have not been of that ambitious and
arrogant mind. But howsoever I might be suspected as faulty or imperfect in
place and time, I appeal to the Lord and mine own conscience, as ye (my
Lords) have done. If I be guilty against the king (to my knowledge) then would
I wish that the one might accuse me, and the other condemn me, in the presence
of you all. Howbeit letting pass this examination, I presume there is some
other cause whereof the kings affliction springs, the which (I doubt not,)
will in time appear in the clearing of us al. For time is, that which
discloseth secrets and reuealeth the truth, and therefore is worthily called
the mother of truth. Nor do I think, that ye king suspecteth any of us in this
case, for if he did, his jealousy would not have forborne to disclose and
utter the same to any of us all: for he respects neither persons, nor power,
nor wealth, nor policy, such is his wisdom, wealth, power and the glory of
the fearful God in him.

zadock the high priest puts forth his Apology; and shows what is the
function and duty of his place.
Abiather having thus spoken for himself, he at the last gives place to
Zadoke, perceiving how ready and willing also he was to say so^what in the
presence of the lords. * Zadock was a uery grave and reverend Father, and a
faithful Priest of the Lord, doing according to his heart and mind, in whom
the bright Vrim and Thumim so shined, yt no man either suspected him of any
fault toward the king, or doubted of his divine wisdom and singular
perfection, and therefore neither the Princes required either any examination
or further trial of his integrity: howbeit, the most reverend father, in all
humility neither refused nor disdained to do, as they had before done in this
respect. Therefore standing up in the midst of the^ he spoke with great gravity
and deliberation to this effect. My Lords all: although it be so, that neither
any of you has given this offense unto the king, nor may it be, that he
holds any of you faulty in this matter: yet am I glad to see and hear how
willing and ready ye have been with all submission to examine and clear your
selves in this presence: And truly, howsoever ye be sorry for the kings
affliction (as indeed ye cannot be glad thereof) yet may ye rejoice in this,
that ye have had this fit opportunity by this confession and trial, both to
clear your selves of guilt, and to manifest your integrity and dutiful
hearts toward his Majesty. But howsoever it be that any suspicion or
surmises may spring of any of your words or dealinges, ye are happy in this,
that ye retain a good consie^ce to testify in and for your selves, to the ease
and joy of your hearts, then the which, there cannot be a greater treasure in
this life. The guilty man proposing to his understanding the law which he has
broken, The guilty conscience.
and transgressed, and withal the judgment and pain ensewing the same, being
rightly concluded and applied to himself, has always dread carefulnes and
sorrow of heart: as who might thus argue: Thus says the law: but thus have I
done and so transgressed the law: Ergo I stand to be judged and condemned by
the same: as who should say: shall not that just God deal with me, as I have
deserved? and shall not I be plagued in the end for my desert, offending
against the law of God as others have been plagued for the like? and should I
promise unto my self safety any way in this my guiltiness? Thus argued Adam
when he had broken the law of the Lord: thus also Cain when he had murdered
his brother: Thus the brethren of Joseph, who had abused and sold him away:
Thus argued Pharao after that he had threatened Moses and Aaron and would not
let the people go: thus Saul, when he perceived David's innocence and his own
malice against him: and thus Achitophel and such like, who in the knowledge of
their own sins and the sense of the divine Justice, concluded a just
condemnation on themselves. Adam fearing what would ensewe, hid himself in the
bushes, and yet he could not be safe, opposed (as it were) to the divine
wrath and all miseries, and therefore confessed, Genesis 4.
that he was naked and was afraid at the sound of the Lords voice. Cain
confessed, that his sin was greater, then that he could be pardoned and
that the punishment thereof should be far beyond his ability to bear:
yea, he said unto the Lord: Behold thou have cast me out this day from the
upper face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hid: fugitive also and a
vagabond shall I be in the earth: and it shall come to pass that every one
that finds me, shall slay me. * The sons of Jacob, seeing they could not
be hidden, Gen, 42.21.
confessed at length their sin against their brother: saying, we have verily
sinned against him, and therefore are we now troubled. And again fearing what
Joseph would do unto them after his fathers funerals, they in the terror of
mind come and beseech him to forget their injury against him. The king of
Egypt at length confessed and said unto Moses and Aaron: Exodus 6.27.
Indeed the Lord is righteous and I and my people are ungodly: On the which he
would conclude his conscience condemning him: Therefore shall both I and my
people be plagued. Saul, in the agony of his heart, slew himself with his
own sword, and Achitophel, who had been a Counsaylor and prouoker of Absolon
against his Father (his own conscience condemning him) went and hanged
himself. Surely of all the torments under the Sun, there is none comparable
to an evil conscience, which aggrauated by his own sting or prick, does
ever accuse, condemn and wring man's heart. If public fame neither condemn
nor accuse, nor suspect: yet the guilty conscience within a man's self forces
the same to the uttermost, neither can it be, that he which lives faulty,
shall escape the torment and terror thereof, nor therefore can he be happy in
his life, be he never so rich, The comfort of a good conscience.
so honorable, so strong, so mighty, so glorious in the world, but blessed
is the man that fears God and walks in his ways: as David the Kings
Father has modulated: For this is that which in the law is required of him,
as the King has said: This man concludes to himself, Joy and gladness, Job.
23.3.4.5.6.7.
when that which he has done shall be well approved by the law. This cheared
Job in the midst of his afflictions, notwithstanding that his wife, and his
three friends hardly charged him with folly. So was Joseph hold in Egypt
when his integrity cleared him: So Moses and Aaron were not discouraged, Genesis
40.41. Exodus 10.
notwithstanding the threats and hard dealinges of Pharao: and thus the Kings
father with a clear conscience protested before King Saul. Behold this day
thine eyes have seen, 1 Samuel 24.10.
how that the Lord has delivered thee this day into m^ne hand in the cave:
and some bad me to kill thee: but I had compassion on thee: and said: I will
not lay mine hands on my Master: for he is the Lords anointed, etc.

And this (to express the innocence of his heart) he feared not to protest
before the Lord in his prayer.

O Lord my God: If I have done any such thing, Psalm. 7.3.4.
or if there be any wickedness in mine hands: If I have rewarded evil unto
him that dealte srowardly with me: (yea I have delivered him, that without any
cause is mine enemy) then let mine enemy persecute my soul and take me: Yea,
let him tread my life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust.

Lastly I cannot but remember that worthy example of Samuel the Lords Prophet,
who was occasioned through the disobedience of the people before King Saul and
them to plead for himself to defend his integrity: 1. Sam. 12.3.
And thus he said with a good conscience and boldness of Spirit: Behold: here
I am: Bear record of me before the Lord, and before his Anointed: Whose Ox
have I taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Whom have I done wrong to? Whom
have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you. They said: (their own conscience
provoking them) thou have done us no wrong nor hurt: neither have thou taken
ought of any ma^s hand. Lo! my lords here is joy and gladness, and ye greatest
comfort in this life! for ye good Conscience has with it a thousand witnesses,
and as many pleaders to testify for his owners integrity, and to defend the
same before the throne of Justice. This therefore is the sweetest and most
wholesome rest of man's soul, the title of Religion, the spiritual Temple, the
blessed field, the pleasant gardin, the golden peace, the Angelical joy, the
holy Arc, the Kings treasure, the house of the spirit, and the glass wherein
a man both sees, orders and confirms himself to the lively image of his
maker. Though the flesh oppress us, the world allure us, and the Devil
terrify us, yet is this treasure safe and sure within us from all danger of
evil. Therefore, I hold that in this life, there is nothing more pleasant,
more sweet, more profitable, and more to be desired and retained then a good
conscience, both toward God and man. Wherefore (my Lords) as ye have very well
done in that ye have submitted your selves to this present examination and
trial: so are ye happy in this, that ye are justified in conscience: for hereof
ye have and shall find the highest comfort and gladness. And now I beseech you
to permit me to do as ye have done, The high priest is willing to ease himself
in showing forth his integrity with the rest.
that thereby I may not only express mine own integrity, and so clear my
self of all offense and suspicion of the same: but also rejoice together with
you, though in the midst of mine affliction for the kings trouble: And that
the sooner, because whiles I stand an hearer and a judge of other men in their
examination and trial, I might not seem to disdain mine own. 1. Kings. 2.35.
Abiather was before this time high priest, howbeit his cause and dealing
concerning both God and the king, came into question before the king and his
princes, and being found guilty against either in his trial, he was worthelie
deposed and the priestshood translated: Then why should I imagine my self free
from censures the rather in respect of my place? and why should I not abide the
hammering of that which should be objected against me and my manner of
proceeding toward God, the king and his people? And if I shall be found
guilty as Abiather was, why should not I be removed as he was, and another man
put in my place more worthy? And now (my Lords) although I may not say, whether
in my person, or in my ministry and behavior (wherein I am to prefigure the
holy Messiah in his priesthood) or whether in that Abiather the priest attended
sometimes for me in the kings presence, any contempt or abuse has been taken
or suspected to his highness offense: yet I know well, that for mine own part
I here safely protest from my conscience before the Lord of heaven and earth
and before you all, that according to that trust which the kings father
reposed in me, when I was to anoint and proclaim my Lord King over. Israel:
and after that good opinion which the king himself conceived of me, in the day
when he took me to him to be the Lords high priest, in the place of Abiather
whom he put away: I have performed the first, and expressed the second,
whithout any deceit in the one or just offense in the other, and that after my
state and dignity, so far forth as a mortal man could possibly extend
himself therein. And of this as of my calling, I hope ye doubt not:
Nevertheless let me be heard I beseech you a few words concerning both this
and that, seeing that the Priesthood was ordained to foreshew and signify the
office and dignity of that highest Priest which is to come, as unto who^ all
the types and shadows of the law do point: it has been both provided and
commanded by the Lord himself, that the Priest might have his lawful
calling, and therewith not only in body, but in habites and ornaments should
be pure, holy and glorious in all points. To the which it was advised how he
should be consecrated, what he should do, how he he should live, what wife he
should marry, and how he should be esteemed in his place. According to the
which (though I say it for my self) I was taken from the midst of my people
as one worthelie esteemed and honored in my place for the tokens of my graces:
then I was straightly viewed and thoroughly examined, wherein I was found clean
and free from every one of those blemishes, with the which whosoever was
touched, was forbidden to prease forth to do the priests office, Leuit.
21.17.18.19.20.
I was well tried to be neither blind, nor lame, nor bruised, or flat of nose,
nor mishape^ in my members nor broken in my feet nor broken in my hands, nor
crooked in my back, nor bleared in mine eyes, nor eyes webbed or blemished, nor
skiruy, nor scabbed nor broken in the stoanes: The blemishes for the which a
man was unfit for the priesthood.
yea I was found free of those imperfections or blemishes which our Elders have
gathered and noted out of that place of the law, which disabled the priest: for
they noted in the head, eight; in the neck two; in the ears, twelve; in the
eyebrows and eye-lides, fifteen; in the eyes, nineteen; in the nose, six;
in the lips and mouth, nine; in the belly, three; in the back, three; in the
priuities, sixteen; in the hands and feet, twelve; in the leges, fifteen;
and in all the body, four: the which being taken away, the natural body
appeared sound, fair, and perfect in all parts: that by the same not only
the purity of the mind might be signified, but also the person of the Messiah
truly prefigured. Then was I consecrated to the Lord according to the law, The
consecration and ornaments of the priest.
then was I clothed in the holy garments: as namely, the Breastplate, the
Ephod, the Tunicle, the broadered Coat, the Mytre, the Girdle, which were
according to the commandment garnished and beautified with gould, blew-silke
purple, scarlet, white twyned silk, and brodered work, also with Owches,
Chains, precious stoans, and other such things, with Vrim and Thumim, in the
which are expressed not only spiritually the several graces of a godly mind,
but also mistically the heaue^lie virtues of the holy Messiah, the final
object of our love. To this I was anointed with the holy oil, and had mine
hands filled for the sacrifices. The duties of priesthood performed.
Thus have I been furnished and approved for the Priests office: Now to this
have I been willing and ready to do my duty in the execution of my function.
I have offered the sacrifices to the Lord for my self and the people, and have
prayed for them, in the which I have been mercifully heard and regarded of the
Lord (as Aaron was) I have taught the people and instructed them in the fear
and laws of the Lord: I have judged and discerned according to equity, and as
placed over the priests and ministers in the Lords house: I have regarded
therein not only the conversation and behavior, but also the order of the
ministeries and services of the persons in the same, for the better service of
God, the preservation and maintenance of the ornaments of the Lords house, and
the benefit of the Lords people. And this the better to perform, I have ruled
my self and lived according to the law in my place, and for my comfort, I have
taken to me a clean V^rgin to wife. Moreover, I have served and honored (next
unto my God) my Lord the King in all dutiful thankfulness, without giving him
any just offense to my knowledge. And therefore as the King is most wise, and
will not take an offense being not offered him, I am sure he is not afflicted
or grieved for any cause of mine, as I persuade, neither for any thing he has
noted or conceited in any of you. But I know well, there be other causes and
things whereof he has taken this sorrow: the which also may be known to some
of you, and yet are ye most unwilling to reveile or make known, but would
rather (if it might be) conceal and cover them: for it is the part of a friend
to cover the fault of his friend: much rather then ought a true Subject, for
the love and honor of his Prince, rather modestly to forbear, then to
adventure the display of any his faults or imperfections. They that observe
not this rule, resemble shameless Cham, one of the sons of Noah, Genesis 9.22
who most irreverently both discovered and derided the nakedness of his father.

This being said, Zadok sighed deeply, and made as a proffer to further
speeches. Nevertheless, he refrained for this time, for he well knew the
causes of the Kings grief, although it pleased him not as yet to utter it,
partly, for the reverence he yielded the kings honor, partly, for his own
modesty, as also, for that he was very unwilling to be the vnfolder of that
which he was sure the Princes and all the Kings friends would be very sorry
and loath to hear, albeit they were so ready to inuestigate that, whereof being
once certified, they did much marvel at, greatly lament, and could scarsely
ease or mitigate, much less salve and recure: howbeit, they endeavored their
best, and thought it bootelesse for them to stand wondering and reasoning
longer then they might set on, and speedily assay which way to bring ease or
comfort to their Sovereign Lord, the which (they well knew) could not be
effected till time they had found out, and considered of the true causes of the
kings affliction. Therefore though much against their wills, yet urged by the
present necessity, they presume on the king in this examination.

CAP. IX.
The Lords are resolved to examine and consider of the King and his actions:
but note, by what occasion, in what sort, and to what end. Of Solomon's birth.
WHen every one of the Lords had perused himself, cleared his own conscience
and approved his words and actions toward the king. Azariah.
Azariah the chief Lord replied again, and said: Now that we have in this
sort submitted our selves to the just trial in all modesty, and no less
faithfulness to our Lord K. Solomon; and so cleared our selves of any just
offense offered him, which brings no small comfort to our hearts, in the
time of this our trouble and trial: Let us adventure to behold the king
himself, in whom it may be, that the cause of his own sorrow may be found.
Therefore let us consider of his person, actions, and his manner both of
entrance and life. Indeed I confess (as Zadok has before intimated) that it
may be thought a thing too malepert in Subjects to censure the Prince, or to
pry too narrowly into his actions and dealings, or to discover any his faults
or imperfections, especially to this end to diffame or deride him: for this was
Chams offense against his father, for the which he was reproved and his
posterity cursed: Nevertheless, I think it not unlawful nor amiss, that the
kings Princes and Privy Counselors, seeing the kings present affliction and
extremity, the which they should regard to mitigate and withstand, and whose
health and safety they should tender and maintain, How subjects may consider
of their princes
in all love duty and reverence of his honor, not only modestly to search out
and to know: but also wisely to endeavor to remove or withstand the causes,
that the unhappy effects might cease, and the dangerous inco^ueniences be
utterly prevented, only in such sort, and to that end, as the faithful
Phisicians accustom to deal with their pained Patientes, or as they which
desire to know the grief of their distressed friends, to the intent either to
provide remedies, or to ease them of their griefs: for although we know the
Kings misery to be great, hear his complaint very woeful ringing in our
ears, and do condole with him with sorrow of mind, yet, unless we seek for
the cause, consider well thereof, and labor with wisdom, and that speedily,
to ease him of his affliction, we shall do just nothing, but shall be rightly
likened unto them which stand gaping and gazing on the prisoners in bands, but
neither go about to deliver them or to comfort them: or like unto those, which
seem to visit the sick, and behold their deadely maladies, but purpose
neither to help or ease them. There be many more which accustom this, then
that perform the former in our days. Helioreph.
* Indeed (said Helioreph) men should much rather (in the sense of their own
faults) be penitent, and in the kings offenses be silent: for as it is against
humanity and good manners either to enter into another man's house not invited,
or too curiously to observe another, not occasioned: so is it much against the
duty of a Subject, either too narrowly to note the kings life and behavior,
or to talk rashly of his actions. Notwithstanding, we see this, that as Kings
and Princes live not so angelically, but they offend in some things grievously,
and offe^ding, they cannot so conceal all things, but they are seen and
noted, and the more because they be Kings and Princes: so their actions and
manners with the behavior of the whole Court, are often more spoken of and
censured in the Country among the Commons, then either regarded or observed
amongst our selves. But as ye have well said, as cures cannot easily be
wrought without first knowledge of the cause of-the grief: so I see not, how
we may ease the King of this his affliction, except we were certain how it
was occasioned. Therefore with the consideration of the present necessity, and
fearing the future inconvenience both to the king, and to all his people (which
we must speedily regard to prevent in this case and time) I think that we
his Princes and Counselors so near unto him may lawfully adventure (as ye
have said) without all just offense to his honor, disgrace to his person, hurt
to his people, glory to his enemies, sin against God, or danger to our selves.
Genesis 21.14. Exodus 18.24. Job. 31.13, 1. Sam. 25.18 32,
Abraham (as we read) hearkened to his wife Sarah: Moses gave ear to his
father in law Iethro; Job heard the complaint of his servants against himself:
Abigail listened to her poor boy, and David refused not them that at any time
spoke to him either for his, or their own good: So (I trust) will the King
give us audience in this case, and the sooner, because we are his Counselors,
who (as he may well persuade) do tender his safety, and have a desire to
counsel, advise, and endeavor the best in all things. * And I remember (said
Ahiah) the David the kings father, was not only contented, Ahiah.
but also acknowledged it right profitable for his safety, that Nathan should
both enquire and examine his life and actions, 2. Sam. 12.13.
and also reprove and correct that which he found faulty in him: yet say I not,
that it is meet for every man to look into those matters, or to meddle in the
Princes affairs: but for such only as are especially elected and called and
authorized, as Nathan was: or be in place to consider, aid, and counsel the
king as we are. Neither think I the kings Majesty will be exaspered or
displeased with any of us, if we do the like, for the better preservation of
his honor and credit: for being wise, he will consider the reason and ponder
all things indifferently. 2. Sam. 16.7
Again, I remember (for it is noted in the kings Annals) that Shimei railing
on David the kings father, called him blood sucker and man of Belial: At the
which (although David might justly have stricken him, because he cursed the
Lords Anointed) David considering upon those reprochful words, what himself
had before done in the case of Vriah, and thereby condemning himself as guilty
in his own conscience, and withal willing to show a token of his own
wisdom and clemency, would not suffer him to be stricken for his
malepertnesse: but he said in the anguish of his soul: Let him alone, for he
curses, even because the Lord has bidden him curse David: who dare then say,
wherefore have thou done so? How much rather then will the king content
himself, that we his Counselors do with a far better mind and purpose, for
the honor and health of his Majesty, and preservation of his people consider
of the things that be his, and seek to redress or amend that which is
amiss. But therein let us follow the example of Shem and Iaphet, Shem and
Iaphet.

Genesis 9.23.


the sons of Noah, when they perceived that Cham had uncovered him and mocked
him: for they turning their faces from their fathers nakedness came toward him
as backward, and covered the same with their own garments: For it is not
intended, that the Kings secrets be displayed or published to his ignomy (for
it is not good to utter the secrets of a Prince) but only that they may be
known to our selves for the causes premised; and that those things which are
either known abroad already, or may be known hereafter, and whereof his
adversaries (beholding and observing the same) may give their sharp censures
against his Majesty, and his words and works with malign and malicious
mouths, may be wisely considered of, well construed, reconciled, resolved and
salued: or at the least, the extremity of those inconveniences ensuing these
unhappy causes may be in some sort prevented. * And verily, I suppose there is
somewhat conceited of himself, and his own works: for it is not long since
I heard him to say, and that with great wofulnes, that he loathed his own
life: and then looking on the works which his hands had wrought, (being
indeed many and mighty) and on the travels that he had taken, the which yet
far passed the labors of other men: he confessed that all was but vanity
and vexation of the spirit: whereby I was presently moved to suspect something
in the kings own person, and to doubt of some of his works and deeds, the
which either his own conceit blames as too base and indecent to his honor,
or his own conscience condemns as unjust, or his wisdom disliketh as too
fond, or his divine spirit abandoneth as impious. Iehosophat.
* Well then (quod Iehosophat) this being well resolved, why should we further
delay? Let us approach (howbeit with all the best wisdom and modesty) to the
consideration of the kings Majesty. Of Solomon's progeny and birth.
As for progeny and birth, there is no cause that the kings Majesty should
abase or dislike himself, for he is the son of worthy Nobles: yea, Noah.
he is descended of the most noble house of that ancient Ianus or Noah, Noah.
to whom the Lord granted to see the end of the old world, and the beginning
of the new: howbeit he came not in by Cham nor by Iaphet, Shem.
but by Shem, whom the Lord especially favored and chose to continue the seed
of the blessed, Abraham.
unto the time of Abraham our father: by whom and from whom the king is
lineally descended, nevertheless, not by his son Ismael the son of Hagar
the bond: Isaac,
but by his son Isaac of Sarah the free woman, in whom the hope of the
promise rested: Again, he was not of Esau, who was justly deprived both of
the birthright and the blessing: Jacob.
but of Jacob whom the Lord loving and liking, called Israel, and Israel had
many sons: but the king came only from Judah, ^udah.
in whose tribe (according to the prophecy of Jacob) the Scepter should be
raised, and a Lawgiver continued unto the coming of Shilo, to whom the
people should be gathered. From hence was the line drawn to Ishai, Ishai.
and from him to David the Kings father, who being a man after Gods own heart,
David.
was according to the divine providence ordained and anointed (by Samuel the
Lords Prophet) before all his brethren, to be king over his people of Israel,
whom he defended from their enemies on every side with a strong and valiant
hand, fed them with discretion, judged the^ with equity and righteousness, and
reigned over them full 40. years, to the glory of the Lord and good of his
people, with great honor, Bethseba. Sol. mother.
The kings mother also was Bethseba, the daughter of Eliam, of no mean
parentage: her name sounds the daughter of an oath, or the seventh daughter.
She was a right noble, wise and virtuous Gentlewoman, and sometimes the wife of
Vriah the Hittite, a man of great estimation. Indeed it was so, that for her
sake (the king affecting her) did injuriously oppress her said husband, the
rather by Ioabs means: at what time this noble woman either doubted or simply
thought, that it was not lawful for her husband or her self being subjects
to deny any thing which the king should command or desire of them, 1. Sam. 8,
11.
knowing what Samuel the prophet had before that said unto the people, when
they required a king, what their king might, or would do unto them by his power
and authority, howbeit the trespass being pardoned, and grace and mercy
restored according to the kings true repentance and humble prayer: she feared
the Lord God of Israel and hearkened to Nathan the Lords prophet
(notwithstanding that he had before reproved the King for his fault) whereby
she lived and contained her self with King David in all godly behavior and
high honor during her life. This Noble Lady in many things both aided and
comforted the King her husband, and did not only bear and bring forth, but
also educated, brought up and nurtoured our Lord King Solomon, in all such
princely and divine virtues (to her power) as did best beseem him that should
succeed King David in the happy kingdom of Israel, as she had well learned
and considered thereof by the inspiration of the divine Spirit, and the
instruction of the Lords Prophet that it was appointed and ordained by the
Lord that this Solomon (before all David's other Sons) should reign over the
kingdom of Israel after him. Therefore she diligently endeavored with the King
the performance thereof as we see it is brought to pass this day to the great
joy and comfort of the Lords inheritance. This therefore the young Queen did
gratefully remember at the time of the kings marriage, ascribing unto her in
the great solemnity the chief cause (next unto God) of his royal preferment,
saying to the daughters of Syon: Go ye forth I pray you, Cant. 3.10.
and behold King Solomon in the Crown wherewith his Mother has crowned him,
in this day of his marriage, and in the day of the gladness of his heart! And
therefore also the king himself in the highest of his glory neither disdained
nor omitted to commend her and her excellent virtues before us al: yea, and
under the same has depainted and set forth not only an holy and vertous
Woman; but also the holy Church, the which also in his temple, with the rich
ornaments thereof he prefigured. And thereof has made an Alephabethical
Encomion, in these words: pro. 31
Who so finds an honest faithful woman, she is much more worth the^ pearls:
the heart of her husband may safely trust in her: so that he shall fall into no
poverty: She will do him good, and not evil all the dais of her life. etc. A
woman that fears the Lord shall be praised: Give her of the fruit of her hands,
and let her own works praise her in the gates. These things the king has
ruminated and uttered with great gravity as worthy the memory and imitation:
therefore we also have thought good to note and affixe the same to his wise
proverbs and Parables * Now with this let us not forget, The time of Sol. birth.
but carefully note and remember (the rather to prevent the occasions of evil
surmises) that the king was neither borne nor begotten nor conceived in the
time of the trespass and disgrace of his Parents, but after the time that the
Lord in mercy had pardoned them both and put away their sins upon repentance
and prayer: 2. Sam. 12.13.
of the which pardon the Lord certified him to the joy and ease of their
hearts by the prophet Nathan: when also that was brought to pass and
verified, which David had with tears desired and with faith hoped to obtain.
Thou shall purge me (said he) with Isope, and I shall be clean: thou shall
wash me and I shall be whiter then snow: psalm. 51.
Thou shall make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the boanes which thou
have broken may reioce. For the which also he dewly blessed the Lord, and in
his thanksgiving said: O Lord thou have pardoned all mine iniquities, and
healed all mine infirmities. psalm. 103.
Finally, the Lord himself to this his pleasure gave testimony, when he did
not only accept his sacrifices and burnt offeringes: but also promised to set
up of his Seed after him upon the throne of the kingdom of Israel, and that
also not Absolon, nor Adoniah, nor Amnon nor any other of David's sons
begotten and borne before this time but only Solomon his son borne of
Bethseba after the pardon granted him, should build an house for his name, unto
who^ he would be as a father to his son. * Al these things the princes gladly
heard, and to ye same subscribed most willingly knowing well both the truth of
the kings petigree, and the honor of his noble birth. zabud.
And thereupon spoke Zabud and said: It seems good to me, The several names
of the King.
that with this which has been said, we regard those titles and names by
the which it pleased the Lord that the king should be called, known and
honored: the which truly have not bin imposed rashly, as many which give names
without respect of the Natures, dignity or qualityes of the persons: but with
great wisdom, judgment and providence: as were those names of Adam, Havah,
Noah, Abraham, Lot, Abel, Sarah, Isaac, Israel, Samuel, David, and such other,
which have had their approbation from the Lord and expressed or taught, or
remembered some worthy thing. In this sort, the King has had and enjoyed five
particular names, and names of honor, two of the which were imposed by the Lord
himself, the third by Nathan, the fourth by his Mother, and the last he
resumed by th'approbation of his Lords. In or concerning any of the which
names, he has no cause ministered him to be displeased, except only in this,
that he has tried himself (bring a mortal man) not answerable in all points
to the same, knowing it a thing most ridiculous for any person whatsoever, to
be noted or called by such a title or name, of the which he shall be found
most unworthy. For the first we have it recorded what the Lord God said to
David concerning him: he shall be my son Secondly he said again touching him
his name is Solomon: 2 Samuel, 7.14. 1. Chro. 22.9.
Thirdly the prophet Nathan called him Iedid-iah: The son of God.
Fourthly his Mother called him Laemuel, and fifthly he is called Koheleh. In
that he is called the Son of God, and that by God himself, it gives us to
consider in him somewhat beyond that which is found to be in other men. For
they are not of the common sort to whom the Lord vouchsafes this high title.
Such are they, which resembling the holy Angels, have not only the brightness of
the divine glory apparent in them: but also are ever willing and ready to
execute his pleasure. In that he is called Solomon, 2. Solomon.
it notes the peace of his government over Gods people according to the reason
which the Lord added saying he shall be a man of rest, and I will send peace and
rest upon Israel in his days. In ye third name the prophet would express not
only the love of God unto him: 3. Iedid-iah.
but also the love of God and his divine graces in him, to the which alluded
the Arabian Queen at her being here, when she said blessed be the Lord thy
God which loved thee, and has set thee on the throne of Israel. In the fourth
his Mother being a wise and rare Princess, 4. Laemuel. 5. Coheleth
would by that name signify the glory of God in him, and by him in the
people. In the last is testified the diligence and desire that the king has,
not only to search out and gather together for his own further instruction
the ancient monuments and holy books, but also a people unto the Lord to be
instructed and taught in the holy Religion for the glory of God and their own
health: Teaching withal, what should be the desire of all Princes in their
places: namely in this sort to tend to the end of their government and rule.
Therefore finding rather an honor, then an ignomy to grow from hence unto the
king: We say as ye kings daughter said in that excellent song: Thy name is a
sweet smelling ointment, when it is powered forth: Therefore do the virgins
love thee.

CAP. X.
Of Solomon's person and estate, form, beauty, education, wisdom. etc. whereof
the cause of his grief could not rise.
THen stood forth Ahishar and said. Truly (my Lords) whatsoever has been
here produced and spoken in the premises, makes very much every way for the
kings honor and estimation, Ahishar.
and therefore I perceive not, what should thereof be gathered to offend him
Neither can I find any thing worthy dislike in any other points which
concern either his person, or his estate: for his form and beauty, his
education, his wisdom, his judgments, his words, his riches, his works his
peace, his orders of house, his pleasures, his power, his marriage, his
blessings, his fame, his glory, etc. the king is most excellent, Solomon his
beauty. Homer.
and singularly renowned, as al men will confess. I remember that looking on a
certain Book of the Poet Melesigenes (who lived and wrote in the time of our
judges among the Greeks) I found where he had given an exceeding high praise
to the form and beauty of Priamus the Troyan, Priamus.
the which in him (as he said) was well worthy a kingdom: so fair was he. The
same Poet has also spoken largely of one Nireus, Nireus.
being the fairest of all them which came to Priamus his Palace: though he
had scarcely any worthy quality either of body or mind. And in our own Records,
we have the praise of the form and beauty of Saul the son of Cis, whom Samuel
anointed King over Israel, Saul. 1. Sam, 9.2.
that he was a goodly youngman and fair. So that among the chidren of Israel,
there was none goodlier then he, from the shoulders upward he was higher then
all the other people. And we here present (for the most part) can say much of
Absolon the kings brother: namely that in his time there was none in all
Israel so much to be praised for beauty: Absolon. 2. Sam. 14.25.
from the seal of his foot to the top of his head there was no blemish in
him. And had his qualities been to the same correspondent, oh God how glorious
might he have been! And further we find, that Joseph and Moses, and Aaron and
David have been praised in this respect: But yet beyond them all, looking with
judgment on our Lord the King, and seeing howbewty is displayed in his royal
person, we cannot but acknowledge that for truth which the kings father said to
him when he beheld him in his beautye. Far fairer then the sons of men, art
thou. Cant. 5.9. Although all these things did properly belong and so were to
be referred to the holy Messiah. yet were they first spoken as of Solomon who
in his person prefigured him, as it is more fully declared hereafter
And this the noble Princess considered and sung of him, He is both white and
ruddy, the chiefest of thousands ten:
His head is as fine gold: his locks are curled black:
His eyes are like the Doves, upon the water streams:
Which are all waste with milk, and bide full vessels by:
His cheeks be like spice bedds: and as the sweetest flowers:
His lips are Lillies like that drop the purest mirrhe:
His hands, as ringes of gold with Chrisolite beset:
His belly yuory white with Saphires garnisht brave:
His legs as marble pillars, on golden sockets set:
His look as Libanon, as Cedars excellent:
His mouth as sweetened things: and lovely all is he.
Howsoever this was spoken, as aiming mistically far beyond the Kings person:
It has doubtless been applied to our Soueraign without adulation, in whom their
appears some especial grace, yea the very image of the divine nature, beyond
that has been perceived in any other man. But were it, that he had felt or
understood some defects in these external things yet see I not how he might be
offended, knowing well that he is but a mortal man, and yt whatsoever is
wanting in the body may be supplied and that to the uttermost by the graces of
the mind, the which the Lord more respects then the beauty of the body (as
he said to Samuel, when he sent him to anoint David for king): moreover he
has well tried it, and thereof has said it in judgment: that favor is
deceitful and that beauty is a thing vain and therefore has not been of the
mind to set his felicity therein. * To this also assented the Princes,
extolling and praising to the clouds the most angelical form and beauty of
the King. Benaiah.
And forth with Benaiah beckning with his and, proffered his speech and said:
Neither indeed may the kings education, Solomon his eductaion
or the manner thereof offend him, as Ahishar has said: for never any in this
world has been better taught and brought up, as towching the fear of God,
and all princely and heroical virtues. For to this end king David had provided
him most wise and godly teachers: as namely, Nathan, Gad, Asaph, and such
other the Lords prophets and wise men, whom he had diuinelie inspired and sent
forth, yea king David himself being a man after Gods own mind for his
heavenly songs and melody called the sweet Singer of Israel, and the Lords
anointed, and also his mother Queen Beth-saba, a most prudent and virtuous
Lady, (as it is before said) and either of them have very carefully taught and
scholed him in the fear of the Lord, and the right princely virtues. At whose
knees he stood, and was glad and ready to receive both instruction and
correction. And thus himself acknowledges saying: When I was my fathers dear
son, and tenderly beloved of my mother, he taught me also, and said unto
me: pro. 4.3.
let thine ear receive my words, keep my commandments and thou shall live:
Get thee wisdom, and get thee understanding, forget not the words of my
mouth, and shrink not from them, etc. Again in his latter time ready to
depart he left with him this direction: 1 king. 2.2.
Be thou strong and show thy self a man, keep thou the watch of the Lord thy
God that thou walk in his ways, and keep his statuts and his precepts, his
judgments and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou
may prosper in all that thou do, and in every thing that thou medlest
withal, etc. And this was his mothers lesson, when she taught and nourtured
him: pro. 31.1.
What my son? what the son af my body? and what O my dearly beloved son?
Give not over thy strength and thy ways unto women, which are the destruction
of kings. O Laemuel it is not for kings, it is not (I say) for kings to
drink wine, nor princes strong drink, lest they by drinking forget the law,
and pervert the judgment of all poor men's children. Again be thou an
advocate for the dumb, to speak in the cause of all such as be succourlesse
in this transitory world, open thy mouth, defend the thing that is lawful and
right, and the cause of the poor and helpelesse. Lo! such lessons has his
mother taught him so well beseeming (I say not a child) but a prince, and
excellent well fitting so beautiful a body, from the which, virtues are wont
to shine, as those precious stoanes which are placed in goodly Kings of
Gould. But beyond all this the Lord his God which loved him, and vouchsafed to
call him his Son, did extend unto him the effect of a fathers office, above
that which earthly fathers are able to do or perform toward their children:
for he nurtured him by his spirit not only in the day time, but by the
nights also. And in this he acknowledged the great love and mercy of God
toward him, as in his wise Proverbs it is to be learned. Lo, thus was king
Solomon educated and instructed in his tender years, of the which he yet
sauoureth even in these his elder days to his double honor and the
consolation of Israel. * Therefore I see not, that the king should be hereof
offended, except only in this that he has not (in his own conceit) answered
in some points to this his education and instruction, but let that alone to be
considered of hereafter: To this the Princes did also accord, and then rose up
Adomiram, and spoke as follows. Adoniram.


Neither wants the king the excellency of wisdom, Solomon his wisdom.
by the which he goes out and in before the people, to judge and govern this
great multitude, to teach all others the true wisdom. This is that, which
being prized, no man can tell the worthiness thereof, as Job has said
thereof: neither is it found in the land of the living, it cannot be bought for
gould, nor may the price thereof be obtained with silver. No gold of Ophir, no
precious Onyx stoans, nor Sapphires may be valued with it, for this is the
highest Treasure of a king, yea and the same without the which a king is
unfurnished of that he ought to have, and so, mere unfit for the place of
government, but having this one jewel, in possession, he is sufficiently
armed not only to do justice, and to defend them which are at home: but also
to withstand and subdue the enemies which, Eccles 7.9.
are abroad: for Wisdom is much better then weapons of war and gives
courage unto the^ that embrace her. This the king (by Gods good grace)
considered in his young years, 1 King. 3.9. and 4.29.
and therefore this was that only thing which he desired of the Lord, when he
was willed to ask whatsoever he would have, and he should have it, and
therefore, the Lord being well pleased with his desire, gave him wisdom and a
large heart, even as the sand that is by the sea shore without number or
measure. By the which the king was most wise, and therein is preferred before
all those famous men of the East Country, which have so far excelled other
men, both in that (...) or Astronomy, and also in that (...) or Science, which
by the voice of birds prognosticateth the events and things that ensue: he
also goes beyond all the wise men, not only of the Egyptians, but of our own
Nation, as namely, Ethan the Esrahite, and Heman, Chalcol, and Darda, the
sons of Mahol: to be brief, the king is wiser then all men living, for he
has that pure influence of the divine Spirit, the wisdom of the highest, and
that not so much by his own study, and industry, (albeit he has been
wonderfully exercised in all laudable Arts and Sciences from his youth) as by
an especial inspiration and divine grace from the Lord his God, who has been
willing to enlarge and bless him most abundantly. By this he has known to
resolve and declare all hard riddles and questions: By this he has learned who
has laid the foundations of the earth, who has measured it, and spread the
line upon it, who has shut up the Sea with doors when it brake forth as out
of the womb, who has made the clouds a covering for it, and darkness as his
swaddling band, who has given the morning his charge, and showed the
dayspring his place, who has bound the seauen-starres together, and losed the
bands of Orion, who has brought forth the morning star in his time, and
guided the euening-starre with his Sun, who has ordained the course of the
heavens, the Sea, the winds, the hailes, the thunders, the lightninges, the
showers of rain, the deawes, the light, the darkness, and all that are both in
heaven and earth: yea, he knows the purpose of the Creator therein. And by
this (for the glory of God and the good of his people) he has spoken three
thousand Proverbs, he has composed a thousand and five songs, he has told
also of trees, even from the Cedar tree that grows in Libanus, unto the
Hysope that springs out of the wall: he has spoken of Beasts, of fowls, of
worms, of fishes, and of all the creatures of God: for their is nothing hidden
from him, his wisdom and knowledge is so admirable. * By this his singular and
sweet eloquence also is powered forth as the dropping of an honey comb, Solomon's
Eloquence. psalm. 45.
unto them that stand before him to hear his wisdom, his lipes are full of
grace (as the Kings father said) and dilectable to the hearers of his words
every where, for his diligence was to find out and utter pleasing words, right
scripture, and the records of truth. Cant. 5.14.
This the noble Princes considering well, semblably commended in him, saying:
His lipes are like the Lillies that drop sweet smelling mirhhe. Doubtlesie
as I said of the former: so may I say of this, that the king herein far
passed all men on the earth without comparison, which has caused that many
noble Kings, renowned Princes, and wise and learned men of diverse strange and
far Countries, were not only astonished when they heard thereof: but the more to
satisfy their eagre minds, undertook great perilous and painful iornies, to
come near him, to visit him, to behold, to hear, to consider, and to take
experience of that whreof they had heard reported concerning him and his
wisdom. Solomon's judgments. (...)
* With this also (my Lords) we may both remember and admire the excellency
of his Mischpatiim or judgments, in the which the very wisdom of the divine
power wonderfully appeared, as in him, whom the Lord his God had brought to
this kingdom of Israel, to do therein judgment and equity, as the noble
Queen of Sheba perceived and said unto him. 1. King. 10.
For into how many parts soever Judgment is divided or any way considered,
the King expressed in every of them a right singular dexterity.

For first according to the certain and prescript rules of the law, he wisely
discerned, judged, and tried all matters of controversy before him brought,
and therein as the parties were divided one against an other, after the manner
of contenders in the Law, their causes being eitheir contrary, or doubtful, he
worthily defended the good, and condemned the evil, extending to either,
justice according to their sundry causes and contrary deserts. Next* as this
title respected his place, office ordinance, function, administration, and
ministry, he was therein not ignorant, but right prudent, neither negligent,
but most careful and diligent, and gave good heed and attended that which was
to him committed in all reverence and divine fear: knowing well, that the
judgment was the Lords, howsoever it pleased him to appoint him the minister,
who (he was sure) would rise up for him in the judgment that he had
commanded, that the congregation of the people might flock round about him.
Thirdly as touching the just, lawful, and ordinary knowledge of the causes
which is rightly regarded in such kind of administrations who saw not, pro. 12.
but that the very thoughts of the King (as those of the righteous) were very
judgment (as he said in the Proverbs) the which were deciphered to us and
others in many singular effects and sound arguments. Fourthly: as touching the
causes judicial, wherein judgment was to be reduced into righteousness,
whereby the poor, and fatherless, oppressed and wronged were to be relieved
and comforted with godly equity shining forth of a just and merciful heart,
psalm, That is; he will acquit and defend the poor
the King did wonderfully declare himself before all his people ruminating to
that purpose the saying of his father. And sure am I the Lord will* judge the
poor, and eke maintain,
The cause of him that has no friend, his safety to sustain.
Fifthly as concerning questions and doubts in matters of our holy religion, or
hard riddles or parables, or the laws and ordinances by which we do and must
live and be judged: or the causes and cases in controversy that expect
moderation and judgment, or the patterns and examples left to be followed and
received for performance in things of moment or manners of life, or the
government and rule of the Church and commonwealth, or whatsoever else which
appertains or is incident to this noble virtue so worthy the royal Scepter,
the king (I say) has before all others in the world, declared himself a
principal and chief personage. To pass over so many examples as might be
produced in every point: for brevity let us be contented with that
particular example of the two Women, which came before the king, The kings
judgment in the case of the two women. 1. King 3.
pleading for the living child. I hope ye have not forgotten it: the thing
was done within our time, and the matter being so rare and worthy memory,
could not so soon be forgotten, although a wonder (as men say) lasts not
above nine days. The King having heard the pleading and contention of those
two women about the child, at length (as a wise Judge, though yet but a child
in years) repeated briefly the cause: The one says (qoud he) this child
which is alive is my son, and the dead is thine: And the other says, Nay,
but thy son is the dead and the living child is mine. Then seeing the case
doubtful, and the more, because there were no witnesses for either part, he
said again to them that stood about him: Bring me hither a sword, and they
brought it: after that he said again: Divide the living child into two parts,
and give the one part to the one, and the other part to the other. For he well
knew what he would do, neither was his mind so cruel and bloody, as to slay
the young innocent for the mothers offense: howbeit some being present, not
considering his purpose, began to deride and dislike this sentence: But by
and by, his intent was displaied: for the woman whose the living child was,
feeling her vowels to yerne within her upon her son, whom she thought was
ordained for death, cried out and said unto the king: I beseech thee my Lord
give her the living child, and let it not be slain: but the other woman said:
Let the child be neither thine nor mine, but let it be divided as the king has
said. Then the king gave the sentence in judgment and said unto the Ministers
that stood by: Geve her the living child (whose bowels yerneth thereon) and
slay it not, for doubtless she is the right mother thereof. This being done, all
they of Israel hearing of this judgment of the king, feared his Majesty, the
godly for love, the wicked for dread: for they saw that the wisdom of God was
in him to do justice. Of this the kings virtue, spoke the kings father in the
spirit; Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity. This being well
weighed (my Lords) I see not what should thereof be conceited to offend his
Graces mind. The princes Subscription.
To all this the Princes gladly subscribed, commending in all things the
judgments of the king: And surely (said they) they are happy in judgment,
which have (as the king has) well learned the right natures of things: for
they soundly consider of th'effectes, and discern and try them well, if they
be such as are wise, prudent godly, and not led by affections, but by sure
knowledge, good counsel, and the guide of the divine spirit. But we see that
none of those can this perform, which either are themselves, unlearned,
ignorant, obstinate, self willed, proud, ungodly, or contemn the good
counsel and godly and grave advise of the learned, wise and virtuous. Surely,
we cannot deny it: for it is most apparent, that our Lord the king has by
this his discrete judgment, purchased to himself authority, to his kingdom
peace and tra^quillitie, and to the high God, condign glory. Now the better
sort of all men gratify his honor, and gladly submit themselves and their
causes to his determination, knowing that he will do justice: The wicked
transgressors and hypocritical persons are fearful to stand before his
presence in the defense of their faults, or trial of their lives. So as well of
the one, as of the other is the king feared, in respect of those his upright and
just iugementes, which (as ye said) has indeed appeared so admirable before
all men.

CHAP. XI.
Of Solomon's riches, peace, orders, pleasures, power, blessings, fame, glory:
from any of the which rises not the cause of his sorrow.
IN the former conference, king Solomon's Princes and Lords have described,
displaied and defended his most noble birth, his honorable names, his
excellent beauty, his godly education, his singular wisdom, his sweet
eloquence, and his upright judgments. Now they are no less willing to
consider of his riches, his works, his peace, his orders, his pleasures, his
power, Azariah.
his blessings, his fame, his glory. And therefore Azariah spoke again and
said; As in the former we have not found any just cause of the kings
disgrace, Solomon's riches.
but altogether causes of honor and prouocations to joy and gladness: so
neither wants he any Riches or the Treasures of a King, whether natural or
artificial. By the natural riches I understand all such things as come from
the fields, trees and beasts: as corn, wines, oils, fruits, victuals,
clothings and such like apt and meet for man's body: by artificial I
understand and those things which are found out or framed by the art and
industry of man, as gold, silver, coin, precious stones, jewels, and such
like: Ineyther of the which, the king is marvelously enriched, according to
that word, which the Lord his God spoke unto him, when he asked wisdom,
saying: I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, even riches and
honor: 1. King. 3.13.
so that there shall be no king like unto thee in all thy days. Eccles. 2.4. 2.
Chron. 1.15.
For this we know (as himself has confessed) that the king has many
excellent vineyeardes planted, orchardes and gardens with frees of all manner
of fruit, and fed oxen and beefes, and more cattle and sheep then all they
which were before him in Jerusalem. And as for silver and gold: we know that
he has made such things as plentiful as stones in Jerusalem, and Cedar
trees as plentiful as the Mulbury trees that grow in the vaileis: and he has
horses brought out of Egypt, and fine linen which his Marcha^ts received for a
price, and he has a chariot which cost him six hundred pieces of silver,
with many of her Chariots and horsemen, yea, an hundred and twelve thousand
horsemen, which he has bestowed in the Chariot Cities, and at Jerusalem with
his Majesty. Moreover, he has servants and maidens a great household, great
substance and the chief treasures and large possessions every way. And truly
howsoever these things do prove as a very foolishnes unto the ignorant and
foolish, Eccl. 2.9. Pro. 14.24.
they are unto (with whom his wisdom remained) as a glorious crown, and he
is greater and of more worship then all his predecessors in Jerusalem.
Helioreph.
*All this is manifest (said Helioreph) neither can any man deny any thing of
that which ye have said: therefore it is set down in the kings Annals, and
committed to the holy Registre. Solomon's works.
And as his riches is great: so also are his works most admirable, according
as himself has said: I have made gorgeous fair works, I have built me
houses and planted vineyeards: Eccl. 2.4.
I made mine Orchardes and gardens of pleasure: I made pooles of water, to
water the green and fruitful trees withal And it is true, and he has
builded Cities and raised the walls, 2. Chro. 8.
and fortified his towns and territories magnificently: but beyond all others,
those his three houses which he has made and performed in Jerusalem, are
excellent, and pass all the buildings and works in the world: First,
according to the commandment of his Father David, and just after the form
and proportion that the Lord had given to David, 1. Chro. 28.19.
and which David committed and left as a pattern unto him, 1. Kin. 6.
he set onto build up that Temple in Jerusalem, even an house for his God. This
house is threescore cubits long, and twenty cubits broad, and thirty cubits
high, etc. And this house was built of stone, made perfect already before it
was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool of
iron heard in the house while it was in building. But it would be wonderful,
yea, and beyond mine ability to tell and your selves presently to hear, how
many strange and diverse and excellent things the King provided and disposed in
and about this excellent work. And in this work, he so well pleased the Lord,
that he spoke unto him saying: Concerning the house which thou art in building,
if thou will walk in mine ordinances, and execute my laws and keep all my
Commandments, to walk in them: then will I make good unto thee my promise
which I promised to David thy father. And I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel: Further, after the end of seven
years (for so long was that magnificent house in building) the king began to
build another house for himself, about the which he bestowed great time, charge
and labor, as it is recorded in the book of the kings Annals: and touching
the which the kings daugther beholding it with admiration, said; Cant. 3.9.
King Solomon has made himself a palace of wood of Libanus, the pillars are
of silver, and the pavement thereof of gold, the hanginges thereof of purple,
etc. Thirdly, the king builded another house in the forest, then the which
there is not a more princely thing in the world for the site, form and beauty
thereof. No man can dislike any of these his works: yea, every one does
highly praise and commend them and him, in the most excellent frame
disposition and order of the same, wherefore it may not be, that from thence
he should find occasion to afflict his own soul. The peaceable time of
Solomon.
*But all these things have been the better effected by the king, for that the
Lord his God, which would that he should be called Solomon or Peaceable, has
given him rest from his enemies on every side: for it has never been heard of,
that the children of Israel enioied the like peace, since the time that they
came out of the land of Egypt. And truly (said Benaiah) neither the king nor
his people have these forty years had any cause to fear the invasion of any
foreign enemy, Benaiah
or the nations embordering, who having been subdued, kept under and qualified
by his father David in his time, have never since that resumed any courage,
or presumed to lift up their hands, or quake against his Majesty: for all
people and nations stand in fear of him, and rather yield to be his
contributaries and servants, then to attempt or adventure wars against him,
knowing well, that the Lord of Heaven is with him, to preserve and keep him,
and that the woods and all pleasant trees do ouershadow him and his people at
the commandment of the Lord, by whose grace they have long prospered and
rested in peace, even from Dan to Berseba under the kings happy government.

Moreover, I am sure there has not been in any age since the creation of the
world, a captain set over the host of any king, that has had less trouble
and fear then I have had in my time under my Lord the king: for although the
king has many barbed horses, strong Chariots, valiant men of war, great
store of weapons, armor and munition of proof, in the which he may compare,
yea and be preferred to all the kings on the earth: yet has he in his time
had as little use thereof, as any whatsoever: for the only terror of the
kings Majesty, and the view of those things has sufficiently daunted the
enemy: whereby we and his people have had little cause to complain of mortal
wars, which have ensuing it so many slaughters, burninges, famines, plagues,
destructions and noisome inconveniences in all ages. The Poet Homer has written
of the wonderful slaughters, Homer.
and burning broiles of the Greeks and Trojans before this time, which sets
before our eyes the miseries of wars. And our own histories have largely
displaied the great infelicitie of our fathers, in the wilderness, and in the
time of the Judges, and of Saul. But we have a cause to bless and praise the
Lord our God, who has in this time of his mercy raised up unto us this Prince
of Peace. I pray God we may thankfully esteem thereof, and not by our froward
ingratitude offer unto our God an occasion of the loss of so heavenly a
blessing, as those commonly accustom, which having not the fear of the Lord
before their eyes, and so no sparkle of the true wisdom; do provoke him to
wrath through the lewdenes of their rebellious hearts. And whether the King
(as he has the wisdom of God) foreseeth in the spirit what is liking to
beside us by his departure from over us: I know not, for what misery or
inconvenience is there, which may not come on them that transgress and offend
against God and the king, if the Lord shall either command or commit the
spirit of troble to fall on them? * And this may come on us and the people
(said Ahiah) we know not how soon. Ahiah.
But (as ye have said) the king has had indeed a glorious peace, The orders
of Sol. house.
and we have enjoyed the like under him: for the which both his Highness and
his people may rejoice together. And here we cannot but with the former commend
the orders of the kings house: the meat of his table, the sitting of his
servants, 2. Chro. 9.4.
the standing of his wayters, their apparel, his Butlars, their apparel and
behavior* the which when the Queen of Seba saw and considered, she was
astonished, and there was no more spirit in her: And she said unto the king: The
saying which I heard in mine own land of thine acts and of thy wisdom is
true, I believed not the words of them until I came, and mine own eyes had
scene it, and behold the one half of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou
exceedest the fame which I heard: Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy
servants which stand before thee always, and hear thy wisdom! Neither were the
kings pleasures less then sufficient, being solaced with his fair houses,
Solomon's pleasures.
his gardens of pleasures, his men-singers, and women-singers and instruments
of Music of all sorts with all the admirable and sweet delights of the
sons of men, yea, there was never any one man under the cope of heaven, that
more flowed in all kind of pleasures meet and convenient for a kings honor.
His power.
*He was also of no sesse power and mightiness, yea, he was greater that way
then all his Predecessors, having a dominion ample and large, with a princely
provision of all sorts of things, both for the defense and maintenance of the
same in all parts. And for the better guard of his Royal person (as the young
Princess noted when she beheld and wisely considered, in her Cant. 3.7.)

About the bed of Solomon there stand
Full threescore valiant men of sturdiest might
Of Israel, with glittering swords in hand,
Expert in war, him to defend by right.
Therein alluding to that which the kings Father had modulated for the king in
that sweet psalm. 45. Gird now thy sword upon thy thigh (O prince of fame)
According to the worship and the glory of thy name.
And prosper in thy glee, ride forth with glad success,
Because of that thy word, of truth, meekenes and righteousness:
Thy right hand forth shall tell the things of dreadful strength,
Thy sharpened shafts the people shall to thee subdue at length,
Yea though that they for safety should themselves bring,
Into the midst inuiron'd with the enemies of the king.
To be brief, His blessings
wonderful are the blessings wherewith the almighty has graced our King: for
he has been blessed beyound all other kings on the earth, as well with
things spiritual and heavenly, as with those which are temporal and terrene,
according to that promise in the law made for such as be obedient, Deuteronomy. 28. 2.
Sam. 7. 1. King. 3.
according to that word of the Lord given to David concerning him, and
according to the that the Lord his God granted him when he had prayed for
wisdom to go out and in before his people. In a word, his blessings are an
astonishment to all the nations of the world, unto whom the fame of his
Excellency has gone forth. This conjoined him in amity with K. Hyram of Tire,
His fame and glory.
and with Pharao king of Egypt: this brought unto him from the uttermost parts
of the earth, the famous Queen of Arabia and many others, and he was in glory
resplendent before all the kings or Princes that ever reigned before him:
whereby many seeing and bearing of him, think that they see or hear not a
terrene or mortal Creature, but a celestial and divine power. And what should
the king desire more? Genesis 3.
nothing at all, except he would be God, as Adam thought to be. But I am sure
the king is not of that haughty conceit of himself, yea, I have observed
this, that howsoever all these things have been excellent and abundant in
him (as a Crown of gold beset with precious stones, Solomon was not proud of
his gifts and graces.
on the head of a most beautiful body) yet did he never wax proud or vain
glorious thereof, as worldly men accustom, when having a little beyond the
ordinary measure of some others of wisdom, riches, pleasures, power, policy
or prosperity, do love and like to sooth, praise, and commend themselves,
rese^bling the Pecocke which swells in the view of his painted plumes,
notwithstanding their human imperfections: yet this is not al, but thinking
so highly of themselves, they contemn others, and endeavor in loath and
disdain to tread them under their feet. Thus (I say) has not the king at
any time done, but rather he acknowledged his mortal humanity, and his great
ignorance and want of wisdom, yea, his base and seely glory, in respect of
the supreme excellency, eternity, knowledge, wisdom and glory of the
almighty, with the which, when he had compared himself and all his noble
endewmentes, he found himself with the same just nothing. To this assented
the Princes, and found no cause in those things premised, whereof the king
should be offended.

CHAP. XII.
Of Solomon's coming to the kingdom of Israel: his proceeding against Adoniah
and Abiather the priest is justified.
AFter this Zadok the Priest who had thus far listened to the words of the
Princes, stood up and spoke to this effect. Indeed (my Lords) I see not as
yet, that from any of those things whereof ye have spoken to be in the king
and his Estate, any just occasion is ministered him of his present affliction,
except it be in this, that knowing the largenes of Gods bounties toward him,
he either has not satisfied the Lords expectation in the use of those things,
or cannot as he would show himself grateful enough. And it may be, that
besides the premises, some question has been or may be moved touching the
kings entrance into the kingdom of Israel, wherein some, especially they
which stand to defend the cause of Adoniah, Abiather and Ioab with others their
confederates against the king, imagine that he has and does rather vsurp and
tyranize, then that he has lawfully attained and reigned, and therein not
answered to his name Solomon which is to say peaceable or a peacemaker: But
howsoever it be surmised or imagined by such kind of persons: it is most
certain that the kings entrance with the means and manner thereof was both
lawful and right, and his government therein may be neither condemned nor
justly reproved, but rather justified and commended of all wise and discreet
persons. King Solomon (although he had a promise of the Sovereignty, both of
the Lord, and also of his father) he did not presume to usurp on the kingdom
as Absolon would have done, when aspiring he lifted up his hand against his own
father the Lords Anointed: Nor would he do as Adoniah did, Sol. was not an
usurper on the kingdom.
who was extolled and proclaimed king ever Israel in the life time of his
father without the consent, goodwill or knowledge of the king, or of the Queen.
The king our Sovereign Lord knew better what was meet to be done, be
remembered how his father dealt toward Saul the king, namely that albeit he
knew Saul to be rejected of the Lord, and that himself was already anointed
to succeed him in the kingdom of Israel, he would dot prevent the time that
God had appointed, nor would he lay his hand on him being in his place the
Lords anointed, although he had many opportunities offered him thereto, for he
might easily have slain him, both in the Cave and in other places without his
own bodily danger. But the king as he was ordained for the kingdom by the
divine providence and the discretion of his father: so also he entered by a
lawful and worthy mean and in the due time. For King David knowing well the
mind of the Lord, who had promised him that there should one of his seed sit
on his Seat after him, and his name should be Solomon, made a faithful
promise unto Queen Bethseba the Kings mother, 1. King 1.11.30.
that according to the word of the Lord this his Son which was called Solomon
should surely reign after him and should sit upon his throne: therefore (as it
is also recorded in the kings Annals) when that king David being waxen old
and enfeebled had heard (by the report of the Kings Mother and Nathan) that
Adoniah had proudly usurped, and that this Solomon his beloved son and choson
heir apparent was to be taken for a sinner in Adoniah his sight, contrary to
the Kings promise made and confirmed by an oath to Bethseba and Natha^ in that
behalf: David was very highly displeased with Adoniah, and swear again unto
Bethseba saying: 1 King, 1.29.
As the Lord lives who has redeemed my soul out of al adversity, that as I
swear unto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying assuredly Solomon thy son
shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my place, so will I
certainly do this day, Whereupon King David commanded me, and Nathan the
Lords prophet to anoint his son Solomon King over Israel, even whiles that
David lived: the which we both faithfully performed. Whereat David then greatly
reioiced and praised the Lord upon his bed, and he said: Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, who has made one to sit on my throne this day even in my sight.
Therefore this thing being so divinely provided, and handled in all points so
directly, no man may justly reprove it, neither may the King in the due
consideration thereof (now in his elder days) either repent thereof, or be
touched with sorrow in his heart. Nor may we otherwise think, but that the
Lord of Israel, loving well his people, has set our Lord the King on the seat
of his Father to do equity and righteousness in the same, 1 King 10. Solomon's
procee^ings against Adoniah.
as the noble Queen of Sheba, at her being here, right worthily testified
and as a prophitesse in that behalf, blessed the Lord and the King in the
same. Moreover I have not found, that my Lord the king has merited blame or
dislike in any his dealinges touching his said brother Adoniah who had so
unjustly exalted himself as an Eagle in the clouds of heaven against his
honor; for truly, contrary to the wonted use of worldly Princes and
potentates, which cannot easily permit or bear a co^petitor of the kingdom,
he did not rashly or severely execute displeasure of Adoniah: but being
perfect, wise, of a most royal heart, and of noble Lions nature, perceiving him
to stand infeare of him, and to submit himself to his gracious mercy on the
ground, he gladly pardoned him, with this saying, yt not so much as one hair
of his head should fall to the earth, if he would thenceforth show himself a
worthy man, and so commanded him to go to his house in peace and to rest
himself, so long as wickedness might not be found in him. No doubt the king
remembered that worthy example of Joseph so full of piety who notwithstanding the
great injury his brethren had done him, Genesis 50.20.
did upon their submission and request, forgive and forget all: yea, he was so
far from revenging that injury, that he said: fear not, now will I nourish
you, and your children, and he comforted them, and spoke kindly unto them *
Thus far proceeded Zadoke, Benaiah.
and then Benaiah because he was not only an eye witness, but also an actor
therein, stood forth and said. And all this do I perfectly remember, being
especially called and appointed by king David (together with your reverence and
Nathan the Prophet) to deal for the king in those high matters the which (I
doubt not) but Natha^ would also confirm if he were present, and therein
commend and praise that noble magnanimity ano rare clemency of the king
extended toward his capital enemy, at such his entrance into the kingdom,
when as being not yet so perfectly settled, and scarcely knowing his friends
from his foes, he might rather have feared the event of such a dangerous
manumission and pardon. Solomon was not willing to revenge an injury.
It appeared, that the gracious king was not only glad to pardon him which had
submitted himself and promised obedience but also careful to eschew all
color or suspicion of tyranny or cruel dealing, even to an adversary. Some
Princes and mighty persons in such cases are severe persecutors, even to the
death of them which have never so little offended them, although neither they
have nor can possibly hurt them, and such (as the king well knows) are more
hurtful to their own territories then the brute creatures are to such as
never hurt or annoied them. The Dolphin Fish.
We find of the Sea-Dolphins (of whose nature the king has spoken among other
beasts and Fishes) that if perchance they find a dead man in the seas they
feel by the smell of him whether he has ever eaten of Dolphin Fish, the
which if at any time he has, then they devour him, if not, then they defend
him from the biting of all other Fishes: and bring him to the shore, as it
were to his funeralles in the earth. Lo, although these Sea-beasts do by
nature revenge any injury, yet are they far off from the persecuting of him
that never hurt or annoyed them, howbeit such is man's cruelty and commonly the
use of mighty persons, that they persecute and hurt them grievously of whom
they never received, nor are like to receive any damage at all. Wherein they
righgtly resemble the wolf which quarrelled with the Lamb and took an
occasion to kill and devour him, because he drank beneath him in the river.
But, as I said, albeit it had been but a just thing in the king to have
revenged that injury: yet was he more merciful and gentle to his foes to
whom in steed of death deserved, zadoke.
he pardoned and them preserved * Ye have well said (quod Zadoke) and thus
should Adoniah have well remembered and considered accordingly and not have
attempted further matter to provoke the Kings displeasure, and turn mercy into
justice against his own life. But seeing that he would not continue
thankful unto his Grace, but renew his old malice and thereby work to
supplant the Lords Anointed, I see no reason why the King should further
spare him to the danger of his own safety. Therefore I verily believe, that
the king has has not offended either against God or the law, in that he
afterward perceiving the wickedness and ambitious practices of Adoniah, Benaiah.
did cause him to be rewarded with death. And well worthy (said Benaiah) for
notwithstanding the King had most graciously pardoned him, and charged him
thereon (in my hearing) to be contained within his own house: he yet
presumed too boldly to come forth, and most malepertly to rush into the
Queens Chamber after David's death in such sort, that she was therewith
wonderfully afraid of him, neither could she easily be persuaded that he
being her mortal enemy (though now subdued) would either wish her well or
entend her any good. For as enemies are not to be trusted notwithstanding
their fair faces and words: so beyond others, had she a great cause to doubt
of Adoniah, who as she well knew, bare her a deadly hatred, for yt by her means
ye sooner Solomon came to the royal Seat, the which he Adoniah had so
ambitiously and eagrelie affected, and unlawfully usurped in his fathers
lifetime. Whereat notwithstanding that she was as between hope and despair
when she saw him sodenlie to enter her chamber, she asked him if he came to her
in peace, and he answered, yea, whatsoever he meant, and he said, that he had a
certain petition unto her, which was, that she would be a mean for him to the
king, that he would give him to wife Abisag the Sunamite, (who had been
sometimes king David's bedfellow to warm and nourish him in his weak old age)
In the which practice, he had a purpose to aspire to the kingdom: not only for
that, though he were the fourth yet the eldest of king David's sons then
living: but also combined with her who was esteemed as king David's wife, he
might the sooner in his own conceit, and by the suggestion of the kings
enemies, have obtained the sovereignty. The which deceit and pretense of his,
the Queen as yet perceived not: and therefore partly for dread, and partly
for goodwill she bare him for king David's sake, she condiscended to his desire,
and made request for him unto the king. But the king being right wise, soon
espied this to be a subtle devise of Adoniah for his own advancement; The
nature and manner of the ambitious.
he knew well, that the ambitious are every way ready to insinuate themselves
into favor: before they be preferred they will feign humility, lowlines,
honesty, affability, and all benignity, they will follow and obey at a
beck, they will flatter and give applause to all men's doings, fearing to
offend any: yea, and (as is the common proverb) they will brush off the dust
from the coat which has no dust at all. But being once advanced and exalted,
they begin to change their opinions, and soon alter their manners: for now,
they are become proud and glorious boasters: they never care to profit, but are
glad of preferme^t: they think themselves far better then others, because they
be placed higher then others: their former friends they disdain, and know not
their old acquaintances: they contemn their benefactors, and be unthankful
to them which have done them the highest good. To let pass other things, they
be burthensom to their subjects, hateful to al men, headstrong, troublesome,
arrogant, grievous, and importune. This (I say) the king knew well, and that
Adoniah was swollen with this humor. Moreover, he perceived that this matter
did does proceed and was furthered by two others his deadly foes, namely, Ioab
and Abiather, who thereby intended to supplant the king, and to set up
Adoniah. And therefore when Queen Bethsabe requested the king for Adoniah,
(according to her promise) he answered her: And why do thou ask Abisag for
Adoniah? ask for him the kingdom also: for he is mine elder brother, and has
for him both Abiather the the priest and Ioab the son of Zerviah: for he
knew, that if Adoniah had once gotten Abisag, who was so dear and near unto
his father, he would also with her have sought for the Crown. Therefore he
swear and pronounced a sentence against Adoniah to recompense his wicked
ambition and iniquity saying: God do so to me, and more also if Adoniah has
not spoken this against his own life! Therefore the king being well advised
(for he did every thing with judgment) sent and commanded me to smite him that
he might die, thereby the sooner to establish the government according to the
will and word of the Lord, the which Adoniah and his counsailors had practiced
to hinder and overthrow. Therefore this actio^ of the king, neither may be
reproved, nor may occasion him (now after so many years of peace) to be
offended with himself therefore. Abiather.
* Thus have ye said (quod Abiather) and your words in mine opinion may not
be justly reproved, The dealings of Solomon against Abiather the priest.
for ye have spoken nothing but truth. But what shall we say to this that the
king at his entrance, did both deprive Abiather then the Lords priest of his
office and expelled and bannished him the Lords house? Although I have the
like name (my Lords) I neither propose this question, nor speak, as if I
would defend the cause of ye Abiather against the king and his proceedinges
therein: but because I have heard some opposition to the same by others, and I
would willingly they should be resolved. zadok.
To this answered Zadok. As I may not condemn that Abiather my predecessor,
because I would my self (as Primas) should be adua^ced and approved in the
place: so neither may I dislike in equity the kings proceedings against him.
For first it is certain that Abiather behaved not himself worthily in his
place, and therefore was justly deprived. For albeyt my-selfe am now high
Priest: yet if I should not answer to my calling and name, I allow the
verification of that sentence of the kings father on my self: Let his days
be few: and his office let another take. And as concerning Abiather, it became
him not to counsel Adoniah and to confederate with him, in that he
unlawfully couetted to be king, both without the consent of his father, and
against the rightful honor of king Solomon. *Next it is most apparent how the
Lord would, that now by this occasion, that word of his should be performed
which was sometime spoken to Eli the priest: 1 Samuel 2.32.
that for the high dishonor and contempt of Gods service in his children, and
by him permitted, the priesthood should be taken away from him and his house,
and another should be preferred in the same. This was brought to pass when
Abiather was rejected, and zadocke taken to be the high priest. 2 Samuel 2 32
The which the King being wise and endowed with a principal spirit, did in
time wisely consider, and justly performed in the depriving of Abiather, and
placing me in his office: for there is not any word of the Lord which shall
fall to the ground, but shall be performed in the appointed time. Howbeit the
king (according to the exellencie of his wisdom) would neither slay nor
cruelly torment or vex that unfaithful Abiather, because he had been the
Lords higd priest, and had been a companion and a favorer of his father
David in all his afflictions. Wherein he expressed a right sober, merciful,
and grateful mind: for he reverenced the Lords ordinance and lawful function
of the person, albeit the person was unworthy: he showed lenity, where rigor
was deserved: and he would not that his hateful enemy should be occasioned
either justly to comdemne him, or at the least to accuse him of any savor of
oppression, tyranny, cruelty, or unkindness toward him which had been kind
to his father in his afflictions, though now after his fathers departure. And
surely, these are the virtues which are not common or usual among the men of
this life, especially among Princes and Potentates, where we often behold and
consider, how the Lords priests, prophets, and faithful servants, are not
only neglected, but irreverently contemned and abused, and that for the
lightest causes that may be imagined: we see that severity recompenseth
private injuries against all men without mercy; and we see, that little
kindness is found to consider of great benefits of them which be living, much
less of them that be dead of whom the proverb is beaten, Out of sight, out of
mind, 1. Sam. 22.17.
Such has been the ungodly behavior of Saul toward Abimelech and the
Priests of the Lord, whom notwithstanding they had made their honest excuse
withal humility, he commanded Doeg the Edomite to murder even fourscore
and five persons that did wear a linen Ephod: yea, and be smote with the
edge of the sword, Nob the City of the Priests, both men and women,
children and sucklinges, Genesis 37.20.
oxen and asses, and sheep with horrible cruelty. Thus the brethren of Joseph
hardly handled their poor brother in that they did not only cast him into a
pit, but sold him away as a bondslaue to strangers, following therein the
Nature of Cain, who murdered Abel his brother upon an offense not given, Genesis
4.
but taken. Judge. 7.
And thus the unthankful Sichemites (in the time of the Judges)
notwithstanding that Gedeon had been beneficial to Israel, showed no mercy
unto his house, but gave consent to the setting up of Abimelech the tyrant, to
the destruction of the same. But thus has not our King done: Nevertheless,
(as reason required) he removed Abiather both from his office, and also from
out of the Court: for he had distained his honor, and disgraced his function
by his lewd behavior therein, and was an enemy to the kings estate.
Therefore that he might not longer abuse the place, so fit for a better person,
yea, for a person perfect, and well approved: Treacherous persons are ever
suspected.
again, that he might not thenceforth (as he was an enemy) unhappily move or
entise any of the Kings Court to conspire with him against the king and his
government, he was justly deprived of the one, and banished from the other:
for as it is indeed wisdom in time, to cast out of the congregation, such by
whom the same is daily offended, and the place abused, to avoid the contempt,
which by such persons is often occasioned: so it is good policy timely to
observe, sequestre and put apart such dangerous persons from the presence of
Princes, and from the society of their Lords and servants, left they both
infect and inflame, and so confound the body with the head, by the contagion of
their treacherous plots, wicked designs and pestilent practizes, in, and about
the which will ever be their daily and greatest studies and endeavors: for
they are set on the pricked forth by the Sire of treasons, and broacher of
rebellions. Hence was it, that Moses commanded a separation between the
Israelites, and Corah, Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth opening, swallowed
up in their rebellion. Thus the Lord reproved Cain for his envy and anger
against Abel his brother, and admonished him to his duty: but after that he
had listed up his hand against him and murdered him, he expelled him (though
too late) and sent him an exile from his fathers house. So also after that
Ismael was noted to be a persecuter and derider of his brother whom he sought
to supplant, he was shut out of Abraham's house with Hagar his mother, who had
counseled and defended him in his wickedness. Therefore we may persuade, that
this proceeding and judgment of the king against Abiather, for the abuse of
his function, and his treachery against both David and our Lord the king,
(being both lawful and discreetely handled, according to the divine
providence, and the equity of the law) is not the cause of the kings present
sorrow. To this, all the Princes subscribed, gladly justifying the wise and
worthy judgment of the king with all his proceedinges therein, in whom they
did manifestly behold the wisdom of the most high God, to do equity and
righteousness.

CAP. XIII.
Of Solomon's proceedinges against Ioab and Shimei.
KIng Solomon being justified and commended in his judgment and proceedinges
against Adoniah and Abiather, in the execution of the one, Azariah.
and ye depriuatio^ of the other: Azariah the chief of the Collectors came
forth and said: But there be, which do not only blame, but condemn the King,
concerning his dealing against his Cosen Ioab, chiefly after he had taken hold
of the horns of the Altar, where, for the holiness and reverence of the
place, be presumed of security: for he verily thought, that the king (which
was wise and singularly affected the holy Religion) would have rather
reverenced the place, and not adventured to pluck any man out of the Lords
house (especially from the high Altar) which did fly thither for defense and
safety, as to the Sanctuary of the Lord.

To this Benaiah the chief Captain answered. Benaiah against Ioab
In that (my Lord) as I am well assured of mine own guiltless hand, being
especially charged by the king to slay Ioab: (for indeed I slew him at the
kings commandment) so am I well persuaded of the perfect wisdom and upright
judgment of the king in that matter, for diverse causes: first, for that Ioab
had been of the confederacy with Abiather, yea and a chief Counselor of
Adoniah, both against K. David, and against our Lord the king: for although he
were the son of Zaruiah, David's sister, placed by him in a very high grade
and authority (as the chief Captain of all his heastes) and had been bold
in the presumption thereof, to do and commit many things both unlawful and
indecent against the kings will, and good liking, as in the murder of Abner
and Amasa, and such like) yet, here he presumed too too far: for as it was
not lawful nor convenient, so was it neither safe for himself to adventure to
set up and to proclaim Adoniah king over Israel, in the life time of K. David,
without the goodwill and manifest commandment and warrant of the king, and of
his noble Counselors unto whom it better became Ioab to have submitted
himself and his Counsels, to whom he should have hearkened and yielded the
due honor according to the law, chiefly in this high matter, and not in such
malepert and lewd sort have usurped on the Kings gracious favor, and
arrogantly presumed so far on the authority of his high place. Truly, this
is a fault, which is often committed, and no less noted in them, whom the
favor of gracious Princes has advanced and graced, and the honor of the
place has puffed up, so far, Men being in honor, do often forget themselves.
that forgetting themselves and their duty, they neither foresee their own
dangers imminent: for it is sufficiently proved, that many men being suddenly
exalted, are also suddenly depressed and humbled in their pride, by the same
which lifted them up: yea, and some are therefore advanced, that forgetting God
and their duties, Gone. 11.^. Judge. 9.53.
they may be thrown down and confounded as Nimrod was, and Abimelech, as well
for example unto others, which thereby are taught to take heed: as for a just
reward of their own pride, ambition, insolency, and great wickedness.
Secondly, Ioab being faulty against God and the King, and now not only
accused before the king and his Princes, but justly condemned, and fearing the
kings displeasure, and the reward he had deserved: has most egregiously
abused that holy place: for Sanctuaries are ordained for a refuge and defense,
Sanctuaries. Exodus 21.14. Number. 24. and 35.11.14. Deuteronomy. 4.42. and 19.4. Ios.
20.3.
not for wilful murderers, stubborn malefactors, traitors, rebels,
seditionaries, and conspiratours against lawful Princes, but for innocents and
such as do, or shall ignorantly, and by an heedlesse occasion offend: that
there they may be protected and preserved, till time the truth of the matters
laid against them be in judgment, discerned and tried: as we find it written
in the law of Moses. Nor was it meet (indeed) that Ioabs ea^xple therein
(though a noble man, so near of blood to the king, and no less favored of
David) should embolden others to commit such heinous actions and villainies, and
then to shrowde themselves under those places of refuge, so far off from the
true meaning of the law, and from the right end of the institution of those
places. Therefore they that offend in like matters, and think to be defended
with their causes, either by such places, or by the wreasting of the holy laws
to their purpose, do always deceive themselves, and draw vengeance on their
own heads deservedly.

* Thirdly Ioab expressed a most stubborn nature, Ioabs stubbornes.
perverse will, and disobedient heart against the Lords Anointed: for when in
the kings name, and by his Highness commandment, I commanded him to come
forth from the Altar, he never so much as asked mercy of the king, nor sought,
nor entreated for his own pardon: but presuming that the King would not have
adventured to pluck him from the Altar, whereof he had taken hold, although he
had been a wilful transgressor: he then answered most stoutely in the
presumption of his heart: I will not came forth, and being further certified, yt
then the king would not fear nor omit to stay him even there, for his
ambitious praetizes and trespass, he replied (as daring the king and his
lawful authority most arrogantly) then let him slay me even here, for I will
not come forth. Neither think I but he will have some regard to the high
reverence of this place, into the which I have betaken my self, for the safety
of my life, as in the Lords Sanctuary: upon this answer, the king perceiving
his pride and the stubbornes of his heart, commanded me to do unto him, even as
he had said, namely to stay him even there, and so he received the execution
of his just judgment. Fourthly, the Lord our God, The reward of murder.
has rightly brought upon the head of Ioab, the revenge of that innocent
blood which he had before that time shed causeles, and now cried to the Lord
for vengeance, according to that word of David, 1. Kin. 2.5.
when a little before his death, he gave the king a very strait charge
concerning this matter, willing that Ioab should not be holden guiltless, nor
be brought in peace to his grave, but that he should receive the reward of a
merciles murderer, Number. 24.
after the words of the law in that case provided: as whereby the sooner he
might remove away from the king, and his fathers house, that blood which Ioab
had shed without just cause for (beyond others his manifold slaughters and
oppressions) he smote and most traitorously murdered two men which were more
righteous and better then himself, in the time of peace, namely, Abner the
son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, 2. Sam. 3.23.
who was (as king David in his lamentation for him, acknowledged) a Prince and
a Great man: and also Amasa the Son of Iether, Captain of the host of
Judah: A man likewise of right excellent government and valor, for Ioab being
a person very proud, envious and ambitious, greatly feared, lest the favor
and estimation of those two Worthies in the kings eyes, would much diminish,
(or at the least) hinder or withstand his further and higher honor. Therefore
David perceiving his wicked inclination, and considering well the equity of the
cause, charged and required his Son our Sovereign Lord, that the blood of
those two worthy persons should be returned on the head of Ioab, and upon his
seed, yt so upon David and upon his seed, and upon his house, and upon his
seat, there might be, and remain a perpetual peace. Thus truly, when one
creature kills another, the heavenly Powers cry out to the highest Majesty,
saying: Lord, Lord, this thy servant presumes to be like thee! Therefore, if
the deed be unjust, the Creator of all answers: Suffer him yet which kills,
for he also shall be killed. Vengeance is mine, and I will repay. And indeed
those celestial Powers shall and will so often represent with their praises to
the Lord, the death of the person slain, till just vengeance be taken of the
slayer, who therefore shall be numbered with them that are appointed to
perpetual torments: Hermogenes.
*as also, one among the Philosophers of the Gentiles has truly said: And so
we observe, that albeit the impious and wicked be for their times and turns
advanced above many others better then themselves, by the great favor and
liberality of bountiful Princes, and so stand a while in an high grade of
flourishing prosperity: and that, when the ungodly commit wickedness against
God and his Anointed, they are spared or passed over with silence, whereby
forgetting God and their proper conditions, they imagine him to be well
pleased, and so promise themselves lasting security in their impieties: yet
nevertheless, in the end, yea even in their due time, are they well overtaken
and destroyed without mercy, being nothing worthy of mercy, though they cry
and call. Therefore the Greek Homer (whom in this matter without just offense
to our Religion, but to the shame of such ambitious persons, we may remember)
has well modulated in all just censure: saying:

(...).
(...). (...).

Thus translated:

Although in pity, powerful love,
A long some time, refraines
To smite the Sinner: yet at length,
He plagues him to his pains.
But most diuinelie has the kings father spoken in his Psalms and hymns
touching this argument, which when learned Asaph the kings Scholemaister had
advisedly considered with the manifold instances daily occurring: he thus
spoke as in the Lords behalf,

Oh now consider this* ye that forget Gods grace,
Lest that I rent you for a pray, and none be found in place,
To rescue or to save your souls.
Wherefore as his most excellent Majesty has rightly condemned Ioab, and
thereon commanded him to be executed according to the law in this case
provided, and the charge that David gave him a little before he fell a sleep:
so can we not but worthily approve his judgments, justify his proceedings,
and persuade, that as thereby he has removed away evil form his kingdom and
house, so neither has he taken thereof any occasion of this great heaviness,
wherewith he now languisheth* for Ioab (as ye know) was not only a wicked
murderer, proud, envious and ambitious of honor, but also stubborn and
rebellious against the king, a conspiratour with Adoniah the kings enemy,
perfidious and treacherous, seditious and covetous, and in a word, replenished
with many vices where with he was distained to the dishonor of our religion,
the danger of our king, the evil example of the nobles; and the shame of
himself. Ye have well spoken (said all the other Princes and Lords) And
indeed, this is not strange, for we our selves have oftentimes seen and well
observed, that the ungodly and irreligious persons, though long forborne and
suffered to sin, yea and to wallow in impieties, saying unto themselves,
peace, and all is well, yet suddenly as holy Job said, they descend down to
the hell, neither shall their pomp follow the^: for glutted with prosperity,
inveterated in malice, hardened in heart, and far off from true repentance,
they even provoke the divine power to power on them that which they have justly
merited in their abominations. And truly this is one of those things which
follow man ordinary course, and semblable succession in the world. But to
speak of Ioab, we know, that the kings father having the spirit of Jehovah
his God, taught him, how intolerable the sufferance of such a member as Ioab
was, should be esteemed in his wisdom, which much better were to be
expelled and abandoned of the people, then that he should be the occasion of
conspiracies, and seditious in the common State: remembering this (beyond many
other his mischiefs) that he had embrued his sword which hung on his loins
in the blood of a friend, as if he had been his enemy in the open field. And
now again, he even bewraied himself openly, as privy to ye new conspiracy
of Adoniah, who aspiring ye second time to the kingdom of Israel, sought to
obtain to wife Abisag, K. David's last bedfellow: for his conscience condemning
him, he fled from the kings face, and took hold (as ye have said) of the horns
of the Altar: howbeit being a man wise and acquainted with the law, he might
have known that a volu^tary murderer or traitor was not to be protected in
that place: moreover, if he had alleged, that seeing the kings pleasure was
to slay him indeed, yet he would die in that holy place, as before the Lord:
yet he might know for certainty, that the place should be nothing profitable
unto him there to die, seeing that for his impiety, he was not worthy there to
be interred among his fathers, whereof all such are worthily deprived, which
are executed by an ordinary sentence and judgment of law, as execrable
malefactors. And in very deed, wherefore should such persons as in their
profanitie neither fear God, nor love his house, nor care for his Altar, nor
regard his divine Service, nor seek to honor him in their lives, presume so
much on his house, on his Altar, on his tabernacle and Sanctuarye as either
there to be protected, or there to rest their wandering bones. For as the Castle
of Syon spewed out the halte and the blind that David and such as retained
both Vrim and Thumim might lodge and dwell there: so the Lords hill, the
Lords tabernacle, and his holy house is built, provided, and prepared for them
only which fear and serve him in singlenes of heart all the days of his life.

Then Banaiah proceeded saying. The proceedings of the K. against Shimei 1.
Kings 2.8*
The like may be resolved concerning that judgment, which was given and
executed on Shimei the son of Gera, the son of Gemini of Bahurim whom the
king commanded me to strike. I speak not this (my Lords) to excuse my self of
crime as guilty in that action, although I may not want my justification
therein: but in regard of the equity of the cause. For it is not unknown unto
you and to many others that yet remain alive, how that Shimei for getting
himself and his oath, with the reverence he should have yielded king David,
cast stones at him, and at his servants, and withal railed at him and cursed
him (being the Lords anointed) with an horrible curse in the day when he went
to Mahavim: and thus he said in great envy, malice pride and contempt of the
king, even to the king himself, The railing words of Shimei.

2. Sam. 16.5.6.


Come forth, come forth, thou bloodshedder, and thou man of Belial. The Lord
has brought upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose steed thou
have reigned: and the Lord has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absolon
thy son. And behold thou art come to thy mischief because thou art a man of
blood! Such words spoke Shimei, and so misdemeaned he himself even against
king David and his servants. Howbeit David was then contented to forbear to
revenge this injury on him, although there were standing about him that offered
to go and to take away his head: yea and afterward, when he came and submitted
himself to David, he promised him rest from his hand: neither would he strike
him in all his days. Nevertheless he left the consideration thereof to Solomon
his Son, whom (he well knew) the Lord had inspired with a princely Spirit and
noble mind, and therefore could not be ignorant how to deal and behave
himself in these and such like causes. And so likewise our Lord the King
being as merciful as he was wise, did not in all the have set on wicked
Shimei, to recompense that abuse he gave to his father: but, first he called
him, and remembered him of his vnreuerent behavior toward the Lords
anointed, the^, he willed him to build him an house in Jerusalem to dwelm, and
not to adventure abroad, and said: Be thou sure, that the day that thou go
out and passest over the river Cedron, thou shall dye, and thy blood shall be on
thine own head. To the which Shemei gave answer: This saying is good. As my
Lord the King has said: so will thy servant do. By which words as he cleared
and justified both the king and his proceedings: so did he both judge and
condemn himself if he kept not that commandment of the king. And yet we may
not imagine, but that he granted further, then that he had any desire to
perform, as those which being endangered, vow and promise many things more
then ever they purpose to pay, the danger being once past: and that he thus
promised more for dread punishment, then for any love or willingness he had to
obey the kings commandment, as those men of Belial which forbear to sin
openly more for fear of the rod of Justice, then for any love or reverence of
godly virtues. Moreover Shemei might have considered (as he was subtle and
crafty enough) that men suspected are ever observed, and therefore such should
be very heedfull, not only of committing the fact, but of all pretense and
show of that which is evil. Howbeit as he that is evil by nature, does ever
presume in his evil without the reverent fear of either God or man: How
Shemei was brought into the snare in his time.
as one guarded and secured in the foolish conceit of his own humor: so Shemei,
either forgetting, or little regarding any of those things premised, passed
forth of Jerusalem, the place wherein he was commanded to stay and went to
Geth to Achis, pretending to seek for and to fetch home two of his Servants
which were some little time before that run away from him. In the which
presumption, he could not escape a vehement suspicion of practicing some lewd
matters with the Philistines, against the peace and government of the king
whom he ever envied, and closely assaied to reduce the kingdom from the
house of David which the Lord God had chosen, unto the posterity of Saul whom
the Lord had rejected. But behold, whiles Shemei went forth in his greedy
ambition to find and fetch home his servants, he lost and overthrew himself!
For thus by the divine preuidence which holds them not guiltless, that
either touch his anointed, or curse and malign their father and mother
(howsoever the servants of Shemei faulted in their going from him, and he had a
just pretense to reclaim them) an occasion was rightly ministered in this time
of his judgment, to cast him as guilty into the kings danger, as whereby the
king might even in this (though upon a fresh occasion) perform the word of his
father David, administer true judgment, and yield that deserved recompense to
that rebellious beast. Now (my Lords) it is apparent (as ye see) that Shemei,
though a person of great place, could neither be justified nor defended in such
his impieties: for why (to recapitulate his crimes) he was most proud and
malicious, a rayler, seditious, perfidious, an infringer of oath, a liar and a
covetous wretch, for having wealth beyond his worthiness, he was thereof puffed
up both against God and his Soueraign, envying the regiment of David and his
prosperity: he cursed the Lords anointed with a most horrible curse, against
the law and the equity of the kings cause: he moved the people to rebellion
against David and his house from whom he assaide to translate the Scepter: he
was untrusty and treacherous to his Lord, whom with all faithfulness he
should have served in discharge of his duty. He had broken his oathe which
he had made to God and the King departing most presumptuouslye from the City
of Jerusalem, wherein he had vowed to contain himself. He had scandalized
the Lords anointed most egregiouslye and more he regarded his own private
lucre and gain in fetching home his Servants which were departed, and drawing
things unlawfully to himself, then the kings manifest and express
commandment, and therefore in respect of the one, he too boldly transgressed the
other. Wherefore the king sitting in the seat of the Lord, gave upon him most
justly the sentence of death, and withal commanded me (the captain of his
guard) to execute the same accordingly, whereof the king (in my judgment) or
any other his true subjects need not to be sorry or displeased. To this the
Princes answered with one mouth: And truly in our judgments, as ye king being
most wise has done just judgment therein: so should he not only be justified,
but also commended for the same of as many as either hear or consider thereof.
Thus indeed has K. Solomon rightly recompensed his dangerous enemies by the
providence and help of the power divine. For doubtless this is the Lords doing,
who loves righteousness and hates iniquity (as the kings father did sing)
therefore as he defends the just that fear him in their justice, Psalm. 45.
so he ouertaketh the ungodly that dishonor his high majesty in their
mischievous devises and casts them down. Thus the cankred old serpent,
whiles he purposed and had subtly plotted not only to deceive, but to destroy
that noble mankind in Paradise, was by Gods upright judgment worthily
condemned to the deepest hell: and so the blessed Seed of the Woman, whom he
had beguiled and thought to kill, did in the end confound both him and his
kingdom. To this might we add the tragecall examples of envious Cain who^ the
Lord God execrated and exiled from the earth for his savage villainy against his
brother being a righteous man. Also of that proud and tyrannous Codorlaomor,
and those other profane princes which had captiued just Lot, which princes
therefore our Father Abraham worthily smote and discomfited: of hard hearted
Pharao and those cruel Egyptians, who were overwhelmed in the red sea, when
they verily presumed to have subdued and utterly rooted out our fathers: Of
those cursed Chananites, whom the Lord prostrated to the powerful hand of his
servant Iosuah: of the perverse and hateful Philistines whom Sampson the
Nazarite plagued in the spirit of Jehovah: of the monstrous Goliath the Giant of
Geth, whom the kinegs father being yet but a young man and tender, slew and cut
off his head with his own sword: of unnatural Absolo^ the kings elder brother,
who had practiced to supplant his father being lawful king who by the just
vengeance from the highest was hanged on a tree by the hair of his head as he
rode through the woods: and (beyond some others) the example of that treacherous
and rebellious Achitophel, a chief Counsailor of Absolon is yet fresh in
memory, who, seeing that his crafty and impious counsel was not affected to
his desire, strangled himself with his own hands. Many more fearful
spectacles of the semblable judgments we find extant, not only with us
within those his highness dominions, but else where among the Gentiles and every
where to the terror and astonishment of the Sons of men, but yet to the
consolation and unspeakable joy of the righteous. Wherein is verified that
which the kings father has modulated in his holy songs.

The wicked have I seen most strong,
and placed in high degree:
In wealth and stoare fair flourishing,
much like the laurel tree.
But suddenly he past him hence:
and prisoned was in hell:
Nor could I find within a whiles,
the place where he did dwell:
But as for just and perfect men:
the Lord them does increase
Who have from him them to content,
great joy with rest and peace.
Again, the Lord protects the just,
his wealth, his life, his lot:
When wicked men are dawnted with
the shaftes themselves had shot.
Oh blessed therefore Godly men,
preserved by God your King!
But woe ye wicked, in your ways,
your lot and every thing.
The King himself in his most grave and high Parables has many things of
this argument to be noted, as also in and among those patheticall speeches
which we daily hear him to ruminate. Neither in truth, are the heathen and
those which are without, free of semblable examples, which schooled them to
learn what that is which the highest God loves, and what he most abhors.
Among the which, it may not justly offend either ourselves or our Religion and
people, that we remember one other grave sentence of the same Greek poet, who
living in the time of our Judges, and observing many things of those days in
the world, whereof he also wrote of great distructions of Kings, Princes, noble
Captains, and mighty Potentates, with the causes of the same, we find that in
the work whereof he tells of the wanderings of the famous Ulysses, he has these
words.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
That is

In truth all godless deeds are naught estem'd with God above:
But rightful heastes and godly works of goodmen does he love.
And eke his foes and wicked wreatches which on earth here live
By others spoil, at length a pray to just men does he give.
And in this manner Jehovah our God confounded the kings adversaries,
establishing the kingdom in his hand, according to that promise made by him to
David, in the time of his grace. The ready way how to preserve Peace.
Neither did his method of proceeding unworthily beseem him, notwithstanding
his name notes Peace, or a Peaceable person: seeing it behooved him for the
purchase of true peace to extinguish the Seditious and broachers of
unnecessary wars, a thing no less necessary, the^ that part of his office
which concerns his government, to and for the which his father king David
counseled and sang as before: Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, psalm.
45.
O thou most mighty! Again, seeing that al things are in vain, wc are
attempted without an happy success, the which is a singular gift of God, and
of him to be desired, he added: Prosper thou in thine Honor. And all this
wel-beseemed ye king to whom ye Lord has granted rest for ye building of his
house, Solomon's name.
and therefore has named him Solomon. This being said, the Princes (with one
accord) approved the kings judgments and orderly proceedinges in the
premises, praised his royal majesty in the same: blessed the God of Israel
that had placed over his people so prudent and happy a king and humbly
beseeched the most holy of Israel for his graces happy health and wished
prosperity.

CHAP. XIV.
The cause of king Solomon his grief was not of his match with the daughter of
Pharao. 2 Nor of his amity with Hyram the King of Tire. 3 Nor of that he
royally entertained the Queen of Sheba. 4 Nor of his own infirmity of age. 5
Nor of the fear of death.
IT cannot be denied (said Iehosophat) but that our sovereign Lord Solomon,
has done equity and righteousness in his proceedings and actions, tending
therein to the end of his government, for his own discharge the good of his
people, and (above all) the honor of Jehovah his God who for the same be
praised for evermore. But now the question is, and the matter argued, augmented
and carried from mouth to mouth among the kings Subjects, (for of this the
kings alteration, many men talk diversely, and imagine many things) whether
the king has justly offended in his match with the daughter of king Pharao
the Egyptian whom he brought into the city of David. And here they call to
mind, not only what the law has provided in this case: but that which the
Patriarch Isaac has charged to Jacob touching the daughters of Canaan which
he would not that he should touch: Iud. 14.3.
as also what Manoah and his godly wife spoke to their son Sampson the
Nazarite, when he would have taken a wife from among the uncircumcised
Philistines. Howbeit I doubt not but that the king being passing wise and
prudent, knows well how to digest that morsel, and to resolve that doubt.
Moreover, it is not unknown unto us, that albeit this Princess was a stranger
unto us and our Religion, whiles she remained at her fathers house in Egypt:
yet as she was not of the brood of those cankered hearted Chananites and
nations which the Lord willed our Fathers to expel and root out: so would not
the king adventure either to touch her, or to bring her into his own house,
(although she was both a noble and beautiful Lady) till time that was done
and performed on her, Deu. 21.13.
which the Law in that case prescribes: but cheifely, as she had forsaken her
own people and her fathers house the^ polluted with many abominations: so
turned she to the Lord God of Israel with all her heart, for the love she had
both to him and his holy Religion. And truly this is also well observed,
that as Rahab of Ierico, a believing woman and convert, was both admitted and
esteemed of the number of the true Israelites in the days and by the wisdom of
valiant Iosuah: and as Ruth the Moabitish woman was married to Booz king David's
Grandfather: and as king David himself refused not fair Thamar whom he had
gotten in the wars: and as other our forefathers have not aba^ndoned such
women upon their true conversion to ye Lord: so neither we abhor such as admit
circumcition, and faithfully serve the true God, notwithstanding they be of the
Gentiles: knowing or at the least presuming that the Lord God, has even among
them, some that are his people also: that the star which Balaam sometime saw,
might lighten them in their due time, as we are lightened: and that shall be
then when the prayer of Noah shall be both heard and effected, wherein he
desired the Lord to enlarge the tents of Iaphet, and to seize him in the
tents of Shem, to whom he would that Shanan should be a servant. Now the king
in this regard would often say of this Lady. psalm. 45.
The daughter of the king is beautiful within, her garments are of beaten
gold. And herself, although time was she could say of herself: I am but
black O ye daughters of Jerusalem, for why, Cant. 4.1.
the Sun has shined upon mine head: yet now having no mean pleasure in her
beauty, Cant, 4.1.
he could justly commend her to her face saying thus: How fair art thou my
love? how fair art thou? thou have Doves eyes, besides that which within thee
lies hidden. Wherein doubtless as he has made her a lively figure, of the
church of God to be gathered of and among the Gentiles in time to come: so
shows he, what is and shall be the glory of the same, and wherein the
praise thereof consists: therefore to declare the Lords good pleasure
therein, we have both heard and considered what the sweet Psalmist of Israel
(even the kings father) both prophesied, and divinely modulated thereof in
these words.

O daughter now take heed, incline, and give good ear:
Thou must forsake thy kindred all and fathers house most dear,
So shall the king affect thy beauty fair and trim:
For why he is the Lord thy God, and thou must worship him.
The Daughters then of Tire, with gifts full rich to see,
And all the wealthy of the land, shall make their suits to thee.
Secondly, after this (as it is left in Record) King Solomon loved Iehova his
God, walking in the ordinances of David, his father, and offered unto the Lord
a 1000. whole burnt offerings: and the Lord being loving and most merciful
unto him, did not only accept the same at his hands, but had him ask of him
whatsoever he would, that it might be given him. He asked wisdom, and the
Lord his God heard him, granted him his request, and declared his love and good
pleasure toward him, his actions, and proceedings, by many notable arguments,
the which (as we may persuade with the wife of Manoah) he would never have
done, had he not loved him, or had he bin willing to have reprobated him.
Thirdly, albeit the Egyptians which had forgotten Joseph, and the manifold
benefits they enjoyed by him in his time, had grievously afflicted our fathers
(as Moses has recorded it) yet, as before that time, our Fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and their children have found refreshing and comfort from
thence, and therefore have been contented to soiourne there, and to join in
amity with them: so without any abuse of our Religion, or danger of our
consciences or just offense to any (being steadfastly purposed to retain the
right honor of Iehova our God) we could not see, How far we may win amity
with strangers.
why we should deny this amity, or to converse with them that are well
pleased, not only to help us at al needs with the things that appertain to the
use and comfort of bodies and life: but also to be reclaymed, and willingly
consent to serve the Lord of Israel, together with us, circumcising the
foreskins of their hearts, as Moses exhorts. And to such a purpose aimed our
fathers the sons of Jacob, Genesis 34.14.
when speaking of the cause in question between Sechem and Dina their sister,
whom he desired, they answered Sechem and Hamor his father saying: We cannot
do this thing to give our sister to an uncircumcised man, for that were a
reproof unto us: but in this will we consent unto you, if ye will be as we
are, that every man child among you be circumcised: then will we give our
daughters to you, and we will take your daughters to us, and will dwell with you
and be one people. Nevertheless, to avoid al occasion of just offense, which
might be taken of the kings wives, being brought into the house of David,
because the place was sanctified, and the Ark of God was reposed therein:
therefore the king built a house for this Queen remote from Bethlem, and
placed her therein, where she continued. Neither have we heard any exception
made (as yet) to the king for such his matching or conuersing with her.
Therefore I persuade, that this is not the thing which so much offends him now,
except perchance he perceives that she has a desire to return again into
Egypt, and to look back behind him, as the unhappy wife of Lot did, the
which the Lord forbid: or that there is moved twirt them some secret
emulatio^, jealousy, or dislike, whereof I may not presume to talk, nor might
I, were I able to express it, the wringing of the shoo being known to him
only which wears it.

Helioreph.
Ye have very well said my Lord (quod noble Helioreph) and the like may be well
resolved of the kings amity with Hyram the Prince of Tyrus and Sidon: although
there be of our nation, that thereat be much offended, disliking that the
Israelites should meddle with, or have to do with any of them which are
without: no less then in times past, it was an abomination to the Egyptians to
eat and drink with the Hebrews. And surely this affinity and amity was not
made upon mean occasions, nor (indeed) without an especial instinct of Gods
spirit, which had moved and persuaded Hyram (though an heathen Prince)
without the motion of king Solomon, as of his own accord, to desire and seek
for this league and society, the which truly was first begun between king
David and him, from whom David gratefully acknowledged the receiving of many
good things, yea, and such, as were appointed and laid up to and for the
building of the Lords house in Jerusalem. In regard of that amity with his
father, being now renewed, and yet continued with him he vouchsafed to honor
him with the name of his father, calling him his father Hyram. Wherein, as he
verily manifested his right thankful mind, to so bountiful a benefactor,
and godly wel-willer: so learneth he all children (as by a true Copy) in what
honor, reverence, and estimation they should hold those persons who had been
not only familiar, but most loving and beneficial unto their Parents in their
lives. Likewise in king Hyrams combination with Solomon, as there is a perfect
intimation of the conjunction of both the Jews and Gentiles within one Temple,
as whereof the mystycall Church should be complete in the time appointed: so
are they which yet be without to yield obedient hearts to this persuasion of
the divine spirit, as whereby with all alacrity and ready wills they might
run after him, which both moves and draws them: according to that lovely
word, and desire of the holy Spowsesse, whom the King in his most excellent
song brings in with this saying: Cant. 3:
O draw me forth after thee, and then shall we run. Next it was respected,
that king Hyra^ was a man very wise, he feared and served Jehovah the God of
Israel, and was wonderfully qualified in all kind of princely graces: Else
truly would not king David have obliged himself in such a mutual love with
him, who (as himself protested) could never abide either profane persons, or
froward hearts: or any of them which had an evil will at Zion. Neither would
the king himself (as we well know) being as the Angel of God, perfect in
knowledge, of exquisite wisdom, repleate with the spirit of God, and chiefly
then, when both the Lord loved him, favored him and blessed him with an
admirable peace, and namely in the time wherein he was busied in the building
of the Lords house, wherein he ever depended on the help and hand of God to
asist him: have had any commerce or dealing at all with Hyram, had he not well
known, that as it was Gods will and working therein: so Hyram was a person
that was to be regarded. Thirdly, Hyram was right beautiful and set (as it
were) in the pleasant Paradise, Ezec. 28.
decked with all manner of precious stones, with Rubies, Tophas, Diamond,
Thurkoie, Onyx, Jasper, Saphyr, Emeralde, Carbuncle and gold: with Tymbrels and
Musical pipes: he was as an anointed Cherub and holy, placed in the sacred
mount of God, and made perfect in his ways. A king of Majesty, and of
excellent regard for his admirable virtues, Hyram his name interpreted.
worthily alluding to his noble name, being (as one would say) loving
exceedingly the promotion of life the beauty of them that appertain to him:
freedom or liberty, an high mountain, a faithful watch, a bearing or
pouring forth, that is to say, of treasures and good things for the help and
comfort of others: the city or refuge of them that maintain peace, and a
discovering or understanding of things, divine and profitable.

Fourthly, as this right noble Prince, had an especial love to the Lord the
God of Israel, and his most holy Religion, and therefore affected wondrous well
both king David, 1. King. 5.1.7.8.
and our Lord K. Solomon: so was he ever most glad, willing and ready to send
unto either of them, whatsoever they requested of him, for and toward the
building of both the Lords house, and also the kings house, in the greatest
abundance: for as his land was plentiful and abounding with all those things
before mentioned, that by the especial blessing of God, so thought he they
could not be better employed, then on the king, and chiefly to, and for so
excellent a monument as he had purposed to erect to the name of Jehovah his
God, and the same God (I say) which Hyram also so deuoutely honored, to the
praise of his Majesty, the true solace of his soul, and the good example of
others. Furthermore, Hyram rejoicing greatly to hear tell of our Sovereign
Lord, now lately adua^ced on the glorious seat of his father, he glorified
God with this saying: Blessed be the Lord this day, who has given unto David a
wise son to reign over this mighty people! Moreover he sent a message to
the king, saying: I have considered all the things of the which thou have sent
unto me: and I will surely accomplish all thy desire therein, etc. So that both
the faith and piety of king Hyram was plainly manifested in this kind of
congratulation of Solomon's graces, especially for that religious institution,
concerning the setting forth of the holy Religion, as whereby not only we
Jews might glory of this, that we have been earnest professors of Gods law,
and builders of his house: But that also the Gentiles, whom we sometimes
abhorred, are by the divine favor instigated and persuaded to conioine with us
in the performance of the same, the which also, as we have seen happily to
commence, has been continued and yet is enjoyed to the comfort of us all.
Therefore as for this benefit we are bound to be thankful to God and
grateful to that good King: so have we not found, or may perceive any just
cause of offense to spring therence, or that the King should thereof be grieved
and perplexed in mind, as at this time we observe him to be. There is some
other matter doubtless that causes the sadness, the which would to God we
could both find and remedy with speed: for long delays bring dangers,
especially in the cure of a wounded and languishing head.

Then Lord Ahiah opening his mouth spoke to this effect; Ye have well said of
the two former, namely, touching king Pharaohs daughter, and the Tyrian king,
with whom the kings Majesty has united himself with the former in marriage,
with the second in mutual amity. Ahiah speaks of the Queen of Saba.
And this also may be spoken of the most virtuous Queen of Arabia, that upon
the report of the kings servants, which were sent at Ophir for gold, prepared
herself in great roialtie, and came hither to this end to hear the kings
wisdom, and to learn the religion of Jehovah our God, and thereon she was
happily taught and instructed, being (no doubt) moved and persuaded thereunto
by the divine power, who as we perceive is willing that the Gentiles should
partake with us of those things which appertain to the highest honor of our
God, and eternal happiness (as ye have before intimated) Now therefore, the
king knowing the purpose of God in this point, and understanding by his
wisdom, that her repair unto him was for this very end, he gladly welcomed
her with her train, 1. King. 10.
and most willingly satisfied her mind every way: for he declared unto her al
her hard questions, touching those divine things (for she had propounded many
unto him) so that there was not one thing hidden from the king, which he
expounded not unto her: But when she saw his royal Majesty with her eyes,
heard his words with her ears, and well considered the admirable building of
his house, the excellent orders of his noble Princes and servants, and many
semblable things far passing all others, and beyond the report she had heard
(which yet was merueilous) she was thoroughly ravished and astonished, and
thereon brake forth, blessing the Lord, blessing the kings royal majesty, and
those his servants with many emphaticall words and wonderful gestures of
body: declaring her self at this time, rather a true Jewish devoted with the
zeal of the glory of our God, then a Gentile; as one educated and nurtured
not in Arabia, but in the City of Jerusalem, yea, in Sion the Lords holy
hill and sanctified Tabernacle all the days of her life. What kind of persons
king Solomon accepted into league.
And here note (I beseech you) that as our most sacred Sovereign has entered
league or affinity with none of this kind (I mean the outlandish) before
that they had acknowledged the Lord, converted unto him, and made faithful
voues and promises to be the Lords and to fear him, (as sometimes Ruth and
Rahab had done) as the law in that case did require: so refused he not any,
whosoever in this mind and sincerity of heart, came or offered themselves unto
him with a desire either to learn of him wisdom, or to gratify his wisdom,
glory, and prosperity, according to the true sense of the same law: In or by
the which, we have not found that the State of our holy Religion, has been
at any time altered, or the same any way empaired or neglected: but we have
seen that by this our shining candle many other candles have been kindled,
and our own nothing blemished or consumed thereby. All this (doubtless) was
in our king very prayse-worthy, as that which fitteth the high honor of a
Sovereign Prince.

Ahishar speaks of the kings age, and of his declining and death
* In very truth as ye have well spoken (quod Ahishar) But hear me (my Lords)
might not this grief be occasioned of this: that the king now stricken in
years and well knowing himself a mortal man, (though a maiesticall King in
his place) does either by his rare wisdom or some late inspiration perceive
that he must of necessity shortly give over, and yield to him (alas) which is
prepared both to arrest him, and to carry him captive to his long home, in the
which being reposed and laid among the dead, Job. 7.7.8.
the eye that saw him before shall see him no more (as said Job) neither shall
his eye return to see pleasure in this life nor shall he thenceforth feel the
delights of the sons of men, A description of old age.
he shall no return to his house, neither shall his place know him any more.
Against the which time therefore, we perceive in man (as the king himself has
said) that the Sun is dark, the light, the Moon the stars: and the clouds
return after the rain: the keepers of his house tremble, the strong men bow
themselves, Eccles. 12.
the grinders cease, because they be few, and they which look out by the
windows wax dark, the gates without be shut, by ye base sound of the
grinding, and he rises up at the birds voice, and all the daughters of
Music are abased. Also he dreadeth the high things and fears in the way,
the Almond tree florisheth and the Grasshoppers are a burden, and concupiscence
is extinguished: for he goes to the house of his age, the receptacle of all
flesh and the mourners go about in the streat. The silver lace is not
lengthned, the golden yewer is broken, the pitcher is cracked at the well, the
wheel is torn at the cisterne, and dust returns to the earth as it was. The
consideration of this doleful alteration in man, (which yet is not effected
but by a strong and forcible mean) cannot but terrify every man living. And
sure it is, A description of death.
that when a man shall see grisely death inuading and assaulting him, he shall
be forthwith agonized, quite quailed in conceit and vexed in his soul, yea,
albeit he be not as yet compelled to yield up his spirit: for as death is in
nature a tyrant, and so cruel to all things which have life, so approaches
he as a mighty giant or man of arms with his bent bow and pearcing dart,
looking most sternelie, dealing most rigorously, tearing and renting his pray
right Lion-like without rescue. Moreover as this is the same, which all living
and sensible creatures both fear and abhor: The anguish of him whom death
summoneth.
so a man once touched with his deadly dart knowing that now by the force
thereof he is compelled to forsake and leave his father and his mother, his
wise and his children, his friends and his acquaintance, his wealth and his
substance, with all the glory, pleasures and delights, of this world: he is
grieved, he soroweth, he weepeth and lamenteth, perplexed as well in mind, as
in body with this most woeful complaint. Time was, that I was much pleased and
delighted in all these things, enjoying and using them with great gladness and
joy: but now (alas) I see him approaching, and invading me, which constrains
me to fly, and to relinquish all those my delights with weeping eyes and
sorrow of heart! But yet, such as stand in the top of this worlds happiness
(as the King beyond all others has stood and prospered these many years with
hearts desire and souls solace) they most of all tremble and be above measure
troubled, even then when they shall but hear of deaths coming, much more when
they feel the dint of his dart: of the which I have heard the king himself in
his wise Parables to speak, the which saying, for the gravity thereof is
coppied out and translated by the learned into many languages. Syrac. had taken
this from Solomon's words in Egypt.
O death! how bitter is the remembrance of thee to that man, who seeks rest
and consolation in his substance and riches: Unto that man which has nothing
to vex or trouble him: but that has prosperity in all things? And this
grief is much augmented and aggraued in this; that though a man be never so
rich, honorable and pleasured in this life: yet shall he not carry away any of
those riches, honors or pleasures with him at his death: but as he came into
the world naked from the womb of his Mother: so goes he thither again out of
this world all naked. Moreover, in the grave whereto he tends, he shall
enjoy neither sense, feeling, understanding nor faculty of working (as the
King himself has said) no, nor yet that possibility to praise God, nor to
give him thanks in the Hell (as David also modulated) the same being a place
both of darkness and silence, wherein man being defrauded of his hope and
expectation the most glorious King is made equal with the poorest beggar, the
strongest Captain with the basest captive: the wise with the fool, the rich
with the poor, the happy with the wretched, the beautiful with the deformed,
and the living with the dead: For there is the same condition unto them all,
without difference. Therefore has the king preferred a living dog in hope,
Eccles. 9.4.
before a dead lion, in despair. * Then answered Abiather, Indeed, that thing
which separateth the soul from the body, so alters man's nature and reduces
every man, of what degree soever he be, into one and the same condition, yea,
into the same confused Chaos or lump from whence he was taken and formed, is
worthily dreaded of all men. But death is the same indeed. Therefore may I well
compare him to that fearful Hiena, Death is like the beast Hiena.
which being an enemy to mankind has a vipers neck, an Elephants back, a man's
voice, the quantity and qualitye of a Wolf, the hair of an horse, and in
sex changeable as sometimes male, sometimes female. For Death which is an
extreme adversary to man's life, and seeks how to destroy him, staieth not his
expectted time and tide, nor waits man's leisure, whether he be prepared or
not prepared, but hasteneth and preuenteth it, as does the viper the natural
time of birth, coming forth by piercing the womb of his mother, the cause of
her present death. 2. the Elephant is a beast fit for the wars, and Death as a
man of war is opposed to al things that has life in this world and
overcomes them. 3. Death is a deceiuer of mortal men: for albeit it is
certain, that all men shall dye yet is his hour uncertain, taking them away
when they think not of him, and yer they be ready, as the Hiena deceives by
faining a man's voice. 4. Death is a consumer of the lives of all things that
live, as the Wolf is a deuourer of the sheep, without sacietie. 5. Death is
neither restrained nor hindered in his course, as the wild horse being stiff
necked will not be bowed. 6. Death kills now men, then women sparing no sex,
no age, no degree of persons, as the Hiena which alters kind. Therefore is
death worthily dreaded of all men. Howbeit, we cannot yet learn or perceive
that the king has either such warning: or if he had, would he be much
astonished or woeful. For being a man of an excellent spirit he fears not
Death, whose day (as I have heard him to say) is better in respect, then the
birth day of a man, and that the dead are more happy then the living; and
therefore has thus counseled the living. Be not fearful of death. Remember
them yt have gone before thee, and them yt come after thee. This is the
judgment of the Lord upon al flesh: and why would thou be against the
pleasure of the most high? whether it be ten, and hundred, or a thousand
years, death never asks how long a man has lived? Again he has said that
death (though a tyrant in nature) is yet acceptable and welcome to some sorts
of living creatures and namely to the man whose strength fails him, to him
that is come to his last age, and to him that is full of care and fearefulnes,
and in misery in this life. Which sentences for th'excellencie thereof, are
also copied out, and notified unto many other nations, which gladly accept and
embrace them. Moreover the King has said, that howsoever a man be dead and
laid senseles in the grave among the dead, and dust be returned into dust: that
yet his Soul, (which is the best part of man) returns unto God that gave it,
that is not to die with the body, but to live and continue for ever with him
whose Image it bears, that freely exonerated off and from all the miserable
torments and vexations which assail men in this transitory life. By the which
(as among some other his words) we find: as a wise man should not be daunted
with the terror of death, but rather expect and embrace him: so himself is
nothing moved therewith, Fear not death.
being of all men the wisest. His reasons therefare many from the which we
take and gather these which follow. Death is better then life: or the day of
the death happier then the birth day. We may simply believe him therein. Mors
ita. qualis vita.
For death is the renewing of a man's nature, I mean to him that leads a
godly life: for if the life of a man be good, his death cannot be evil. And as
men do always desire that which is good: so neither do they fear that which
therein they desire. once to dye, to whose will and pleasure therein al men
must yield and obey, Genesis 3
as good subjects to their prince in his place and authority. And therefore we
should neither murmur at, nor fear that, which he has ordained, knowing
withal, that he decrees nothing but that which is good and profitatable for
his children. Fourthly, this is not only Gods decree but also his good
pleasure by this to glorify himself, and to Messiah, from all sin and
dangers of Soul, that follow after, and awaite them in this world. Sixthly, a
man Adam, on Abel, on Noah, on Abraham, on Moses, Iosuah, Samuel and David, and
it shall not pass over How long a man should desire to live here.
as the time of his ministry in this life is by the divine providence appointed
to endure, and no longer) and that when the time of this his service is
determined, he should then desire rather to depart hence the^ to live any
longer, assuring himself yt he shall neither effect nor perform any thing
out of the due time (for every thing and every work has his opportunity and
time, as the King has said) This time therefore abserued Noah, Abraham, Isaac
Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Iosuah, Samuel, David and other our godly forefathers in
their lives. And this time (I am assured) the King shall accomplish, and
therein shall do and perform that only, which the Lord has appointed him in
his place, for his glory and the benefit of his people. Thus far the Princes
were contented to hear one another of them, and withal to justify that which
had been said for the King. Howbeit, howsoever some of them dissembled the
matter, there was not yet any one of the^ that either declared or revealed the
cause of the Kings affliction. Neither (indeed) was he which knew the
matter, willing to open it, because it touched the Kings Majesty. Whereby it
was like to be as dangerous to his person and state, as the malady is to that
patient the cause of whose grief is neither revealed nor well known to the
phisician. This the lords considered: therefore they yet desisted not to search
and enquire further until they found out the causes of the kings present
sickness.

CHAP. XV.
Zadoke has found the causes of the kings troubled mind: and declares them
of Solomon's glory.
ZAdoke the most reverend Father, having now a good whiles hearkened to the
conference of the Lords: and perceiving, that they would neither be quieted
in heart, appeazed in conscience, nor surcease to search and examine matter by
matter, and cause by cause, until they might at length find out (if it were
possible) the very causes of the kings sorrow: And seeing withal, that every
one of them had in their turns spoken, and now again expected his grave
sentence: he stood up, and after a long pause he spoke unto them in these
words. My Lords all, I have heard you one by one, and considered well of all
your sayings: howbeit, I have not yet heard that any man has found out, much
less declared the causes of the kings affliction. For I am well assured, that
there be diverse other reasons and occasions which might justly move him (as
being a mortal man, Subjects may not be quick censorers of their princes.
though so wise a man) to be sorry in his heart. But I know well (as it has
been said) that it becomes not subjects but in (dutiful modesty to sifte or
examine, much less to censure the actions and dealings of their princes, the
which is also a matter no less dangerous, then presumptious. Nevertheless, in
regard of your present opportunity, so willing and earnest to urge on mine
answer to satisfy your desires, but chiefly, that thereby the sooner (as we
be here assembled in council) we may consider, consult thereof, determine and
endeavor not only to ease the kings grace of his trouble (if it may be) but to
satisfy all others, and work to preserve the commonwealth, which through the
kings displeasure may unhappily be annoyed and brought into danger: Therefore I
will no longer hold you in suspense, There be 7. causes of Solomon's trouble.
but reueile the whole matter to your content. I have found seven causes of
the kings troubled mind. The first whereof rises of the deep consideration of
his own Supremacy, and the present high glory of the kingdom of Israel. The
second springs of Hyram the king of Tyrus upon the view and dislike of those
cities which the king has granted him. The third grows of certain letters
of intelligence which the Arabian Queen sent him, after that she departed from
the court. The fourth is from his Mother and the Prophet Nathan, which are now
both departed this life. The fifth is of Rhehoboa^ the kings son and heir
apparent, not so well pleasing his fathers heart. The sixth comes from the
kings adversaries as namely Hadad, Rheso^ and Ieroboa^, which have lift up
their hands against him The seventh and the greatest of all, is the sense of
Gods high displeasure and fearful judgments conceived and bent against him,
and the people for some hamous sins and transgressions.
At this word, The princes.
the Princes and Lords were fully astonished all abashed, and not able to
speak for anguish of mind, stood looking one on another. Notwithstanding,
after a whiles they desired reverend Zadok to explane that, which he had (as
yet) but briefly and obscurely touched: and first how it could be, that the
kings sorrow might rise from ye consideration of his most excellent Supremacy,
and the high glory of the kingdom of Israel, whereof both the king and they all
with his people had so good an occasion to be glad and to rejoice with praises
to the Lord God? zadoke. The great glory of Solomon and his kingdom was a
pronostication of a future declination.
To this replied Zadoke. Although that men for the most part neither foresee,
nor foreshew their own dangers imminent, like as the Sun, the Moon, the
stars, the seas, the trees, the herbs, the beasts, the birds, the worms
the Fishes, the elements naturally pretend and foreshew the times, the tides,
the tempests, and the alteration of terrene bodies: yet who doubts of this,
that the king being wise and prudent foreknoweth things yet to come, not only
as such as have a prophetical spirit, but as those which are able and
accustomed to gather the effects and events by the causes and occasions in
natural things which is not the meanest king of Philosophy but a science right
excellent, no less profitable for many purposes in man's life, and that which
appertains to a reasonable creature. By this he sees that those things
which flourish most beautifully, often wither most speedily, when yet others
endure. This is first found in the life and constitution of man's body, wherein
that which is most flourishing and glorious, is soonest and that lightly altered
and turned al about, as health into sickness, strength into weakness, beauty
into deformity, prosperity into misery, life into death. And hereof the
cunning phisicia^s pronosticate the future sickness and danger of that person,
whom they see to stand in the highest grade of prosperity and health: as when
the Sea is at the very highest, then it begins suddenly to fall again by
the Ebb: when the Moon is at the fullest by and by she waneth. Therefore the
wise shipmaister, knowing how storms and tempests succeed calmes and
tranquillities, he fearing thereof prepares himself to eschew the danger.
Now the king knowing all this, and seeing himself placed in the highest grade
of his honor, and that the kingdom of Israel is no less advanced to the
highest grade of worldly felicity, therein far preferred before all the
kings and kingdoms of the earth: he also knows, that now of necessity must
ensew and follow an alteration, yea, a declination of that resplendent glory:
and that the sooner by the means of man's inconstancy, wherein he is like a
bird in a Cage which will not be quiet, though by his excessive flittering and
striving he kill himself.

Of this inconvenience feared Job, Job. 1.
in his prosperity (as he testifies) therefore, seeing his children
wonderful merry, and in their mirth given to al kind of riot and pleasures to
delight themselves, he used to pray for them every day: howbeit; their fulness
was suddenly emptied and himself, though so good a man, cast into great
adversity. Moreover as it is the nature of worldly things to be subject to
alterations: so man can neither conteyne himself in any condition, be it never
so excellent without some desire of change, yea, in how better place and estate
he is set, furnished with all things, so much the sooner will he abuse the
honor and grace of the same to his own destruction, verifying that saying of
the kings father.

psalm. 49.12.20
Man being in honor placed, declares his want of wit,
And in that honor cannot stay, as one for it unfit.
Wherefore unto the beasts that in their death decay,
Compared he is: for in this life this is his common way.
Therefore the king fears greatly that these pleasant things shall not continue
and abide long in this sort, and that shortly after these pleasures will ensew
pains, after peace trouble, after ioies sorrows, and after prosperity
infelicity, at the least, then when it shall please the high God to take him
away from reigning over us. In the time of prosperity think on the days of
adversity in this life.
This should teach all men, living in this world, not to trust in the great
glory of this time, nor in the wealth, nor in ye strongest power of man, nor in
wisdom, nor in anything under the Sun: for all these things (being
transitory) have as well their falling, as their rising, as well their ending as
their beginning, as well their discommoditie as their commodity incident. Now
that king, and also the kingdom have that supremitie of glory and peace, it is
most apparent, not only by the firm testimony of Gods words spoken unto the
king promising him such a thing, but by our own certain knowledge and
experience thereof, and all men that have understanding cannot but behold and
confess the same with us. For who is like to K. Solomon in wisdom, wealth,
fame and glory, of all the kings on the face of the earth? and what kingdom is
co^parable to ye kingdom of Israel in beauty, peace and prosperity? For albeit
the king has been sometimes resisted and shouldered by Adoniah, Ioab Abiather,
and some others: yet has he prevailed thus far forth, prospered and
triumphed over his enemies valiantly: and although the kingdom of Israel has
been many times battered threatened and troubled by diverse enemies on every
side sithence the coming of our fathers out of Egypt, as the Sun and Moon
with Eclipses, clouds, and dark mists) yet has the same still increased,
grown and prospered more and more, as the Sun from his rising unto the high
noone, and as the Moon from her Conjunction to her perfect fullness, until
this very day: wherein the same is so highly advanced that the exaltation
thereof can no further proceed proceed: but henceforth begin to decline,
droope, return and decay, after the state and course of worldly things:
wherein we see how one generation passes away, another succedeth, The world is
like a sea of glass. Eccles. 3.
one falls, another rises: one dies, another is borne: one thing
corrupts, another thing is engendered. Neither can things be established
otherwise in this wavering world, how glorious soever it be to the eye or
delight of man: therefore the world is not vnaptlie likened to a sea of glass
And surely this is an exceeding great sorrow to a wise and glorious king when
he seeeth and preceiueth, that all his glory will end in ignomie, his
pleasures will be finished in pains, his wealth will wast and wash away, his
peace will be quenched with wars, and his prosperity will draw after it
adversity: all this the very heavens portend, the earth pronosticateth, the
elements express, the creatures forshew, and the king himself (through his
wisdom) does foresee, and therefore he is full sad and heavy in his heart.
Alas (quod the Princes) is it so indeed? The princes.
and is there not any thing to be found out, or prepared this hard lot to
withstand? It is true and too true (said Zadok) But how to withstand it, I
know not, zadock.
saving that well I wot al things are possible to the Lord God of heaven, and
earth, The best way to withstand this inconvenience is to go to God and crave
help at his hands.
to whose high Majesty, devout and faithful prayers and supplications must he
made, powered forth and offered up by us them which shall be included within
those doleful times: that it would vouchsafe his goodness for his names sake to
grant us true patience and constant ability to stand before him satisfied with
his grace, sufficient for them which depend on him, and to shroud our selves
under the wings of his mercy compassing all his works, howsoever things be
carried and seem confused in this world, psalm. 37.25.27.
neither shall so much as one hair of ye head miscarry of the which belong to
Jehovah our God, To this purpose spoke the kings father in his godly
meditations, saying: I have been young and now am old: yet did I never see the
righteous forsaken. Therefore he resolved, as well for the solace of his own
soul, as for the comfort of them in posterity: that it is good for a man to
hold him fast by God, to put his trust in the Lord God and to speak of all his
works in the gates of the daughter of Zion: how further to withstand those
fatal decrees why should we search? will the most high alter his purpose? are
not all his works judgment? Deuteronomy. 32.
and does he not work and effect whatsoever is in his thought? and that
evermore for the comfort and profit of his saints that by faith trust in him,
yeas assuredly, whereof we may not doubt. To this replied the Princes: Neither
will we presume to inuestigate those hidden things which the Lord has sealed
up with seven seals, nor attempt to walk in his secret ways, which no
mortal man is able to find out, nor study we to withstand the purpose and
providence of the Almighty, which is ever strongest and shall with the truth
prevail: But rather we will assay to conform our will unto his will, and our
lives to his pleasure, being well content with that which is revealed as that
which is only appertinent to us and our children for ever. Now let it be your
pleasure (most reverend father in God) to explane that second cause of the
kings displeasure, which rises (as ye said) from Hyram the king of Tyrus the
kings brother in amity and especial well willer, with the rest as they follow
in order, for our understanding.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the second. and third causes of king Solomon's grieved mind. viz. of Hyram,
and of the Arabian Queen.
THen Zadok the most Reverend father in God being willing to satisfy the
Lords, proceeded in the declaration of those other causes of the Kings
sadness: Of Hyram.
and now concerning the second he spoke as it follows. It is true that albeit
Hyram be an especial good friend to our Lord King Solomon, as he was to his
father David, yet ye know well (my Lords) that the king as well to gratify him
for his approved goodwill, as to recompense his rich bounty in that he
furnished the king with Timber, and many other necessaries for the building of
the Temple and his royal howses, and such like, he had given him some twenty
Cities in the land of Galilee, the which he thought the King of Tyrus would
gladly have accepted at his hand, the rather in regard of his lonely affection
and friendly goodwill. 1. king. 9.11.12.13.
But now king Hyram lately coming out of Tire to see those twenty Cities,
declares himself scarcely well pleased with king Solomon concerning them,
saying unto him: What kind of Cities are these which thou have bestowed on me,
my brother? Moreover he called them the land Cabul, which is barraine, or as
old and worn out: howbeit we perceive not, but that he might be well enough
pleased with those Cities, forasmuch as the king has not only in love,
joined amity with him as his brother; when he could have made him a Subject
unto his power by conquest: but also has admitted him into his Territories, so
far as he thought it was lawful for him to do, for the land of Israel
being divided and appointed by lot to them after their Tribes, might not be
alienated nor given away to strangers. Moreover the king of his grateful mind
and princely liberality has also bestowed on the King of Tyrus (besides
those Cities) for the better provision and maintenance of his house the
annual free gift of twenty thousand quarters of wheat, 1. King. 5.10.
and twenty Buts of pure oil. For as the three noble Graces were never better
entertained in any place, then in king Solomon's Court, especially by himself
who had made himself a right worthy mirror of kindness unto all men: so was
he never to seek how to requite benefits, and to declare himself grateful to
all them which ever did him pleasure: How bountiful has he been that way to
the famous queen of Arabia, who came from far unto him to hear his wisdom
with her guiftes? and to let pass particulars how gratefully has he
recompensed al as well strangers as others that at any time repaired to him with
any their presents. Neither indeed would he, that any person should so much
as conceit in him the least touch of unkindness. Therefore it cannot be but a
merueilous grief to his noble heart, that the king of Tyrus, even that prudent
and religious Prince to whom before many others he would express love and good
affection, and from whom he expected the like, should any way dislike his
grateful reward, and suspect him of unkindness toward him. And surely (said
Prince Azarias) I Protest, that in my judgment there cannot be a greater
grief to a gentle heart then this, as whereof I have heard the king to say not
long sithence that such manner of dealing besotteh a wise man, and discourageth
a liberal heart. Worthelie therefore may the king be sad and sorry, Eccles.
10.1.
as one that had offended in the highest degree, as ingratitude is aptly
placed in the highest grade of vices. Nevertheless I doubt not, but he knows
best how to digest this bitter corasiue by his most excellent wisdom, which to
him should be (as it is) a strong rock of defense against such perturbations
and affections of man's nature, and so much the sooner, because the offense is
not justly given by ye king, howsoever the offense is now unjustly taken by
Hyram: and yet this may not be long of Hyram, or any discontented humor in him,
but of some others which are about him, or too near unto him, being unto him as
so^time smoothing Ziba was to good king David, who by their sinistre adulation,
assentation, and wicked whisperinges in the kings ears, may soon overthrow
and pervert the good nature of most noble personages: of which kind of persons
therefore it is needful that Princes take heed, and once knowing them, not
only to observe, but also to expel them in time, as semblant to that Litta in
a Dogs tongue, which being not timely taken out makes him stark mad. For
king Hyram himself (we may persuade) fearing God, and loving our king, would
never have caught that occasion of dislike, but gladly have accepted yt
whatsoever the king had bestowed on him, though never so small, esteeming more
the good mind of the giver then the value of the gift. But howsoever it be, now
needful it is, that we consult, provide and assay how to assuage those mighty
displeasures, that so they, which as brethren in love and amity, should not in
equity contend and strive together, might be reconciled and continued mutual
friends, as well for the common good as their own content in the divine fear,
and not in any sort provoked to wars, for it must of necessity follow ye many
great losses troubles bloudsheds and huge inco^uenie^ces will overtake those
realms and provinces which have of long time had traffic and socitie, and
continued league together, if afterward through the grudge and displeasure of
their princes they should mutually stand in arms, strive, and through envy
wrath and dissentions, seek and work one the others destructions. Neither
howsoever they may afterward agree and be reconciled, shall the manifold losses
and greeuances of their poor subjects taken and sustained in that interim or
whiles, Unquiet heads groan for wars and troubles.
be sufficiently recovered or salued. There be some, which cannot content
themselves with the present peace and prosperity of our nation: but seek
occasions of trouble, as by this tune weary of all peace, groan for bloody
broiles, and think (because they be not yet acquainted with military affairs)
that war is a pleasant thing, yea, and so profitable, that (by reason of the
ordinary spoils) the poor shall thereby be enriched, the wretched be made
happy, that those aduancements are both lawful and glorious even with and
among them that be brethren: and thereto are they ready to enueagle the heads
of their princes, and to urge them to revenge every small injury: as if it
stood not with the honor and magnanimity of a Prince, to pass over and to
forbear the least injury offered him by an other Prince, though his friend and
compeere, unrequited. But it is our part to persuade the contrary: that all
such should esteem of peace which may by any means eschew wars, knowing well
that David, the kings father (though he were a man of war) did rather desire
peace, even among them that had made themselves ready for wars. It also
becomes us to counsel and persuade, that rather light and final injuries
should be winked at, and passed over, even among Princes, then that they should
unhappily by revenging of them, open wide gappes to far greater
inconveniences: and in this ease, he that knows not how to dissemble, neither
knows he how to reign or live in the world. Eccles. 7.21. The king is the
conserver of peace and the counsailors must advise thereto.
To this the king himself would persuade when he said: Be thou not over wise,
nor be thou over just. Again Give thou not heed to every secret talk of thy
servant, lest peradventure thou hear him to speak evil of thee. And indeed,
it rightly becomes the royal government to seek to conserne peace which
extolleth the virtues and praise of him that rules therein, and it no less
becomes us which be Counsaylors, to regard the same, and timely to prevent
those mischiefs, which by too long delays and want of due consideration, do
often hurt the body together with the head, and confound them both in the end.
Ye have therefore well done (most noble Zadoke) to put us in mind of this
thing. Thus have we heard of two causes of the kings troubled mind declared
and committed to due consideration. Now let us likewise understand the third
cause, which rises (as ye said before) of the Queen of Arabia. It seems
very strange unto us, that from thence the king should take any conceit of
sorrow, when (as we know) he received her so joyfully, entertained her
magnificently, and dimissed her with Majesty. zadoke declares the third cause
of the kings trouble.
But that notwithstanding, it is reported (said Zadoke) that sithence the time
that noble Queen departed from the Court, she addressed certain letters unto
the king, whereby he is certified, that whiles she was here with the king, she
espied and beheld in the kings house (called the house of the forest or of
the wood, which the king has builded for his pleasure) a tree, on the which
(as she has learned by a divine inspiration) a certain man shall be put to
death: For whose death, the Jewish kingdom shall be utterly destroyed and
wasted. And this has that noble Queen in those her letters by many tokens and
arguments made known to our Lord K. Solomon, as a thing requisite to be
declared (and if it be possible) to be prevented in time: the which
nevertheless at her being here, she durst not to reveal: partly for fear of
the kings displeasure: * for Kings are soon exasperated toward them which
in any thing seem to dislike them and their works, which is the cause that
oftentimes they are praised and justified, when rather they deserve to be
blamed, whereby they flatter themselves in their own sins and foresee not
the unhappy event of their perverse studies and endeavors. Neither therefore do
they sometimes hear, know, or see (and so not enjoy and use) that which might
tend to their safety and best profit, albeit ye thing be commonly known and
talked of abrod: partly she concealed it in that she was very loath, in that
time of her princely entertainment, to offer unto him any occasion of sorrow or
heaviness: * for they that are invited or well entreated, are or should be
unwilling to utter or show forth that (especially to their friends when they
be merry) the which they think will trouble their minds. But now upon these
tidinges by certificate from the Queen, the king is stricken with a marvelous
fear, thinking that this prophecy of the Queen should aim to the holy
Messiah or some other excellent personage, whom our nation shall unjustly
oppress and put to death on this Tree. And it is that (as I hear) which Seth
the son of Adam did sometimes plant on his fathers Sepulcher, and has ever
flourished as a tree of Paradise til time it pleased the King to take it into
the house of the forest * Surely, the king had this tree in no mean estimation
and price, It is said that about the time of Christ this tree was grown again
whereof there was taken to make the Cross whereon he was crucified.
else had it not been placed in this glorious house. But now, the king upon
these tidings, and willing to prevent this inconvenience feared to ensew, has
removed it from thence and hid it full deep under the earth, that it might
henceforth neither sproute again, nor be found of any man living. And it may
be, that the king (the rather by this occasion (foreseeing the ruin of our
Nation (according to Gods everlasting decree and purpose) is very sorrowful and
heavy: but the more because this destruction shall be justly procured and cast on
them for their injury, cruelty and envy against him whom they should in all
duty love, honor and embrace. He now calls to mind what his father David
prophesied of this tragedy.

My hands and feet peirced wondrous wide, psalm 22.17. psalm. 109.25.

a man might tell my bones on every side.
They made me, as their vile reproach to be.
and looking too, did shake their heads at me.
And now albeit the king knows that no man living can withstand the purpose
of God in this matter: yet he would not that any thing should either be placed
in his house, or preserved and kept within his realm, which might minister the
means of this unhappy event in time to come: for albeit men are not to enter
into the depth of Gods secret devises: yet, looking on the law and word of God,
they must by the same learn to eschew that which might be the occasion of
transgressions and sins, as those men that be weary and fearful of
murder, theft, Men must not commit sins of their own malice and then think
to be excused because it was Gods will they should so do, but they must hearken
to the law and word of God Exodus 20.
and such other crimes because they be forbidden, and threatened to be punished
for committing such things, howsoever the secret will and providence of God
is, that they should be accomplished. Therefore the thief, or the murderer
may not say when such a fact is done. It was Gods will, it should be so done,
else it could not be done: therefore I may be discharged or excused! But the
word and law of God must be hearkened unto, and obeyed which says: Thou shall
not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. And
though it be necessary ye offenses come yet woe to them by whom they come.
Therefore as the king is right sorry, yt such a thing should be effected: by our
nation so would he that the means whereby this might be wrought or furthered
should be removed and the injury prevented to the uttermost of his power, that
so he might be guiltless of the innocent blood, and free from the destruction
of our nation, thereon likely to be occasioned, Adoniram.
without wise prevention. Now truly (said Adoniram) this being considered of,
is no small cause of a troubled heart. For such a conceit thereof being cast
into a man's mind, and especially into the kings mind, cannot but occasion
great conflicts, and the rather, for that in the very place which he had
erected and so beautifully garnished for his pleasure and delight there should
be found such a mischief, as might either disgrace or shadow all. But behold,
such is the nature of this world, Note the nature of worldly felicity.
that in the same where men place their felicity and think to find occasions
of their greatest joy and solace, there commonly is interposed one thing or
other which hinders or disturbeth altogether. Howbeit, the lord in his loving
mercies forbid that such a Tragedy should be either wrought or occasioned by
the king or by us, or by any his or our successors in the kingdom of Israel by
the which the same with the government thereof so well established, should be
dissipated and wasted. Above all, be it far from us and our nation, that such
an outrageous evil and heinous injury should be offered to the holy Messiah,
whom to honor and embrace is perfect wisdom and health: and whom to reject
and abuse is very foolishnes and destruction. Psalm. 2.1^.
The which the kings father well considered when he said: O kiss the Son left
he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way: if his wrath be kindled, yea,
but a little: but, blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Surely, if
this heinous matter were but broched in our days, we would either prevent it,
or assay to withstand it: but rather then we would yield to the mischief, we
should choose to die: as Moses, and Iosuah, and Gedeon, and Samson, and David,
have well resolved for the glory of God, and the welfare of the people.
Nevertheless, the kings father, to confirm the former has plainly
prophisied: that, the heathen shall furiously rage, psalm. 2.1.
and the people shall imagine a vain thing: the kings of the earth shall stand
up, and the Rulers shall take counsel together against the Lord and against
his Anointed. Abiather
And not doubt (said Abiather) king David has pointed therein to some great
trouble intended to the holy Messiah at his coming, of whom we have gathered,
the kings father has been before ordained a figure, whose troubles therefore
(as we all know) have not been small, but wonderful great enforced against
him by them, whom he never injured nor justly offended: yea, and that not by
mean persons, but by kings, Princes, Rulers and Potentates of the earth.
Against the which notwithstanding the Almighty has defended and delivered him
to the shame and confusion of all his enemies, which have now no cause left
them to triumph against him. And so I doubt not but howsoever the rage and fury
of the adversaries shall be against the Lords holy Messiah, he shall for all
that be mightily protected: he shall tread down the head of his enemies, and
prosper in his devises. But God grant that neither our Princes, nor Priests nor
Prophets, nor people be appointed the actors or executioners of this heinous
Tragedy, against the holy Messiah: then might not the King be sorry, nor the
people be destroyed in time to come for the committing of so heinous an action.

CAP. XVII.
Zadoke speaks of the fourth cause of King Solomon's trouble, viz. of Bethsabe
and Nathan.
KIng Solomon's Princes being willing to hear what Zadok could yet further say
in the causes of the kings trouble, urged on and said. We have heard what ye
have said touching the Queen of Shaba: Now let it please you (most reverend
Father to proceed, to declare unto us the fourth Cause, the which (as ye said)
did rise of the Kings most noble mother, and of Nathan the Prophet. Indeed
(said Zadok) there has no mean sorrow invaded the kings mind of late,
occasioned by those two noble persons: howbeit, not that either of the^ has in
thought, word or deed hurt or offended him, but that by their death be is
deprived of them. For as they were such as he wonderfully loved, affected and
favored: Natural affection sorroweth for the departure of friends.
so they were no less profitable, and comfortable to his state and honor in
their lives. We see that very nature provoke men, (yea the very wisest and
holiest men) to be sad and to lament the departure of other men, especially
of their fathers, mothers, brethren, sisters, kinsfolks and friends: for in
them they see not only the horror of death, the dissolution of soul and
body, that the same which was lately living is now dead, and that which was a
man is become a senseless carkesse and very earth, to the terror and horror of
all mortal men, which are taught therein to know their own condition and
nature: but also that they must now depart one from another, the father from
his son, the mother from her daughter, the brother from his brother, the
friend from his friend; and both man and woman from all his and her
acquaintance and familiars of this life. Therefore, when the king speaks of
death, by the which a man is resolved into dust from whence he was taken, he
says also, Eccles. 12:
that The Mourners go about the streets, Again, that men mourn for the dead
seven days. Wherefore our father Abraham (although he knew right well that
Sarah his wife being dead, Genesis 23.1.2.
was freed from all the miseries of this life, whereto all persons that here
live are subject, and was assured by his faith, that she being a true believer
should rise again to eternal life: yet) he sorowed, he wept, and mourned for
that her departure many days. Genesis 50.1.
Also that godly Joseph, the son of Israel, when he saw his father to be
dead, he mourned and wept for him, 2. Sam. 4.31. and 13.36. and 18.33.
expressing thereby both his piety and natural affection. Thus David, the
kings father wept woefully, and bewailed the death of his friend Abner, the like
he did for Absalon, and for Amnon his sons. And therefore the king (though a
wise and godly Prince) worthily soroweth for his dear mother, and for the
Prophet Nathan whom the Lord has taken away from this world: Nevertheless,
Eccles. 4.2^
I have heard him to say and that according to the truth* that the dead are
happier than they which live: and then must that follow, that he which is dead,
and freed from this world and the troubles thereof, is in better case than the
highest Emperor, king, prince, or potentate in his life: and being so, we
should seem to envy that their happy estate, How far to be sorry.
if we that be yet living should celebrate their funerals with excessive sorrow.
Sorrow then we may, for that is natural: and sorrow for our friends and
acquaintances, for that is godly: but to be sorry without measure is neither
natural, nor godly, but heatheanish and brutish. For therein we shall not
only hurt the natural constitution of our bodily health, but declare our
selves to want that constancy of faith which our godly fathers have retained,
and the word of the Lord has taught touching ye eternal happiness of man
after this life: yea, we should be as enemies to them that be delivered from
the miseries of this world, as they which are sorry that men being in prison and
torments should be delivered and eased: and we should be as the envious, that
is wonderfully grieved to behold and consider the good health and prosperity
of another man. Therefore albeit (I say) the king is for this right woeful and
sad, as nature and piety requires: yet I say not that he is overcome
therewith, knowing well (as he is a wise man) how to bridle affections, and
therein best to behave himself: yet as a mortal man. * But (my Lords) besides
this natural sympathy and piety, such was the wisdom, the judgment, the
grace and virtues of his Mother, Bethsabe a wise woman, right profitable to the
king in her life.
and such a help and comfort she was unto him every way, that as he thought in
her life he could not honor her enough: so he may not forget her and her
virtues after her death. As this noble gentle woman instructed and taught the
king when he was a child: so she never desisted to advise and counsel him in
all godliness being a man: and she thought it appertained to her duty, not only
to teach and cathecise him with wisdom: but also both to admonish him gently,
and to reprove him sharply: knowing well that sometimes gentle admonitions,
and sometimes sharp chidings has their place to do good in them that fear
God, as some precious stones shine the better bring steeped in sharp vinegar,
and some others, when they be boiled in soft oil. There be some, which though
they be in place, The necessity of good admonitions.
either dare not, or list not to tell, admonish or reprove the mighty and rich
until they see them through folly fall down to the ground, and Fortune
sternely frown at them: then perchance, (but never before) they will tell them
of that which now it is too late for the^ to avoid: resembling therein that
malady, when then and never before appears, when it has thoroughly conquered
nature in a man. And then they will say, as the Physician did to the man which
after his long cure dyed, surely if thou had forborne to eat of this, and
that kind of meat, thou might have lived longer. But hereof it comes that
as those which are wounded, when they want friends are constrained to seek
help of their enemies: so even those noble personages themselves being
offenders in their places (as they be men and do offend often) having none of
such their faithful friends about them, as will either admonish or gently
reprove them of their offenses, do often hear of their faults afterward by
their very enemies, and that to their shame and sorrow. Truly, the king
knowing both the wisdom and faithfulness of his Mother, and considering what
a comfort and stay she was unto him, not only in those private things: but
also in the better administration of the kingdom with him: he did worthily
honor her, he was glad to hear her, he disdained not to follow her wise
directions, and placed her on a seat next unto his royal majesty, when at any
time he sat to give sentence of judgment in matters of the highest
importance. But now this princely counsailor is taken away: and the king sees
that the departure of such a precious ornament of his palace, is a
prognostication of trouble to them that remain behind her: seeing that with
the loss of such a member, the commonwealth of Israel is deprived of much
wisdom and many good things. And in this respect, The departure of Nathan,
The loss of good counsailors a pronostication of future troubles.
the death and departure of that excellent Prophet Nathan his Scholemaster and
faithful counsailor, does not a little grieve him at this time: not only in
that Nathan is dead: but also in that the king by his departure is deprived of
a most wise, godly and happy counsailor. For truly this is one chief cause that
a Prince should mourn, namely, when his grave Senators and prudent
Counsailors be taken from him: for this is as if the eyes should be pulled
from out of the head, knowledge should fail in him that has an office of
weight to be performed, the stays taken from an house, and a staff from him
that leans thereto. In this consideration, our Fathers in the wilderness
lamented with abundance of tears, when Moses their Leader was taken from
them, and in this respect all Israel mourned mightily over Samuel, the Lords
Prophet, when he dyed. For these did see, that in the departing away of those
worthy Personages, a great part of their glory, their weal, their
prosperity, their safety and defense departed also with them: for the taking
away of most noble Kings, worthy Princes, grave Senators, godly Magistrates
and virtuous persons, Deuteronomy 3.1.16. God shows mercy to them among whom the
godly do live.

Genesis 7.10.


is a common Pronostication of evil events to ensue on them that remain
behind in the world: from the which it often pleases the Lord first to
remove and take to himself * such his servants for whose sake or through
whose ministry and means he has been willing to defer, or withhold from
the people such woeful afflictions. So long as Noah was yet remaining in the
world without the Arc, the Lord stayed the waters that they should not fall
to cover the earth: but when Noah was embarked then by and by the destruction
threatened, was executed on them that remained without the Arc. The like we
have observed in the overthrow of Sodom and the Cities there-about, Genesis
19.22.24.
which was soon effected after that Lot, was taken from thence. Thus also
during the days of Moses, and the whiles Iosuah lived, the wealth of Israel
increased, and great prosperity enjoyed our fathers, the which then began to
be molested, and to decline after their unhappy departure from Israel, as the
Story of the Judges does certify us. So as long as the Prophet Samuel judged
Israel, the land enjoyed peace: yea, and whiles be lived, king Saul retained
his honor before his princes and the people, and the people their saftie: for
he was a rare Prophet, well beloved of the Lord, he was a noble Counsailour
to Saul, and a most wise director of him in all his affairs: to whom, whils he
listened, and followed his godly counsel, he and his people prospered on
every side. But after that he rejected Samuel, (but especially after the death
of Samuel) Saul was so agonized for want of good counsel, that despayring of
good success he slew himself, disgraced his house, and the people were
sorely afflicted. Even so while those two right noble and godly persons, namely
Bethsabe the Queen, and Nathan the Prophet lived and prospered in Israel, all
things went well, and the King and his people prospered in great honor and
peace: but (surely) sithence the departure of those two worthy members, there
is a kind of defect espied in many things, yea as well in the king, as in his
people, as ye shall more plainly understand, when I shall rippe up unto you
the seventh cause of the kings sorrow. Worthily therefore may the king be
greiued for the loss of his most princely mother, and no less for the death
of the divine Prophet, and wise Counsailor Nathan, as for the falling down of
two such principal pillars, as by whose strength and counsel both the king
and the Commonwealth of Israel has been (sithence the kings most hapy
government) the better stayed up and maintained in peace and prosperity.

And in very deed (said the Princes) this may be no small grief to the King
(in our judgment) as now we call to mind and consider how tenderly his
mother loved him, The princes assent to zadokes reed.
and how honorably the Prophet esteemed him: again how dear was the one, and
how favored was the other of his royal grace, we cannot but testify. And most
happy were the King (indeed) of he had well observed that which the one
taught, The consent of the prince with the prophet a stay to the common wealth
and a comfort to the Church.
and the other confirmed in him in his and their happy days. For these two ever
well agreede in the right ordering of the holy religion, in the right
institution of the King, and in the well governing of the commonwealth of
Israel. And surely when these both departed from us, we found (as ye have in
sort signified) that a great part of the light of Israel was shadowed, and the
kings honor blemished, but such is their lots, and such is our discomfort and
the occasion of the kings sorrow. Now here we may remember well what the Lord
God said to Moses a little before his departure from Israel: Deuteronomy. 3 116.
Behold (said he) thou shall sleep with thy fathers, and this people will rise
up and go a whoaring after strange Gods of the land whether they go: and will
forsake me and break the appointment which I have made with them: and then my
wrath shall wax hot against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and
hide my face from them, and they shall be consumed and much adversity and
tribulation shall come upon them: so that they will say, are not those troubles
come upon me, because God is not with me? Wherein we may see the order of the
destruction of them whom the Lord determines to consume. First he takes

This partly begins to work on us in the taking away of those wise
Counsailors: but oh God! what may we fear to ensewe on us, of our Sovereign
King should be also called away? Surely then it cannot otherwise be, but
that those troubles which awayte for us in such a time will suddenly seize on us
to our extreme pain and miserye In the mean time, it is meet that we be
diligent in our duties and places as well toward the king, as toward the
people, and assay to supply them which are so departed: above all, let us have
an eye to the law of our God, and not to contemn the same, nor in any sort
neglect it, that so the Lord may thereby the sooner in his mercy regard the
king and his people: that neither we may be without an honorable King, nor his
Majesty destitute both of faithful counsaylors and obedient Subjects. But now
(most reverend father) we also request that the fifth cause of the kings sorrow
be likewise examined, the which (as ye said) rises of the young Prince
Rhehoboham, the kings son and heir apparent to the kingdom.

CHAP. XVIII.
The 5. and 6. causes of the kings sorrow: viz of Rhehoboam, Hadad, Rhelon, and
Jeroboam.
THe fifth cause of the kings trouble (said Zadoke) is indeed of Rhehoboam,
who (notwithstanding his right virtuous and rare educatio^, which might well
persuade in him obsequie, obedience, the fear of God and a godly life, through
the wisdom and especial regard of the king) does yet rather imitate and follow
the corrupt humor and unthrifty nature of his mother Naama the Ammonitisse,
then the good nature, Rhehoboam his nature and inclination.
and wisdom of his father: and he leans more unto those young and green
heads that are grown up with him and have waited, attended, and been
conversant with him in his childhood, then to any of the K. noble Princes and
wise Counsailors, the which the King perceives, and knows to pronosticate
the decay of his house and the dissipation of his honor. For Rhehoboam being a
young man, will have his own will and his own liberty, he is grown
disobedient, and scarcely can be restraigned by his father, or kept within the
bounds of his duty, The King sees whereto this will grow after his departure,
when this young Prince shall be placed in the throne and have the raines at will:
And truly this will be to us a very strange Metamorphosis and sorry change: Thus,
as the King in his divine wisdom foreseeth the misery which the everlasting
God will bring upon us and his people: so does he more then fear the same to
be justly occasioned and performed in the days of that Prince Rehoboam that is
to succeed him that during his own time this matter shall be deferred for the
sake of David the Lords anointed, to whom God had made a faithful promise
which concerned not him alone, but also his Seed. 2. Sam. 7.
And that notwithstanding, he well perceives that the people begin to affect
Rehoboam more then they either love or like him their present king, for who is
else that second man which shall stand up after him of whom he lately spoke?
Eccles. 4.15.
Now hence is it, that the king is occasioned to loath the labors of his own
hands to lament that unhappy condition of his son and the people, and
thereof it is that he says in the wofulnes of his heart: I am weary of my
labors which I have taken under the Sun: Eccles. 2.18.
because I shall be feign to leave them to another man that comes after me:
and who knows whether he shall be a wise man, or a fool: and yet shall he
be Lord of all my labors, which I with such wisdom have taken under the Sun.
Then turning toward his people, he said: Woe be to thee thou land, whose King
is but a child (meaning a child in affection, manners and wit, such as Rehoboam
is feared to prove after him) and woe be to thee (O land whose Princes are
early at their banquets (meaning such, as those counsailors of Rehoboam and
companions of his youth shall declare themselves to be) And thereunto he added
this affixe: Through slothfulnes the balkes fall down, and through idle hands
it raineth in at the house. Surely, surely, the untowardness of this youthful
Prince has already very much disquieted the kings heart: neither (besides all
the former causes) can it be otherwise, then an vnspeak able grief to a most
loving and dear father, especially to such a rare, wise, renowned,
magnificent, mighty, magnanimious and glorious king, to leave behind him a
thriftles, an unhappy child, possessor of all those his ingenious travails. It
was not without good cause that father Noah in the grief of his heart, Genesis
9.25.
denounced a bitter curse on Canaan the son of Cham and his generation,
whereof there ensewed no mean inco^uenie^ce to the Chanan^ts in posterity, who
at this day (as ye see) stand odious in the sight both of God and of our
nation. Neither may we imagine, that any light cause shall move a father to
cast on his own children a curse in steed of a blessing. So the sorrow of our
first parent Adam, conceived upon the ungodly and brutish behavior of his
first borne Cain, especially in that tragical action perpetrated against God
and his brother Habel, was so great that Adam was verily resolved (as it is
delivered unto us) not to know his wife any more: that thenceforth he might not
be occasioned to lament and be grieved in such sort, for the loss of another
son, neither did he know her indeed (as it is reported) for the space of an
hundred years after that time. Howsoever it was, no doubt his grief that way
conceived was unspeakable: neither is the kings sorrow (foreseeing such a
thing to ensew him in the days of Rehoboam) any mean or measurable sorrow. Oh
therefore that yet it would please the Lord our God (if possibly it may be) in
his mercy to allure and persuade Prince Rehoboam to fear his highest majesty
and to keep his laws, which is that which is required of him in his duty, to
honor his father our Sovereign King in his life, that his days may be
prolonged in this land, to hearken to godly and grave counsel, to remember his
creator even in those his tender years, and to learn and follow that which
belongs both to his fathers peace, the safety of Israel and his own honor:
In sum, that he so order and demean himself and his family in the true use
of his fathers faith and religion with the daily exercise of his princely
virtues, that al Israel may be moved by God to be willing to incline unto
him, and to obey him, as a man most meet to succeed him and to sit on his
seat whenever it shall please God to take from over us our Lord the king. To
this answered the Princes present: Verily, verily, these be causes and
arguments weighty and sufficient to provoke sorrow and grief, and such as
may trouble any King, Prince or Potentate in the world. But we yet hoped, that
seeing these troubles are such as commonly follow the nature of man, Wise men
be not soon over come with ordinary afflictions.
and to the which all men in this life be of force subjected, the king being
most prudent and provident, will not be overcome nor quailed with these, or any
such passions: but will assay (as he knows he should) to bear and digest
them, or so to pass them over, as he may rather take profit then hurt thereby
to himself. Thus he sees what Noah and Abraham, Moses and Samuel, Iehosuah
and David with such other noble personages have done in the like cases, in
their times. The whiles it is our parts and duties to counsel and persuade
the king to that which shall be most meet and profitable as well for his own
health, as for the common good and therein not to contemn, nor neglect Prince
Rehoboam nor to defraud his honor, hoping and wishing for the best to ensewe
touching him, howsoever God shall work to dispose of matters in his secret
counsel, that so the fault of his disobedience and defect (if so it fall out)
may neither be ours, nor any way occasioned by any of us. And so Jehovah our
God be merciful unto our sovereign Lord, unto Rehoboam his son, unto us,
and unto all Israel, the land of his delight.

Now it may please you (most reverend father) to call to mind that sixth cause
of the kings grieved heart, which came as ye said of Hadad, of Rezon, and of
Jeroboam, The 6. cause of Solomon's sorrow,
the kings adversaries and of every of them. It is certain (answered Zadoke)
that troubles be common in all places of the world and incident to al men
living on the earth, seeing that al men be sinners, and no man does good (as
both David in his songs, and our king in his wise parables record) neither
therefore is anyone man without his particular cross, Troubles are common.
nor any person without his adversary or enemy to vex and molest him, eue^ then
when he seeks to be quiet. And surely it is rare and an especial blessing of
God when men may enjoy peaceable times to finish their works taken in hand for
the glory of God and the weal of his people, as had our king, during the time
he was occupied in the building of the Lords house. The kings father knew this
well, and all the histories of the former times are stored with such spectacles
and examples, that troubles awaite all men in this life. Howbeit these things
seem strange and so were unto them which have in long peace lived and prospered
under the reign of peaceable Princes, as we have done in the happy time of our
Sovereign Lord. 1. King. 11.14.23.

Hadad the Edomi^e.


Now so it is, that very lately (as ye know) there be risen up against the king
and his people those three, namely Hadad, Rezon and Jeroboam, dangerous and
shrewde enemies: for that Hadad (as ye remember) is an Edomite, of the kings
Seed which was in Edom. And that, when David the kings father was sometimes in
Edom, in the time of his wars, and that Ioab then the captain of the host
was gone up to bury them that were slain in the battle, he smote all the
men-childre^ of Edom. At what time this Hadad fled and certain other Edomites
of his Fathers servants with him, to come into Egypt, Hadad being yet but a
little Child. Howbeit he had gotten favor in the sight of Pharao the king, who
has given him to wife the sister of his own wife, even the sister of Thaphynes
the Queen. Now as soon as Hadad had heard tell that David was laid to his
Fathers, and that Ioab also then captain of the host was dead, he came
again into Israel by the power and assistance of Pharao: where after process
of times, being strengthened by his affinity and combination with the Egyptian
King, he took an occasion to rebel, and to stand up against our Lord the
King. It appeared that he had a mischievous mind both against the king, and
against all his house, whereby not only the king and his court was much
troubled, but his subjects (especially those territories which embordered on
Hadad, were annoyed with sudden incursions, invasions and spoils. The king
(God knows) has long lived and reigned in great peace with all nations, as
with his friends: now must he study every day, how to defend himself against
the^ as his enemies. And Hadad (as I may say) is not only an enemy so
professed, but a most dangerous enemy: that not far off, but eue^ at home
within his graces dominions: and the more, for that Pharao whom the king had so
many ways benefited, Take heed of old enemies.
and in regard of love and good will was contented to take a wife from thence
to confirm the league of mutual friendship between them. By the which we
may observe, as it is not safe for a man to trust his enemy, then when he has
gotten ability with ways and means to revenge an old grief: so neither is
it wisdom either to trust or depend much on them which are of another
religion, howsoever they offer themselves obsequious unto us then when we may
pleasure them in the things of this life. For surely though Nature be
suppressed, yet will she sprout again. What oaths, vows, or promises soever
are given or taken to the contrary, notwithstanding. Therefore how could this be
otherwise then a grief to the king?

The second adversary, Rezon an adversary to Solomon.

2. Sam. 8.3.


namely Rezon was the son of Eliada, who fled sometimes from his Lord
Hadadezer king of Zoba, when David smote him as he went to enlarge his border
at the river Euphrates, who also gathered men unto him, and became captain over
the company when David slew them, and they went to Damascus the Metropolitan
city of Syria and dwelt there, where he also reigned king. Therefore is he
an adversary to Israel retaining his mind of revenge and denying to pay
tribute. And this is the mischief of Hadad and the hatred against Israel;
Hadad now reigns in Edom and Rezon in Damascus over all Syria to the great
grief of the king and his people. Howbeit, all this does not so much vex him,
as that his late servant Jeroboam the son of Nabat the Ephrathite of Zareda,
whose Mother was Zarviah this kings aunt, is now lately stepped forth, Jeroboam
the servant is an adversary. 1* King. 11.26.
and lifts up his hand against him. For when the king built Mello and amended
the broken places of David, and saw that this Jeroboam was a man of strength
and ability for the work, he made him ruler over all the charge of the house
of Joseph: whereby Jeroboam getting courage, credit, favor and power, is now
waxen proud obliuious of duty, and presumptuous, wherein he opposes himself
against his Sovereign Lord: whereat the king is not a little troubled, and the
more (indeed) for that he nothing thought (much less suspected) such a thing
to be wrought by his servant Jeroboam, whom he had trusted and obliged by
favor and many singular benefits to be faithful and obedient unto him.
Sudden tidings of unkindness trouble wise men much.
But it is no marvel (though the king be a wise man) that he should be
hereat trouble, for we know that gentle hearts do much alter, when they
suddenly hear any hard and strange tidings. Thus David the kings father (though
a man valiant in war, and strong in heart) was not a little grieved, when he
heard that Absolon his own son had conspired against him but yet more, when
tidinges came to him that Absolon was slain: he was likewise sore moved when
Ioab had killed Abner a Prince in Israel, when he heard that Amnon had
defiled Thamar his sister, that Absolon had killed Amnon, and that Adoniah, did
aspire to the kingdom against his will in his life time. * Howsoever the
providence of God had decreed and appointed that Ieroboham should thus be
exalted: Ieroboham his unkindness.
it is cereaine, that Jeroboam has pretended mischief in his heart against
the king, and therefore most wickedly and rebelliously has lifted up his hand
to hurt his highness and us. A note of most beastly unkindness in him, who
forgetting the kings gracious favors and large bounties toward him
undeserved, has attempted the kings overthrow and destruction to advance
himself. But such is the pride, insolency, ambition, and ingratitude of many,
whom the favor and benignity of good Princes has unworthily exalted and
honored, that forgetting both themselves, their places and all the goodness of
their gracious princes and their duties, do eagerly seek to attain to the
very places and honors of their Princes and benefactors, by wicked and ungodly
means. Howbeit, they find in the end that lot of the Eagle that carried fire
to her nest together with her pray which consumed both it, and her young ones,
for God which brings down all stony mountains and all high rocks to fill
the valleys to make them even with the ground, calls their impiety,
unfaithfulness and rebellion into remembrance before him, yielding unto them
in the just judgment that which they have worthily deserved. * But Ieroboham
having found that the King understands his purpose and practices against him,
Traitors and rebels live ever in fear.
and that he seeks to bridle his insolency, durst not to abide the hammering
and trial thereof (for traitors and rebels having guilty consciences, live
ever in fear of the divine revenge) he is therefore fled into Egypt unto Sysar
the Egyptian king and there continues gaping for and expecting to hear of the
king death, when he minds with a fresh courage to give the onset to his
son Rehoboam, which shall succeed in the kingdom, whom he knows has
neither the like wisdom to govern his people, nor will have sufficient power
to resist his enemies, and to defend himself. And yet (well I wot) that these
things being ordinary troubles, which happen to realms provinces and nations
(and therefore whosoever be a Prince must settle himself armed against them
in his time and place) our Lord King Solomon well knows both how to bear the^
and wade through the midst of themal, with a right valiant mind, as David his
Father has full often in his days done. Lo, thus have ye heard the
declaration of six causes of the kings sorrow: all which indeed could he well
enough digest were there not yet a far greater and more dangerous then any of
the former. For the seventh (beyond all the rest) pierces and griueth the very
ground of his heart, and that rises of the great displeasure of the Almighty,
conceived against him and his people. Alas (said the Princes) then may the King
be worthily sad indeed, when the Lord of heaven looks so were upon him and
us. For dreadful is the angry face of the almighty, The princes.
especially toward them that have justly provoked him, and his wrath is a
very consuming fire: who is able to abide it? But now, let us hear the
declaration of this cause also, if it be your good pleasure (most reverend
Zadoke) to whom he answered: zadoke.
although I am not only most sorry to hear thereof, but very loath to relate
it, yet to satisfy your importunity for the former causes, I am ready to do it
according to your desire. And I pray God, that neither the sin, The princes,
nor the occasion thereof be in the Lords justice laid to our charge. To the
which, said the Lords, that God forbid: but howsoever it be, the Lord for his
holy anointed be yet merciful unto our King, unto us, and the whole
commonwealth of Israel that he may be glorified not in our destruction but in
our preservation and prosperity, as in times past, he has been glorified in
the pardon, recovery and prosperity of Adam of Abraham, of Jacob, of Moses, of
David, and others, our godly forefathers in their times: So be it (good Lord)
we pray and beseech thee.

CHAP. XIX.
Zadoke declares the seventh cause of Solomon's sorrow, which is the sin of
Solomon.
NOw will I endeavor (said Zadoke) to satisfy your request. I will declare
the seventh cause; Yea, I will show you the last and greatest cause of the
Kings sorrowful heart. And well is this called the greatest: For were it not
thereof, the King might well resolve (as he knows best how to resolve) that
every thing whatsoever might or should betide him, could not so much hurt, or
annoy either him or his people, as it shall be for his and their good so long as
both he and they shall fear God, The safety of them whom God preserves.
howsoever it should seem hurtful and loathsome in the eyes of men. See
therefore what a soueraign good thing it is to fear the Lord, for such as
fear him the Lord loves, and the^ whom he loves, he safely protecteth, and
for that their protection, he has a special care and regard. This David
considered, found in trial to be true, and therefore did sing, as in the
Psalm. psalm. 91.11.
For why; unto his Angels bright,
a special charge gives he,
In all thy ways for to protect,
preserve and prosper thee:
And that they bear thee in their hands,
and wait still thee upon,
That not unawares thou fall, nor bruise
thy foot against a stone.
Thus are they happy which fear the Lord, because the Lord blesses and
preserves them. But now the king perceives that the Lord has turned away his
gracious countenance, and looks sternly and angerly upon him and upon his
people, and that the fierce wrath of God is bent and now coming unto him and
us, the force whereof no man living is able to resist or to withstand. For who
can bear the matchless power of the Almighty? A description of God being
angry.
God in his anger is as a ramping Lion, as an hungry Bear, as a consuming
fire, as a mighty storm, as a waliant warryer, as a cruel tyrant, as a
mighty Giant, as a terrible Judge. If he touch the high mountains they shall
tremble and smoke (as David did sing) And this to confirm, the king has
placed before his eyes the fearful Judgments of God, which in his wrath were
executed on the old rebellious people: he remembers that when the Lord God was
provoked to anger, by the disobedience of our first parents Adam, Genesis 3.24.
and Hevah, (though they were his beloved and the first that he had created in
his own Image) he looked sternely on them, and withal he delayed not to
call them into just judgment, nor spared he to punish them. Therefore, he sent
the^ both out of pleasant Paradize, opposed them to all miseries, and barred
the gate, that they might not enter into that blessed Tabernacle, which was
appointed, not for the polluted, but for clean and holy persons: The king also
remembers, the example of Gods heavy wrath against Cayn, Genesis 4.
whom he reprobated, punished, and banished from his fathers house, and made a
vagabond on the earth, and that justly because he had sinned against the Lord
in killing of his brother: He sets also before his face the example of Gods
fierce anger, on the old worldings in the time of Noah, whom he destroyed
without mercy with the flood of waters: Genesis 6.
he calls into memory the example of the divine wrath, executed on the
filthy Sodomites, Genesis 19.
whom the Lord burned with fire and brimstome. He is not unmindful, Exodus
32.28.
how the Lord vexed and afflicted our Fathers in the wilderness, when they had
angered him with their sins, of whom only two of them which came out of Egypt
(being above twenty years of age) could recover possession in the promised
land. Neither is he forgetful: how terrible the Lord showed himself to king
David and his people, not only then, 2. Sam. 12.
when David had transgressed in the case of Vriah: but also, when he had
numbered the people. For the one offense, the Lord stirred up his own son,
and them of his own house against him: and for the other, threescore and ten
thousand perished with pestilence, and had not David repented and entreated
mercy, he had likewise perished in that high displeasure. Sin is odious to God,
For sin is that which the Lord abhors, and as odious as is a Toade, or
serpent to a man, so is the sin that men commit against the Lord unto him: so
that as they are contemned and abandoned of men which nourish and foster up
such venomous beasts: they are no less loathsome to God which commit sin, and
wallow and tumble in the filthiness of that which God abhors. Therefore
upon such (as David said) the Lord raineth hail, fire and brimstone, which is
their portion in his wrath, neither is there any thing else due unto them, but
death, shame and confusion: again, praying against such, he says to the
Lord: Set thou an ungodly man to be Ruler over him, and let Satan stand at his
right hand. psalm. 109.
When sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned, and let his prayer be
turned into sin. Let his days be few, and let another take his office. Let
his children be fatherles, and his wife a widow: let his children be vagabonds
and beg their bread: let them seek it also out of desolate places. Let the
extortioner consume all that he has, and let the stranger spoil his labor:
let there be no man to pity him, nor to have compassion upon his fatherles
children. Let his posterity be destroyed, and in the next generation, let his
name be clean put out: let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance
in the sight of the Lord and let not the sin of his mother he done away, etc.
Now of such things fears the king, and therefore is waxen very pensive and
heavy, not able to withstand the strokes of Gods anger, conceived against him
and his people. The fiercenes of Gods wrath.
*Alas, Alas, (then said the Princes) it is a most fearful thing to provoke
the Lord, and to fall into his hands with guilty consciences: for wonderful
and terrible is the Lord in his wrath, as ye have well said. For though the
Lord be slow to anger when he looks for man's repentance and amendment of
life: yet is he of great power, and will in no case acquit the wicked, Though
he be most merciful being pleased: yet being provoked, he is most terrible and
cruel to them that provoke him. His dealing will be with blustering storms,
high tempests, and whirle-winds, and the clouds of the air are the dust of
his feet* he will rebuke the raging sea, and dry it up, with all the famous
rivers of the land: yea, Basan and Carmel shall shrink, the spring also of
Libanus shall be destroyed, and the fair trees thereof shall be burnt with
fire: The great mountains shall quake at his mighty power, and the hills shall be
dissolved: the earth also shall burn at his stern countenance, with the
world and all that dwells therein. What man is he, that is able to stand
before his fierce wrath? or who can rise up before the dreadful anger of his
countenance? his fierceness is powered forth like consuming fire: yea the hard
Rocks cleave in pieces at his might: the strong pillars of heaven tremble, and
all the kindreds of the earth weep and wail before him, when he begins to
appear, to visit and to hold his Court of Justice. Well therefore may the
king mourn, and be holden with continual sadness, if the consideration of
the divine wrath has seized on his heart. zadoke tells that the king himself
is the cause of this wrath.
* But so much the more (said Zadok) is the King perplexed, and stands in
fear, because (as he has lately found and considered) the greatest cause of
this anger both rise of himself. For if a stranger had hurt him, he might have
dissembled it: if an enemy, he might have revenged it: if a friend, he might
have complained of it: but the cause being in himself, to whom should he
make his moan? of whom should he seek comfort. Although I will not justify
the whole Congregation of Israel, The people which dyed in the plague were not
free of transgression.
no more then I might say, that all the people which dyed in the pestilence in
the time of David's transgression, were guiltles: (for no doubt they were
faulty also before the Lord) yet beyond them all, our Lord king Solomon has
highly offended, whereof it may come to pass, that the Lord, who was
merciful unto Israel, and in his mercy gave them such a King, as by the which
he might express unto them his love, is now minded to take and remove far
from them this happy occasion of their peace, and so to leave them and commit
the^ to the hurtful hand of the angel of wrath to be punished, according to
their deserts: from the sense whereof, they have been thus long kept and
preserved, by the blessed means of king Solomon. Now, I remember what the Lord
said to Moses, when our Fathers had offended, and Moses nevertheless earnestly
prayed and requested him for their pardon. Suffer me, says he or give me
leave, Exodus 22.10,
that my wrath may wax hot against the^, and consume them. See the goodness of
God, who not only stayed and was restrained from smiting of them upon his
request, but acknowledged Moses the mean of their pardon!

In what sense the people are said to be plagued for David's sin.
But we have that example of our own time, even of David the kings father and
his people yet in memory. For as long as he pleased Iehova his God, God
esteemed him and accepted him for the occasion of their peace, though they had
deserved wrath and confusion. But after that David had transgressed with them
and angered the Lord, then became he, who was before an occasion of the peoples
saftie, an occasion of their punishment, that not only for his own sin, but
also for their sins, who now had not him (in this time of disgrace) for their
further means to health, nor any other such Savior, as might stand up in the
gape between God and them, and that because they repented not: wherefore the
Lord sent forth the messenger of death, who smote 70. thousand persons with the
plague of pestilence, that they dyed within 3 days. And surely we may fear
every one of us, what shall shortly ensue and fall both on our king and the
people, seeing that God being now angry with our king for his sins, neither
looks graciously on him, now accepts him and his doings, as an occasion of
our peace. Solomon's youth and age.
Indeed, the king in his young years behaved himself most gravely, shined in
all princely virtues, which did adorn and beautify both his person and place,
which gave unto us, and to all his people, both hope and expectation of a far
greater excellency to follow in his Age: as those trees which, blowing fair
in the spring time of the year, put men in hope of fruits thereof in the time
of harvest. But alas, the king has in this point far deceived all men's
expectation, behauing himself most unwisely, both before God and in the eyes
of all good men, in this time of his age, by the which he has distained his
honor, and deprived us all of that glory the which through him we had
atchiued, and hoped by the same to have had established on our Nation for ever,
according to the word of the Lord, spoken to David in his good love. And of
this, as I cannot think without grief of heart: so can I not speak without
weeping tears, and deep sighs. *Then answered Zabud, zabud.
(as not a little grieved and sorrowful in his heart, to hear such hard
tidings of the king, with whom he had been so familiarly acquainted) and said:
But what is it (I beseech you, most reverend Father) wherein the kings Majesty
has so heynously and daungerously faulted, and so highly provoked God to
displeasure? I doubt not, but that without dishonor to the king, hurt to your
self, or offense to any of us present, it may be spoken here in Council,
that thereby the sooner we may consult and consider thereof with judgment,
and endeavor (to our power) to salve the displeasure.

Alas (said Zadoke) when one man offends against another, there may be a
dayes-man to reconcile them: zadok tells wherein the king has offended.

1. Sam. 2.25.


but if a man sin against the Lord of heaven, who can decide it? Thus said
Eli the Priest in the like case. But now saving the kings honor and your
reverence (my Lords) the king has committed (ah how sorrowful am I to say
it?) the king has committed (but alack, shall I utter it? my tongue would
rather cleave to the roof of my mouth) The King has committed (ah yet how
loath and hashfull am I to tell it? Howbeit, it is already seen and not
covered, it is spoken off and not couched in silence, even of them that dwell
not in the Court, but in the Country: yea, as well of them that be without, as
of them that remain within, howsoever we would dissimble it) the King (I say)
has committed three great evils, of the which the most part of all this
displeasure and sorrow comes both to himself and to us. For behold, First,
The King has multiplied wives to himself: He has combyned himself with
strange women. He has turned away his heart from the Lord.

This being said the Princes were all abashed, and wonderfully amazed, not
knowing what to say, or what to expect; or what to think; but pauzed, and
looked one on another of them, nor could their fearful tongues utter the
thoughts of their grieved hearts.

CAP. XX.
The first of Solomon's sins: Viz. the plurality of Wives.
AFter a very long pauze, Abiather the Priest, stood forth and objected for the
king concerning the plurality of his Wives, Abiather obiecteth for the kings
wives.
and said: How should this be a fault so heynouse in the king? Abraham our
Father was permitted to take Hagar his maid, notwithstanding that Sarah was his
wedded wife. And Jacob the Lords servant had two wives, namely, Leah, and
Rachel: and yet besides them he had the company of his two maids, Bilha, and
Zilpha, on whom he begat children. So Lamech, before the flood, had two wives,
Ada, and Zella. And (to let pass others) David the kings father (a man so well
beloved of God) had diverse wives, of whom he begat sons and daughters.
Therefore why might not the king do the like?

zadok answers to the plurality of wives.
To this answered Zadok: It is true: howbeit, we should not live by examples of
men, but according to the Law of the Lord. All men be sinners and offend in
many things: therefore what they do, we may not respect, nor presume to
follow: but regard what the Lord has instituted and commanded. And surely
this plurality of wives, has been a fault even in those fathers, Genesis 3.15.
and 16.3.
howsoever they aimed thereby to the multiplying of their seed, whereof they
hoped the Messiah should be borne, according to the promise. Neither should
they have staggered in faith touching the Messiah, to imagine that Gods promise
could not have been performed without their own wisdom and means. Abraham
seeing his wife aged, thought that the promise of God should have holden on the
venture of Hagar: howbeit, God being faithful effected his promise in Sarah,
though beyond the course of nature, and man's expectation. And this to prove,
we read that at the beginning, when God created man, he made them Male and
Female, and therein, not three, or four, or more; but only two in one flesh,
namely, one man, and one woman. Genesis 2.24.
And there-vpon this Law was ordained, that for this cause a man should leave
his father and mother, and should cleave to his wife, not Wives. This was the
first Institution of Matrimony, and thus it was observed by Adam, by Seth, by
Enos, by Kenan, by Mehalaleel, by Jared, by Henoch, by Methusalah, by Lamech,
and Noah and his three sons, who (as we read) brought into the Arc with
them, every of them one wife: for they were but eight persons in all, that is
to say, four men, and so many women, being their wives. genesis 4.19.
The breach of this Institution was first found in that other Lamech which
descended from Cayn, and afterward (as it is delivered to us) killed Cayn, with
a dart. From whom it was drawn to others, and continued for a custom in the
posterity, though so contrary to the Law and ordinance of the Lord. But
leaving the errors of those, we are to observe that first ordinance, with those
holy fathers of that first Age, if we will be free from blame in that respect,
and not presume the transgression thereof, howsoever some others, be they
kings or potentates of the earth have followed, or faulted, and been
tolerated in the abuse of the same. But after this, there is a special Law
provided by the Lord, and given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 17.
unto kings and princes (before all others) that none of them should multiply
wives to himself. And this the kings mother doubtless considered, when
schooling him, she thus charged him saying: Pro. 31.2.
O my dearly beloved son, Laemuel, give not over thy strength and ways unto
Women, which are the destruction even of kings It may be she called to mind,
Homer. II. and Vliss. A tragical History written before this time. genesis 6.
what is written in that Heathen Story, of the destruction that fellon so many
Kings and Princes in and about Troy, touching the rauishing of Helena. It may
be she remembered, what betyded the old world for the evil conjunction of the
sons of God with the daughters of men. And the king himself sometimes in the
remembrance of this Lesson could advise others from this destruction. Saying:
Pro. 5.18.19.
Let thy well be blessed, and be glad with the wife of thy youth: let her be as
the loving Hynde, and pleasant Roe, let her breasts always satisfy thee, and
hold thee ever content with her love. He speaks of a wife, not wives:
nevertheless, howsoever it has been occasioned, the king has offended, yea,
he has wonderfully exceeded therein: for he has not contented his lust with
one wife, according to the Law, nor with a few wives, after the example of
those godly Fathers, Abraham, and Jacob: but he has taken unto himself 700.
wives which were Queens, and 300. Concubines, in the whole a 1000. as the like
was never heard off before this time. And by these women he has been drawn
into an inordinate lust, and bin overcome in affection to the stayning of his
honor and blemishing of his holy profession, the which is in him an heinous
fault. For although the heathen (which know not God, and are as brute beasts
without understanding) do neigh as the stoned horses after every woman that
has a fair face, and seek to satisfy their fleshly lusts in these kinds of
pleasure: yet should not king Solomon, endowed with so excellent a spirit and
wisdom, have sought to satisfy his desire therein: and that the rather,
because as the constancy of the chaste helps to the prolonging of life, The
inconveniences of fleshly lust.
as appears in the Vultures, which being chaste and sober that way, live (as
it is said) by nature an hundred years: so they which delight in fleshly lust,
and be so ordinarily inflamed and overcome with the same, are of a very short
life, as we may see in those Sparrowes, which of other birds are full of
Lechery. And it is a sure axiom, that they which engender much, live the
less while. The king therefore in this has abreuiated, empared, wounded and
endangered his life. His natural life is shortened, his civil life is
distained, his spiritual life is perced, and his life eternal is endangered.
For in the first, there is an euacuation of that natural heat and moistness,
by the which man's life is conserved, and the strength of body sustained. Yea,
Luxury is such an immoderate wantonness of the flesh, which as a sweet
poison, an importunate plague and a pernicious potion, does both weaken man's
natural body, and effeminateth his mind. O extreme filthiness of lust! all
other sins are without the body, but he that gives himself over to this
sin, offends against his own body! Before this goes ever heat and
petulancy, with it in company is stinch and uncleanness, and after it
follows sorrow and repentance. These be the leaders, the fellows, and the
followers of luxurious persons. Secondly, this sin takes from a man all his
credit, good name and glory: and brings to him distrust, an evil fame, and
ignomy. What vice is more dishonest? what more damnable? what more hurtful to
man's civil life and estimation? for behold, how virtues are decayed: how
victories languish: how glory is swallowed up of infamy: how the virtues of
mind and body are infringed? Surely a man can scarcely discern, whether it be
better or worse, to be captiued either of this vice, or of his mortal foes. *
Thirdly, the spiritual life, is in them wounded: for all such as give
themselves over to the lust of body, do grieve the spirit of God in
themselves, and suppress all the good motions of mind, whereby being like to
the beasts, they run into many mischiefs, and sin more and more against
God and their own souls. Genesis 6.5.
Thus those old sinners were alienated from the Lord: for as their thoughts
were by nature evil, they were the sooner by this furthered and blinded in
their malice: for why the spirit of God which sanctifies and garnisheth men
with graces, did not only depart from them, but also repented that ever they
were, in respect of their filthy abominations. Neither is it possible, that
he can live spiritually to God, which is dedicated to the flesh: for between
the spirit and the flesh there is ever contrariety. Lastly, as this
withstandeth the graces of the divine spirit here, by the which men should
pass to the life of glory, as by virtues men attain to honor: so indeed it
shuts up unto them the gate of the kingdom of God, into the which, neither
fornicators, Genesis 3.24.
nor leachers, nor unclean persons shalenter, no more then Adam could enter
Paradize, after that he had polluted himself with sin. Lo, what an enemy is the
luxurious man to his own life, whether natural, political, spiritual, or
eternal. And by this we see the dangerous condition of our L.K. Solomon! yea,
by this we may behold and consider what is ye frail nature of man in this
life. A man being in honor and puffed up in prosperity, has none
understanding (as king David said) and therefore may be compared to the
beasts which perish: for he forgets himself, he remembers not the Lord, he
waxes proud, insolent, hautie, high minded, prone to pleasures, and
ungrateful to God. In this he well resembles the Siphny stone which though
of it own nature soft, yet boiled in oil, waxes wonderful hard. But after
this, their follow on him an hell of mischiefs and huge torments: for who can
prosper in his devises or endeavors, which forgetting God, walks his own
ways in the lewdnes of carnal lust? Genesis 19. Exodus 32. Numb. 25. Judge. 19.
Homer.
To pass over these examples of the Sodomites, of the Israelites offending
with the women of the Moabites, and Madianites, of those men of Beliall that
ravished the poor Levites wife, in the time of our Judges, and of Paris the
Troiane of who^ we have heared: let us not forget the example of David the
kings father. 2. Sam. 11.
After that God had both advanced him and given him rest and prosperity in his
honor, he too soon forgate himself, and burned in lust, in whom the love of
the flesh was so natural to the flesh, that albeit reason, as reason, would
put the desire to flight in him, yet the flesh yielded herself a captive
thrall to those desires, by the which he was more fiercely assaulted, then with
the greatest enemies that ever he had. For there be no foes so deadly and
importunate, as those which a man finds and fostereth against himself within
himself: 2. Sam. 12.14.
David had fought with the huge Goliath, and cast him to the ground: he had
killed a Lion and a Bear, which came to devour his sheep: he vexed and
spoiled the Philistines and other the enemies of Israel, and ever returned home
a victor and triumpher in the name of his God, whereof they could sing to his
praise, David has slain his ten thousand! Howbeit this noble Prince, in his
rest and prosperity, (as I said) suffered lust in him to subdue reason, gave
the raynes at large to carnal appetite, and therein inflamed and agonized, he
unlawfully desired and abused Vriahs wife: and yet not so contented, he caused
Vriah to be unjustly murdered; whereby he distained his honor, he quenched
out the spiritual graces, and endangered his soul, to the high displeasure of
God, who does neither love, nor permit such delights in the children of men,
much less in his own the servants of grace. And thus (be it here spoken in
counsel) has our Lord the king forgotten himself, and both abused and
dishonored his honor. Thus men set in honor are soon overtaken therein: for
temporal felicity is a most unquiet thing, neither can man's nature be
contained whithin his bounds and duty of life in worldly prosperity. Worthily
therefore David thanked the Lord, for that he had beaten him with adversity,
which (as he confessed) he found to be best for him. It is good for me (said
he) that I have been troubled. But if wise men and godly men can scarcely and
very seldom measure themselves in the use of this flattring enemy: how then
should the ignorant and sinners do, when the Lord sulleth them in this easy
cradle?

Besides this, here we see, What man is, when he is given over to his own
will.
how foolishly the wisest of all men behaueth and demeaneth himself, and into
what inconveniences he runs, when it pleases God for his trial, to loose
unto him the raines of youthful liberty, and to commit him to the guide of
his own counsels! Surely, he may well be compared to the pondrous iron,
that of it own nature sinketh to the bottom of the stream, except it be
sustained or holden up by some other thing. This should move us to pray unto
God, that as he would vouchsafe to succor and defend us: so he would not give
us to our own wills: but that his will might be fulfilled in us. For if we
should but have the guide of our selves, and not be sustained and defended by
the power and will of God, it cannot be otherwise, but that we shall not only
fall, but fall away and perish from him, and from our own salvation every
hour, in every day of this our life. Therefore, that I may be brief,
howsoever this evil custom of the plurality of Wives came in, or howseuer
this kind of pleasure has been used, and delighted in, among worldly men:
yea, howsoever many wise men, have been seen to solace themselves therein, it
is doubtless in the king a great fault: and the more, because he is the king
and should be a guide of holiness, and good example of life unto others:
especially, because the Lord has so blessed him with wisdom, and divine
graces before all the kings of the earth.

Thus have I explained the first of those three faults, which provoked the
Lord to displeasure, the consideration whereof, now moves the king to this
heaviness of mind. But yet, the second fault exceeds this in degree, to
aggrauate the sorrow, and pain him to the heart. These words being spoken, and
in such sort as Zadok could deliver them, provoked the Princes to weep with him
weeping, and to condole together the kings hard lot. Howbeit they requested him
to say somewhat more of that second sin, which was (as he said) more heynouse
and dangerous: and so pauzed, and expected what Zadok would say.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Solomon's second sin: and third sin: viz. of his strange wives: and his
turning away, with the divine Commination for the same.
THe second sin of Solomon (as I before said, quod Zadok) is indeed a degree
higher then the former, albeit the former was abominable and dangerous to his
body, life, fame, soul and glory. And that is, the king has combined
himself with strange women: for he has taken the daughter of Pharaoh,
Strange women.
and the women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Sydonites, and Hethites:
whereas yet, concerning those Nations, the Lord said unto our Fathers, zabud
objected.
Go ye not into them, nor let them come into you: else will they turn your
hearts after their gods. To this objected Zabud for the king: But yet it has
been permitted in the Law, that such women might nevertheless be taken,
accepted and used of our Nation with certain prouisoes and conditions. For the
Lord says by the hand of Moses: Deuteronomy. 21.11.
If thou see among the captives (taken in war) a beautiful woman, and have
a desire unto her, that thou would have her to thy wife: thou shall bring
her home to thine own house, and she shall shave her head, and pare her
nails, and put her raiment, that she was taken in from her, and let her
remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a month long:
and after that thou shall go in unto her, and mary her, and she shall be thy
wife. In this sort David, the kings Father took one of his wives, namely the
mother of Thamar, whom he had captiued in his wars. And thus did our king
take and accept Pharaohs daughter, of whom his father spoke in the Psalm.
Hearken O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear: forget also thine own
people, and thy fathers house: so shall the king have pleasure in thy beauty:
for he is thy Lord God, and thou must worship him. And truly, howsoever the
Queen did dissemble her own former Religion, and made show of love unto that
which we love and embrace; the king so accepted her, and thought nothing less,
then of any hypocrisy in her. And therefore in his integrity he embraced her,
and took her as his own.

All this I grant (said Zadok) And I will not deny, zadoke answers the
objection.
that the king did observe the like, according to the Law, in all other his
wives and Concubines. But why should not such as are received on conditions, be
retained on the same conditions, and not otherwise? for the meaning of the Law
is, that if such a woman (albeit she be Pharaohs daughter, or the daughter of
any other Prince or person) shall not hold and observe the conditions touching
the Religion and peace of Israel; but apostate and turn away from the Lord,
and daily endeavor and study to pollute the honor of our king, and contemn the
religion of our God, that thereupon she be abandoned, rejected and sent away
from the Commonwealth of Israel, much sooner from the kings society: yea,
rather then that society should he continued to the danger of those
inconueniencies, Exodus 34.16. Deuteronomy: 7.3.
the parties should be reduced and committed to the censure of the general
Law, as when the league is infringed by the breach of the conditions, the
parties stand as in their former estate: any thing to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding. And this is the Law to the children of Israel, touching the
abandoning of this kind of society, with any of those seven execrable
Nations: as the Hethites, the Hevites, the Gergesites, the Amorites, the
Chananites, the Pherezites, and the Iebusites: Thou shall make no marriages
with them: neither shall thou give thy daughter unto his son: nor take his
daughter unto thy son: (The reason is added, whereunto this prouiso or
condition has respect) For they will deceive thy son, that he should not
follow the Lord: and they shall serve strange gods: and then will the wrath of
the Lord wax hot against thee, and destroy thee. This thing Abraham our
father both considered, and respected long before the Law given by Moses: for
he had seen the inconvenience of such conjunctions in the old time, when by
the same the sons of God were polluted, and the whole earth destroyed in the
days of Noah: Genesis 24.3.
therefore he gave his servant a special charge for the match of his son
Isaak, with a mate of a faithful Family. The like also Isaak respected, when
he disliked the marriage of his son Esau with the Hethites, and charged his
son Jacob not to take him a wife of the daughters of Chanaan: Genesis 26. and 27.
but that he should repair to his Uncle Laban, and take from thence of his
daughters. But howsoever such conjunctions might be tolerated or winked at upon
occasions in some others* what needed Solomon the son of David, to have
lusted after the women of a strange Natition? Are not the daughters of Zion
fair, and beautiful, and wise, and virtuous? yea, are they not preferred in
honor to all the women in the world? And did Solomon fear of any heathen
Potentate, that he would in this sort be lincked unto him in amity for the
retayning of peace? Yea, is he not stronger and more wise, and politic then
any of them all? And do they not more dread and admire him, then he has
need to doubt, what they are able to do against his Majesty? But alas, lust
is blind, and many wise men (as I said before) be led blindfolded into the
pit of preuarication and woe, by such women, as being of an evil opinion and
like Religion, will receive no kind of Counsel which withstandeth or
hinders their fond lusts and vanities. And thereof it is, that the King so
prudent, wise and famous, has been bewitched, enchaunted, and besotted so
far; that in the lightness of voluptuousness, he has altered his single
mind, and distained his honor. *These be great faults (my Lords) but yet he
is much more blameable and guilty of judgment, and no less of punishment,
The third sin of Solomon.
(though he be a king) because that in his lusts he has turned away his
heart from the Lord his God, which has appeared to him at two sundry times.

For behold, the king hearkening unto those his strange Wives, which had now
at length apostated and turned back again, to the Religion of their Fathers
and Country: he has followed after Asteroth, the God of the Sydonians, and
after Melcome, the abomination of the Ammonites, and he has built an high
place for Chamos, the abomination of Moab, even in the hill that is before
Jerusalem: and unto Moloch, the abomination of the children of Ammon: and the
like has he done for other his outlandish Women, which burnt incense, and
offered diverse sacrifices to their sundry Gods.

Neither seemed the king then touched with any remorse of conscience: but
clean contrary to the Law of God, the charge which his father gave him, the
lessons his mother taught him, and that which his own wisdom should persuade
in him: he has fowly prostituted himself to their lewdness, and disgraced
his Nobility. Yea, all this has the king done even in his elder years and in
that time of his age: Solomon offended God in his elder days.
when he should rather have abandoned fleshly lusts, the delights of the
sons of men, and all the vanities of the world, and have offered up himself
both body and soul, a sweet and holy Sacrifice acceptable to the Lord his
God, in that holy Temple, which he both built and dedicated to his Name. Alas,
what a blemish is this to his Grace, and that his gray hairs should be
polluted with youthful lusts. This is one of the things which I have heard
him say, that his very soul abhorred. But when unto those lusts shall join
that transgression of the Laws, and abominable sins against the true
service and honor of God, and that in old men, oh God, how great and
dangerous is this kind of abomination!

A great deal more loathsome and dangerous is the fire in an old house, then
in a new: and no less dangerous and loathsome is sin in an old person,
beyond those which be in the younger sort. Old men should be to the younger,
examples of a chaste life, holiness, godly behavior, Religion and virtues:
they should be profitable to the commonwealth by their wisdom, reverend
before all men for their age, and well prepared for the place of eternity,
unto whose gate they are, or should be ready to enter with holy hearts and
clean bodies: they in whom the contrary is found (especially among the
Princes, Nobles, Magistrates, and persons of name and account) are rightly
likened unto those old Cocks, that bring forth certain black and bluish
Eggs, Similitude.
which being covered by some venomous beast (as a Toade or serpent) in the
canicular days, there is hatched a Basiliscus, or Cockatrice, of that venom,
which infecteth and kills men with his piercing sight. By the Egg, is
understood the evil work or action of the faulty old man; by the venomous
beast, is meant the suggestor or flatterer of him in his faults: by the
Cockatrice, is noted the wicked example: and by the persons killed, the seers
and imitators thereof. For those elder persons, and namely Princes and
Magistrates, which have been esteemed and honored in their places, now
sinning against God, and the honor of their functions, and their sins
fostered and nourished by the pestiferous and wicked suggestion, gives a most
pestilent example, the which being seen of the Subjects, younger, and inferior
persons, infecteth and corrupts them: and as much as lies in him, he kills
him. And thus has the king done! Howbeit, now at length he perceives that the
just judgments of God threatened in this case, and wont to ensue on them that
break and contemn his holy ordinance and Law, is now prepared against him
and this whole Nation: yea, more fiercer than it was in David's time, when
seventy thousand dyed in the pestilence. Neither has he found (as yet) by his
wisdom, how to excuse himself in this matter: nor how to defend his
innocence: for behold, it is neither the king though so wise and royal, nor
things in heaven, nor them on the earth, nor any other power or might
whatsoever, that is able either to dispense with this divine Law, or to bear
the effects of that celestial wrath.

Would God, that King Solomon's example could be remembered of all the^ that
shall come after him, An admonition for princes to remember Solomon's example
and learn to fear the divine judgments.
to be placed upon his throne, that in the midst of all their prosperity,
they would think of adversity (as Job did) with that reverence and fear that
they presume not so far to tempt the Lord in the lust of their eyes, the
lust of their flesh, and in the trust of their proper wisdom, worldly
policies, and high places: for howsoever they be preferred, and advanced, and
do stand, yet should they know themselves to be but men, yea miserable and
frail men in this life, subject to whatsoever misery betideth other men:
Wherein the King is no freer then the beggar, though preferred in his estate
royal, and the lusty young man is no more respected then the old man to whom
crooked age is a continual sickness, such is man's condition! for this cause,
men be well likened to the grass in the field, and all their glory, honor,
wealth, wisdom, beauty, and whatsoever else, whereby a man is adorned in this
world, and in the which he delights, (as that which is man's, or incident to
his pleasures in this life) is rightly likened to the flowers of the grass in
the field the which are by diverse occasions either withered or altered in a
very short time, neither is any one herb or flower in the field more free
from those blastings and burnings, annoies and perrils, then any other in the
same, notwithstanding that one beyond the other, is in higher estimation and
price among men. But as for the Lord our God, he is most mighty, ever the same
without alteration or changes, always sufficient, a revenger of them that
dishonor him, and a very consuming fire to devour the ongodly as the stuble
from the face of the earth, he is in his judgments most just, in his works
most perfect, in his wisdom infinite, and in all things good for his saints,
and glorious in himself. This is he that overthrows man in offenses, and
compasses him about with a net, wherein if sinful man should complain of
violence done unto him, Job. 19.7.
he shall not be heard, and if he cry for help there is no sentence to be
given for him: he must abide his lot, and bear the justice of the Judge
without hope of change or alteration of the decree, until it be his pleasure
upon man's true repepentance to turn Justice into mercy, and pain into peace.
* All this (answered the Lords being true can neither be denied nor dissembled,
but we will witness the same, though to our sorrow, because it touches our Lord
the King. Howbeit, we have not found that the holy religion has been altered:
but that the services of Jehovah our God and al his holy sacrifices are
continued in that house which ye king had dedicated to that use: howsoever
those strange women have in their apostacy turned to their Idols again,
affected the superstitions of their several nations and obtained, by the kings
favor permissio^, to use their own religions within these his territories and
dominions. I grant (said Zadoke) that our holy religion is yet preserved in
ure: howbeit, not without a manifest contempt, zadoke tells that religion is
much blemished by those sins of Solomon. 1. Sam. 5.2.3.4 Judge. 6.31.
when such as deride and disdain the same shall be both permitted and maintained
in the open face of the king and his people. Could Dagon stand before the ark of God? Would Gedeon permit in his days, that any man should plead Baals
cause? did our father Jacob suffer, that his wife Rachel should retain with
her Labans Images, or that any of his sons or family should be polluted with
any strange Gods, when as they came to Bethel to sacrifice unto Jehovah? and
should then king Solomon not only permit those horrible Idolatries and
loathsome superstitions of Idols, but also exhibit them maintenance in the same
that follow such things so near the Temple and the holy City of God? This
thing is not hidden from the Lord who sees and will be avenged on the same.
Howbeit, the King most unhappily doting on those profane women, his wives and
concubines, which are now revolted from the Lord and his religion, and turned
back unto their fathers and their Gods, has been contented to conniue and
bear with them in such their abominations even before his face and in the
open sight of the Lord people: yea, and rather then he would divorce them or
deny them, or reprove them or correct them, or displease them therein (as he
might have don and indeed should have done in this case) he has both
appointed and commanded many great sums of money and treasure to be paid and
given forth from his own treasury both to the building of certain houses and
places for such their Gods, and also for the daily maintenance of their
services in ye same. Thereof it is (before al other things) that Jehovah his God
is provoked, and waxen angry with him, with us and his people, and has thereon
not omitted to threaten him and us with many mighty plagues and punishments, to
ensew, yea such as neither he, we, nor our posterity shall be able to bear: and
thereof (as I understand) the Lord has lately spoken by his prophet and
messenger unto the King himself: saying Forasmuch as this thing is done of
thee, and thou have not kept mine appointment and my statutes which I commanded
thee: 1. King. 11.11.
I will rent the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy Servant.
Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, because of David thy Father: but
I will take it from the hand of thy son. Howbeit, I will not take away all
the kingdom, but will give one Tribe to thy Son, because of David my Servant
and because of Jerusalem, which I have chosen. Now here I call to remembrance
what the Lord our God has resolved in such a case, by the consideration of
his words once spoken to Eli the Priest, in the days of our judges, 1. Sam.
2.25.
I will worship them (says he) that worship me: but they which despise me
shall come to shame. Moreover I remember what the King himself has said in
his wise Proverbs. The turning away of the unwise shall hasten his own
destruction. And well I wot therefore that of all the creatures in the world,
pro. 1.32.
the impious and wicked person is most unhappy, that not only in respect of his
sins and condition of life, but in regard of his end and conclusion, for as
the end of much eating is sickness, the end of pleasure is pain, the end of
this life is death and corruption: so the end of the Sinner is extreme anguish
and misery both in this world and after his death. For being justly
sequestered from the society of the Saints, and so shut out from the divine
protection, he is, even whiles he lives, molested with an unquiet conscience,
an aching heart fearful cogitations and dreams and many afflictions both of
body and mind, the hand of God being streatched forth against him from above,
and the instruments of wrath tormenting him from beneath: Finally, this life
finished, he broils and toils in bitter torments for ever more: In the
which he may be compared to those flying fishes which being in the waters are
persecuted by other fishes for their pray, and springing up with their finnes
into the air, they are followed and devoured of the cormorants and Sea-meawes:
or to that bird which being on the ground is hunted by dogs, and flying above
the earth is taken by the vultures: for true it is that the man of impiety and
sin has neither peace nor safety either in this world, or in the world to
come. This thing the kings father well knew, and considered of in the depth of
his heart: therefore when he was remembered of his transgressions and faults by
Nathan and by Gad the Lords prophets and messengers to him in that respect,
feeling the true sense of Gods angry countenance justly bent against him and
his people for the same, and the perilous estate both of himself and his
dominions, by and by (although a chosen, magnanimious, puissant and valorous
minded King) coming to answer before the highest God, he suddenly cast
himself down to the earth, as a base caitiffe, he repented him of his
sins, and in the fearful agony of his afflicted soul, he cried out I have
sinned! I have sinned: Mercy Lord mercy! nor would be leave off crying, and
repenting, nor any otherwise esteem of himself then a sinful, guilty and
condemned wretch, until he perceived that the Lord was willing to be appeazed
and of his mercy, to turn his gracious face toward him as in times past:
resembling the bird of Paradise, which being taken in a snare is never quiet,
nor leaves crying and flittering till time he either dye or be delivered. And
thus behooves it our Lord the King, to esteem of himself under those his
transgressions, this to respect and the same to perform which in this
desperate and dangerous case, is the best counsel we may give him for remedy
and ease. For surely, surely, God being thus provoked and that justly, he will
not be appeazed, nor will he surcease to streatch forth his hand of justice
against him so offending, until that he meekly acknowledge his offenses before
him, repent, and seek him with sorrow and singlenes of heart, as we may see in
the examples of our forefathers both in the wilderness under the conduct of Moses
and Aaron and in this land under the government of our wise and valiant Judges.
Now (my Lords) hereof is it, that Jehovah our God being most justly displeased
with our Lord the King, he has in justice stirred up and provoked against him
(besides the two former enemies which much troubled him) that Jeroboam, who
thirsting for the soueraignity of Israel now especially opposes himself in
might and policy against the King. Neither may we think, but howsoever those
persons (especially Jeroboam) are maliciously bent and provoked against the
king and his government, The kings enemies are the very instruments of Gods
wrath appointed to vex the king and his people.
and do of themselves little respect or consider the providence and working of
the most high in this his displeasure that yet they be the very instruments and
ministers of Gods judgments, as those other adversaries of Israel have been
in the times past, against our fathers, when as they forgetting God, did rebel
against him and his holy servants: And therefore the only way to resist them,
is not the wisdom, power, policy, or arm of man, but the grace of our
merciful God, the which we must seek by godly repentance and obtain by
faithful prayer unto God in the trust of Messiah until which time the Lord
will never be persuaded to draw in his hand which is stretched forth. Solomon
repents.
This the King himself well knows, and therefore he is humbled on the ground
he bewaileth himself, he weepeth, he lamenteth, he abandoneth the vain
things of this world, and he turns himself both body and mind (as in the
best sort of penance) unto his God, who (I doubt not but) will be merciful unto
him, as he was merciful unto his father David when he so repented.

* But yet in this interim, to the aggravating of the kings grief, it is
fallen out of late (whereof the King is also certified, for what can be hidden
from his eyes) that when this fellow Ieroboham departed from Jerusalem, the
Prophet Ahiah the Sylonite found him in the way having a new garment on him and
they two being alone in the field, the Prophet caught that new garment and rent
it in twelve pieces, The Lord threatens Solomon to punish him for sin.

1. King. 11.


and said to Ieroboham: Take unto thee ten pieces: for thus says the Lord God
of Israel, behold I will rent the kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, and
will give ten tribes to thee, and thou shall reign according to all that my
soul desires, and shall be King over Israel. Again I will for this offense
which Solomon has committed, punish the seed of David but not for ever.

Now the consideration of this (being added to the former) has caused the
kings eyes to fail through weeping, his bowels to swell, his liver to be
powered out on the earth, and himself to swoone in the midst of his house.
Neither should we also, in the regard of this his great sorrow, and the
miseries imminent on him, on us, and on the people, but weep and howl with
him, and repent, and cry to the Lord for mercy.

CAP. XXII.
Zadoks Reed is approved and secunded touching the cause of K. Solomon's
trouble. And it is so recorded.
THe former speeches being well heard and considered accordingly by the Lords
assembled, Prince Zabud the kings familiar friend answered. My Lord Zadoke, I
suppose, ye have fully pierced the center, and have plainly revealed (though
in secret unto us) the highest cause of this so strange metamorphosis and
alteration of the king. Your words so grave and right reuerendly disposed on
this occasion, we allow (as well worthy) and commend your plain manner of
dealing in this matter, though of such weight, for howsoever it be honorable
to conceal the Kings secrets (as my Lord the Kings secretary will confess)
yet in this case, I hold it necessary that those things be manifested to us
of this assembly, no less then it shall be needful that the sickness and
grief of the languishing patient with the causes thereof be made known to
the faithful Phisician, who (at the least) howsoever he may be able or not
able to cure the malady, will nevertheless extend his good will, endeavor his
best, and wish the patient health. And out of doubt, as ye have said, so may I
say, what I likewise have observed (being ordinarily so near his grace, as any
one else in his Court) that he has had very lately a message sent him from God,
containing both a sharp reprehension and a fearful commination. The message
was therefore irksome to him: for who may but bash, when God reprooueth him?
and who should not tremble at the sentence of punishment? The reproof touches
to the quick: but the threate dawnteth the guilty conscience: for as the one
argues a displeasure for a fault committed: so the other awardeth judgment
for the same. But yet what the very cause thereof was, I could not understand
until now, for ye have said it to be (besides all other causes) the high
displeasure of God justly conceived against the King and his people, for that
the King has, contrary to the divine law, multiplied wives to himself in a
great number: that he has also combined himself with strange Women, yea, such
as are strangers in Religion to us: and that by their society and temptations,
he has been allured and turned his heart from Jehovah his God, then the which
(alas) what can be more reprehensible, horrible and fearful. * The King
himself (said Zadok) will not, at the least, he should not dissemble this
matter: zadoke proceeds to tell what the prophet said to K. Solomon.
for the Prophet, who brought him this Embassady from God, delivered it not in
a corner, nor staggered he to tell it to the Kings face, and that with
wonderful audacitie. For so God commanded him to do, and neither to fear,
nor dissemble, nor conceal any thing of that he had in charge, and he had his
authority and power then from God, which emboldned him. Therefore the holy
Prophets whom God authoriseth and sends forth into the world, The boldness of
the prophets.
setting God before their eyes and their duty, nothing dread the faces of
mortal men in their holy ministry and service, unto whose aspect the greatest
potentates of the earth, which fear not the Lord of heaven, appear but as
savage beasts or base things that perrish, howsoever glorious they seem to the
conceits of profane men. So the Prophet beholding the King charged him, and
said without fear, that he had transgressed and not observed that which first
David the Kings father received from the Lord and had given him in charge to
perform: nor that which Jehovah his God (appearing to him at two sundry times)
willed him to observe and keep as he was willing to enjoy and retain his
blessings, be shadowed under the safe wings of his protection, possess the
peace both of mind and body and thenceforth prosper in his place. M. Recorder,
ye know well where the words be recorded. I pray you to turn over the Annals
till ye find the place and then let us hear the words read openly before us
all, that we may the better consider, and compare the same with the Kings
dealings, Iehosophat the Recorder finds the record of the matter in the
Annals. Psalm. 102.18.
for thus must one thing be considered with another, if we think to
understand that which we desire, and to effect the thing which to our duty
belongs. * I am here ready (said Iehosophat the Recorder) and I know very well
where this matter lies written. Oh how necessary and profitable is the true
record of things in writing! And this is written for them that come after: that
they thereof may learn to be wise as we are taught by the writings of Moses,
Iosuah, Samuel and others both learned and godly that lived before our days.
And now (my Lords all) hearken what I have found written by Nathan the Prophet
in the Kings Annals. Most willingly (said the Lords) therefore read on in
the name of God. I find (said Iehosophat) that after the time Solomon was
anointed King in the place of David his Father, and did sit on his throne by
his fathers goodwill, The charge that David gave to his son Solomon 1. King.
2.
advise, consent and direction, David seeing the day to draw near, that he
should rest with his fathers he called Solomon, and charged him saying: I go the
way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a man: keep
thou the watch of Jehovah thy God, that thou walk in his ways, and keep his
statutes and precepts, his judgments and his testimonies as it is written in
the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and in every
thing that thou medlest withal. That the Lord also may make good his word
which he spoke unto me, saying. If thy children take heed to their ways, that
they walk before me in truth withal their hearts, and withal their souls,
thou shall not be without a man on the seat of Israel. And all this the kings
Father took from that holy Oracle which Nathan had before that time brought
him. Wherein the Lord had certified David, 2. Sam. 7.
that Solomon his son should build an house for his name and he said: he
shall build an house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his
kingdom for ever. I will be his father and he shall be my son. And if he sin,
I will chasten him with the rod of men and with the plagues of the children of
men: but my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul,
whom I have put away before thee. And thine house shall be established, and thy
kingdom for ever, before thee, even thy throne shall be established for ever.
*After this I find it recorded again, that the Lord appeared in Gibeon to King
Solomon in a dream by night. Whiles he yet walked in the ordinances and ways
of David his Father. And the Lord said. Ask what I shall give thee and the
King said: Thou have showed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, when
he walked before thee in truth, 1. King. 3.5: How David walked with God.
in righteousness and in plainnes of heart with thee: And thou have kept for him
this great mercy, that thou have give^ him a son to sit on his seat, as it is
come to pass this day. And now, O Lord my God, it is thou that have made thy
servant King in steed of David my Father: And I am but young and wot not how to
go out and in. And thy serva^t is in the midst of thy people, which thou have
chosen: and verily the people are so many, that they cannot be told, nor
numbered for multitude: Solomon's request.
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I
may discern between good and evil. For who it able to judge this so mighty a
people. And this pleased the Lord well, that Solomon had desired this thing.
Therefore God said unto him, because thou have asked this thing, and have not
asked for thy self long life, neither have asked riches for thy self, nor
have asked the life of thine enemies: but have asked for thy self
understanding and discretion in judgment: beheld, I have done according to thy
words. Lo, I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, The Lord granted
him his request, and moreover of his loving mercies.
so that there has been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shull
any arise like unto thee. And I have give^ thee that, which thou have not
asked, eve^ riches and honor: so that there shall be no King like unto thee in all thy days. * And if thou will walk in my ways to keep mine ordinances and
my commandments as thy father David did walk, I will prolo^g thy days, etc.
Again I find it recorded that when the King had builded the Temple, and had
prayed to the Lord, that it would please him to sanctify the same for his name
etc. 1. King. 9.2.
The Lord appeared unto him the second time and said I have heard thy prayer
and thine intercession that thou have made before me. For I have hallowed this
house which thou have built to put my name there for ever. And if thou will
walk before me, as David thy father walked in pureness of heart and in
righteousness, to do all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes
and my laws: then will I stablish the seat of thy kingdom upon Israel for
ever, as I have promised to David thy father, saying. Thou shall not be without
a man upon the seat of Israel.

zadoke shows how gracious the Lord has been to Solomon and his people. 1.
King. 10. To what end God gives good princes.
*Lo (said Zadok) ye see how gracious the Lord our God has showed himself to
the King, and by him unto the people of Israel whom the Lord has chosen, and
to whom therefore it was his pleasure to give us such a King (as the Queen of
Saba in the due consideration thereof said) for godly kings are adorned, and
given of the Lord, for the prosperity and peace of them whom his grace
loves. And as by him they reign, so is he careful to defend them from evil,
and to lead them forth in all goodness by his wisdom and providence.
Moreover this is an especial grace of God bestowed on such Princes. For
without this, the wisest man living can neither follow the good nor eschew the
evil in this flattering and guilefull world. * But read on gentle Iehosophat:
Is there not somewhat else? Yes (quod Iehosophat) and thus the Lord added on the
contrary part But if ye and your children turn away from me, and will not
keep my commandments and my statutes, A commination on the Apostates and
disobedient. 1. King. 9.6.
which I have set before you, but go and serve other Gods and worship them:
then will I weed Israel out of the land which I have given them, and this house
which I have hallowed for my name will I cast out of my sight, and Israel
shall be a proverb and fable among all nations: and this house shall be taken
away: so that every one that passes by it shall be astonished and shall hiss:
and they shall say why has the Lord don thus unto this land and to this house?
and they shall answer: because they forsook the Lord their God which brought
their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other Gods,
and have worshipped them and served them: therefore has the Lord brought upon
them all this evil. * Then answered Zadoke, ye have read enough of this
Argument. Lo, (my Lords) as in the former member, the Lord has declared his
divine love and great mercies both to the King and his people, and generally to
all them that believe in him and walk in his ways, so in this latter, he
shows how much he hates and abhors them that apostate from him, follow
after other gods, Exodus 20.
and be disobedient unto his will. For the Lord is a jealous God visiting the
sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate him: For he cannot suffer or abide sin and iniquity (as both
Moses and Job have truly testified) seeing that the committing of a sin is a
proud contempt of his law: neither will he wink at the ungodly in their
iniquities being such as depart from him and set his commandments at naught.
Therefore he does neither in love respect them, nor in mercy regard them: but
as a Judge inexorable and a Lord most righteous, he detesteth their ways,
beats them with afflictions, rejects them, casts them down and
destroys them, yea be they never so wise, wealthy, royal, famous, strong, and
glorious, he will (notwithstanding) speak to them in wrath and vex them in
displeasure, Psalm. 2.
he shall beat them with a rod of iron, and tear them in pieces as a potters
vessel.

* Note this ye that have tasted of the goodness of the Lord in the abundance
of his mercies, An admonition not to depart, nor forget God. psalm. 50.22.
and take heed that ye neither turn away from him, nor disobey him, nor
forget him, unmindful of your duties, lest peradventure before he give you
true repentance, he suddenly come upon you as a thief in the night, and all to
tear you as a ramping Lion, and there be none found to rescue or deliver you.
Neither is it good that any man should presume on this that God has yet been
merciful in the end, and has graciously pardoned one or more that have so
sinned and offended his majesty, when they have repented: for as godly
Repentance is not in the will and power of man: but is the gift and work of
God, on them only which he is well willing to pardon and receive again by
repentance: Against presumption.
so who is he that knows (when he presumes to sin in hope of mercy)
whether it shall be Gods pleasure to give him repentance and to receive him to
mercy yea or no? Was not this the destruction of Cain the son of Adam?
Because he had seen the Lords great mercy on his parents, which were
pardoned in the promised Seed, he presumed on the same and murdered his
brother: yea albeit the Lord in justice did both threaten and judge him: yet
he said: But is mine iniquity more then that it may be forgiven?
Nevertheless the Lord cast him forth from the upper face of the earth a
fugitive and vagabonde, and in the end recompensed him for his brothers blood.
This was also the sin and overthrow of Saul whom God cast away before David:
1. Sam. 15.9.19
For notwithstanding the Lords commandment given him against Agag and the
Amalekites, he presumed to preserve that which was by the divine decree
prepared to the sword, the rather to content his covetous mind, thinking that
yet the Lord would have dispensed with him, and winked at his folly. But
Samuel said he was a fool, in that he transgressed the word of the Lord
and that therefore his kingdom should be taken from him and given to
another. In this sin offended Baalam, Number, 22.28.
and was both reproved of his own Ass, and afterward destroyed among the
Lords enemies.. Worthily therefore did the Kings Father pray unto God, to
keep him from presumptuous sins.

CHAP XXIII.
Azariah tells of the kings ingratitude to God. The Lords counsel and
consent that prayer be made for the king: that the best be construed of him and
that his words be nevertheless worthy both the collection and preservation.
ZAdoke having thus considered and advised, to dissuade al other men from
presumptuous sins, and so from destruction: Azariah the chief Prince
answered and said: Ye have right well said (most reverend Father) and semblably
remembered the words so worthily recorded. Oh that the King had well observed
and kept those holy commandments and walked in the ways of the Lord, as did
David his father, and as himself at the first did, to the glory of God and the
instruction and peace of his people! then had it been well for himself and
profitable for us all, for they that observe this, want no manner of thing that
good is. Deuteronomy. 28.
But the contrary perpetrated and wrought, and now at length revealed, the
fearful wrath of God appears, and his hand is already stretched forth:
neither is there found a man to stand up in the gap (as sometimes Moses did
with our fathers, and as K. David did in his time for us) to pacify this deadly
ire, that we perish not. For as there is no safe contending with the Lord, so
are we not able to answer him one for a thousand. And this is such a grief
unto the King as will stick by him in the bone faster then that we shall be able
to remove it. For as they which have once surfeited with pleasant meats, are
thereby occasioned to be grieved and to lament the same some long time
thereafter, Salo. 5.7.
(though at the present they think themselves never thereof satisfied): so the
King has in these pleasures and the desires of his flesh so glutted himself
(as it is apparent to us now) that he has thereby not only provoked God to
anger, but also quite spoiled the right constitution of his health. He may
therefore alas with Esau lament, but too late and say, as we have heard him tell
of the ungodly. We have over wearied ourselves in the way of destruction: Sap.
5.7. It was Gods pleasure that as well the faults as the virtues of his children
should be recorded and remembered for the posterity. Iehosophat.
what good has our great pleasures brought unto us etc. But I pray you (right
noble Iehosophat) let this also be written and recorded for them that come
after, in such manner and form as the most reverend Father Zadoke, has before
declared it, I mean touching this last and greatest cause of the kings sorrow,
which comes of the displeasure of God toward him by reason of his heinous
offenses, and above them all, for that he turned away his heart from God in
those his elder days. * It shall be done (said Iehosophat) with all speed and
fidelity. And yet (as we see) the king has somewhat declined from the common
course of men in this world. For the greater part of them in their youth are
wanton, licentious, addicted to diverse vain lusts, and little regard the power
of God, and the holy religion the which they esteem a thing only incident to
old age, wherein men be more contemplative, and yet nevertheless, we also
see, that of them there be some, which in the end are reclaimed, do repent, come
home and serve the Lord and so are more religious in their man's estate, or
rather in their old age, then ever they were in the days of their youth.
Eccles. 12.1.
But the K. in all the time of his youth (being under the education and nurtour
of his father David, of Bethsabe his mother, and of Nathan the Prophet) did
well remember his maker, and thereby behaved himself in all things most
worthily. He was a grave wise man even in his young years, for he hearkened to
his father when he taught him, and to his mother when she schooled him, and
to wisdom when she directed him. Oh how wise was he in his youth! Eccles*
47.14
filled with heavenly understanding, as with a flood, his mind covered the
whole earth and filled it with grave and dark sentences, his name went abroad
in the Isles and for his peace he was well beloved. The countries meruailed at
him for his songs, An example of Solomon's ingratitude to God after his large
gifts.
proverbs, similitudes and interpretations. By ye name of the Lord God, which
is called the God of Israel, he gathered God as Tin, and had so much Silver as
Lead. All this not with standing as it has been with great grief declared by
the most reverend father: so must it be also recorded here by me. (for I
cannot dissemble it or pass it over) that the King has bowed his loins unto
women, and has been overcome by his body and turned a way his heart from the
Lord. And therein shall appear to all posterities a most notable example of
the kings ingratitude and disobedience against God, and therewithal, a
fearful example of the divine judgments, to teach all others to take heed
how they forget God and anger him with disobedience after all his large
bounties toward them. For besides the examples of the Elephants, Storks, and
other beasts and birds without reason the earth which has no sense, shall
worthily condemn him. For the very earth receiving good seed of the sowers
hand, yeeldes him again in recompense and token of thankfulness, a far
greater quantity, as some thirty, some sixty, so^e an hundred fold: teaching
both how ready men should be to requite benefits received, if they may do it
without injury, especially how thankful to God, of whose hand they have
received both life and living and also to fly that menstrous sin of
unkindness: then the which no sin can be greater, for within it, is
comprehended every other sin whatsoever, either against God or man, either to
give or not to give, it is in a man's own power: but to recompense or requite a
good turn it is of duty required. And there where power or ability wants,
a good mind is accepted. Oh God! how many graces, blessings and wealthy gifts
has the kings grace received of the Lords hand! never king had the like before
him, and it is said (which we believe) there shall never any succeed him
comparable to him in all these things. Therefore should his thankfulness to God
have been greater, and far above all the rest. For of him to whom much is given,
is much required. Again shall not the pain of such unkindness exceed the
punishment of others? it is much to be feared: and the mighty shall be
mightily tormented. Wherefore the King understanding this, is right sorrowful
in his soul: zadoke yet speaks for the King, whom we should not condemn
as a reprobate.
Neither can we be merry and glad as we have been sometimes in the
flourishing happy days and prosperitye of our King. * Then Zadoke the high
Priest (whom for his gravity all the Lords did reverence and for his
wisdom they did gladly hear) replied again again and said. Yet may we not
so condemn the king, as if be were utterly cast out of the favor of God, for
truly he expresses great tokens of repentance every day. The King is but a
man and has imperfections and infirmities
The King is excellent wise, but yet the king is a man, neither is a man so
perfect in this life, but that not only he has infirmities, but also many
imperfections. Yea as the fairest day has his cloud, the sweetest honey a
prick, and the finest wheat his branne: so has the best man living on this
earth his fall and fault. But this I confess, that seldom there has bin seen
in so wise and holy a man, so foul a fault: and I esteem the fault so much
the more, by how much the king was wise and excellent before others. A little
fault appears great in a wise man
For as ye least blemish will appear in the fairest face, so a little fault
shall be esteemed much in a wise man. How-much more this monstrous sin, in the
wisest of all men, which has his eyes in his head to foresee and to prevent
dangers then, when the fool runs forth without knowledge to his own shame
and confusion? Surely the King has been in this wonderfully overtaken. An
example of man's insecuritie unto all other men, A caveat.
how wise, prudent, or politic soever they be, and a caveat for them to
beware they fall not, then when they think themselves to stand most assuredly.
For security is a deceitful hagge, Security. The princes verdit of the Kings
fault.
and will cast men suddenly into dangers, when they imagine themselves most
safe and sure. * Indeed (said the Princes) this thing being so indiscreetly
handled by so wise a King, will be an exceeding blot to his honor, a sclander to
the holy religion a shame to his Princes, a plague to his people, an
encouragement to his enemies, and an evil example for the posterity, and yet
it shall be (as it is convenient) in the Record lest unto them. For we may not be
found false witnesses therein. Alas, that ever we should with these our eyes
behold such abominations, with these our ears hear such evil reports, and
with our hearts fear in these days of such things as are threatened and like
to fall on us! zadoke tells that the King is contrite and sorry for his sins
and so repenreth.


Howbeit (said Zadoke) there is some hope in that I perceive the king does not
only feel in his heart the severity of the divine wrath and foreseeth the
misery that is threatened and thereof is sorrowful: but also knowing what is
best to be done (as his father David did, when he had sinned and was reproved
by the Prophet) he is wonderful contrite and grieved in heart for his sins,
which he now hates and condemns in himself: he is humbled on the earth,
and covered with sackcloth and ashes: he makes ^rs strange confessions of
his life and behavior. He abandoneth all the delights of the world, which
he esteems and calls vain, and henceforth does assay to dedicate
himself anew unto the Lord his God, against whom he has faulted. And as he
has taught, that the just man falls seven times in the day and rises
again: so he knows that his only way to rise, is by faithful repentance,
the which the Lord has promised to preserve, keep in store and to give unto
them that be his chosen, that thereby they may pass unto his hill in safety,
howsoever the adversary has beset them and battered their faith with sin,
and thereby occasioned them to be beaten with the rod of men, which is yet so
necessary in them that fall, that therefore they should not be ashamed to
repent, but ashamed to sin. Neither does the king despair of mercy. * Lord
God, (said Benaiah) and could it be, that so wise a person should so fall? May
it be lawful for us to inuestigate the causes of this thing? Benaiah.
* It has been already said (answered Zadok) that the king was yet but a man.
zadok tells the causes of the kings fall.
If he had been God (as he is not) he would not have fallen in this sort.
Other causes of this declination in the king, are known only to the Lord,
who will hereafter (I doubt not) also reveal the same in the due time. And yet
it may be, howsoever we have cleared ourselves of all heinous crimes and
offenses, Sometimes the sins of the people are the cause of the trouble and
plague of their princes.
both against God and the king in those our own conceits, that the cause of
the kings fall has risen partly from some of us: partly by some thing
committed in and among the people, in whom are oftentimes found that which
provoke the Lord in displeasure to take away those blessings which in his
loving mercies he had bestowed on them, and so such kings and Princes by and
under whose government they have, and might have inioyed long peace and
prosperity. But for this time, let us in all sobriety cease to search after
those hidden things too curiously, remembering that the king himself lately
advised: Search not out the things which are above thy reach and capacity. And
let us commit this with the success thereof unto God, wha has appointed these
and all things else to succeed and come to pass by his Providence, after his
own will, for his glory, and the good of his chosen, howsouer it appears
unto us, that the King has therein offended, and in whatsoever sort they
appear unto men. And let us have a chief care, that our Wills be made and
conformed here in earth to his will in heaven in all things. Pray for the
king, and speak well of him.
* Furthermore, as we be bound both by the law of God and a good conscience,
let us neither forget nor omit to pray, and make intercession unto God for the
King, both daily and hourly, and therewith both command and excite the
Congregation and people to do the like. It may be the Lord our God will hear
us, and be merciful. Let us also speak well, and the best of the King, even
in our privy chambers; and with him good in our hearts: and so much the sooner,
because he is the Lords anointed, and at this present sets not himself
in wickedness, nor makes a mock of Religion and good admonition as did
Pharaoh when he said: Who is the Lord? or as those ungodly, which jest and
contemn correction, and have a delight in their sins. But rather he is
contented to hear, to be ruled, to be reclaymed and to be directed by the
wisdom of that divine Spirit as (himself has said) the wiseman is wont to
do. pro. 10.23. Solomon has declared many arguments of his repentance.
And therein (as unto us it appears) he has expressed many arguments of a
true repentant heart both in his gesture and manner of life. Neither are his
Sermons, words and speeches to be neglected or forgotten: being right worthy
the noting, observation and memory of all men. For as they savor of the holy
spirit: so are they uttered with such wisdom, discretion, gravity and deep
affects of the soul upon this occasion, that they do not only argue, and
declare the Kings true repentance: but shall also teach, instruct, admonish and
move the hearts of all Gods people to fear God and serve him with reverence,
and therefore shall be right profitable for the holy Congregation and worthy
preservation for all posterities. Solomon's words and sermons are meet to be
collected and preserved.
Let us therefore call those his Words, and sermons, into remembrance, let us
collect and write them in a Book, and let us (after our power) conserve them
or some part of them in the sacred Register among other the kings wise
parables, Proverbs, grave sentences, Prophesies, and holy songs Let us neither
defraude the King of that he has deserved, nor withhold from the holy
Congregation, that which to the same belongs, nor appear negligent in our
duty to be performed to either of them. And as in this, we shall serve the
Lord, honor our King, and benefit the Church: so by those his words and
sermons (being thus exemplified) he shall be more commended and praised of the
Saints, then by the worldly glory of his Throne: no less wise then those wise
Princes, Patriarks, Sages and Seers, which are much more esteemed for their
grave sayings, words and writings, Elioreph the Notary.
then exalted for their great conquests and worldly riches. * Then said
Elioreph the kings Notarie, right worthily spoken (reverend father) for indeed
the words of the king are such as are in all things consonant to the verity,
and shall witness for ever the kings co^trition and true conversion unto
Jehovah his God after his sin committed. Moreover, they shall be preached as
fruitful and godly sermons in the Church, to teach, admonish, exhort,
reform, conform, comfort and instruct them that come after us in the fear of
God and the observation of his Laws, Eccles. 12.
the which is (as the King has often and yet daily teaches) that which
chiefly appertains to every man, and is required of all men that live in this
world: Therefore my self with the convenient help of Ahia my fellow Notary,
and with the advice of my Lord the kings Recorder, will gladly endeavor this
thing to effect, In the Name of God, whom we beseech to look upon the King,
and upon his people in the abundance of his loving mercies.

CAP. XXIIII.
Objections, and exceptions against Solomon, and his words and deeds, the
which the Princes endeavor to defend.
AFter that the whole assembly of king Solomon's Lords, were thus disposed and
agreed in counsel, that the kings Words (which he in this time of his
troubled spirits, and thencefoorth did utter and speak before them) should be
called into remembrance, considered of, and kept in the holy Register among
other the divine monuments of the Church (ad it in before declared) Abiather,
Abiather the priest.
which sometimes had ministered before the king, in the steed of Zadok, stood
forth, and objected to the decree, Objections against Solomon and his words.
after this manner. But (my Lords all said he): I am much afraid of this, that
many in the posterity will the less esteem, or at the least doubt, of some
other things, which are noted in the holy Register, when unto the same we
shall add and combine (as of equal authority) those matters of the king, the
reverence of whose person, and the authority of whose Words, I have (even with
these mine ears) heard some wisemen to call into question: and whereof they
are wont to say to them that commend the king and his words: yet praise not
the unworthy because of his riches: nor his words by reason of his wealth: Is
not a green apple tree bearing fruit, better then the dry Cedar of Lybanus
lying on the ground? and is not a living dog preferred before a dead lion?
and what is that person to be esteemed, or his words regarded, which has
distained his wisdom with foolishness, and polluted his honor with
ungodliness. For truly, as when women deck themselves, they endeavor to choose
the best glasses and cast away others which are polluted or deceitful: and as
scholars to write do set before them not ragged, but plain and perfect
copies to learn by: so in the Church, or in the Commonwealth, should only
those examples be proposed for imitation and instruction, which are the holy
deeds of worthy men. And as that work is most praiseworthy in the which both
the Art commends the matter, and the matter the Art: The perfection of the
person should join with his words.
so those Sermons and words are always best meet the conservation and
observation, wherein the worthiness of the person commends the Words, and
the wisdom of the words commends the worthiness of the person. Neither
should we praise that too much, which is polluted in part, lest unhappily the
unwise that knows not to put difference between the good and the evil, will
take and use as well the one as the other: for although the wise and prudent
are wont to make choice of the waters whereof they drink, knowing that all
Fountains are not of one goodness, operation, and use: yea, and be as the
Bees which make honey (and not poison) of every herb: yet the foolish which can
not discern or make difference of things, will be ready to take those waters
which breed fury and madness, and procure death, and with the Spider will
make poison of the sweetest flowers. It may be, that some of you (my Lords)
think, as I have said, would ye be as plain and simple to deliver it
forth as I am. What say ye to that which I have objected?

Then stood forth the most reverend Father, zadok answers for the king
against Abiathers objection.

Contemners of other men.


and as the mouth of them all (for they all willed him to give an answer) be
spoke and said. By your leave, Abiather: As he that commends another but
sparingly, seems to want his own praise: so they that contemn other men
rashly, seem to envy their happiness. And truly as the slothful dogs
do bark at every one whom they know not, whether he be friend or foe to
their master: so there be certain ignorant persons, which carpe at all that
themselves understand not, be it never so excellent and good. Again,
Vncharmed tongues.
there be many vncharmed tongues, which use to speak evil of that which they
know well to be good.

These will contemn the honey together with the pricks: they will condemn true
men, Haters of that which is good.
because there be some thieves and they dislike al things in respect of the
fault of some things. There be others, which bear evil will at Zion, and
therefore blaspheme the holy religion of the children of Zion: Envious persons
and sclanderers.
neither are any of these disposed (upon occasion) to yield the due either to
God, or to the king: but strive in their unquiet spirits to derogate from both:
and so to draw from this most princely person (I mean K. Solomon) and his most
excellent labors, Sermons, and Doctrines, all the honor, credit and estimation
which to either of them justly belongs: unprofitable persons.
whereby they are become both unprofitable to themselves and hurtful to
others: for thereof it is, that both themselves never feel the sweetness and
comfort of those most sovereign and healthful solaces therein provided and
proposed unto them; and many others (especially the ignorant and over
credulous) are and shall be injuriously defrauded also, as well of this the
kings Solace, as of many other things godly, wholesome, profitable and
necessary, the which the true-hearted and faithful of the Lord do and shall
thereof gladly reap and enjoy to their exceeding great good and highest
consolation. These aspire not to the true happiness themselves, nor would that
others should attain the same: wherein they resemble those idle and wayward
dogs, that lying in the maunger, will neither eat the hay, nor suffer the
laboring Ass to feed thereof. But right judgment and reason resolve, that
albeit it is not good to praise them much, which of their own accords are apt
to vain glory (as we may not tickle them which by nature are given to
excessive laughter): Who^ to praise and whom not.
yet, meet it is, that we praise the praiseworthy, and upon an occassion
provoke them to laughter which are over pensive and sad: that we yield to
every man his duty: as honor to whom honor, love to whom love, fear to whom
fear belongs: lest as in the former, we should provoke to vice which rests
in extremities: so in the latter we should discourage from virtue which
holds the mean: and so declare ourselves so unjust in the one, as wicked in
the other. *Therefore, although that both sovereign Lord, K. Solomon, and those
his last words have already both deserved in themselves, and obtained among the
godly-wise, both credit and authority sufficient: yet, The credit and
estimation of Solomon and his words.
upon this necessary occasion, I shall be always ready (as my duty is) to
plead for the defense both of the one and the other, not withstanding his
unhappy stain with those transgressions and sins, and so much the sooner;
because (being both an ear and an eye witness) I can best testify; and
(being the High Priest) I can or should well discern both of the one and the
other, without partiality or corruption in judgment. Nor do I doubt (my good
Lords) but that ye all will consent with me in the same, as far as truth
will warrant me to plead for my Lord the king: Surely, I would not exceed
the bounds of truth, nor endeavor to defend or excuse sin in any person, be
he high or low.

* And well worthy (most reverent Father) said the Princes: nor is it meet,
The princes consent to zadok in the kings apology.
that any of us all should presume to avouch that for truth which is a false
lie: for as he which hears false witness against a man (as the king has
said) brings forth lies, and is a very clubbe, asworde, and a sharp arrowe:
so should we be, if we should produce any thing, besides the verity in any
thing, much more in those matters which concern the kings Majesty: the which
the Lord forbid: for besides many other reasons, we shall through such
untruths not only hurt the King, and delude his people, but overthrow our
selves. But may we understand, (most reverend Father) by sound report, what
all those things are, that be or may be objected against the king and his
Sermons, and words which might impair the credit of the one, and the
authority of the other? It is good to withstand the beginnings of mischiefs:
for if such conceits have already entered the ears and minds of men, what may
we think will thereof ensue in process of time, if there be not a
prevention? ye know the common advise, Withstand the beginning of a malady,
else the medicine will too lately be applied. But as a word spoken in due
season, is like apples of gold in a graued work of silver: so the testimony
which we shall exhibit with you unto the king, in this opportune time,
shallbee precious, and full of excellent beauty in the face of them that fear
the Lord, in time to come. Therefore, as Abiather has ministered unto us the
occasion of this question: let him also declare here before us all what he
has heard, or may imagine to be objected against the king, and those the
kings words. And let him also say, what he fears may yet be further excepted
to the same, always provided that modesty be not transgressed. Then answered
Abiather: My Lords (saving always the kings reverence, Abiather reports what
he has heard objected against the king and his words.
and the credit of his words, with the pleasure of your honors) I will
speak as the reseconding Echo, (reporting rather the words and speeches of
others, than any of mine own): for both against my Lord the kings Highness,
and also against his sermons and words I have heard, of late, some (and that
not mean, nor ignorant, but great personages and prudent) largely to object.
Neither may any of us think otherwise, but that the king, and his words and
life are observed and noted by others, not only his friends, but his enemies
also: The words, the lives, and behavior of princes are observed of the people.
and so much the sooner, because he is the King, on whom before all others,
the eyes of all the people are bent, as on a famous city set on an hill: or as
on a light on the table. And truly the errors and mean faults of Princes
(whose lives are set forth to be seen, observed and followed of many)
appear often wonderful great, as in the face of a man a little web or
scarre is sooner seen and disliked, then a far greater spot or blemish in
any other the parts of the body. And then, as the eclipsing or defect of the
Sun brings a great annoyance to the earth, and no less calamity to men,
and other inferior treasures: those faults and errors of the king, who should
chiefly direct all others to the common good, and highest felicity engender no
small perturbation and other great inconueniencies in the affairs of his
Kingdom and Commonwealth. An admonition to princes.
Therefore it is meet, that the king, and such high estates do walk advisedly,
both in word and deed, with honorable behauior: and that Princes be right
wary, that they neither do nor suffer to be done any thing which themselves
would not that the people should not observe or imitate, or justly dislike in
them: above all, they must regard, that they neither commit nor command any
thing contrary to the Law of God, and the honor of that place wherein they
that stand are called Gods: because they represent the Majesty of God, and
reign by his providence and power, to do equity and righteousness unto the
people. And herein observing duty they stand devoyd of all dread, honored
of their Subjects and others, and go forth most courageously in their lawful
enterprises, no more respecting the sinister talks of their malicious enemies,
then the great barbed horses fear of those little Curres which bark at their
heels. But when these rules be neither observed nor followed, both the honor
of the place is distained by those persons, and themselves in fine requited
with obloquie and diffame. For as the great ramping Lion so greedy of his pray,
is made afraid both at the crowing of the Cock, and at the sight of the
Cockes-combe: so many mighty and high Potentates of the earth in the knowledge
of their own slidings have been wonderfully annoyed and astonished, both by
the hard reports of very mean persons, and by their churlish behauior toward
them and their honor upon such occasions. And I do no less fear, that both
the reports which are carried abroad, and the opinions of men with their
demeanure occasioned thereby toward the king, has both much disgraced his
high magnificencie, and disquieted his happy peace. Moreover, there be, which
stick not to except against his government. For as the rule whereby men work,
must first be made straight and plain, before the work can thereby be either
corrected or directed: so a prince ought to be free from all heinous vices:
yea, it is required that he be perfect and sound in all princely virtues,
before he be able to rule well or to correct, or to direct others. Neither
indeed (amongst the wisest) have such persons been esteemed worthy to bear
rule, in the affairs of a Kingdom, or to instruct guide, and direct others,
in the Church, which have not thoroughly subdued their affections, restrained
their appetites, abandoned their lusts, and bridled their natural passions.
Truly these, and such like are the ordinary matters now in question, and much
ruminated among the very rusticall and Country people, in such sort, as the
ears of them that hear the same may glowe, the King himself may be sorry,
and all we of his Court utterly ashamed.

And first against the king himself there be which thus object. Objections
against King Solomon.
Although that King Solomon has in his time far excelled all the kings in
the world in wisdom, wealth, glory and other things of the highest request:
yet beyond all expectation, he has wonderfully transgressed and sinned against
God, against his people, against his own honor. And with this they bring
forth against him all whatsoever my Lord Zadok has said before, and a great
deal more. Wherein they point at him, as at one of the fools of Israel, far
unmeet the dignity of his place, honor of his calling, and reverence of his
Age. for, as he best knows the nature of all herbs and beasts, he should
in this (they say) have imitated the nature of either the herb, or of the
beast Chamoeleon: whereof the one will ever change the color of her leaves to
the quality of the place wherein she grows: and the other will resemble the
colors and shows objected. Thus it was said of Saul, i. Sam. 10.6.
as soon as Samuel had anointed him for King over Israel, that he was
changed into another man. Thus also our Lord the king behaved himself after
that he was anointed and proclaimed King in the place of his Father David: and
thus he should have worthily continued and retained the honor of his place,
especially in his elder years, wherein is required sobriety, gravity,
holiness, wisdom, zeal, and perfection. This the king knew well-enough:
for he wanted no wisdom, no knowledge, no understanding, no judgment. But
that notwithstanding, he abused both his calling, place and age, whereof it
is, that as they which come out of hot bathes do suddenly cool more
vehemently, and as that water which has been once heat, seems to be more
cold then any other: and as they most deadly hate one another, which have
been sometimes friends when they fall at variance: so turning himself from
the Lord his God, and from the use of those princely and heroical virtues,
wherein he was first exercised; he is esteemed execrable wicked in the eyes
of wisemen. Therefore, There be among them, which do not only call into
question his election, and remission, but also do judge him a person profane,
reprobate and damnable, and so not meet to be a King, much less to be the
King of Israel. For as the judgment of the tree is taken from the
consideration of the fruit, and of the fountains by the taste or use of the
waters: so gather they this censure from the consideration of the kings life
and demeanor, for whiles a man continues wallowing in sin, without true
repentance, he declares no pardon: and he whose sins are not pardoned has
none hope of health. Again, he that repents not of his sins when he has
sinned, is a profane person, he that obtains not mercy is a reprobate: and
he that is shut out from salvation is damned. Howbeit, the Lord forbid, that
this thing should be found or justly proved in our Lord the King of Israel.
Herence, also they object against the sermons, words, Exceptions to Solomon's
doctrine and words.
and doctrines of King Solomon, as of fruits unwholesome growing of such an
evil tree. For neither could his understanding (as they say) henceforth be
perfect to this purpose: for as they which suddenly turn themselves to the
shadow which have seen the Sun, have their eyes dazeled and cannot as yet
see clearly: so it cannot be, that be which has turned away his mind from
spiritual contemplations to the obscure lusts of the flesh, should so soon
afterward be of perfect understanding in those heavenly mysteries and divine
doctrines. And here it is remembered, what the King himself has sometimes
said: That wisdom enters not into a wicked soul, nor dwells in a body
that is subject to sin. Therefore they from hence argue: Solomon has not
presumed to use the name Jehovah of late. The book of the Ecclesiastes not
well understood of many, whereof it was that so many evil opinions have bin
fathered thereon.
that the King in this time is not replenished with the perfect wisdom, and
so can neither utter, nor teach wisdom unto others, by any deeds or words
of his. *But yet they are more bold on these their assertions, because the
King has not of late used the most holy Name (...) Jehovah, which is proper to
the Almighty, either in his private talk, or in those his Words which he
has lately uttered before his Princes, or in that Book of his, called the
Song of Songs, which they hold and will esteem a cause sufficient, that both
those his Words, and Books, should be not only suspected, but also
rejected as profane, and unprofitable for the Church of God. Yea, they say
morouer, that from hence (as from a bitter root) will issue forth sundry
monstrous opinions and dangerous doctrines, by the which, the most profane
persons shall strengthen their prophanites, the ungodly their impieties, the
superstitious their superstitions, the sinners their sins. Therefore (as we
are of Israel, and ought not to be polluted with the manners of the heaten) so
should we before all others abandon those and such like works and words,
which corrupt good manners, and that kind of learning which confounds the good
constitution of a man's health, and hasteneth his destruction, as for the
conservation of bodily health, the Phisicians do advise men to eschew those
dainty meats which provoke them to eat when they are not hungry, and those
delicate drinks which tempt them to drink being not thirsty. And of this
kind they object, that the king has much spoken in this his old age. But
howsoever it be, we may be sure of this, that as the best wine loses his
verdit and grace, when it is infused into foul and filthy vessels: So the
words of the king be they never so good and profitable (in right estimation)
shall by this his ungodly life and polluted behavior, loose both their right
grace and commendation in the judgment of all men. I am right sorry I was
occasioned to say thus much of my Lord the King, and of his Sermons and last
Words.

Azariah for the king, and his words.
Then answered Azariah (in the behalf of all the other Princes) Indeed (as ye
have said) there may be many things objected, by such, as being not only
ignorant and neither able to discern between things holy and profane, and so
perceive not that the fault lies rather in their own synister interpretations
of the Kings works and words, then in the works and words themselves: but
also by such as regard not to yield honor to them to whom honor belongs,
and little care whom they wound with their tongues, or whose words or works
they deprave and sclander, (as my Lord Zadok has before well noted). Give not
sentence before the matter be heard.
But let us advise all them that come after us: that they give not sentence in
a matter before they hear it with discretion, lest it turn to their folly and
shame, pro. 18. A Caveat.
especially in these matters of God and the king: and that they beware, that
they be not seduced and led away, by the sophistry and guilfull practizes of
such deriders, from the true use of this the kings Solace, and so consequently
from the way that leads to the highest felicity and best good. Genesis ^.
The spirit of God is ever wont to reprove them that be unjust in judgment,
and thereof that cursed and reprobated Serpent is already condemned. But here
we heartily request you (most reverend Zadok) which are adorned and beautified
with that right * Vrim and Thumim, That is, knowledge and perfection.
to speak in the defense of king Solomon, our Sovereign Lord, and of his
words: and say whatsoever the Lord, shall put in your mouth to be spoken,
without fear or partiality: and we will not only give ear unto you, but
also be right thankful. We doubt not, but that after your answers to all
those and such like objections heard and waighed with deliberation, Note well,
what will be in the end resolved of Solomon and his words, if they be weighed in
an equal balance.
many more shall not only suppress their rash judgments concerning the king
and his words: but acknowledge and confess with us, That all things are not so
damned nor so dangerous, nor so doubtful, as they have imagined them to be.
Nay, the Accusers themselves shall grant rather, that Solomon our king, is
neither a damned, nor reprobated, nor a profane person: but that he is an
excellent Saint of the Lord, a true penitent person. that has obtained mercy
and forgiveness after his sin, and henceforth expects the joys of his
Lord in everlasting happiness, through faith in the most holy Messiah, whom
he did most worthily prefigure and set forth in the world, according to the
foreknowledge and good pleasure of the everlasting God.

CHAP. XXV.
Zadok proves by many arguments and reasons that Solomon was not a profane or
damned person: But a Saint of the Lord and a right excellent member of the
Church.
THen Zadok (as one most willing to defend the honor of his most Sovereign
Lord King Solomon) answered again and said. I most heartily thank you (my
Lords all) that ye have vouchsaued me this honor. For I esteem it an honor
to my self to be thought worthy by your wisdoms to speak, and to have your
audience in the defense of my Lord the King, and his cause. Neither do I
think, but that in conscience and duty I am holden so to do: for it in not
meet that I should hear my good Lord, and his words to be sclandered or
evil reported, and to pass it over in silence, yea, I shall be thought
therein to give consent to those sinister reports. And first, as touching the
king: The king is not to be justified in his sins nor excused.
it cannot be denied, but that he has (indeed) wonderfully doated on his
strange wives, and has hearkened too much to them, which ever retaining that
evil opinion and custom, would never receive nor admit that counsel which
the wisest of all men living gave them, and has been by them allured, seduced
and led away from Jehovah his God, against whole Majesty (by their
instigation) he has wrought wickedness. And therefore, howsoever some might
allegorize of the transgressions and sins of our Lord the king: yet will not
I, nor may I in equity justify him or excuse him therein, no more then I may
either justify or excuse the sin of Adam in his fall (howsoever there be
which call it an happy fall) or the sin of Jacob, in his two wives, howsoever
the privilege thereof came in with the promise, of the multiplication of the
holy seed: or of Noah in his drunkenness, or of Lot in his incest, or of
Judah in his whoredom, or of the kings father in his murder, pride and
adultrey: wherein it is certain that they both displeased God, and deciphered
their humane imperefctions and infirmities: Nor was it the will of God, that
such their sins (albeit they were his own children) should be concealed or
covered, but rather he would that (for some good causes) they should be
revealed and reproved. He that justifies the sinner is abominable before God.
For as sin is that which only provoke and displeases the Lord, and
therefore is no less odious unto him then a most ougly and venomous Serpent
unto a man: so he that either justifies or excuses the sinner in his sin,
shall not be holden guiltless before Gods judgment seat. Nevertheless, as
godly wisdom, and holy love have both taught and persuaded a reverend opinion
and like construction of those men, A reverent opinion of the repentent sinners.
their actions, and words, in whom godliness and the right worthy virtues in
habit could not be utterly ouerthrown with one or a few contrary actions,
(whiles the mercy of God remaining with them) they held fast the foundatio^s
of their holy hope: so is it not meet nor convenient, that we should rashly
cast into dangerous suspense either the holiness of our Lord, The holiness,
repentance, remission and salvation of Solomon proved.
king Solomon, or his repentance after his sin, or his remission after his
repentance, or the hope of his eternal salvation, the which depending on the
everlasting love, and sweet grace of God in the merit of the holy Messiah, may
not only be presumed, but also rightly gathered and sufficiently proved, as
by your patience you shall hear. Satan's subtilty.
Indeed Satan (the great enemy of mankind) has assayed to deal with the king,
as the Eagle deals with the Goat: for when the Eagle comes to hurt the
Goat, to whom she has a mortal enemitie, she first assayeth to take away
his sight by pulling out his eyes, and then afterward she kills him:
against whom the Goat defends himself with his horns: So this Enemy,
having a deadly envy to the King and his glory, though to dispoyle him of his
knowledge and wisdom: but he nevertheless by his faith and hope in the
Lord as with two strong horns has resisted him, so far, that though he
were much wounded in his body, he has yet preserved and kept safe his yes.
Solomon's eyes
For (as I have heard him say, and do find it by experience) his wisdom
remained with him. Neither was he drawn from the foundation of his hope. For
as the trees which are strong deep rooted, and have sufficient sap in
themselves, cannot easily be overcome by either the violent heat, or noisome
cold, when such as have neither roots, nor strength, nor sap do wither and
decay: so they which are rooted and grounded on the sure foundation of their
hope, and have in them the habit of divine virtues, cannot utterly be quayled
or overthrown by either the heat or cold of afflictions, or the vehemence of
Satan's assaults, or the alluring lusts of the flesh, or the concupiscence of
Nature: for they be holden by the right hand of Gods spirit, and stand like
the tree planted by the waters side, psalm. 1.
whereof David the Kings father could so divinely modulate and sing.

Therefore I will first prove, that our Lord king Solomon, is not (...) a
profane or damned person: Chadesch. Chadosch.
but (...) a person holy, dedicated to God, and a member of the holy
Congregation. For in this Antithesis or contrariety, that which is the one
cannot be the other: and that the Lord has not taken his Spirit utterly
from him, (howsoever his Graces were shadowed in him when he sinned) as he is
not willing to cast them away whom he knew before, or elected, howsoever he
seem to hide his face from them in his displeasure: and they only are
fore-knowen and elected which are his Saints and holy ones, (howsoever they
appear or are esteemed before the face of worldly men): Howbeit, although
there be many notable things externally to be seen in the Kings person, which
yet are not to be neglected nor forgotten, but well considered remembered and
applied to purpose (as in the nature of those Symboles, Figures, Types and
shadows which teach and put us in mind of things as well spiritual and
eternal, as future, of the which we have and retain many at this time): yet
will I not begin with those external things, lest peradventure any man
should say, that the King is not therefore the better in the spirit, nor the
more acceptable to God, because he is outwardly glorious, no more then he is a
good king that reigns in a wealthy country, or he a wise governor which is
placed in a goodly ship, or he a worthy man, who wears a fair Coat or that
a perfect Steed which is arraied with a golden Saddle. Solomon is a figure of
Messiah,
But I will aspire higher in the consideration of our king, to express and
confirm unto you his excellency, as well before the Lord, as before mortal
men. And namely, and chiefly in that, whereby it pleases the Lord his God,
that he should prefigurate and foreshew that holy Messiah, whom we do verily
believe to come into the world, and do daily expect. But first of this most
glorious Person (I mean the Messiah) it may please you to hear me a few words
(for they shall be both sweet and comfortable to the true hearted Isralites)
that from thence I may the better argue for the Kings holiness to your
content.

To this the Princes gladly accorded, The comfort of the tidings of the Messiah
being most willing to hear tell of that most holy and sweet Messiah, of Gods
mercy promised, so long ago, typed, shadowed, prefigured, and now so earnestly
expected. For as their is nothing more pleasing to the prisoner, then to hear
of his liberty, more wished for to the hungry, then meat: more comfortable to
the sick then the coming of a cunning Phisician: and more joyful to the
condemned to death, then the glad tidinges of pardon and life: so what should
be more pleasing, more desired, more comfortable, and more joyful to us which
are captiued to the Serpent, starued for want of graces, sick and sore in
sin, and by a just sentence condemned to death: yea, to eternal death, then
to hear the glad tidings of the coming of ye most noble Prince, ye careful
pastor, that faithful Phisician, and that mighty Savior, which will (as he is
best able) release us, refresh us, heal us, pardon and save us? Say on
therefore (most reverend Father) for we long to hear of those cheerful
things. zadoke tells of man's fall and misery. Genesis 3.
* Then hearken (said he) I know it is not hidden from you (for Moses has
plainly written thereof in the book Berescith, and it is often read unto you)
that our first Parents by the Serpents subtlety, took the forbidden fruit in
Paradise, and therein break the commandment: the pain and inconvenience
thereon threatened for the same was, that they should dye the death that same
day. Therefore it followed, that they were exiled and kept out from the presence
of God, they were wounded with the act of their transgression, they were
captiued in the Serpents bands, they became odious to their maker, they were
dispoiled of all their divine virtues, they were opposed to all miseries, and
lastly subdued unto ghastfull death and hell torments. Lo such was the woeful
condition of those our first parents. Howbeit, this had not been so
intolerable and grievous unto us, had not the effect of this transgression
been extended and propagated by nature on all Adams children and posterity,
but it is too true that all men are thereby holden guilty, as the naughty
children of like parents, and as unwholesome fruits of the same tree. This
David the kings father has considered and acknowledged, Psalm. 51.
in Mismor Ledavid; Behold I was shapen in wickedness and in sin has my
mother co^ceived me: yea, and when the Lord looked down from heaven, he saw
that all were gone out of the way and were become abominable, and that none
of them did good, no, not one. The recovery of man by Messiah.
But yet seeing Jehovah our God was most willing to recover and recure man (I
mean those whom he had in his love fore known for his own, elected to life,
and appointed for his glory) he did in wisdom devise and provide a wonderful
mean thereunto, wherein his mercy striving with his Justice might yet in the
end conclude for Equity, by the which, this man who was indged and justly
condemned, should be pardoned, and yet the divine justice not infringed. How
this could be compassed by Gods wisdom and providence, ye shall hereafter
understand. Here let us consider in the nature of the divine goodness, that God
is more ready to pardon and to save, then to judge and destroy the children of
his election and grace: and the rather for that he loves them, has created
them in his own image, has appointed them for his glory, and would not they
should be lost for ever. Again, he considered man's frailty and pitied it,
he was merciful and expressed it, he was liberal and extended it, he was the
best father, and declared his affection, he was willing to save, and performed
his will. Therefore, he would neither suffer sin either to overthrow him, or
to reign or to rest on him, but hating and abhorring sin from his heart he did
destroy the same by his grace: he had compassion on man's miserable condition,
therefore he little waighed, yea, he forgot the injury that man did him: he
showed himself ready both to satisfy for his guilt and to heal his pain, he
was more ready to pardon man, then man was to ask mercy, and finally when in
justice he should and might, if he would have thrown him down into the depth of
the nethermost hell, he nevertheless, after his mercy recovered him, restored
him to grace, and raised him up into the highest heaven. And this to effect
when neither angels nor powers, either in heaven or earth, or under the earth
could do the deed: he proposed his own Son, even that most holy and
eternal word of God by whom all things were made. Genesis 1.1. whom he
appointed to deal for man's guilte, to satisfy the divine Justice and to
compass and effect the most excellent work of man's redemption, by and in the
which he might gather and join again unto himself a chaste spowsesse as
unto whom he might express the greatness of his love, and continue as an
husband or head to defend, preserve, maintain and beautify the same for ever.
The obedience of Messiah.
Thereupon the Almighty was not so ready that man by this mean should be
recovered: but that son also himself (as an earnest wower that seeks for
her whom his soul loves) was also willing and obedient to do and perform
all things convenient therein. According to the which, the Kings Father did
sing in his person.

Burnt offeringes and sacrifices for sin thou have not required: psalm. 40.^^.
Then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me,
that I should fulfill thy will: O my God, I am content to do it. Thus was the
most holy son and word of God brought in, talking with his father touching
man's redemption and showing both his willingness and obedience, to relieve the
state of mankind! Hereof it was, that the Lord God decreed and said that the
woman's seed should tread on the serpents head, Genesis 3.
which signified, that one should be borne of the woman's body (the which the
Serpent had corrupt) that should not only purify her and all mankind, but
also confound the Serpent and all his power. From the which time, our fathers
have expected, and we (as yet) expect and wait for the coming of that holy
Seed.

Now here (by the way) we may consider that albeit the Lord God be wonderful
merciful unto mankind, he does not overthrow therein his Justice, How the Lord
was both just and merciful.
but observing either, he expresses great Equity in a wonderful fort. For
behold he laid that on his son, which was due unto man, and again he gave
that unto man, which was only proper to his son: he laid man's sin and
faults on his son, he imputed the righteousness of his son unto man. In
the one appeared his justice, in the other his mercy. And in them both conjoined
equitye. That which was due unto man, the holy seed takes on himself, namely
man's punishment, which man's nature could not bear, that which the holy seed
merited, namely eternal life, the Lord gave unto man, for the sin of man
which deserved death, was imputed unto this seed, and the Justice of the holy
seed which deserved Heaven, was imputed unto man, I mean, unto them only that
by faith depend on that promise. and those be the same, whom the Lord God had
before loved, elected and predestined to eternal glory, and whom he would
not by any means permit to perrish and dye for ever. This is the only
recovery of mankind, and hope of his health? This is that eternal verity and
object of our faith! This is the same, whereunto all the law and the Prophets,
and all the tipes and figures both of them before us, and of them now in daily
use, do aim, point, Promises of the Messiah. Genesis 6. Genesis 22. Genesis 22.18.
and direct us for all succor, help, comfort and relief. The decree and
promise of this seed was after this confirmed to Noah, to whom the Lord
said: With thee will I make my covenant, and thou shall come into the Arc. But
more plainly to our father Abraham, to whom the Lord declared this Savior,
and said of him. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
The same which was called the seed of the Woman, is now called the seed of
Abraham: for the Lord would that he should come of Abraham's Seed after the
flesh. Prophesies of Messiah. Genesis 49. Exodus 4.13.
This is that whom Jacob our Father called Shilo and prophesyed that he should
come in the tribe of Judah. And to him should be the gathering of the people.
This is that same to whom Moses pointed in the book Velleschemoth, when he
said to the Lord. Send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send:
Deuteronomy. 18.15.18.
and in his book Haddebarim the Lord himself calls him a Prophet, saying
thus unto Moses I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren like
unto thee. This is the same the holy man Job calls his Redeemer, whom he
knew to live. Job. 19. Number. 14.17.
This is that bright Star and Scepter of the which Baalam did prophecy in
Moses Book Vaiedabber, saying, there shall come a Star of Jacob, and rise a
Scepter in Israel. 2. Sam. 7.12.13 14.
This is that true King of peace promised to David the Kings Father in 2.
Schemuel. 7. that Seed of David, and David's Lord, whose throne shall be
established for ever. To be short, this is that lively Image of God, and King
of glory without all spot or blemish, most mighty, wise and excellent, which
shall in his time new build Heirusalem, and prepare himself an holy Temple
and house for his worship therein. I mean, a Church spiritually framed and
gloriously garnished after that proportion and form which David the Kings
Father gave and prescribed him according to the writing thereof, which he had
received from Jehovah his God, and the which the King has in his time of peace
builded and perfected accordingly.

Therefore, of this holy Seed sang the Princely Prophet in many Psalms,
calling him sometimes Gods Son: sometimes a King: psalm. 2.45.110.
sometimes the King of glory: sometimes a Priest eternal after the order of
Melchisedek: sometimes his Lord: sometimes his God: sometimes his Redeemer:
sometimes his Savior: sometimes the Messiah, or Anointed of Jehovah.

And as this holy Seed has been thus promised and foretold of, and believed
to come into the world: Shadows, tipes and figures of Messiah.

The tree of life in paradise Abel.

Abraham. Noah.


so has he been shadowed, typed, and prefigured: As first, by the tree of
life in Paradise, of the which if our first parents had taken and eaten, they
had never dyed, but should have lived forever. Next by the Sacrifices of Abel,
Abraham, and others, in the which, it pleased God to declare himself gracious.
This Noah also prefigured, when the Lord made him the finisher of the old
world, and the beginner of the new. To the same pointed Melchisedek and
Melchisalem, Melchisedek.
to show that he was a King, and a Priest: A King of peace and righteousness and
a priest of the highest God for ever, as without beginning and without ending,
for the number of his days may not be reckoned or known. The same was
signified in the ladder our father Jacob saw, Jacobs ladder. Moses. Iosuah.
by the which the angels did ascend and descend to and from heaven. He was
fore-shewed a deliverer from thraldom in Moses, and a Savior in Iosuah: for
Moses brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt, and Iosuah conducted them,
inherited them, and preserved them in the promised land. Also Aaron the priest
of the Lord prefigured him with his Vrim and Thumim. Aaron. The pascall Lamb.
etc,
To the same also served the use of the Pascall Lamb and those other symboles
and sacraments in the Wilderness, as the Manna from heaven, the Water from the
rock, Judges.
and such like. In the book of * Shophtim, is mention made of many bodily
Saviors, by the which was mistically showed the person and office of Messiah.
There was Sampson, Gedeon, Othoniel, Ieptha and Samuel. And within our age,
Sampson. Gedeon. Othoniel. Ieptha. Samuel. David.
the calling, anointing, and manner of the reign and condition of David
foreshewed the same. For all these things (my Lords) have and do rightly aim
to that most holy Messiah, whom the Lord God would that men should believe and
expect, and hope to come, and at his coming love and embrace as the only
person in and through whom the divine Justice is satisfied, the heavenly will
fulfilled, the Serpent and all his fiery darts quenched, and mankind pardoned,
healed, recovered, and blessed for ever. Now, this being said as an
introduction to that which follows, we will come to speak of our Soueraign
Lord K. Solomon whom I trust to prove and declare a Saint of the Lord, and a
right worthy member in his Church, and so consequently, no reprobate, nor
profane, nor damned person. for if the former be proved, we shall by the same
easily clear him of the latter, as before I have said. The Princes at this
word seemed much comforted, and showed their willingness yet further to hear
what Zadoke would say. For this said they shall not only please and satisfy
us, but all others, as well they which now live, as they which shall come after
us. Therefore proceed (most reverend Father) to prove that which ye have
assumed for the king. And we will gladly give both an attentive ear unto your
words, and unto you condign thanks.

CHAP XXVI.
Zadoke preveth that K. Solomon is a Saint of the Lord.
THen Zadok proceeded and reasoned for the King saying

Whosoever is made and ordained, by the will, wisdom, and providence of God,
a most lively and excellent figure of that holy Messiah the son of God: the
same is not a damned, or reprobate, or profane person, but he is a Saint of
the Lord,

But our Lord King Solomon is made and ordained by the will, wisdom and
providence of God, a most lively and excellent figure of that holy Messiah, the
sun of God.

Therefore our Lord K. Solomon is not a damned reprobate, or profane person,
but he is a Saint of the Lord.

Now, although no man may justly deny either the first, or the second
proposition, in any thing whatsoever: yet (as I perceive ye are willing to
listen) ye shall hear me to declare and prove either, and so concludet or the
King. Surely (my Lords) it were not only a great absurdity to hold it, but an
horrible thing to imagine, that the most holy Messiah the son of the
everlasting God, that bright morning Star, that right holy Seed, that high
divine Priest, that excellent prophet, and king of Glory so well resembling the
almighty in holiness, beauty, and in all perfection, should be prefigured and
declared by a profane and unholy person: and that the excellency of his high
dignity and royal government should be typed by any thing common or unclean.
Neither have we found such inequalities in the proportions of the law of the
Prophets and holy writings, especially touching the promised and expected
Messiah. But this we find, that as the best things be best figured and
declared in and by that which is most like or near in nature, kind and
quality: so is the dignity, person and function of the most holy Messiah
prefigured and foreshewed according to the wisdom and providence of the
Almighty, where the types agree well with the things typed. Therefore it was
commanded in the law, that the Lambs which were taken for the sacrifices
should be clean without all blemishes, Exodus 12.5. Genesis 4.4. Aaron a figure of
Messiah. Exodus 28.30. Levit. 8. and 21.6.18
as such as Habel offered up to the Lord, of the best of his flocks. Therefore
Aaron the Lords Priest (who in his body prefigured the body of Messiah, and in
his garments expressed the excellency and perfection of his graces and virtues)
was a person without defectes or blemishes of body, and glorious in his
beautiful ornaments, according to the commandment, the which also my self
(being the present high Priest) am holden to retain and use, and the which,
for that Abiather my predecessor used not, but abused, he was justly deprived.
Moses also (who brought our fathers out of the house of bondage and the same
whom that prophet should resemble was a man well-beloved of God, well learned
sanctified and made like unto him in the glory of his Angels: Likewise the
Captain Iosuah (whom the Lord appointed and enabled to lead our fathers into
this promised land) was a man full of the spirit of wisdom, and the Lord his
God both stre^gthned and encouraged him, whereby he might be made a meet
figure of the true Iehosuah, our leader and guide into the land of the living.
To be brief, David, the Kings father (who in his time bare an excellent
figure of that Messiah both in his anointing, nature, reign, exaltation, and
humiliation) was a man after Gods own heart, and every way furnished with
divine graces, and right princely virtues meet for the same. The like may be
said of our forefathers Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph,
Sampson the Nazarite, and others, in and by whom the Lord our God would tipe
and foreshew his dear son the Messiah, notwithstanding all their humane
imperfections and fleshly infirmities. All these things said the Princes) have
we heard with great delight and that to our full satisfaction in that part.
The princes.
For (indeed) such is the nature of the divine proportions in the law, in the
Prophets and in the psalms: And therefore, he which by the wisdom, will and
providence of God is made a lively and excellent figure of that holy Messiah,
must of necessity be a Saint, and not a damned wretch, reprobate, or
profane. But now what will ye produce for the proof of this, that our Lord
King Solomon (among those blessed Fathers) is by the same wisdom, Solomon is
a figure of the holy Messiah.
will and providence, or dained and made a right figure of that most holy
Messiah? This proposition (said Zadok) can neither be denied nor abandoned:
but confessed and received as well of them now living as of al them that shall
come after us in all posterities, who in the due consideration thereof with the
circumstances, shall grant and conclude with us in the same. And this may
easily be gathered and proved to put all men out of doubt. First in that
according to the divine providence and direction, he has built and garnished
that right glorious Temple in Jerusalem, Solomon in the building of the Temple,
figured the Messiah. (...)
an house dedicated to the name of the Lord: the which doubtless stands for
a perfect figure of ye holy Koheleh or Church of the Lord our God, whether
mystical in the Congregation of them that serve God after his will declared in
his word: or spiritual in the heart and mind of all the faithful where it
pleases the holy spirit of discipline to dwell: or glorious in heaven of all
them that be delivered from hence and translated into the society of the
celestial angels. An house indeed, The Church figured. Genesis 3.
which none either in heaven or in earth can or must build or garnish but
only that most holy Messiah and promised Seed. And this was prefigured by the
woman's body, between whom and the Serpent the Lord set enmity: and signified
in that Adam called her Havah the mother of all living. Herein are found those
kindreds of the earth, who in the promised Seed are blessed for ever. And this
is that princely spowsesse, indeed, of the which the King in a prophetical
Spirit spoke in his Schir-hasschirim: moreover, this is that same which was
shadowed in the family of faithful Abraham, Cant. 1.
in the Arc of Noah the righteous, which was builte and provided according to
the pattern the Lord gave him and mankind preserved, in and by the house of
King David, wherein God was honored and served in the true use of the law, 2.
Sam. 5.
prayer, and the holy sacrifices, and by the mount or castle of Zion, from the
which both the halte and the blind were taken away: that the bright Vrim and
right Thumim with all knowledge and perfection might dwell there. And the same
is doubtless expressed in this great and holy house, which the king has built
for the name of his God, wherein, we may not imagine that the King has been
more curious then godly, more precise then profitable, or more sumptuous then
wise, considering that there is not the least jot or point therein, which has
not either his proper use, or mistical entendeme^t: as in place hereafter ye
may better hear and consider thereof with judgment. And thereof we may gather
and conclude, that as the holy Messiah was killed in Abel, delivered his church
figurately in Noah, was foreshewed the Father of all nations in Abraham, was
offered up on the Altarin Isaac, was blessed in Jacob, was a deliverer of
mankind out of the serpents tyranny in Moses, was a Savior of the Lords
people in Iehosuah, and borne, and anointed, and humbled, and exalted, and
favored in David: so has he built his Church figurately in our Lord King
Solomon. Furthermore, this is strongly ratified as well by the report and
testimony of those records which the prophet Nathan has written and left unto
us: as by the consent of our own knowledge and conscience, which have both
seen and heard, and in wisdom considered one thing with another. By the
which we are sure, that all those divine promises which the Lord God made
as well to King Solomon as to David, his Father do aim and point further then
either to David, or to Solomon, yea, they concern that most excellent K. the
Messiah which was so promised and typed, and believed, and expected to come,
and that in many things, the which the K. has begun or expressed
mistically, shall be accomplished made and performed indeed in the true
Messiah, and that some things are common both in the one and in the other, as by
comparing them and their actions shall be easily perceived in due time. But first
concerning this figure (I mean King Solomon) When King David had determined to
build an house for the name o^ the Lord: 2. Sam. 7.13.
and that the house should be made and proportioned according to the writing
and charge which the Lord had given him: Yet said the Lord; I will not that
thou shall build that house: but out of thy loins shall spring one that shall
build the same. For thou art a man of war, and art much troubled as yet: The
building of two houses by two sundry persons.
but he shall be a man of rest: and I will give him rest on every side, that he
may the better compass and effect the same. By the which Oracle, David did not
only understand, that his will and pleasure was, yt such an house should be
builded, which should prefigurate his holy congregation: but also he learned, by
whom those two houses should be builded: Howbeit, not by King David, although
he were a man after Gods own heart, and in many things a true figure of the
Messiah but by his Seed: and yet not both by one and the same person: but the
one should be made by his son Solomon, whom he begat on Bethsabe: the other
by the holy Messiah, who albeit he be the son of the highest, is after the
flesh David's son. For he is to rise not only in Iudahs-tribe: but also in
the house and lineage of David, according as the same David said thereof in the
person of God: I have made a faithful promise to David, and I will not alter
it, of the seed of thy body will I raise up to set upon thy throne, whose days
shall be as the days of heaven. And therein, he would that as figures go
before things figured, and voices before words: so the building of this
material house should go before the building of the Church (as touching the
times and seasons wherein the Lord would work and manifest his heavenly will and
pleasure therein as Baalam said, I shall see him but not now, Number. 24.
and behold him but not yet (for every thing under the heavens has his
appointed time) And so, that this former house should be a figure of the
latter in all due proportions, and the Builder of the one should prefigurate
the Builder of the other. Therefore, as the former is a true figure of the
Church of Messiah, which he shall in the due time gather and build to
himself: so is King Solomon (the son of David, who has built this Temple) a
true figure of that Messiah. And truly albeit King David was not permitted to
build either house in his days: yet, toward the building and performance of
all things in and concerning them both, he gathered and provided many things
of the highest request. For toward the material house he gathered and made
ready heiued stones, plenty of Iron, 1. Chro. 21.
Doors, Brass without waighte, Cedar trees without number, and he made
ordinances and laws, and prepared things in great abundance, the which also
are not without their signification of greater matters therein shadowed.

Again toward both the Mystical and spiritual house to be builded in the
due time, as he was the man whom the Lord chose to reign over his
inheritance, and for his excellent Songs was called the sweet singer of
Israel: so he exercised himself in the divine services, he ruled the Lords
people and prepared them to the Lords house; yea, he composed and modulated
many spiritual and sweet Psalms, Hymns, and Songs to the praise of God,
and the edification of his Church: he provided also and left behind him, for
the heavenly Solomon, many prophesies, testimonies, and holy examples, from and
by the which he might vouchsafe at his coming into the world to take, gather
and confirm, yea, and to conform to purpose his doctrine and works for the
better edification of his Church. For he has plainly spoken before in the
Spirit of the nature, the dignity, the function, the obedience, the
diligence, the travails, the manner of life, the manner of death, the rising
and the wonderful glory of that King of Israel, and declared himself a lively
figure of the same.

Moreover howsoever those promises before made do point and belong properly
to the most holy Messiah, 2. Sam. 7.12.
and not to any man besides him: (as they do indeed) yet to declare that
David, the Kings Father did not wholly exclude Solomon his Son borne of
Bethsabe, but did so understand the words spoken in this case, as that
literally the same Solomon was the person especially chose^ and appointed to
build that material house therefore he said I had in mine heart to build an
house of rest for the Arc of the covenant of the Lord: and for the
footestoole of our God: 1. Chro. 28.2.
and had made ready for the building: But god said to me, thou shall not build
an house for my name, because thou have been a man of war, and have shed
blood. Again. And he said unto me Solomon thy Son, Verse 6.
he shall build me an house and courts: for I have chosen him to be my Son
and I will be his father. Then turning himself to Solomon, Verse 9.
he said And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the Lord of thy fathers and
serve him with a pure heart, and with a willing mind. Again. Take heed now:
for the Lord has chosen thee to build him an house of a Sanctuary: be strong
therefore, and show thy self a man. Verse 10.
And in this sense did K. Solomon also take the words of the Lord which Nathan
the prophet brought him, as himself testified, when sending to Hyram the
Tyrian king for further provision, he said: 1. King. 5.2.
Thou know that David my father could not build an house unto the name of
Jehovah his God, for the wars which were about him on every side, until the
Lord put them under the soales of his feet. But not Jehovah my God has given
me rest on every side, so that their is neither adversary nor evil to resist.
And behold I am determined to build an house unto the name of Jehovah my God,
as Jehovah spoke unto David my father saying: Thy son whom I will set upon
thy seat for thee, he shall build an house unto my name. 2 Chro. 6.10.
And that Solomon did this perform accordingly, himself testified again
saying: I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the seat
of Israel, as Jehovah promised, and have built an house for the name of Jehovah
the God of Israel. For indeed, 1. Kings 6.1. 2. Chro. 3.1.
in the four hundredth and fower-score year after that our fathers came out of
the land of Aegipt and in the fowrth year of the reign of King Solomon upon
Israel, April. 1. Kings 6, 38. October.
and in the month * Ziff (which is the second in our account he began to build
this house, and in the eleventh year, in the month * Bull, (which is the
eight) was the same house finished throughout all the parts thereof, according
to the fashion of it, and so was he seven years in the building of it, that
in the mount Moriah, in the place where first Cain, and Abel, and afterward
Noah offered their sacrifices, yea and in the Alley of Arnon, there wherein,
David (when he saw the Angel with his drawn Sword) was commanded to rear
his altar. Nevertheless, to signify, that both this person and his work had
a further and higher aim, then either we could see with the eye, or
comprehend in thought, much less utter with the tongue (as the things of God
are such as pass all men's understanding) we heard what the King himself
said when he dedicated the house unto God: And will God in very deed (said
he) dwell with men on earth? Behold heaven, 2, Chro. 6.18.
and the heaven above all heavens may not contain him! How much less the
house which I have built? For the King (as he had the wisdom of the holy
Spirit) knew right well, that this should prefigurate the Church of the holy
Messiah, and that not only the same which is or shall be militant on earth, but
that spiritual Temple of God in the soul and mind of man, yea, and also
should express (as by a lively Simbole) the society triumphant and glorious
in heaven. Genesis 6.15. Exodus 25 and 26
Therefore as he alluded therein to Noah in the building of the Arc, and to
Moses in the framing of the Tabernacle, 2. Sam. 5.8.9. 1. Chro. 28.11.19.
and to David in the institution and disposing of the Tower of Zion, and
followed the proportion which his Father David had plotted and prescribed: so
he expressed not only his earnest love, and hearty zeal that he had to his
God, but his desire to display and set forth the wonderful perfection and
excellent glory of that Church. Neither yet did he show himself either too
curious, or too costly, or over glorious, or superstitious, or superfluous in
any one ornament, or in the least title or thing whatsoever in and about the
same house, albeit both the work was magnificent, of great charge and labor,
and the ornaments in and about the same rare, precious, and many in number.
For truly as this material Temple signifies that Temple of Messiah, whether
mystical in the Congregation, or spiritual in the faithful soul, or
glorious in heaven: so the ornaments and diverse and sundry functions and
garnishings and glory of the same, express and declare unto us the noble
personages, functions, orders, ministeries and virtues of and in the same. For
there be godly Kings and Princes, Prophets, Priests, Ministers, Judges.
Magistrates and many wise and holy persons, both men and women: there is the
wisdom, the judgment, the iustifications, the sanctifications, the
perfections, and in a word all the graces of the Saints and there are the
angels, heavenly spirits, Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Moses, Iosuah, and other with
the glory of the children of God. But ye happily desire, that some certain
particulars might be produced in this comparison. To speak of all, it would
both weary me and confound your hearing, they are so many and wonderful, yea,
beyond the knowledge of man as yet: neither is it meet that we should *
inuestigate over curiously, Deuteronomy 29 29.
and sift out too precisely that which is laid up in the divine counsel until
the happy time of the Messiah, who then (and not before) shall tell us al
things, yea things hidden from the beginning. In the mean time, it is enough,
that we believe this, that the law shall go forth from Zion, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem. The Church is like an house.
And first (as ye have heard and do perceive) the Church of the Messiah is
prefigured and expressed wholly by an house: and that conveniently in regard of
the parts, orders, and use thereof. But this house has two general parts,
whereof the one is that, in the which as well the people, as the priests do
enter, wherein they pray they teach, they hear, they offer sacrifice, they
praise God, they talk and declare their holy devotion and obedience to God and
the law in their several places and functions: the other general part is that
holiest place, into the which none but only the high Priest and that once in
the year enireth to sacrifice as well for himself, as for the people. By the
former is expressed the condition of that part of the Church, which is in this
life militant, gathered and made up of all sorts as well of the common people,
as of the priests, and of the Gentiles, together with the Jews: By the latter
is signified that part which contains only the Lords holy elect and
glorious company of heavenly Saints in the kingdom of holy Messiah. Between
those two parts of the Temple there is made a certain lofte or Chamber
boorded or seeled. By the which is not unaptly signified man's mortal body in
this world: the which nevertheless, being once rent or dissolved, the gate or
entrance is made open of the passage from the one part to the other. For by
this, we pass out of the troubles and confusion of this place, into the place
of glory. This Temple has a foundation strong and permanent: by the which is
signified the power and might of Messiah, who being best able to support and
bear the burden and building of his Church has laid the same on himself, as
that sure rock of rest, upon the which whatsoever is fast grounded shall stand
and never fall. This is the same, by whom our fathers in the wilderness were
relieved and strengthened. This Temple has also walls standing on that
foundation, raised up of framed stones, and set well in order: by the which we
understand the goodly companies of holy men, rightly disposed and well ordered
in the same. There be also windows to give in the light: By the which are
meant the order of the wise teachers and ministers in ye same: There be precious
stones, which note the most excellent Princes, Prophets, Priests, and
Magistrates. There be two Altars, whereof the one is of gold, standing in the
holiest place the other is of brass standing in the other part. By the former,
we consider the merit of Messiah, by the other the pure heart of the holy
ones. On the one is offered the same unspotted Lamb, unto which all the
sacrificed Lambs of our law do point: on the other, is lifted up that
sacrifice of prayer, faith, thanksgiving and righteousness, where of King David
has spoken. There be also Cherubins in the holiest place: which note those
Angels and ministering Spirits which standing in the heavenly presence, are most
obedient to his will, and even ready to help, succor and comfort the Saints
which are on the earth. There be lights and Candles in number ten: By the
lights are meant the doctrine of the right knowledge of God by the which the
people are taught and instructed: and by the Candlestickes we may consider
that divine law unto the which he would that all those doctrines and
instructions should draw men, and to note the perfection thereof (as alluding
to the ten commandments in the Law) which indeed contains the very
sum of all other commandments, they are in number ten: for this is a number
of perfection. Moreover, on the walls be certain pictures most gloriously
beautified, which express the noble graces, and virtues of those lively
stones, I mean the saints: and withal diverse other things right beautiful
and most admirable, which also are to be applied to so many sundry functions,
administrations, duties offices and virtues, in the Church of Messiah, of the
which I may not presently delate, nor may as yet presume to unfold that, which
I know shall be shut up and fast sealed from the perfect knowledge of man, Many
things were sealed up from man's knowledge before the coming of Messiah,
until the coming of that most holy one. Moses himself could see but the
very back parts of him, whom he desired to behold, and things which shall be
indeed, are as obscurely shadowed unto us, as yet. But when he comes, he
will both confirm that which is declared, and show all things else most
plainly, which yet are hidden from our eyes. Now, all these things (my Lords
are not unknown unto you, or at the least unto some of you: and therefore I am
sure, ye will not yield to this, that the King should be either called or
accounted a damned, or reprobated, or profane person: but rather (as ye
should indeed) conclude and subscribe to this: that King Solomon, whom the Lord
his God has appointed the Builder of his Temple, which so lively expresses
the holy Church of Messiah, and there in has made him an excellent figure of
that Messiah, is a Saint of the Lord, elected and ordained to salvation.

To this answered all the Princes. Indeed, we know it: but much the better by
this your explanation. And therefore we see no reason to deny your conclusion:
but rather (as we should do) acknowledge and confess the Kings Holiness, and
subscribe to that whatsoever ye have said concerning the same. And now (my Lord
Zadok) if ye have any thing else, further to ratify or establish that which ye
have assumed (although we doubt not of any thing) We pray you to bring it
forth also, that his Highness be not defrauded of that which in right he
ought to have, nor others left without a resolution of that whereof they might
peradventure rest doubtful. Neither are we any thing weary to hear you to
speak so justly for the king, so delectably for us, and so profitably for the
people. Ye have thus far walked in a very pleasant way: Walk on as yet,
(good father) proceed, and be not faint, the end of this course is both
profitable and right praise worthy in the judgment of all good men.

CAP. XXVII.
Zadok produces many other arguments to prove that Solomon was a Saint
appointed to salvation.
ZAdok listening to the godly desire of the Princes, touching the further
probation of the kings holiness, and acceptance with the Lord, notwithstanding
his sins, opened his mouth again and said: God forbid (my Lords) that I
should either conceile or keep back any thing, of that which may either
satisfy you to be revealed, or confirm my former proposition, in the which I
assumed, that the king was a Saint of the Lord. Therefore hearken, and I will
speak. As the Lord our God had chosen and appointed the king to be a true
figure of Messiah in the building of his Temple: and therein a Saint of the
Lord: So also has the same Lord ordained and declared many other notable
things in and by the king, to fore-shew and express the same: for surely unto
this belongs also the honor of his birth and acceptance, his diverse titles
and names, his wisdom, his judgments his wealth, his kingdom, his fame, with
many his actions, his words, his qualities, his graces, his virtues, and rare
enduments most admirable in the eyes of all men. Of some few of the which I
will speak very briefly: for to tell of them al, I am not able, they are both
so many and wonderful, much less to apply them in every point to him, whom
with his virtues these things do fore-shew, and teach unto men.

Solomon a figure of Messiah in his birth.
And first touching the honor of the kings birth, and acceptance with the Lord:
It is true that Solomon is the son of David: as before it has been said,
concerning whom the Lord made a faithful promise, saying: Of the seed of thy
body will I set upon thy seat. Howbeit, 2. Sam. 7.13.
the Lord also said to David concerning him: I will be his father, and he
shall be my son. Surely, this properly fits the Messiah, who is to come of
the seed of David: and yet he is that natural Son of God. Thereof spoke
the kings father. Jehovah said to my Lord sit thou on my right hand: Again,
Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee. This is he (indeed) to whom
the stabilitie of the kingdom of Israel is promised. Where the Lord said, I
will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever. Solomon, as yet sits on
the throne, and governs his kingdom: but the time will come, that (as the
tipes must cease, when the things typed come in place) our Lord K. Solomon shall
yield and give his place to the holy Messiah, that true Son of God when he
shall begin to reign in mount Zion. Therefore let us conclude: that the king
prefiguring also in this point the holy Messiah, is a Saint of the Lord.
Secondly, the Lord has imposed, Solomon in his Names a figure of Messiah.
and ordained such titles and names to and for the king as might no less
express and set forth the same thing. We heard before, that the king had such
Names as tended to th'exemplification of his honor: but yet, it was not then
considered of every one of us, to what certain person, or thing those names
properly pointed: for it is very certain, yt every of those names are more
proper to the Messiah, then to the king, albeit they were on him justly
imposed, and of him at the first literally understood. The Lord God himself
speaking unto David of this person, yer ever he was borne or begotten, said:
His Name is Schelomon: which is Peaceable, 1. Schelomon. 1. cho. 22.9.
or a maker of peace. And the Lord showed the reason thereof, saying: For I
will give him rest from his enemies round about him, and I will send peace and
quietness upon Israel. By this he foresheweth the true Melchisalem, that king of
peace, the right reconciler of his elect unto himself, who without this noble.
Prince are at wars with Lord, and opposed to the intolerable strokes of his
Justice. But hereof it is, that they have quiet consciences, peace with God,
and finally eternal rest and safety in the most glorious kingdom of the King
of peace.

To this also aymeth the blessed peace and tranquillity, that the Lord has
given the king, and through him unto us, from our bodily enemies on every side
in those the happy days of his government.

Next when the Lord would express his love and affection toward him, and
again, the love and affection that he had and should have to the Lord his
God, thereby the sooner to foreshew the mutual love and delight between God
and that holy Messiah: he sent the Prophet Nathan (as some of you yet remember)
who according to the divine pleasure, 2 Iedid-iah. 2 Samuel, 12.25.
called him Iedid-iah, Beloved of God. For so it is written, that the Lord
loved him, therefore he called his Name Iedid-iah, of the Lordes-behalfe.
Indeed, it pleased the Lord in this sort to declare his Jove to the king:
Howbeit, the Name properly fitteth that person, Psalm. 2.
to whom the Lord said (as before) Thou art my beloved son this day have I
begotten thee: And the same which the Arabian Queen did mystically point unto,
when in the spirit of Prophecy, she said to the king. Blessed be the Lord thy
God which loved thee. * After this, the kings mother, namely Queen Bethsabe
(that not without the instinct of the heavenly spirit) perceiving the majesty
and fear of God in him, 3 Laemuel. pro. 31.1.
and withal knowing him to be made a lively figure of the holy Messiah, called
him Laemuel, that is God with him, or God with them: meaning that God was with
him, and that he was as God unto the people, as Moses was sometimes said to be.
The which tittle therefore fitteth none so properly as it does that bright
Star ((...)) which Balaam descried and spoke of in his prophecy, (...). Number.
24
the which (as we have observed) contains both the number of the name
ineffable, and the number of the Divine law: for the two former letter (...)
make in number 26. the which also the name (...) yields and the two latter
letters make 22. in which number of letters, is written the whole law, the
which only in the time of the right Laemuel shall be performed and thoroughly
affected in him, by whom there shall be but one Lord, and one Law: one faith
and one religion: one shepherd, Genesis 49:^0. 4 Koheleth Eccles. 1. (...)
and one sheepefold. Lastly he has another Name, which no less (indeed)
appertains to that right Shilon unto whom the gathering of the people shall
be. That is Koheleth, which signifies a Congregator, or a Preacher, or a
builder of a Church. The King had this Name worthily imposed partly in regard
of his wisedwne which was in him wonderful beyond al others, as if in one and
the same person should be heaped and laid up together, all the wisdom and
knowledge both divine and humane, which not only any other one man, but which
all men together at the same time living, had or could contain or comprehend:
partly in regard of his Office and ministry, by the which he did not only
build the material house, which should prefigurate both the mystical,
spiritual and eternal: but also did preach and endeavor to call into the same,
and to instruct and conform all others as well Gentiles as Jews in the true
Religion of the most holy and everlasting God. But, the effecting of all this
properly belongs to that holy Messiah, who has and shall have in his time
all wisdom, and all knowledge without measure, and thereof shall give and
dispose abundantly to others and by his proper ministry gather together the
outcasts of Israel, bring home them that be and shall be scattered abroad, by
his wisdom justify the multitude in bearing their misdeedes, and not only
build of diverse stones and sundry things, a Church and holy Congregation to
himself: but also defend, foster, sustain and preserve the same forever. Now
(my Lords) in all these things has our Lord the King right worthily
prefigured the holy Messiah: to the which I hope ye will willy subcribe, and
thereof conclude with me, that he is neither a damned, nor a reprobate, The
consent of the princes.
or a profane person: but a singular Saint of the most high. To this answered
the Princes ye have well spoken (most reverend father) and semblably applied
whatsoever ye have produced for the king. Many things whereof we know, and
all other things we believe to be true, as ye have declared them: therefore
we will gladly both subscribe to the same, and conclude with you for the Kings
holiness. Morouer, as we have been willing to hear you, and are glad of those
your resolutions: so are we not weary, but more willing as yet to hear you
further and further in these things: neither shall ye be more ready to speak,
then we shall be pleased to listen and learn to understand the mysteries of
the kings excellency and glory.

Therefore, if ye have any thing else to produce, say on we beseech you.

To this said Zadok: Yea (my Lords) there be as yet, many more Arguments to
this purpose, and more then I mind at this time to produce. It shall be
sufficient that among many, I take some few. For the thing being already so
well proved, that of the truth few or none need to doubt, it may be
bootlesse for me to heap together overmuch, lest I may not only seem to
affirm and confirm that which no man denies: but also to confound your
memories with ambages and tedious circumstances. But hearken again. As it has
well pleased the Almighty to elect king Solomon, to appoint him the builder of
his house, Solomon in his dignity prefigureth Christ.
to honor his birth, and to entitle him with those most sovereign Names: so
has he made him king over his people Israel, to do unto them equity and
righteousness. And this the Lord did in his love to his people, 1. king. 10.
as the noble Queen of Saba said at her being here: and so said Hyram the king
of Tyrus, writing to the king: Because the Lord loved Israel, therefore has he
placed the king over them. Wherein, we see how he typeth the holy Messiah, for
insomuch as the Lord loved his Church (I mean all those faithful ones, whom
he had before elected and purposed to glorify in the end) he made his Messiah
their Prince and Captain. He gave unto them in his good pleasure, such a king,
as might sit upon mount Sion, from whence he had expelled all the halt and the
blind, that this king of the right Vrim and Thumim might be placed, and reign
therein, doing righteousness and equity unto his Saints. If therefore the
Lord loved Israel, and in his pleasure placed over them a king, whom he also
loved, and by the same would prefigurate both his Messiah and his Church, what
should let us in this to conclude for the kings holiness? Moreover, the end of
this government shoots to the same scope: which is to do equity and
righteousness. This our king endeavored to his power, and so much performed, as
a mortal man could: but the full perfection thereof indeed is reserved to the
most holy seed, which is appointed to combine the Lords Justice with his
Mercy, and thereof conclude Equity: when laying man's guilt on himself, he
shall bear the strokes of the divine justice: and imputing his perfection unto
man, he shall procure him pardon. Thus shall justice be administered, and yet
mercy shall not be abandoned: but one thing so considered with another, that
both righteousness and equity shall be extended. This work (I say) is
proper to the Messiah, wherein therefore our Lord king Solomon stands a true
figure. Furthermore to be brief: Solomon's magnanimity.
the K. great magnanimity expresses the same: he spared and forbear to punish
the^ which had offended his Majesty: as Adoniah, Ioab, and others, whom he
would never have struken, had they not after their second offense against him
worthily deserved the reward of their wickedness: and how mercifully he dealt
with Abiather it is apparent, to signify how ready the Messiah shall be to
forgive them that offend him upon their submission, after the divine nature,
who (as David the king did sing) is more ready to pardon, then to punish them
that sin against him, when they repent, as we see in the example of ye same
David. To this, His wisdom.
may be added, the excellency of Solomon's wisdom: I mean that pure influence
flowing from the glory of the most high, the brightness of that everlasting
light, that undefiled mirror of the divine Majesty, and the image of his
goodness, that without measure: The which shall perfectly and fully far
beyond all that the King has or can have, be found really and actually
resident in the person of holy Messiah, the fountain of all wisdom and
heavenly graces, the depth whereof the wit of man is not, nor shall ever be
able to sound, His judgments and other things. The 2. harlots The priesthood
translated.
as long as the worldendureth. Moreover, his discretion in Judgment concerning
the cause of the 2. women and their children signifies the manner of dealing of
the Messiah in judgment between his Church and the malignant in time to come:
his translating of the Priest-hoode from the house of Eli, foretells that the
Priesthood in time shall be translated when the true Melchizedek shall come
to offer up his sacrifice for the people of God. His judgment on Adoniah and
Ioab, Adoniahs judgment.
fore-sheweth that the King of glory in his days shall powerfully throw
down and confound all such as be enemies to the Lords Anointed, and which
seek to disturb the commonwealth of his Church. Hyram his contribution.
The sending to Hyram the Sidonian for timber and other things for the building
of his Temple: signifies that the Messiah, as he is a light for the Gentiles,
so he shall from thence also take and gather into the Church, according to the
request of Noah, Genesis 9.
who prayed that Iaphet might be persuaded to dwell in the tents of Shem. To
this also belongs the coming of the famous Queen of Arabia, The Queen of
Sheba.
to hear the kings wisdom, with her royal presents, and her entertainment:
for the time shall come, that in the like manner, the kings of the Gentiles,
and the people which dwell in the remote and uttermost parts of the earth,
shall be congregated to hear the wisdom of the holy one, Solomon's glory and
riches.
and shall be most grateful to him for his loving mercies. Also, the great glory
and riches of the king sets forth the high glory and noble virtues of that
heavenly king from whose kingly stock many princely branches of divine issue
have and shall spring out, and of whom the kings father divinely inspired
prophesied, when he spoke (in the Psalm) of his beauty, psalm. 4.5.
grace, blessing, courage, might, worship, renown, prosperity, honor, truth,
meekenes, righteousness, noble actions, strength in war: of his throne, his
scepter, his judgments, his righteousness, his anointing: his apparel, his
marriage, his royalty, his Godhead, his praise, his eternity and everlasting
glory. For all these things are found and shall for ever be well approved, and
highly praised in that holy Messiah, Solomon's prayers and sacrifices which the
Lord accepted. 1. king. 8.22.
to whom only the king by the letter points, as the figure to the thing
figured. Now, with this we may not forgette, that the king having finished
the Lords house, stood before the Altar of the Lord, in the sight of all the
Congregation of Israel* and stretched out his hands toward heaven, and blessed
the Lord, and praised him and his truth: yea, he kneeled also on his knees, and
prayed unto him, that the word might be verified which he spoke unto David his
father, and that it would please him to have respect unto his prayer and
supplication, as well for himself as for the people, praying in that house.
Also he stood and blessed all the congregation of Israel, verse 56.
with a loud voice saying: Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his
people Israel: according to all that he promised etc. The Lord our God be
with us, as he was with our Fathers, and forsake us not, nor leave us: but that
he may bow our hearts unto him, that we may walk in all his ways, and
keep his Commandments, his statutes and his Laws, which he commanded our
Fathers. And those my words that I have prayed before the Lord, be nigh unto
Jehovah our GOD day and night, that he defend the cause of his servant, the
cause of his people Israel, at all times, as the matter shall require, that all
nations of the earth may know, that Jehovah is God, and none but he. Moreuer,
the King offered Offerings before the Lord, yea, peace-offrings in great
abundance, and therewithal dedicated the house which he builded to the Lord
with great joy and gladness. In all the which things Jehovah his God was well
pleased with him, yea, and with the people through him, heard his prayers,
received his requests, granted his petitions: and apeared unto him in Gibeon,
with this comfortable saying: I have heard thy Prayer and thine intercession,
that thou have made before me. For I have hallowed this house which thou have
built to put my name there for ever, and mine eyes and mine heart shall be
there perpetually. Now consider, I pray you, what K. Solomon is with the Lord:
will the Lord hear and accept the reprobate, and profane persons? or will he
honor and esteem their works although they seem glorious to the conceits of
worldly men? No surely. What says the Kings, father touching their prayers.

The prayer of ungodly men is turned into sin. Psalm. 100.6
And thus I have heard him to modulate concerning himself, and his estimation
with the highest,

The Lord I know will not vouchsafe my prayer or words to hear
If unto sin mine heart I should incline, and him not fear:
But if I come into his Courts with offerings worthy prays,
And pay the vows I promised in mine afflicted days:
If on him with my mouth I call, and with my tongue him bless,
And offer him the sacrifice of thanks and righteousness:
Then will he hear my prayers and consider of my case:
And my request will grant in time, of his abundant grace.
In all these things therefore, the king is declared to be not only holy and
approved of God: but also a perfect figure of that most holy Seed, who in his
time shall pray, shall offer, shall please God, shall be heard, shall be accepted,
and all his desires performed to the satisfying of his soul, and to the health
of his people. Finally, The plurality of Solomon's wives.
the very plurality of the kings Wives and his Concubines, on whom he was
enamored and dishonored, howsoever unlawful, offensive to God, and a disgrace
to himself, shall not be reckoned as a thing unnecessary in this comparison,
seeing that the most holy Messiah, in his ardent zeal for man's recovery, will
be contented that the serpent shall trippe on his heel, Genesis 3.
whereby he will be dishonored and abased, whiles he takes on himself man's
ougly deformities and sins, being so willing through his own humiliation and
ignominy, to ease man so burdened, and to bring him home again unto him,
from whom he had far wandered, and to reconcile him with him, against whom
he had monstrously transgressed. And therefore as his Proverbes, the which for
the most part, he uttered in his flourishing and perfect estate, are applicable
as chiefly appertaining to the government of a godly family: and as these his *
Words, That is his Ecclesiastes. 1.
now daily and ordinarily uttered, and ruminated, are applicable, as especially
belonging to the ordering of a godly Commonwealth: So also those his
Loue-songs, and Ballads entitled * Schir-hasschirim, The Canticles of Solomon.
The Song of songs: and composed in his younger days (yea, before the twentieth
year of his age) shall not be rejected or abandoned, but esteemed and properly
applied both to that mystical and spiritual woowing, espowsing, combination,
and familiar society and communication of the holy Messiah, with his elect and
faithful Saints, of the which he gathers and garnisheth a Church as a
chaste Wife to himself. Lo, my Lords: in these and many other such notable
things is our Lord K. Solomon, by the will, wisdom, and providence of God, made
an excellent figure of that holy Anointed: and therefore he may not be
esteemed a naughty or profane person: but to be taken (as he is indeed) a
Saint of the Lord. Neither do I any thing doubt, but that the best learned
and godly that either now live, or shall come after us, will so judge and
esteem of him, when they shall hear and well weigh not only of that which
has been said heretofore concerning him, his words, actions, and estate: but
also shall plainly behold the verification thereof in the very person and
perfect beauty of that promised Schilo, the King of righteousness and highest
peace, at his happy coming in the world into the appointed time. This being
said, all the Princes were much comforted (although in this their kings
affliction) and gave thanks to Zadok, who yet seemed further to resolve and
satisfy them in any thing whereof, either any question might be moved, or
any doubt justly arise concerning the kings holiness.

CAP. XXVIII.
Zadok argues for the King, concerning his repentance and remission after his
Transgressions.
ZAdok having thus far pleaded for K. Solomon, and with many substantial
Arguments proved him a Saint of the Lord, and therefore that he could not be
either a damned soul, or a reprobated wretch, or a profane person as some
have or might over harldy and rashly censure him: the Princes showed themselves
both joyful and thankful. But after a whiles Prince Azariah in the behalf
of the rest stood forth, opened his mouth and said. Most reverend Father,
we all confess with thankefulnes, that ye have framed a worthy Apology for
the king, and with Arguments sufficient ye have proved him to be not (...)
profane, but (...) a Saint. Neither do we doubt of any of those things, but
partly know them, and partly believe them to be so indeed, as ye have said.
And God forbid that any of us, by reason of our suspensiue opinions and
doubtful conceits, should tender occasion to any of them that come after us,
to be doubtful of the King, whom (we well know) the Lord has elected, and
will preserve, and whom we esteem (notwithstanding his sins) a Saint of
the Lord. And in truth, as those persons which have bruised frankincense, and
been ensenced therewith do smell of the same, neither will they by and by
lose the savor and sent thereof, though they be purged: so the King, having
been endued with the divine Spirit, and long exercised in the use of the
right Princely and sacred virtues, does yet, and shall enjoy the sweet savor
and acceptable memory of the same, neither may so short a time (as this life
is) blotte it out. Whereby being enboldened, he may therein contemn them that
shall either disdain him, or unjustly judge of either him, his words, or
actions.

But now, because the Kings Remission and Pardone, Solomon's sins are
pardoned and he remains a Saint of the Lord for ever.
after his trespass, was called into question, it may not displease your
Reverence, that we enquire, whether his sins be remitted: that is, whether
the Lord has forgiven and pardoned his trespasses, forgotten his iniquity,
absolved him of his guiltiness, and loosed him from the bands of eternal
death, yea, or no. For they will reply, and thus object: It may be, that he
was a Saint, and servant of Jehovah his GOD, so long as he kept his mind
chaste, his body clean, his actions without reproof, and the truth of his
doctrine pure and unspotted: Or so long as he well pleased GOD, who justifies
the believing sinner: or so long as he was ordained to stand the figure of the
holy Messiah, wherein he sheened in perfect beauty: but afterward in his
transgressions and sins he turned his beauty into ougly deformity. Nor
indeed, according to your former words, could he possibly be and remain
the figure of the holy Messiah longer, then whiles his beauty remained perfect
in him. Therefore, except he were forgiven, and by this his remission cleansed
and restored to his former excellency, or at the leasted admitted into the
favor of GOD, and justified, the former doubt will be still retained, and
urged against both him and his words. Therefore let it please you to resolve
this doubt and satisfy us therein, as we know ye are well able (most reverend
Father). To this answered Zadok. I am most willing both to resolve this doubt,
and to satisfy you (my Lords all) in this case: therefore, to prove that the
King has obtained mercy and pardon of the Lord God for all those his
transgressions, and so consequently stands and remains a Saint and person
dedicated to the Lord, notwithstanding all those his transgressions, I thus
reason for my Lord the king. * Whosoever has truly repented him of his
sins, Solomon obtained mercy, for he repented him of his sins.
he has obtained mercy and forgiveness: But our Lord King Solomon, has
truly repented him of his sins, therefore he has obtained mercy and
forgevenesse. The first proposition is proved by many sound Arguments and
positions of holy Scriptures. And first by the due consideration of the Nature
of GOD, who as he has created man to his own image and likeness and has a
will to preserve him, so desires he nothing more then his conversion and
amendment after his falling, as whereby he may not be hindered, but
furthered and bolpen in his walking toward the highest Glory: yea, in this
he resembles a true father that both pitieth and pardons his own son
which has offended him, upon his true repentance, as both Moses, Job, and
David, of famous memory have told us, with other our holy Prophets, who
teach and assure us, from the Lords own mouth, that if an ungodly man will
turn away from all his sins that he, has done, and keep all his Statutes;
and do the thing that is judgment and right, he shall doubtless live and
not die: neither shall his sins be either retained or mentioned unto him:
for God has no pleasure in the death of a sinner: but gladly will be
merciful unto him, and pardon him upon his repentance. For God is most ready
to forgive. Therefore he comfort us with this saying: Circumcise the
fore-skinnes of your hearts: Deuteronomy.
cast away your transgressions, and turn again unto Jehovah, your God, and
ye shall not dye but live. And this is that which we believe, and persuade of
our Lord the king. Surely, Cain himself (though too presumpsuous and proud
in his sins) could inregard hereof say: and is my sin greater, Genesis 4.
then that it can be pardoned? Knowing, that the promise which GOD had made to
Adam in Paradize, both imported and included remission, saying, that (...) that
is, the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head, whereof man,
though an execrable sinner should find both remission and life, with Jehovah
his GOD. Next to this we have a great many comfortable examples, in the Books
of Moses, Job, Iosuah, the Judges, and Samuel, as of the pardon offered unto
Judah, Lot, the Israelites, and to be brief, to David the Kings father, to
whom the Lord said by Nathan the Prophet: God has put away thy sins, thou
shall not die, the which he often remembered in the Book of the Psalms, psalm.
103.3
whereof he also provoke his soul to the praise of GOD, who had forgiven
him all his iniquity and covered all his sin. Now, as none can forgive
sins, but God only: so those our ancestors, when they sinned, persuading
that all their sins were done against God, either immediately or by means,
they would in the hope of remission and health repair unto him, seeking first
to be reconciled with his grace, before they would go unto men, remembering
what old Eli the Priest, 1. Sam. 2.
said sometimes to his children. If a man sin against man (said he) the
Judge may decide it: but if a man sin against GOD, who shall be his Vmpire,
or Dayes-man? Moreover, knowing that pardon required precedent Repentance,
without the which, who will forgive him that offends him among men: they
neither presumed to approach the divine throne with proud, insolent and
presumptuous Spirits but with contrite and humble hearts, desiring mercy for
sins committed and confessed with great submission. For albeit, that
Repentance be very sharp and bitter to the sinner and many men had leaner
sin openly, then repent secretly: yet is this the Medicine of trespasses, the
consumption of iniquities, a weapon against Satan, and a sharp sword prepared
and able to daunt the deadly adversary.

This is the hope of health, the purchase of mercy and way to felicity: I
cannot yet cease, but speak again of this sovereign treasure, and medicine
of the sinners sore, being therein as full as the Moon, and most willing to
be powered forth in the excellency thereof, so full of consolation, and rich
blessings. This is that, which (through the mercy of the living God in the
promised seed) remitteth sins, opens the gates of Paradize, salueth the
man that is broken in heart, and gladeth them that be sorrowful. This is that,
which calls a man's life from destruction, restores his estate, renews his
decayed honor, gives him boldness, reformeth his spirits, and powers in
grace upon grace.

This is that, which loses things bound, clarifieth things obscure and
animateth things desperate. The beauty of this virtue is as clear, as the
Sun: as bright as the Moon, as glistring as the Stars. The sweetness
thereof is as honye, the price as gold, and the estimation beyond all
precious stones: For this is that, which neither sin ouer-commeth, nor
defection destroys, nor despair blotteth out. Finally, this abandoneth all
vices, imbraceth all virtues, tormenteth sin, extolleth righteousness,
obtains mercies, produces virtues, freeth sinners, recouereth the lost,
recreateth the desperate, He that can truly repent* needs not to doubt of
salvation.
refreshes the hard labourer, and brings to her possessors eternal
happiness. For by this a man shall be saved, although he has lead all his
life in sin (as there is no man which sins not, full often and every day.)
Such an excellent thing is true Repentance! But ye will say? How is this
wrought in a man? how is this repentance wrought in man?
How shall a man truly repent? Indeed, this thing is not wrought in man of
man's own power nor wisdom, For GOD stays not to expect it from man's
wisdom or ability, (for so may both his expectation be frustrated, and man
be deceived) but it is the goodness of GOD to renew them by repentance,
which are waxen old in sin.

Therefore the Sinner should never despair, Despair not of mercy.
nor fall from hope: neither should he be ashamed to repent, but ashamed to
sin: and consider that as the one is a wound, so the other is a medicine for
the wound: Sin is the wound: Repentance is the medicine: the wound has
shame, the medicine has boldness: the wound is made by the malice of the
devil: the medicine is wrought by the love and goodness of GOD, in the merit
of the holy Messiah, which bears and washes away all the sins of them that
truly repent. The princes.
* To this the Princes having yielded attentiveness, with great gladness
consented, esteeming the Oration as profitable as it was plausible, and as
fruitful, as gladsome unto them. And then among them stood forth the Priest
Abiather, Abiather obiecteth.
and said. Ye have well spoken concerning the former proposition (most
reverend Father,) It is likewise in request, that ye prove the Minor. For it
may be called into question hereafter, whether the King has truly repented
him, yea, or no? For except this be proved, what is any thing of that which
ye have spoken touching Repentance, appertinent unto him? and if it concerns
not him, what profit takes he thereof, for he is not remitted? or how is our
common question answered, and the doubt resolved? zadok proves that king
Solomon repented.
To the which answered Zadok, neither is this question so hard to be answered
unto, nor the doubt intricate to be dissolved: for if there were none other
Argument whereby to prove the kings true Repentance: yet is this enough, that
he is a Saint, a person dedicated to the Lord: therefore he is not fallen from
hope, therefore he is truly repentant: For as the strong foundation stands
still, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that be his: The saints do
not fall away for ever.
so we may not think, that the Saints of God, for whom mercy is ever kept in
store, can fall utterly away from hope, or be shut out from mercy in the time
of their need. For as the wood whose nature is to swim on the water, may yet
being ouer-laden with iron sink, but the iron being taken off, the wood
nevertheless ascends again to the head of the water and swimmeth: Neither may
we say, that it is no wood, because it did sink once to the bottom: Though
the faithful fall, yet they rise up again,
So though the righteous men whose nature is by Faith to stand and walk in
Gods way, being oppressed with the burden of sin through the devils malice,
do unhappily couch down (as with Isachar between two burdens) yet may we not
rightly say, that they are not of the Lords chosen: for it is so, that
whenever that burden is removed (as it is from them that repent) they rise
again and be renewed, as in their former estate, and being of that generation
and nature, it is not possible that they should fall utterly away: for the
sons of God do not so apostate that they fall into eternal perdition,
howsoever they sin and sink under their sins. For the just man falls, but
he rises again. And therein they be likened to the herb Adyanton, which
being steeped deep in the waters (though a long time) will nevertheless (being
taken up) appear very dry. For the righteous man, which had fallen, after his
rising again by Repentance, is as beautiful as ever he was, maugre the malice
of the Serpent. And touching this doctrine I have heard the King himself to
say (according to the truth of the holy writings and words of our Prophets)
that the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, These be Solomon's
words which afterward were gathered by philo the Jew. Sap. 31.
and there shall no torment touch them. etc. Again. God proves them and
finds them meet for himself: as gold in the furnace does he try them and
receives them as a burnt offering, and when the time comes they shall be
looked upon. Again. They that put their trust in the Lord shall understand the
truth: and such as be faithful shall persevere with him in love. For his
saints have grace and mercy, Sap. 4 15.
and he has care for them. Again. The loving favor and mercy of God is upon
his saints, and he has respect unto his chosen. Moreover I have heard the
kings Father to say. The Lord will not permit the righteous to fall for ever;
though for their trial and bettering he suffer them to slide for a time.
psalm. 55.22.
And th'excellent prophets Nathan and Gad, have preached, and others the Lords
Prophets and holy men have, and do yet preach: that God loves his chosen with
an eternal love, therefore he draws them unto himself by his mercy
(although they sin seven times in a day) whereby they rise again, and are
renewed. Therefore it cannot be that this person (I mean King Solomon, so
holy, elected and beloved of God) should find no place of true Repentance after
his sins committed. Neither may we in equity and charity (being indeed
witnesses of such his Repentance) but testify and avouch the same, before the
whole world. But be it, that his Repentance were neither apparent, nor here
protested by us, should the king therefore, If this were not so plainly
testified* yet might not Solomon be justly condemned as a reprobate.
which is so holy a man, and the Lords chosen be condemned? God forbid. And it
were too sharp a censure either to say so, or to think that every person whose
sins have been laid open in the holy Scriptures, has not been truly
repentant, except that also such his repentance has been expressly and
plainly depainted and set forth in the same. Adam his repentance.
What plain or express mention (I beseech you) is there made in the holy
Scriptures of Adams repentance after his fall in whom we be all cast away by
nature, howsoever the same is presumed or gathered by circumstances? or of the
repentance of Noah after his drunkenness? Noah. Lot. Sampson. Simeon. Levi.
Judah.
or of Lot, after his incest, or of Sampson after his daliances with Dalila? or
of Jacobs sons Simeon and Levi, which against the mind of their Father, dealt
deceitfully and cruelly with Hemor the son of Sichem and his citizens? or of
Judah th'eldest son of Jacob after his sin with Thamar his daughter in
law? he confessed (indeed) that she was more just then he, so did Pharao
also confess, that the Lord was righteous, and that he and his people were
Sinners. Surely, albeit that these and many other the Lords chosen, have been
both noted in the holy Scriptures which are extant before us, and also punished
in some measure for their sins and offenses: yet did it not always follow,
that the repentance of every of them has been so largely declared to the
world, or so plainly set forth in words as was the repentance of David the
Kings Father, David's repentance.
and of some of others: And yet, who should either in wisdom, reason, equity,
or good conscience, call their repentance, conversion or turning again to the
Lord, into question, to whom the Lord has expressed the full assurance of
his love and mercy in their lives? What said the King in this case Though the
righteous be overtaken by death, yet shall he be at rest. Again. The souls of
the righteous are in the hand of God and their shall none evil touch them.
Worthily have these golden sayings been taken from his mouth, Sap. 4.7.
and copied out and conserved for the posterity, to give comfort unto the
Lords chosen, and to satisfy them that might otherwise condemn themselves and
their cause in the consideration of their punishments and miseries in this
life. Therefore it is true, that as the man which has been long nooseled up
in vices, will not only with much ado leave them, and leaving them will yet
retain some savor thereof in his person: as such which having been long
clogged with iron fetters, will yet halte after they be loosed; so on the
contrary part, he that has been brought up and exercised in holy virtues,
will not soon loose the habit, much less the savor of them: as those vessels
will long retain and yield the smack of that liquor which was in them first
steeped, although they be washed and assayed to be purged from the same.
Neither may we think, but that if (after the opinion of the very heathen
Philosophers) one vice overthrows not a virtue in habit, much rather should
we of Israel, not so much as imagine, that one or a few faults of the
children of God occasioned either of ignorance, or of fear, or of infirmitye,
or of natural concupiscence, or of the malice of the old Serpent, should
rent asunder an habit of holiness, and so infringe or weaken the power of
Gods free election and love, the which by his spirit ever works a godly
repentance, unto them which are elected and by the same in mercy appointed to
glory. For those whom in his love he has elected before all worlds, he will
in his mercy pardon and glorify: and for that purpose he gives them a godly
repentance, as that which is ordained for the calling home again, and recovery
of those the Lords chosen whom the Serpent had beguiled and seduced. For the
Lord our God will not loose any one of them which appertain unto him: nor
will he suffer his truth to fail.

CAP. XXIX.
Of the nature of Solomon's sins and arguments of his true Repentance.
ZAdoke had no soonr delivered the former speeches: but by and by Abiather rose
up again, and objected saying: Whether are Solomon's sins greater then the
sins of some other that did repent and were pardoned? 1. King. 11. 5.
It is (said most reverend father) yt the sins of our L.K. Solomon are of ye
nature, as they have far exceeded the sins of those holy ones of whose
repentance we be either certified, or persuaded in the holy scriptures, as more
heinous and dangerous: for behold his strange wives and fleshly Concubines have
turned away his heart from the Lord his God: in so much that he has followed
after Astaroth the God of the Sydonians, and Milcom the abomination of the
Ammonites, he has builded an high place for Chamos the abomination of Moab,
and for Moloch the abhominatio^ of the children of Ammon, and has wrought
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and has not followed the Lord perfectly
as did David his father. Al these are your own words concerning the King and
his trespass (most reverend father) neither have I added any thing in the
hearing whereof, who is there (almost) but that will condemn the king of a
more heinous and dangerouse sin, zadok.
then that the Fathers of whom ye have spoken did ever commit, in their days?
But yet I beseech you (said Zadok) that those my words may neither be
wrested, nor amiss understood in this case: God forbid that therein I should
so far depresse the Kings hope and estimation with the Lord, as to judge
his sins either irremissible: or such have exceeded the sins of those
others, whom the Lord has pardoned upon their true repentance. Indeed it
cannot be denied nor defended, but that the king has sinned grievously against
the Lord his God, as I said before and therein has offered an offense unto the
Lords people: Howbeit that either the nature of those his sins is such as can
neither have pardon (as was the sin of Cain) or that it was more heinous and
horrible, either in quantity or quality, then the sins of some others, whom
it pleased the Lord in mercy to remit and renew upon repentance, we neither
find nor dare to avouch. Our first parents in Paradise committed an horrible
transgression. They hearkened to Satan, they brake the commandment, they
forsook the Lord their God, and were made thralls to the tyranny of the
Serpent which had deceived them: Adams sin: Genesis 3. Judah. Genesis 38.26. Lot.
Aaron. Exo. 32.2. Genesis 34.25. Simeon and Levi. Ruben. Gen 49 4. The Israelites.
Sampson. Judge 2.11.13. and 3.6. and 16.18. Laban. Genesis 31.30.
for the which they were justly driven out of Paradise and made subject to
misery and death: notwithstanding, it pleased the L. God (as ye have heard) to
forgive them, and to gather to himself an holy church eue^ from among them
which had sinned. We read that Judah took his daughter in law Thamar and lay
with her contrary to the law, and acknowledged yt he had sinned therein. Lot
was made drunk and lay with both his daughters. Aaron the Lords priest yielded
to the making of a molten calfe, which the people worshipped. We read that
Simeon and Levi the sons of Jacob dealt deceitfully with Hemor and Siche^ his
son and murdered them, and their people, against the will of their father, who
in his last words, cursed their wrath which was shameless, and their rage which
was cruel. As for Rube^ (Jacobs eldest son) he defiled his fathers bed, and
distained his dignity. Our fathers (in the time of the Judges) were carried
away to serve Baal and Astaroth, and they were co^ioined with the Cananites
against ye law of the L. Sampso^ the Nazarite combined himself with a strange
woman, yea, and in the end yielded his power to the harlot Dalila. Laban the
father in law of Jacob, was a worshipper of strange Gods and Terah the father
of Abraham was not free from the like offense. And are the sins of those our
fathers, especially the greatest of these sins, inferior to the K. sins?
Notwithstanding it is testified yt the L. pardoned the^ and restored the^ to
his favor. But ye say, that the K. has turned away his heart form the Lord.
Indeed of all others his sins this is the greatest. Howbeit, I say not
therefore, that he has utterly turned away his heart, as that he has quite
forsaken God, and by wicked apostasy fallen away from him for ever: for had it
been so, we should not have seen him in this his estate. And as I well
remember, I heard the king himself to say (and we cannot deny it, when we
well consider thereof and of him in this his estate) that in the depth of those
his sins and vanities he perceived that yet his wisdom remained with him:
psalm. 51.11. 1. Sam. 16.14. 2. Sam. 7.15. How Solomon is said to turn away his
heart from God.
by the which he meant the graces of that divine spirit, which King David prayed
that the Lord would not utterly take from him, being indeed an effect of that
mercy which the Lord his God said he would not take from him, as he took it
from Saul, whom he had cast off before him. But I say the King has turned
away his I will show mercy, to whom I will show mercy. The same said to Hagar:
Return again to thy mistress, Exo. Genesis 16 9.
though thine heart was turned from her. Again he says to the sinner
'Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, and do those good works
which thou have used to do when I was well pleased with thee. Again, Remember
thy maker: So I confess (though with sorrow of heart) that the king in that
his estate has not so zeolously set forth and maintained the glory and
services of God, as he was wont to do: for whosoever is addicted to the
former, is defective in the latter, but he neglected a great part of his office
and duty. But yet (the Lord be thanked) we know that the state of religion was
never altered or changed: The holy religion never altered but continued the
same in Solomon's time

2. Chro. 11.16.17.


but that has and yet does remain the same as in the time of David,
notwithstanding the idolatries, superstitions and prouocations of his strange
women: which is a notable argument, that yet thee held the sure foundation of
his says unshaken. And therefore let us not presume either to say or to
think, that King Solomon is fallen utterly away from the Lord his God, who
has so wonderfully loved, beautified and blessed him. It is one thing to
offend God by evil thoughts, evil words or wicked deeds: another thing to
deny God and to forsake him utterly. He that sins and offends God, and yet
believes in God, he is by his repentance reserved for salvation: but who so
does deny God and utterly apostate from him, there remains unto him not so
much as one little shell wherewith he may draw a very small measure of the
water of life. It is not one and the same thing to turn from the Lord and to
turn utterly awry from him without retire or return: The former of these
faults is often seen in Gods own children, when (like prodigal and
disobedient sons) they be tempted to depart from their most loving father,
and yet do return home again, and are renewed by repentance, as were Aaron,
Moses, David: ye latter is seen in the reprobates only, which fall away and
never return, and therefore are not renewed by repentance: for they cannot
truly repent, The reprobates cannot truly repent.
because the Lord gives not repentance unto them: as it was apparent in Cain,
in Lots wise, and in Saul, whom the Lord cast away from before him. But this
falling away from God, we have not found, nor shall perceive in K. Solomon,
the Lord be blessed therefore. Neither may we think, that howsoever he is
said to follow after Astaroth, Milcom, Molock, Camos and such others the Gods
of the heathen, that therefore he was so gross an Idolator, as he did adore
and worship those strange Gods, no more then we may think, Solomon did not
worship Idols.

Exo. 32.2.


that Aaron the Priest did adore and worship the golden Calfe, which himself
had made at the importunacie of our Fathers in the wilderness. And I know (my
Lords) that ye have not seen any such thing in the king nor do ye imagine (as
I suppose) that the king at any time was so foolish as to adore or worship such
kind of Gods, of the which his father David, deciding the gross Idolatry of
the heathen thus sang.

Their Idols both, of silver gold and men's hand work they be:
They mouths have, but do not speak, and eyes but cannot see:
They have eke ears but do not hear, and senseles noses, so
They have hands, but they handle not, and feet but cannot go.
Doubtless (answered the Princes) we persuade, as ye have said: yea, said
Azariah, and we have often heard the K. himself to blame and reprove such
kind of Idolatry, and thus has he said (whose words for wisdom and gravity
are copied out and divulged even among the Gentiles). Sap. 13.10. and 14.8. and
15.3.
Miserable are they and among the dead that call them Gods which are but the
works of men's hands. Again deriding the folly of those Idoll-worshippers, he
says he is not ashamed to speak to that which has no soul: for health he
makes his petition to that which is sick: for life he humbly prays to him
that is dead. Again, cursed be the Idol that is made with hands, yea, both
it and he that made it: he because he made it, and it because it was called a
God, whereas it is but a frail thing: for the ungodly and his ungodliness are
both like abominable unto God: even so the work and he that made it, shall be
punished together. Again: To know the Lord God is perfect righteousness: yea,
to know his power is the root of immortality. As for the thing that men have
found out through their evil science, it has not deceived us, nor ye painters
unprofitable labor, namly an image spotted with diverse colors, whose sight
inticeth the ignorant to lust after it, and he desires the picture of a dead
image that has no breath. Both they that make them, they that desire them and
they that worship them, love evil things and merit to have such things to
trust upon. Again the enemies of Israel that worship those Idols are most
unwise and more miserable the^ very fools. For they judge of them to be Gods,
which neither have eyes to see, nor noses to smell, nor ears to hear, nor
hands nor fingers to grope, and as for their feet they are too slow to go. Lo
those and such like words has the king his wisdom uttered touching those
heathen Gods and the worshippers of the^, even publicly, and in presence of
all them to come to him to hear his wisdom: that thereby the sooner he might
withdraw them from that gross error and impious abomination, and bring them
to the right worship of Jehovah the God of Israel. Ye have truly spoken in this
matter (said Zadok) for in truth, I have not known any one man of life, yt
has more disliked and derided this kind of Idolatry, and that has more
sharply reprehended them that have followed after strange Gods, then the K.
himself. Neither did he think yt any man which either knew Jehovah our God,
or had any wisdom, or reason, or judgment, or human wit would acknowledge
such a senseles image for a God, and worship it, much less himself would
either adventure or attempt a thing so heinous, shameful and dangerous against
the law of God, reason and good conscience being a man so wise, holy and
zealous for the L. his God. Therefore, let us not imagine yt the K. was so
persuaded to prostrate himself before those vain images of the heathen, to
adore or worship them as Gods, or yt he did invoke or pray to them: or trust
in the^ for any aid or comfort: seeing that both he knew the abomination of
such vain things, In what sense it is said that Solomon followed after strange
Gods.
and felt the goodness of the living God at al times so gracious toward him?
but (indeed) this is true, that the K. has in his fond love and carnal
affection to his wives being Idolators and Apostats from the true religion, so
doted and besotted himself, that he has winked at such Israel, and in the
sight of Jerusalem, Israel, and the husband of those his wives, he should
rather (as he might well do) have restrained and punished such horrible abuses
of the name and honor of God. But howsoever it was seeing we have not seen such
palpable idolatry in the K. as yt he did worship their idols, nor ca^ we see
into ye K. heart (as God sees him) and Gods secret ways are such as no
vultures eye did ever see (as Job said) and the botto^les profunditie thereof we
may not attempt to sownd: let us here content our selves with so much thereof,
as it has well pleased him to reveal unto us, judge justly and soberly of God
and his ways, constre the best of his Saints, and think honorably of this
chosen person and his actions and words, not rashly censuring the one, nor
indiscreetely conde^ning the other. And out of all question, if in this
resolution and mind we duly search and wisely examine and consider of all
things, we shall find and confess, that howsoever it be, K. Solomon did not
only turn away from God and endangered himself, (as all other sinners do)
but that also he is returned again and assured of safety, King Solomon did
turn again to the Lord.
as those which truly repent them of their sins; that he had not only his
heart seduced and corrupted: (as his Father David had when he committed murder
and adultery:) but has also a new heart created and a right spirit renewed in
him, as the same David had after that he repented, psalm. 51.
prayed and found grace with the Lord: that he did not only deny the Lord,
whereby God was exasperated against him, as our forefathers both in the
wilderness and in the time of the Judges have don: but also has acknowledged
his power, Number. 21.8.
and confessed him, and therein eschewed his own destruction, as many of our
fathers did which beheld that brazen serpent in the wilderness, and wept before
the Lord, and were preserved and comforted: he did not only sin to provoke the
Lord: but also he did repent and well pleased the Lord. Exo. 10.17. 2. Sam.
12.13. Genesis 4.14. 1. Sam. 13.4. Genesis 3.20. and 38 26. Exo. 32.22
And this he has done not with his mouth only as Pharao did, but with his
heart as K. David did: he dispaired not as did Cain and Saul: but he sorrowed
and repented in hope, as did Adam, and Judah, and Moses and Aaron. And this he
did also truly and speedily, as soon as he saw the Angel of Gods wrath had
drawn forth his sword against him and his people, as David did, when he saw
the angel of God plaguing the people: in this point he well resembled, that
wary bird which seeing the fowlers bow bent and himself in danger, makes haste
to fly away before that the arrow be sent forth against him, remembering what
his father had modulated: If when that men offend the Lord, they will not turn
again:
He furbisheth his percing sword, in justice them to pain,
He bends his bow, and it prepares with dreadful darts of death:
And lethall instruments, to take from them their vital breath.
But alas there be in ye world too many co^parable to that foolish bird which
makes no have to escape from the snare before he be taken therein. Therefore I
now remember not only what he cou^sailed Be not slow to turn to the Lord, for
suddenly shall his wrath burn like fire: but what his father advised. psalm.
95.8.


To day if ye his voice will hear,
Then harden not your faithles heart:
As ye with grudging many a year,
Provokte me in the wild desert.
It is meet that men attend him when he calls. If men offer gold, which is
yet but transitory, there be which come with speed: and the tree being
shaken, they will gather up the fruit without long tarrying: But when the Lord
proffereth peace to man's soul, they come slackly and regard it little, which
is the cause they often miss the kings thousand. But as for our Soueraign L.
albeit we had been neither eare-witnesses, nor eyewitnesses: yet (besides the
K. gesture and present constitution of body) the very words which we have
heard from him, and yet daily hear him to utter, That is his Ecclesiastes
and the which being taken and collected into a register, may be called the
book of his repentance, shall for ever witness and manifest the same thing.
For therein it does and may appear, that our L. King Solomon, not only after
his full and perfect experience of all the delights of the sons of men, and
the affairs of this life: but also after all those his transgressions, wherein
he had so much vexed and disquietted both his mind and body, angered the L.
offended the holy ones, distained his honor and endangered his soul, is
nevertheless by the admirable operation of the divine spirit, brought to the
true sense and knowledge of his sins and so of the danger of himself and his
people, the which is always the first grade to true repentance, from whence
he has orderly proceeded to the full perfection thereof, as hereafter ye
shall understand. In the mean time (my good L) let us think right honorably
of the K. and believe that Jehovah his God has not barred him out from the
contrition and repentance of the blessed and so neither from the divine mercy.
Ye have well spoken (most reverend father) said the Princes which we have
gladly heard, and will both concur and conclude with you for the King to the
honor of our God. And truly in this, that he has acknowledged and confessed
his offenses, he may not be either condemned or disliked, albeit he be the
King of Israel, no more then such a thing was blamed in David, his father: but
rather to be commended, as it was in him: as first in regard of the good
example, whereby others might be instructed: next for the more ease of his own
heart oppressed with sorrow in the consideration of his sin with the danger
ensewing it. Thirdly for the better pacifying of the divine wrath which is
vehement against obstinat sinners: and fouthly for ye good of his people, who
upon his repentance and remission might hope for peace: there be some who when
they have sinned, will not easily acknowledge themselves faulty either to God
or to man: and therefore are hardly persuaded to amend. Wherein they be like
those which holden of desperate diseases not feeling themselves sick, are
hardly recovered: for this is a great hindera^ce to ame^dment of life, when men
which are offenders will not acknowledge their offenses. But there be some
(though not many of them) which offending, do by times feel and know their
offenses, and seek to escape the divine wrath by a faithful reco^ciliatio^ and
so are recovered in good time. And these be like not only to those wise birds,
which (as ye said) eschew the arrows coming toward them: but also to those
which being distempered in their bodies soon espy it, and seek to prevent
inconveniences by the advice and help of the cunning phisician. For as the
sense of the sickness is the commencement of the cure: so the acknowledging of a
fault is the first step to pardon, and so to the ame^dment of him that has
faulted. But proceed (most reverend father) we pray you, and desist not, until
ye have fully declared the order and manner of the K. true repentance for:
truly howsoever it has been a grief and sorrow unto our hearts to hear of
those his great transgressions and sins, it is and shall be now a joy and comfort
unto us to hear of his happy Repentance, by the which, (it may be) the L. will
also repent him of that evil which he had purposed to do unto him and us, and
will turn justice into mercy, that we perrish not in this his high
displeasure, which is as a fearful fire to consume the^ that will neither
repent them of their sins, nor seek him whiles he may be found in the
singleness of heart.

CAP. XXX.
Zadok declares the order and manner of Solomon's Repentance.
THe Princes, having heard Zadok thus far, acknowledged the equity of his
dealing and withal, having praised and commended the King in this point, that
although he were a King: yet he disdained not both is acknowledge himself an
offender (after the example of his father David): they requested Zadoke to
proceed, who continuing the former argument, spoke again to this effect.
Surely (my Lords) as the K. is most wise, and his wisdom ever remained with
him: so perceiving that he had sinned against God, who thereby was provoked to
anger: he did not only acknowledge the same in his heart, but also considered
that the judgments divine were now ready to be executed against him and his
people. Yea, Solomon's Contrition, as in Eccl. ca. 1. and 2.
he felt the arrows of God to stick fast in him, whereby he was moved to such
great contrition of heart and sorrw of mind for his sins, that there was no
health in his flesh, nor rest in his bones, he was brought into such an
extreme trouble and heaviness that he went mourning all the day long, as
sometimes I saw his father David to do, when his heart was contrite after the
knowledge of his sins and sense of Gods wrath.

Secondly, Solomon's confession of his sins.
the king has not omitted to utter forth the fearful thoughts of his
troubled heart, and to confess the greatness of his vanities, that not only
before the Lord, the seer and searcher of all men's hearts: but also before the
face of all me^ yea, in the Catalogue of vanities he brings in himself to be
noted. For when he might have pointed at the folly of Adam, of Cain, of Nimrod,
of Pharao, of Abimelech, of Saul, of Nabal, and such others (as commonly men
are wont to do when they note others, and the whiles conceal their own sins
and imperfections) yet the king leaving all others and their faults, pointed
directly at himself, as a principal fool, among all the fools of vanities
kingdom worthily to be derided and reproved, yea as we our selves cannot deny
it, the K. in the low conceit of his own integrity and great humblenes of
mind (notwithstanding he be a most glorious K.) would (if he might by our
consent) that his faults and the greatness of his folly should be openly
proclaimed and published by his own person throghout the long streets of
Jerusalem. For the K. well knows, that it is a more grievous thing to
transgress the law, then to be punished according to the law, and a more
shame for a man to commit a sin, then to repent for a sin: for in the one,
both God is dishonored, 3. Contempt of the world
and man offended: in the other, God is glorified, and man is satisfied.
Moreover, as for his glory and royal apparel with all external beauty, he
esteems it, but as the painting on a wall of clay, Favor and beauty.
which being scowred off the clay appears. Therefore he said favor is
deceitful, and beauty is but vanitye: yea, he esteems this for no beauty nor
glory at all, yt one bird should be decked in an other birds feathers, nor
this for any honor at all, yt a noble man should beg his beauty of the worms,
the birds, ye beasts, or of others so far inferior in dignity: yea, he may be
full ashamed to purchase his glory from thence, as who says may these things
garnish thee? but he were beautiful indeed, if he could beautify the^. For
when a man seeks to deck himself with other things, he should acknowledge his
own vileness and want That beauty which with the garment is put on, is with ye
same put off again. Therefore this is of the garment, and not of ye person, but
above al it is a shame for any man to shine in the beauty of royal garments,
and to be deformed in his ma^ners. Therefore this is not forgotten in the K.
catalogue of vanities. And to be plain, the K. now esteems al ye honors,
pleasures, riches, dignities, policies, studies, counsels,, thoughts,
actions, and endevors of man in ye world (which are without the word wisdom,
Solomon's humble conceit of himself,
nor help him, nor comfort him, after death. *Fourthly the K. presumes not
he^ceforth to be called or named the K. of Israel, notwithstanding his wisdom,
wealth, fame, ye great glory in that place wherein his father David by the
divine providence had placed him. There be some, which upon many meaner
occasions, resemble the Chamelion (a beast which is fed with the air, and
therefore is ever gaping) for they desire the food of popular praise, and the
highest titles, whereof they take a pride and vaineglory: but the K. being
wise, and so having learned to know both the deceitful world, and the vanity
of this glory, neither admireth the one, nor fawneth on the other, but he
seeks and uses all the ways and means he^ceforth to purge himself of this
dangerous humor: Eccles 1.12. Solomon said he was King but not that he is King.
therefore to the^ which call him my L. the K. of Israel, he is wont to say
indeed, I have sometimes been K. over Israel in Jerusalem, but now, I am not
that King. Notwithstanding we know well, that he yet reigns over us, and so
we esteem him, and honor him for our K. (as duty binds law for the which
now perceiving and feeling a touch of the divine anger, he is worthily
humbled, and acco^pteth himself nothing fit for the dignity of that most
royal place, although he may yet be far preferred before all the K. and
princes of the world, at this day: Thus David his father abased himself before
the L. and thought (indeed) when he fell into the reckoning of his condition,
that he was too vile to be a dore-keeper in the house of God. Thirdly the K.
2. parts of the 12. shall remain to his son and posterity: the other 10. parts
shall be given to his serva^t Ieroboa^, who is therefore gone away from him and
waits but for the time and occasion of th'effecting thereof, and that those
parts shall be Israel, yt the K. thereof shall be called King. of Israel, as if
therefore the K. should have said, howsoever the men of this life, admiring
themselves and doting on their lewd affections, are ignorant of their proper
infirmities, imperfections, and deformities (without ye sense and knowledge
whereof they are most wretched, seeing that neither feeling nor perceiving them
and the dangers thero^ ensewing, they are neither humbled, nor desirous to have
them cured, (...) of themselves defended): for mine own part, I both
acknowledge and confess mine infirmities and imperfections, yea the corruption
of my nature (as being a sinful man): in the consideration whereof, as I am
cast down and humbled: so am I not willing to seek the glory of that vanity,
but rather to cry and crave for aid and deliverance. Nor do I imagine, yt there
can be in my self any thing meritorious of ye everlasting goodness which
quickneth the dead, for what have I (putting my sins and infirmities aparte
which I had not received from the almighty? The office of a King.
) nor know I what there is in man's nature whereof he may ware proud. And
although ye call me K. and I have been to that end both exalted and graced: yet
what cause have ye now to esteem me so? is honor meet for a fool? a K. is
honorable: but I have distained that honor by my lewdnes. A King rules and
subdueth his own lusts: but I have given place to my lusts and been overcome
thereof. A king does equity and righteousness, the end of his preferment: but
I have done injury to my God and given offense to his people by mine horrible
ingratitude. A K. banisheth from his Court Idolators and wantons, and
whoremongers etc. but I have fawned on those which in my presence have
dedicated themselves to those abominations. A king should be a pattern of
beauty unto his people in all godly virtues: but I have given them an example
of lewdness in mine inordinate excess. A King is the stay and glory of his
place: but I have both weakened and deformed mine house with transgressions. A
K. both respects and expects the honor of the most holy, but I have
blemished the same with the damps of sin. Therefore unworthy I am the title of
a King. And if I may not be named a King, then much less should ye call me
the King of Israel. And truly I may not henceforth be called K. over Israel
because the L. God for mine offenses against him has justly deprived me of the
honor of that high dignity: But rather henceforth (as I have rightly merited) I
may be numbered among the fools of Israel. Messiah the true king of Israel.
Yea, and albeit that my servant Ieroboham has lifted up his hands against
me, and shall usurp that Name and dignitye: yet shall both this Name and
dignitye be reserved (as rightly imposed) for the most righteous Seed and
Prince of Israel which was promised to David my Father, and which in his due
time shall be raised up to sit on his seat, and to reign over the house of
Israel, that is, over the Saints and holy people of God, in doing them equity
and true judgment for ever. In the mean time I must in all humbleness of
mind bewail my sins, and the misery of mine house and posterity,
occassioned by the same: the which I cannot but every hour remember, consider,
lament, and finally repent, and abandon those manifold vanities of the sons
of men, Solomon is a preacher to teach and persuade the people. pro. 31.
wherein I have been polluted and wearyed in my life. Lo thus the King
ruminateth in affliction, hereof is his continual meditation in the sorrow of
his mind, and thus he expresses his faithful repentance every day! *Fifthly,
although he has spent some portion of his life in sin, and the whiles did
forget the wholesome lesson which his mother Bethsabe gave him: yet being in
the end prevented by the grace and mercy of God, he does agine often call
to mind and recount her wife instructions, and ruminateth of that which
himself has thought good to write and speak (in his wise Proverbs) as a
confession of his sins: and a worthy argument of his Repentance: yea, he
has not only converted, and dedicated himself again unto the Lord, in
wonderful great fear and reverence: Solomon inciteth all others to virtues.
Eccles. 12.
but also (as a learned and experienced Preacher of Repentance and
Righteousness) he halloweth and calls all men from the vices and vanities of
the deceitful world, teaching and exhorting them to fear the Lord, and to
keep his commandments. And in this, the king is not like them which think
that a benefit languisheth and perishes as the flood which powers forth her
streams into diverse channels and small veins: but he is, as the liberal man,
right willing to benefit many, thereby to cause his benevolence to abound,
therefore he studieth, he preaches, he speaks, he exhorts, he
admonishes, he comfort, he refuteth, he confirms, and whatsoever else
necessary and convenient in a Preacher to draw men from worldy vanities, and
to lead them toward the best good, and true felicity, the highest object of
man's hope. All this, his nobles and his servants, All these things are
testified by Solomon's servants.
which stand before him, hear his wisdom and observe his words and works,
find and well understand, neither can we but testify the same for him,
before all men. Yea, we see and can witness, that there is in him both the
wisdom of GOD, and the knowledge of the holy Spirit, in such abundance, as
we are not able to express it: and in this, we find him, yet more wise,
that now all the last he has changed his mind, and withdrawn his affection
from the world, so far that as he did sometimes swerue from the Lord GOD,
and by his evil example, did give an occasion to many others to blaspheme and
offend, or at the least to be offended: so he now endeavors himself, ten
times more to eschew evil, and to seek the Lord in singleness of heart,
and to exhort and persuade others to do the like: to, and for the which, he
has labored day and night, Eccles. 12,
to search and find out delightsome words, right Scripture, and the words
of truth. Wherein he followed not the common wont of sinners, which being
polluted and defiled with filthiness, have a desire not only to wallowe
therein, but also that others should be defiled with them in the same,
resembling those Wrestlers or Fighters, which care not to brush off the dust
from their own garments, but rather endeavor to defile one another, and fall
together even with the same. Thus has not the King done, and to be plain:
The King having been nourtered and well trained up in his youth, shows forth
at this time the ripe fruits thereof, notwithstanding those blemishes of
humane imperfections. *Finally, although it be a thing too common with men,
that though they for-beare to sin for a time, (fearing the punishment
thereof) they nevertheless afterward forget themselves, and return again,
Solomon after his repentance revolted not from God.
as with the dog to his vomit, to their former vices (as lately did Adoniah,
and Shimei): yet the King being otherwise minded, has shunned and abandoned
all his worldly delights, vices, and vanities, and dedicated himself again
unto the desire of heavenly things, and the joys eternal, in regard whereof,
for the love of GOD, and his own health, he abstaineth not only from things
unlawful, but also from things lawful and tolerable, pleasing the mind and
affection of man, and now continues steadfastly the same, having made a sure
Covenant with himself never to apostate or turn backewarde again: and
therefore, as the Trauailer which goes toward a most famous City, is ever
talking of his journey and of the place, to learn the customs and guise
thereof, and to express his desire to hasten and come thither, Solomon's common
and daily meditation and talk.
as ravished with the love of the same: So we perceive, that the King is never
pleased nor eased, but when he talks and tells of those high treasures of
that most happy place: thereof he ruminateth, thereof he delights to talk:
thereof he is glad to hear: all other things be they never so pleasant seem
loathsome and vain in his conceit. For of this nature are the words of his
common talk: and such are many of his Proverbs, the which seem to be powered
forth from the good treasure of a good man's heart, as the good fruits sprung
of a good tree. The definitions of repentance.
And truly those are notable Arguments of the Kings true Conversion and
Repentance: For whether Repentance, be defined * that affection and passion of
the mind, by Messiah: * Or, a changing or a renewing of the mind or opinion,
Repentance, and the ripe fruits and notes of the same, A conclusion for
Solomon's Repentance.
and so conclude, that Solomon our King is truly repentant. For were he not a
true repentant person, we should never have found such wholesome fruits on
this tree, Signs and tokens of true Repentance.
nor such sovereign treasures to be drawn forth from his humble heart.
Neither may we think, those fruits and treasures are of that nature, as they
can be found in that person, (especially toward the end of his life) of
whose true conversion and faithful repentance it may justly be doubted; no
more, then sweet waters are expected from a bitter fountain, or Figs to grow
of Thistles. Job. 27.10.
For why, the Hypocrite has never such a delight in the Almighty! Nor can it
possibly come to pass, that the persons in whom these and such virtues are
found resident, dwelling, or springing (so proper to the Lords chosen) should
be utterly shut out from a godly repentance, and so debarred of the mercy of
that most merciful God, who vouchsafes both to call sinners unto him, and
promises them mercy that truly repent. Note this.
For as the Lord, being ielous of such his graces, has not bin willing that
the damned Reprobates should be seized of the same, or so much as handle them
with their profane and sinful hands: so has he been, and is most glad and
right well pleased, that those graces be powered out as proper to them, whom it
pleases him to renew by repentance, and to bring with great honor to his
eternal glory. *Therefore as we know that the King is Repentant: so we also
believe he has eschewed the danger of Gods wrath, obtained mercy and pardon
of his sins, Solomon's pardon and salvation.

This cure is wrought of Gods mercy.


and reteineth hope of his eternal health. But this we acknowledge to be
wrought, not by the trust we have in that his repentance: but in that sweet
mercy of God which draws men to Repentance, in comparison whereof, all his
sins and all the sins of men in this life are not so much as one drop to
the Sea. The Sea is great: so is his sin: but the sea receives yet a
measure: so does his sin, but the mercy of GOD is beyond all measure.

Therefore, although men should be ashamed to sin, yet should they not be
ashamed to repent them of their sins (as I said before) and to hope for
mercy. Neither let any man say: he pardons sinners in such sort, as neither
their sin, no, nor any scarre and show of their sins remains. This is strange
to us, The nature of this cure.
and not seen in the curing of the wounds of a man's body, wherein though we
have a thousand cunning Physicians or Chirurgians, the scarres of the soars
remain to be seen an argument of the wound: for why, the infirmity of a man's
nature, and the imbercillitie of Art and medicine are repugnant to it self: but
when God pardons he blotteth sins out, in such sort, as not so much as any
scarre or sign of the wound remains to be seen, but together with the healing,
there is given perfect beauty, after the pardoning of the pain, he powers out
righteousness, and he makes the sinner equal with him that never sinned.
This the Kings father testified in himself when he said to his soul: The Lord
has forgiven all thine iniquity and healed all thine infirmity: he saves
thy life from destruction, psalm. 103.3. Arguments for Solomon's Pardon.
and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. * But howsoever it be,
there is no reason, why we should doubt of the assurance of the love of God to
him whom he vouchsaueth to entitle his Son. Neither should we suspect the happy
continuance of Gods loving mercy on him, which of his own word was both
promised and warranted him, when we find neither testimony, nor sufficient
presumption of his final apostasy and reprobation? Nay, we shall both
decipher our want of love in judging so rashly and irreverently of the king,
and of the generation of the righteous, whom the Lord will not suffer to fall
for ever (as K. David said): and our want of wisdom against our God, whom
therein to our power we should make a liar and unfaithful in not performing
that his word and promise made concerning him in the figure as it concerns
the Messiah, indeed: Who said: He shall be my son, and I will be his father: If
he sin, 2. Sam. 7*
I will chasten him with the rod of men and with the plagues of the children of
men: but my mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul. Which
words are to be understood not only, nor wholly of the Messiah, but also, and
partly of Solomon: the child of God by adoption and grace to whom the L. would
continue merciful, and not utterly cast him off: else, why should Saul with his
apostasy and reprobatio^ (as by way of a comparison) be here brought in? And
this not only the K. himself has often both said and declared yt yet His
wisdom did remain with him, that is, that Spirit of God, and the mercy of
God, Eccles. 2.
which was taken away from Saul in the Lords anger for his rebellion: but also
all we are able to testify for him, in whom we have discerned and do yet
approve the excellency of the Spirit and mercy of the Almighty, * Moreover,
Another Argument for Solomon's Pardon.
although the Lord by his Prophet Ahiah the Silonite has (for the Kings
offense) threatened punishment to the Seed of David, (as we have heard to our
grief and sorrow): yet being mindful of his promise and mercy made and showed
to David concerning Solomon, to our great comfort, he has in his grace stayed
himself there, and added this restraint: 1. king. 11.39.
But, not, for ever: or In all his days. Whererin, we see, that mercy is
reserved, and the punishment is determined in time, which may not be
understood of the pain of the reprobates and damned in hell, the which is
neither a punishment, but a torment or plague, and that, not determinable, but
without and beyond all time. Therefore we conclude, that Solomon is not fallen
for ever, nor shall be punished for ever, nor is deprived of the divine mercy:
but repenting and being so well-beloved of God, he is pardoned by him, who has
commanded the woods and al pleasant trees to over shadow them that be his, from
this time forth for ever more * And persuaded thereof, Solomon's salvation.
Can a sinner be saved? It is yet certain (as I said) that as such obtain
mercy, which repent, so shall they be surely saved which obtain mercy. This
the kings father testified when he modulated thus, Blessed are they whose
unrighteousness is forgiven, Who are blessed?
and whose sins are covered. Blessed is that man, to whom the Lord will not
impute sin. And who are indeed blessed? even they to whom the kingdom of
God belongs, and which are appointed to eternal happiness. Thus the first
man Adam, thus Abel the second man that feared God: thus Abraham, the father of
true believers: thus Moses the Lords servant, and thus David, the kings father,
and other the Lords Saints were pardoned of their sins, and blessed of the
Lord. And therefore the King being the Lords chosen, and by his wisdom
knowing the excellent effects of repentance, and the sweetness of Gods loving
mercies is doubtless happy and expects his rest and glory with those
Saints, which having been wise and turned many unto righteousness, do and shall
shine and glister as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for
ever and ever.

Therefore, howsoever it has been objected against the King: as neither the
Egyptians for the heat, Solomon's defense.
nor the Scythians for the cold do feel the terrible clappes of thunder. So
shall our Lord King Solomon, partly by his excellent holiness and glory: and
partly by his true Repentance and forgiveness of sins, besides this our
testimony touching him, be protected and defended against all reproaches and
obloquies of slanderous and envious tongues, as well in this age, as in all the
ages that shall follow and succeed in the world: yea, and as he that casts
his darts against a rock or other sound thing, does sometimes hurt himself by
the sudden rebound of the same: so whosoever shall henceforth aim so
contumeliously to the Kings person, being a man so holy and glorious, may
paraduenture be perced himself by the inexpected rebounde of his own dart:
and so they which have been glad of his sorrow and rejoice at his fall, shall
mourn in their own destruction, as a just reward of their malicious censures,
and ungodly glory: when on the other side, they which love the Lord and his
Saints, shall be glad and rejoice in the sense of his loving mercies.

CAP. XXXI.
Why God permitted Solomon to fall? Why Solomon now uses not the Name
Tetragrammaton? The preservation of Solomon's Sermons.
THE most reverend Zadok, having made the former Apology for the K. and
thereupon taken a pauze yet, as not willing to give over, but as (after a little
breathing) to proceed; the Princes took an occasion of applause, wherein they
both approved and commended all those things which had been said for the
King, The Nature of good subjects,
as right glad of that which might be justly found and spoken in his defense:
being such persons (indeed) as wished him no evil, but all good in their
hearts. But Zadok to prevent them who might of any his words take an occasion
to presume in their sins, zadok by defe^ding the king would not offer an
occasion to any man to presume too far upon the divine mercies.
said: I have not produced the former arguments for the king, nor spoken any
thing (my Lords) whereby I would animate or encourage men to presume upon the
divine mercies, and so to sin, that mercy might be powered out: The Lord
forbid, that any man should of this take that occasion. Nay, rather every man
might beware and take heed that he fall not then, whiles he thinks himself
to stand most assured. For as the most righteous man is not without his sin,
and so prouokes the Lord to anger, and deserves damnation: so shall not he
escape some measure of punishment: Sins shall be punished.
above all, heinous sins shall be horribly punished, even here in this life,
as it has been apparent in David, when he offended in the case of Vriah: and
also in this our king, of whom the Lord said before: 2. Sam. 7.
If he sin, I will beat him with the Rod of men, and with the plagues of
the children of men, thus did God beat even him whom he had made a man after
his own heart. And thus he threatened even the same, whom he named his Son!
If he has thus done on those green and flowrishing branches; what will he
do on the dry and withered stubbes? surely, whereas he pruneth and corrects
the former, to amend them for their good, he will cut off and destroy the
other from among his people: for though as a father he pittieth his own: yet
as a just Judge he will condemn, and as a tyrant will rent a sunder the
sons of Beliall, Deuteronomy. 32.
neither desist or spare, until that in them he has filled up the measure of
his wrath, according to the measure of their transgressions. The which thing,
if the ungodly (the feed daily on mischief as on bread, and draw sins unto
themselves as with strong ropes) duly considered and regarded, they would have
less courage to flatter themselves in their manifold impieties, and to promise
peace to their souls in the depth of those their dangers. Azariah.
* Then spoke Azariah for the Princes, saing: Well said (most reverend father):
But we beseech you, wherefore did the Lord God permit and suffer our noble
King, not only to slide: but also to sin, yea, and to transgress so
horribly before the Lord and his people? zadok. Gods secret judgments are
beyond the reach of man.
Should godly sobriety license us (answered Zadok:) to sound the profunditie
of the divine thoughts? or to enter into the bowels of his secrets? or to
search out the causes of his hidden and unknown ways? no surely: but rather
then to search or endeavor to find out, we should reverently admire, and in
all things justify them; for it is true that Moses said: Deuteronomy. 3 2.4.
Perfect is the work of the most mighty GOD: for all his ways are Judgment:
He is a GOD of truth, without wickedness, righteous, and just is he. Deuteronomy.
29.29.
Those secret things belong to GOD above, and they are not for a man to know
or find out, nor shall he be able in any other sort, then he is able to
find out the circle of a Ring. Job. 28.7.
This is that way whereof Job spoke, the which the birds have not known, the
Vultures eye never saw, wherein the Lions whelps walk not, and into the which
no Lion ever came. It is far easier to know the way of an Eagle in the Air,
of a Serpent upon a stoane, of a ship in the Sea, and of a man with a
yong-woman (which yet passed the kings understanding) then to find out the
reasons and causes of the Lords secret judgments and hidden ways: Therefore,
when the wisest men in the world have presumed this enterprise, they have
been compared to the hungry man, which dreameth that he is eating, and being
awaked out of his sleep, finds himself empty: Thus are they fed with
wind in steed of words, they take the shadow for the body, they find
wandering clouds whiles they seek for rain, and for substances they take
hold of accidents only. The causes of Gods secret judgments, are not to be
found out.
But the better to suppress the curiosity of man's mind, let us consider
certain examples of the works and ways of God, the causes and reasons
whereof we could never as yet find out. In the days of Iosuah the Captain of
the Lords Hoaste, we find that one Achan sinned against the Lord, Achan.
Ios. 7.25.
in that he had contrary to the commandment taken among the spoils a
certain Babilonish garment, and two hundred sickles of silver, and a tongue of
gold, and conveyed and hid them away: for the which the whole Hoaste was
troubled and fled before the enemy: and afterward, not only Achan, but
also his Family and all the he had was destroyed. Now, if Achan only
sinned, why did the people fly and fall? Again, why were his sons, and
Family punished? and what had his children and cattle deserved, that they all
perished with him? was it not commanded before (Deuteronomy. 24.16) The fathers shall
not be put to death for the children: nor the children for the fathers:
Chorah. Number. 16.13.
but every man shall be put to death for his own sin. Also in the rebellion
of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, why were the people plagued for these men's
offenses? and wherefore dyed their Wives, and children, and servants, Abraham
and Sarah. Genesis 18.
and cattle together with them? * Also, we find that Abraham being fore-folde
that he should have a son of Sarah his wife, laughed as well as did Sarah: and
yet Sarah was reproved and not Abraham. We may imagine that the one laughed
for joy, and the other in scorn: but we have no such cause delivered unto us:
for they both believed God. Moreover: Adam. Genesis 3.
why did God permit Adam to fall, and Hevah to be tempted? Why was Abraham our
Father made a soiorner in a strange land? Abraham. Jacob. Pharao.
Why was Jacob vexed and afflicted with so many evils in his days? why did God
harden the heart of Pharaoh? Why did the Lord plague threescore and ten thousand
of David's people for his sin? In all these things, David.
let us (as I said) wonder, and justify the Lord, knowing, Job. Genesis 18.
that as no kind of iniquity dwells in the most high: so being the Judge
of all the world, he judges according to right, as Abraham says: and would
that men should content their minds only with that which it pleases him to
reveal and utter unto them. The general cause of all.
But thus we may say, that in all those things, the Lord has respected his
own glory, and the benefit of his children, and that, as his will is in all
things performed, it was his will that (among others) the King should fall, and
show his imperfections: and that as I can gather (besides the former) for these
four causes: Certain particular causes of Solomon's sin.
First, that the people which beheld his wonderful wisdom, wealth,
prosperity and glory (wherein he has as by way of Messiah) might not esteem
or think of him more then it is convenient. For (indeed) they have for the
most part taken him rather for God, then for man: and others have taken him for
the promised Messiah, and not for the Figure of the same: wherein they began to
derogate from the Lord and his Anointed, by giving of his glory to a mortal
man. And surely for this cause has the Lord often suffered the right worthy
vessels of his grace to fall, and to be noted in the holy Scriptures with their
imperfections and imfirmities, as were Adam, Noah, Abraham, Lot, David, and
such like. Next, the king Messiah: so by those his slidings, and the sins of
his wives, and strange women imputed also unto him, (in that he both affected
and maintained them, notwithstanding their blemishes in religion) he might
foreshew the burden of man's sins, laid and imputed to the holy one, on whose
heel therefore the Serpent was to tread, in the regard whereof, he shall be
both reputed and esteemed vile and of no reputation among the children of men,
and shall be punished for their transgressions, as David has prophesied
thereof: Besides that, in this declination of the Kings honor, is noted the
renting and final dissipation of our Nation and Why Solomon used not the holy
name Tetragrammaton: in his Book of Eccles?
that Abiather objected further against the king and his words, namely in
this, that he had not of late used, nor remembered in his common talk, the
glorious Name Jehovah, whereof he would conclude (as it appears) a note of
prophanitie in the King, as one that either should deny or forget the living
God, who is to be remembered and praised for ever. Wherefore, lest any advantage
might be either given or taken, in passing such a thing over in silence, which
might (indeed) argue a consent to that which is objected, ye shall understand
that in any wise we may not gather of this omission of that sacred Name, either
a denial, or a forgetfulness of the Lord God, by the king: nor may we, thereby
the sooner, derogate authority from him and his words, no more then we may
justly condemn the poor sinner and his prayer, which in the consideration of
his own vileness, dares not to lift up his eyes to the heavens. For as this
Name is wonderful and most dreadful to the sinful: so, who knows not but
that we esteem it Ineffable, not to be pronounced or used, except in weighty
matters, and in the causes of the highest importance. But the omission of this
Name by the king, may be imputed partly to the great honor he yielded the same:
partly, to the singular humility of his contrite spirit, who now deeply
weighing the heavy burden of his sin, and all those vanities wherein he had
been long wearied, with the terror of the divine judgments, threatened on him
and his posterity, by the Lords Prophet, he thinks himself most unworthy to
take in his mouth, or to use that dreadful name, being not forgetful of that
which he heard his Master Asaph (after the Prophecy that David had given him)
often times to sing and say.

(...)
(...)
(...)
But God unto the sinner said: And why, psalm. 50.16.

presumest thou to preach mine holy heasts:
and in thy mouth to take my Testament?
For the King is now so far humbled, An argument of the kings repentance.
that notwithstanding his wisdom, place, and glory, he esteems himself of
no reputation, and therein too vile not only to name Jehovah: but also to be
as a doore-keeper within that holy house which himself has built and
dedicated (in the time of grace) to that most glorious Name. And this is so
far off from all just suspicion of prophanitie, or forgetfulness, or denial
of God in the King, that the omission of this Name, does rather mightily argue
his faithful fear and humbled heart in true Repentance, and with the like
spirit, in the remembrance of his sins committed, and the punishments thereon
threatened, and felt in part, and in this regard he also refused to be called
the King of Israel (as before it has been said). Would to God, the like
consideration, dread and reverence of this most holy Name, did in the same
spirit, hold and possess the hearts of all others, that not only mean and
private persons, but also princes and great personages would rather either
tremble with David, to hear thereof, or fear with Solomon, to take the same
rashly and commonly in their mouths! then should not that commandment be so
presumptuously and daily broken: Exodus 20.
Thou shall not take the Name of Jehovah thy God in vain. Neither should this
vengeance be so often justly inflicted: Jehovah will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain. Therefore has the King worthily omitted the
common use of this Name, in those his words, and late writings. Howbeit, he
has nevertheless in all humility, reverence, and gravity used, and yet does
daily use those other Titles or Attributes of God, whereby he is sufficiently
known in the Law, and in the Prophtes, as namely, (...) that is, God,
Creator, King: Supreme or highest. And he thus resolves (with holy Job, Job.
27.3.
that now so long as his breath is in him, and the spirit of God in his
nostrels, his lips shall speak no wickedness, and his tongue shall utter no
deceit. But (howsoever it be, that men have their imperfections and slidings)
as we may not tie the authority of holy Scriptures, divine Sermons, and the
truth of the Almighty to the credit or estimation of any mortal man: The way
to try all writings, words and works of men.
so neither shall those Words and Sermons of our Lord King Solomon, be
esteemed only after the person, and authority of Solomon, though he so far
excelled all other men living in wisdom, knowledge and many other right
excellent and rare induments and virtues: but also according to the consent it
has with the prophetical and legal verity and doctrine, indicted by the
finger of Gods Spirit, by whose motion, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel,
Moses, David, and other holy men have spoken. And it is most certain
(howsoever some would gather thereof, as Spiders which gather poison of the
sweetest flowers, and as the purest streams may be polluted by the trampling
of soul feet: and the best Scriptures may be abused, as Satan himself and
the deceivers of all times have therein presumed to credit and authorize their
own) that yet these present words of King Solomon, as also his Proverbs,
Solomon's words are approved, collected and reserved by his princes and
servants.
Parables and divine songs, the which he has, in the fulness of the Spirit
of wisdom, vttred, spoken and modulated, are sound verity, good Scripture,
and words agreeable to the words and writings of Moses, and the Prophets, in all
things. Therefore let us proceed with diligent carfulness, to call to mind
those the kings words, which in this time, and upon this occasion, he uses
to utter and speak before us, with great gravity; and to collect them into a
Book (in the Name of God) not forgetting to express our grateful mind
toward his Grace, in this our care to preserve his Words, and to commend
them to the holy Church, for the better instruction of the same, acknowledging
and testifying withal, the diligence, wisdom, godly desire, and excellency
of him, who studied to be yet more wise, and to teach the people knowledge,
that thereby abandoning the deceiuable vanities of this wicked world, they
might with him walk the right and perfect way toward the best Good and
highest felicity. These words being said, Zadok pauzed again: whereat the
princes (with one accord) expressed by signs both their grateful mind, and
ready will to yield to the performance of this duty, knowing so well, not only
that the reasons alleged were of sufficient probability and merited
allowances: but also that those the Kings Words were perfect verity,
profitable for the Church in posterity, and therefore would that they should
be committed to writing and preserved accordingly.

CAP. XXXII.
Zadok answers to certain Objections and expounds those words Vanity of
Vanities.
Abiather.
THen Abiather the Priest, who had before objected against the king and his
words, rose up again and said. But yet (my Lords) before we collect and
record those the kings words, that our labor therein may not be in vain, and
beseech you, let us further hear, what my Lord Zadok will answer to those
particular Exceptions, which are taken and may be urged hereafter for some
presumption against the Kings Words (especially against this his ordinary
talk) toward the ratification of diverse erroneous opinions: that so, all
things being made plain by us (by whom those the Kings Words must be gathered,
recorded and commended to the church) there may hereafter no just advantages
be taken, nor any exceptions be admitted against any thing in the same. The
princes
And we are well pleased (said the Princes) if it shall please my Lord Zadok
to vouchsafe us his learned judgment and patience therein. zadok
And I also (said Zadok) shall not be unwilling to answer Abiather in these
things as the Lord shall enable me, for the better setting forth of his
glory, and the truth of the Kings wisdom uttered in those his words. What is
the first Exception, The first exception. Eccles. 1.2.
tell me Abiather? The first Exception, (said Abiather) is taken against those
words of the king, where he said, and yet daily says, Vanity of vanities,
and all is most plain vanity. There is not any of you all, but have heard him
utter these words, as well as myself: wherein (howsoever the king entendeth it)
there be, which think that the king therein condemns all the Creatures of
God in the world, with all those functions which, in the law of God, we are
commanded to use and to exercise our selves in, to his high glory, the good of
his Church, and the benefit of the commonwealth. And this he would prove by
many Arguments, and in the end so concludes again, Vanity of vanities. Ye
have said (quod zadok), Eccles. 12.9. The answer.
but by your leave Abiather, and by your patience (my Lords all) Seeing it is
your good pleasure I shall answer, I am the more willing (as I said) and ready
to speak for my Lord the Kings Words: It is true, that the King has said
and daily ruminateth this proposition, Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities.
and all is but vanity: as the ground or conclusion of those his Words. But
does that conclude a contempt of the Creatures, and of the holy functions and
gifts of God, which in their natures are good? Nothing less. Nor (indeed) has
the king spoken therein of those Creatures, or of the true use of them in their
kind, nor of those lawful functions either in the Church, or in the Common
wealth: But the words (having a large scope) do nevertheless include in them
all those things which are placed under the Sun only: that is to say, within
the kingdom of vanity: Vanities kingdom.
Wherein is found to reign much malice and little wisdom, wherein all things
be vicious, all things be loathsome, al things are full of obscurity and
snares, wherein souls be endangered, bodies be afflicted; wherein all things
be vanity, and affliction of the spirit: and within the which are not
comprehended any of those works or ways of God. (...) The labor of man under
the sun.
And this the king has sometime noted by the (...) or labor of man under the
Sun: which word (as ye well know) notes rather the affliction of the mind,
then a work of the body, or any other labor. But to make this yet more plain,
let us consider first what the King means by this word Vanity, and then,
what the For why Vanity, (...) vanity.
(which the king uses singularly and absolutely signifies a very light thing,
that which soon vanishes away as the smoke, or as a bubble of the water, and
as touching any profit, is worth nothing. psalm 144
The vanity of Adams sons, (as said the Psalmist). Thus Adam and Hevah
reposing all their hope of the promised seed in Cain their first borne, whom
they called, a man of the Lord, they thought of the next Son, but as of a
mere trifle, or transitory thing in respect of him, and therefore they named
him Habel, Genesis 4.1.2.
vanity. But the King here speaks of an exceeding great vanity, the which
to declare, he duplicateth the word, and says Vanity of vanities: that is,
behold a notable and wonderful great vanity!

what things he comprehends under vanity.
Secondly, What things are comprehended by him within this vanity, the next
word plainly shows us: for in (...) Haccol: where it is to be noted (I
will speak it rather to teach others, then any of you to whom the Phrases of
our tongue are so well known) that this word (...) Col, put absolutely without
He, (...)
is a sign universal, whereby the total sum of things is signified, and is
so much to say, as All, or Altogether: Haccol.
but having He prefixed, as Haccol, the same is abridged and restrained to some
special or particular sum of things: as not All generally or universally,
but All that, that whole, that all, which is either spoken of before, or
comprehended within such a predicament, place, or time. Neither may any man
think, but that the particle in this place, is referred to some particular or
special sum of things, or to some notable person: as when pointing to such
persons, or such matters, we use to say: (...) That singular, or speciciall
Prophet. (...) That word, or that singular, or notable word, Ille sermo That
word.
or matter. So said the Greeks (...). So, by this, we may not say that the
King has included all things under vanity: but only a particular sum of
things. Seeing therefore, that all things are not drawn under this vanity, but
some things: what things are excluded from vanity, and what not.
we may consider, first what the things are which are excluded, and stand
without the compass of this All: and then, what those things are, which are
comprehended within the same: both the which are to be gathered and understood,
by the drift and scope of the Kings own words. First, therefore it may be
known, 1 the creatures are excluded.
that all the Creatures of God are excluded, which in regard as well of the
Creator, being the best good; as of the perfection of the things themselves,
being in their natures good, together with the conservation of them by the
divine providence, to and for good uses, may not be vain. So the king many
times teaches the true use of them, and wills men neither to contemn, nor
to abuse: but to embrace, enjoy, and use them in the fear of God. 2 Substances
of things.
Neither are the Substances of things concluded in this particle All, the which
notwithstanding the diversity of accidents remain the same, as the Lord has
ordained them from the beginning. Nor may we bring under this particle All, the
works and ways of God, 3 Gods works and ways.
either spiritual within us, or external without us, the which (as Moses
testifies) are perfect and good. Eccles. 3.14
For whatsoever God does (as the King himself also considered) it continues
for ever, and nothing can be put unto it, nor taken from it. 4 Solomon's temple.
Nor does this particle comprehend the Temple of God in Jerusalem, which the
King has built and dedicated according to the will, wisdom, and purpose of
God, to be a type and Figure of that Church, which the true Solomon, namely
Messiah shall build and dedicated to the eternal God, although that when the
thing figured is effected, the figure cease and vanishes. Nor is the Word
of God preached, 5 Gods word preached, and the words therein commended.

6 The several functions which are lawful.


nor the godly works and labors therein taught and commanded to be done,
subject to this partilce: nor the several functions of the Ministers in the
Church, or of the Magistrates in the Commonwealth, or of husbands, wives,
masters, servants, parents, cihldre^, etc. Neither may these things be
esteemed or called vain without the abuse of the things, and an offense to the
Creator, and institutor of the same, who has made them all perfect and good in
their nature, to be used and enjoyed with thanksgiving, and prayer in the fear
of God. On the other side, these are the things which the king comprehends
within this particle All, as namely, The counsels, the studies, the endevors,
These things are vain.
the driftes, the devices, the purposes of man, assaying to effect and bring to
pass all things, by, and after his own wit, wisdom, 1 Man's purposes and
studies.
and by his own power, policies, engines, and ability, without the word and
counsel of Gods Spirit. Also all those works and buildings which the King
has wrought and made for the lust of his eyes, the lust of his flesh, and for
the pride of life, 2 Idle works and buildings.
as those which he builded for the abomination of his strange Women, with all
his labors, expenses and delights, in and about the same. Also man himself
(as now under transgression a stranger from the Lord) having vain thoughts,
3 Man himself is vain.
vain words, vain deeds, as of whom said the Kings father: Man is
altogether vanity, yea, and lighter then vanity it self) is surely herein
comprehended. 4 The abuses which Solomon touches in this Book.
Finally, the King here notes all those devises, counsels, studies, works,
matters and things, the which are descried and found to be within Vanities
kingdom, and particularly noted in his Catalogue thereof, to the which this
particle Col, so abridged and restrained by He, has a special relation. And
surely, this is a main and mighty stroke against the prudence and virtues of
the natural man: to abate his pride, to humble him, to teach him to admit
correction, to hearken to good counsel, to meditate of his own condition, to
distrust his own ways, to use the Creatures, and not to abuse them, to turn
himself from those things of vanities kingdom, which are transitory and
vain, and to affect and follow after the things spiritual and heavenly, which
are permanent for ever, and of the greatest price to all effects and purposes.
* Then replied Abiather, Abiather.
and said unto Zadok, In that ye have denied the consequence (most reverend
Father ye, have right well satisfied us; neither (indeed) perceive I how of
the Kings Words (as ye have expounded them) we may conclude the contempt of
the Creatures of God: or the condemnation of those ordinary functions in the
Church and Commonwealth.

CAP. XXXIII.
The works and labors of men, which Solomon condemns in his Ecclesiastes.
AFter this, Abiather proceeding in his reply, said again. By those your
answers (most reverend father) wherein ye have so well expounded and explayned
the Kings words, we may know the necessity and end of good interpretations,
without the which, The necessity and end of good expositions of the
scriptures.
the ignorant and common people (being not so well learned in those sentences
and phrases of holy scriptures) may too soon (as blindfolded persons) fall
into the pit of errors and preuarication. They therefore which endeavor to
withdraw or hold back this good help from the holy Church, do what in the^
lies to hinder the people of the true understanding of Gods will, of walking
in that light of righteousness, and consequently from the happy apprehension of
the true felicity, by Faith in the holy Messiah. But it may please you to
hear me further: Another objection, that he should dissuade men from their
lawful labors. Genesis 3. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 28.
I have heard the K. to utter another sentence, whereof (at ye first show)
appears to spring a very dangerous doctrine, and such (indeed) as might
easily discourage all men that shall it hear from those laudable labors, and
travails which are to them enjoined in this world, commanded the^ in the law
of God, and have the promises of blessing and prosperity in this life. For the
K. speaking of vanity, expostulated and said by and by, (as I well remember
his words) What else has a man of all his labors, Eccles. 1.3.
wherein he labors under the Sun? as who should say: a man gets nothing by
all his labors in this world: and if it be so: to what end the^ should he labor
sweat, and work? nay rather let him fold together his hands with the fool,
esteeming one morsel with quietness, better then both the hands full with labor
and vexation of the spirit: let him be idle, and take his ease, and not strive
to get his living in the sweat of his face and toil of body and mind, nor to
do his necessary works in those six days, wherein the Lord has commanded
him to labor in his vocation!

zadoks answer.
To this zadok answering, said: As ye commend (as well worthy) good
Interpretations: so neither would ye dislike this sentence of the King, if ye
either understood it aright, or at the least, noted well what I had said before
touching those things, The works of a man's vocation are not condemned etc.
which the King would comprehend within Vanities kingdom. It is not his
meaning (by that his expostulation) to condemn the lawful works of any man's
vocation in this life, which are to him either enjoined or commended with a
promise of blessing: nor to discourage any person from his study and labors
in the same. I need not to tell you again, that as the king is most wise: so
he best knows what a man is, what he is to sustain in his life, and wherein
he may find peace and rest for his soul: and that after his wisdom and
experience, he knows well, what the Law, what the Prophets, what the
Psalms, and wise men before him, have therein both taught and commanded:
neither has he ever given that semblance, or show of prophanitie or
impiety, to oppose himself in his Doctrine and words against those holy
Oracles so received, and well approved of the chief Masters of the
Assemblyes. Eccles 12.11. Eccles. 4. 5. and 5.11.
But in this, the King speaks not of those laudable works and actions of a
man: nor of all kinds of labors and works unto him enjoined and incident,
the which (truly) I have heard him many times to commend: yea, and to praise
them which are diligent in doing and effecting them well: Again, I have heard
him vehemently to reprove such persons, as give over themselves to idleness
in the neglect of the works of their lawful vocations. What things are
condemned.
But the K. (in this place) points at the vain and miserable studies
counsayles, devises and endeavors of man, after the which, in conclusion,
ensues the practice of that which he neither can, nor may lawfully compass
and perform. And this is made plain by the due consideration of the Kings
words of the same expostulation: in the which we consider this, that the King
speaking of man's labors, Nota Exodus 20.9.
takes not any of those three words used by the Lord, in the Law, where he
says: (...)
(...) Thou shall labor: and thou shall do all thy work. The first word
(...) signifies, any kind of service, (...)
or servile labors, such as are not to be done on the Sabbath or Festival
days: but on other days they are to be done without denial, by this
warrant: Levit. 23.2

Exo. 20.9.


Six days thou shall labor: But that kind of labor the king means not,
in those his words: What gets a man else of all his labors. The second
word of the Law, (...)
is (...) which signifies to do or to make any thing, and herence is that
word (...) a deed, or work done or wrought: or the effecting of any thing by
any action or work. This word has that place of Job, whereas it is said to
God concerning him: Job. 1.10. Exodus 18.20.
Thou have blessed the work or labor of his hands: and so said Iethro to
Moses, Show them the way wherein they must walk, and the work or labor that
they must do. But the King has not used this word of the Law in his sentence.
The third word is (...) which notes every thing, which serves to to the use
and ministry of man, whether Arts, or Works, or Flocks, or whatsoever else
which are gotten and obtained by the labor and industry of man. This Labor,
Levit. 23.2. Exodus 12.16. and 20.9.
is a work necessary to man's life, and is not forbidden to be done, but on
the Saboth days, and holy convocations: else they are both lawful and
commendable: for in six days (says the Lord) thou shall do all thy work,
which is necessary to be done. (...)
Neither has the King that word (...) which signifies that work, which is
done with an earnest affection and desire to be effected, and is both lawful
and laudable in them that study and endeavor to do, and perform the work of
the Lord with diligence. This truly observed the kings father, in the Lord
himself, to whom he thus sang.

Our ears have heard our Fathers tell, psalm. 44.1.

and reverently record:
The wondrous works that thou have done,
in elder times (O Lord).
But the word which the King here uses and applies to this his purpose is
(as ye know) (...) which signifies a labor with weariness, and not with
pleasure or delight. (...)
(as are those other labors, wherein a man expects the end of his works
with sacietie.) For it has tediousness and no relevation, it has sorrowful
despare, and no hope of comfort, in respect either of the horrible loathsomnes,
or of the unhappy event thereof: for it is wonderful tedious, and yet in the
end effects nothing to content or please the mind. This is that work
whereof spoke Job, Job. 3.10.
saying, He hid not sorrow from mine eyes: and the same which the Kings father
has concerning that ungodly sinner, singing thus.

Behold, he labors in the throws of mischiefs:
He has conceived sorrow, and brought forth impieties.
Genesis 2.
But this is not that or such a kind of labor as Adam had in Paradize: or that
which men should have labored in, if that Adam had not fallen from that his
blessed estate: but rather that, The effect of Adams fall.
which all men are constrained to feel as an effect of Adams fall: having an
affinity with those 2. words which (beyond all other) express and set forth
the vanity of man: the first whereof is (...) which has the same letters,
(...)
but being inverted or other wise placed, it varieth only the manner of
signification, and is interpreted (as ye know) transgression, preuarication, a
voluntary transcension against the conscience: a contempt, contumacie or
rashness: and namely, the trespass of a subject against his Prince, of a wife
against her husband, of a servant against his master, of a son against his
father, according as we find it in Levit. 5.17. and in Job. 21.34. and some
other places of the holy Scriptures. *The other word which is so near allied
to this in signification, is (...) Aven, that evil concupiscence of our first
parents, (...)
by the which they (having listened to the Serpent) transgressed the
commandment of God. Job. 31.3.
This is that, whereof the same Job spoke: Is not destruction (said he) unto
the wicked and some strange thing to the workers of concupiscence? against the
same sang the Psalmist.

Psalm. 119.133.
Direct a right my steps, to walk within thy way:
Then shall not vile Concupiscence within me bear the sway.
And this word, is oftentimes applied to Idolatry, as Samuel said to Saul, 1.
Sam. 15. 23.
who rebelled against the Lord: Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
concupiscence and Idolatrye breaks out. By this then it appears, that the
king means chiefly this kind of affliction of man, and that whereof himself
was weary as he said I am weary of my labors.

Next, he calls those labors, his labors wherein he confirms that which
was said before touching the abridging of Col. For in this he speaks only
of man's labors, (...) Man's labors so named for 3 causes.
and he calls them so, for three causes: first because they be occasioned
through man's own malice and concupiscence. Secondly, Deuteronomy. 32.
For as a man is contrary to God in his nature: so is he also contrary to him
in all his works, labors, thoughts, ways and devises. Thirdly, the King has
showed the place of these labors, which is (as ye heard him to say) underneath
the Sun: that is, within the limits of Vanities kingdom: among worldly men,
The place of man's labors.
which in the world are of a lewd mind, and without God. For the things that
are wrought in man's heart and disposed by the divine spirit: are not called
either the works of man, or the labors of man under the Sun: but they be
called properly (as they be indeed) the Works of God devised, decreede and
wrought in heaven, by him that spoke the word, and all things were done. To
be brief, the King has here brought in two general arguments to prove his
former general proposition ( vanitye of vanities): 2 Arguments against man's
vanity.
the first whereof is taken from the condition of man in this life, in the
which, howsoever he search he finds naught else of himself but labor and
toil. The second argument is taken from the effects and fruits of his
labors, wherein when he has vexed him self, he finds no contentation, no
sacietie, and so no felicity: but altogether vanity and vexation of the
spirit. And that the king might more fully express the greatness of this
Vanitye and confirm with the more emphasis that which he had said he
expostulateth with this interrogation, what else has a man? In which manner of
speech, there is a greater force, then if he had said, A man gains naught
else. For this is so vehement an affirmation of the thing proposed, as if it
could not be denied: and is so much to say; as, ye cannot in any wise deny,
that a man gets nothing but vanity, of all those labors wherein he
afflicts himself under the Sun.

CAP. XXXIIII.
Zadok answers to some other objections and speaks 1. of the generations
and Elements.
THen spoke the Princes, and said unto Zadok: ye have right well explaned the
Kings words: and we verily believe, that his meaning is, The princes
approbation of zadoks words.
as ye have said therein. Neither think we yt he has, or does condemn all the
works of God, which are done either by himself, or by man, after his
commandments: but only all those labors, whereof himself is now sorry and
ashamed, namely, such as he has done and wrought under the Sun, as a
carnal or natural man without the wisdom of Gods spirit, or the warrant of
his Law. Therefore, we may not either reject or dislike the Kings words in
this part. But has Abiather the Priest any thing else to object against the
Kings doctrine and words? Another objection ca. 1.4.
yea, that I have (answered Abiather) for I have heard the king to speak of
the Generations, as if he comprehended all generations within the same
predicament, as vain: and thus he said: One Generation passes away, another
comes: the Earth stands for ever. Yea he combineth with them the four
principal Elements, as the Sun which rises and falls: the wind which
blows and compasses the earth: zadok answers to the objection and
expounds the place.
the waters and rivers which come and go from and to the sea: and the Earth
which remains ever the same. * Indeed (said zadok) the King here speaks of
the Creatures and things themselves: howbeit, although they be made subject to
man's vanity, in that they must stand for the use of sinful men, according to
the will of him that has so subdued them under hope, and expectation of a
delivery from this intolerable thraldom, which will be in the end of this world
yet are they not in themselves vain, but good and profitable, both to the
glory of God, and to the benefit of men: Neither has the King meant to place
them in his catalogue of vanities. But from the consideration of them, being
compared with the labors and affairs of men under the Sun, he takes
Arguments to prove the vanity, not of the things, but of sinful man who is so
inconstant and variable from his duty, and consequently unhappy. But if it
please you (my L.) for the better satisfying not only of Abiather, but of al
them that shall hence gather a conceit of the vanity of these generations and
elements, I will (by the divine grace) speak first of these generations, and
what the Kings purpose is therein, (...) a generation what it signifies.
and afterward of those elements. * The word (...) Dor signifies (as ye
know) the constituted and ordinary order and course either of times, or of
persons, or of actions, or things. A certain succession or revolution: an
order of degrees of the natural propagatio^ of things, as one thing is
engendered or rises up of another thing. An age, A generation for one of the
ages of the world.
a generation, the which as a sphere or globe has his reuolutions, courses,
steedes and turns. * Sometimes this word is set and used for one of the ages
of the world, which we have reckoned as from Adam to Noah, from Noah to
Abraham: from Abraham to Moses: from Moses to David the King etc.

* Sometimes an age is restrained to the time of a hundred years, as where the
Lord said to Abraham: The time of an 100 years genesis 15.13.16.
Thy seed shall be a stranger in a land which is not theirs four hundred
years. And afterward he expounds it, saying: In the fourth age they shall
come hither again: the which fell out about the time yt the Lord delivered our
fathers from the thraldom of Egypt by the hand of Moses. * Sometimes it is
taken for the time that a man lives in this world: whose life is called an age
or a generation: The time of a man's age in this world.
and so have our fathers understood it.* But it is certain that the King in
this his manner of speaking, understands not only the time and age of a man's
life, or of years: but the very ages of the world, with the ordinary and
common succession and generation of the persons and things in the same.
Wherein it is evident, how one thing is corrupted, and another thing is
engendered: how one man dies, and another is borne: how one thing passes and
another follows. And this course is so established in the world as it cannot
be altered, like that, whereof the Lord said to Noah, yet shall not sowing
time and harvest, cold and heat, Genesis 8.22. The condition of worldly things.
summer and winter, day and night cease all the days of the earth. * By this,
we may see and consider the course of this world, the shortness of a man's
life, and the alteration and succession of things in the same. A man may not
expect to live here still, nor think to have the face of things always
alike: for a man is no sooner borne and takes the place of him that went
before him, but by and by he posteth hence again, to give place to another.
This world is but his place of peregrination and travail, wherein his voyage
ended, he must yield to him that comes after him. Therefore let us not
build high houses as to dwell in them for ever, nor lay up treasures in this
life, from the which we shall soon be shaken: but rather let us play our
parts well while we stand on the stage of our time in the fear and service of
God, therein to prepare our selves for the time we must departhence, and for
the life to come, and then yielding our selves up unto the Lord, we may
willingly resign over our places unto them that shall succeed and come after
us according to the will and purpose of God. Lo this is the lot of this life
wherein one generation passes and another (...) comes. And this cannot but
condemn man's inconstancy and vanity, Man's inconstancy.
which contrary to the due course of the Creatures and the constant succession
of the ages, times and persons of the world breaks order and is wearied in
many intricate and wicked imaginations, counsels, devises and actions, as
therein striving with him that is mightier, and seeking to withstand the will,
power and providence of the most high. Howbeit, The continuance of man's vanity.
in this, man accords to the course and sucession of those determinat ages:
that as man (since his fall through our first Parents) is sinful and vain:
so is he sinful and vain as yet, and so he will be unto the end: for as
Adam begat Seth in his own likeness: So one sinful and vain man begets
another in his likeness, one vain devise brings forth another, one vain
action another, one vain thing another, in and among the children of men:
that, look as were the Fathers preceding, the like are the children
succeeding, in whom the Proverb hits true: That Nature, though spee be
suppressed, does rise again: which is a continual argument not of man's constancy
and perseverance in virtues (as the creatures which retain their kind) but of
his apostasye, and wicked pertinacy in vices, as degenerating from kind, and
continuing a monster without cure or recovery, as long as he lives. Lo, ye
have seen both what is meant by these Dorim or generations and also what is the
Kings purpose therein.

The like may not vnhapily be said and gathered of those other four things
following, The course and order of the 4. Elements.
which it pleased Abiather to call the four principal Elements: as namely
the Earth, the Sun, the Wind, and the Water. For as it was the Nature of the
ages and generations to come and go, and to succeed one another in their due
courses and turns, The Earth.
as so by the Lord appointed not to be altered: so is it the Nature of those
Elements: For first the Earth, although it has the circumference of all the
other Elements in their turns round about it, and thereof is called (...)
Eretz of the word (...) Rotz (which signifies to run or to have recourse
unto anything, and imports inclination, promptness, or proanesse) yet it
stands, abides, and remains the same, and in the same estate wherein, and
to the uses whereunto it was ordained and appointed from the beginning.
According to that testimony of the sweet Psalmist. Thou Lord, Psalm. 119.90.
haste laid the foundation of the Earth, and it abides. This is the lowest of
all the four Elements, to the which all ponderous things fall and incline, as
to their certain center. This is the Mother of all earthly creatures, the
receptacle of all inferior bodies, the Sepulcher of all corruptions, the grave
of all dead carcasses, and the Element which is mightily oppressed: howbeit
she susteineth it, she endures it and stands in her place immovable,
because the Lord God has so appointed it, and therein she served the Lord,
and is profitable to men. *The other three Elements also, have their due
courses and uses wherein they abide and serve God, according to that testimony
of the same Psalmist. They do continue to this day by thy divine decree. (In
that estate wherein they were created). The Sun arises, and knows his going
down: The Wind blows, breaths, and knows her circuites and turns: The
Sea ebbeth and flows in her tides, 119 91. The Sun. The wind or air.

The Sea. psalm. 147. The creatures condemn man's inconstancy.


powers forth in venes to fill the springs and receives it again from the
Rivers; And therein, as they follow and keep their proper uses, they praise
the Lord: as said the Psalmist, all this the king opposes to man, thereby to
condemn him of inconstancy and rebellion against his maker. Besides this who
sees not, how excellently this depaignteth and sets forth man's mortality
and vanity? for howsoever one age passes, and another comes, yet both the
one and the other come to the Earth, and there it abides: and howsoever a man
has been glorious in his days, in conclusion he returns thither from
whence he came according to that decree: Thou art taken from the earth, and to
the earth thou shall return. Man's mortality and transitorines. Genesis 3.
For this is the end of his course, wherein he is compared not only to the
Flower of the field (as Job said) that comes up from the ground, and after a
little time withers, and falls into the ground again: but also to the
Millstone, which having run about all the day with great weariness and heat,
rests at night there where he began in the morning, without profit or joy
of his labors. Behold therefore the great vanity of the men of this life! By
this time (I hope) ye well understand those the Kings Words. For surely, he
condemns not the Creatures in their kind: but by the due consideration of
the same, with their right uses, as in an excellent comparison, he depaignteth
and sets forth the inconstancy, the misery and the vanity of man in this
world, wherein (as the Kings father has said) he walks in a vain shadow, he
is a liar, and lighter then vanity it self, under the Sun.

We understand well your words (said the Princes) and wish that all the Kings
people, yea, and all others, as well they that come after us, as they which now
live and shall hear the same, might so conceive and consider thereof. Surely,
this interpretation shall be both profitable and necessary for the children of
the holy Congregation: for thereof they shall take wholesome instruction, and
no mean comfort of spirit, in the true use of the Creatures. And now
(Abiather) we pray you, if ye have heard any thing else obicted against the
kings Words, that ye bring it forth, for we know not when we shall find the
like opportunite to have the same answered, We are over bold with you; and
very troublesome to this most reverend Father. But his former affability and
willingness has given us the more boldness, to request his reverence in this
behalf. At this word, said Zadok; (My Lords) indeed, as ye say, I am most
willing to speak in those necessary points, so far forth, as I may bring
light to things obscure, withstand erroneous interpretations, abandon evil
constructions, and satisfy your godly desires: for as it belongs to my duty
so to do: so my mine hearty desire is to execute and perform it with all
diligence, for the glory of GOD, the defense of the truth, the comfort of my
Sovereign, and the benefit of the Saints.

CAP. XXXV.
Zadok answers to some other objections and reasons of the knowledge of
things natural and of man's insaciety.
ABiather, being nothing scrupulous in the report of that he had heard
objected against the King and his words, and the bolder because he was willed
with out fear to bring forth before their most honorable presence,
whatsoever he had, or could oppose in the behalf of the Kings enemies, or
of any others which were or might be suspensiue of either the one, or
the other: heeh has discouraged all men from the investigating and searching
out of the true natures of things, and so from that knowledge and study which
is not only pleasant, but also profitable and necessary for all men that live
in this world: and the same, wherein the King himself has much delighted and
so far excelled, that he could not only speak of the natures of the
Celestial motions, and of the Trees, the herbs, the beasts, the birds, the
worms, the fishes, the earth, the water, the fire, the air, of the man, and
of the woman, and of all the creatures: but also knew the right uses and end
of them in their seasons and kinds. To this answered Zadok, that they in this,
did much mistake the King and miscontstre his words. Indeed (said he) he
says thus All things are laborious. A man is not able in word to express
them. Eccls. 1.8.
And this is the other member of that his general comparison, wherein he
proceeded to prove his former proposition excluding from man's ability, and
the human affairs, both the perfection and the felicity of man. The Kings
own words are (...) And the word Debarim (as ye know) does not signify simply
voices, Al those words or matters Debarim
or words (as men for the most part understand it) but also whole sentences,
or the declarations of matters: yea, the matters, or things, or causes with all
the circumstances thereof. And here the word may be applied either to the
person before spoken of, which is man: or to the devises, studies, endeavors,
and works of men: or to the matters and causes now in question and lately
spoken of. Iepayim Laborious
For all these things are indeed (...) laborious, hard, irksome and full of
trouble. It is no mean labor to search, find out, and express the vanity of
man, or the causes of the common events. (...) Adam so called of the earth.

(...) Enosha man, so called of his misery and mortality.

(...) Isch a man of singulate honor and estimation, such as Adam was in his
full perfection. Genesis 2.

The necessity of natural philosophy


Moreover to teach that not only any person of the common sort, but also
that the best among men comes far behind in this point, he says not that
(...) the natural man: or the mortal man is not able to do it: but that
(...) is not able to perform this work. Which word being taken in his proper
signification, notes not every vulgar person, but some singular and right
excellent man, comprehending his perfect age, authority, dignity, glory,
excellency, estimation, with all the noble faculties of man's wit, and the
dignity of his nature. And this word is made (as ye known) of existence,
fortitude, efficacy, and being. Hereof speaks the King, and his meaning is
no thing less then to condemn this excellent knowledge of the natures of
things or to diswade men from it, how painful soever it be: for he knows
that whosoever shall take this knowledge away from either the legal or
prophoticall and divine doctrine and precepts shall deprive the same of a
great light, for by certain similitudes taken from ye natures of those things,
are many high and profou^d matters taught and persuaded therein. Genesis 2.19.
This knowledge had Adam, and therefore could name the creatures according to
their natures: the same had Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Job, David,
and our L.K. Solomon as it appears in their several histories, and it
appertains to the reason and wisdom of man to search and find the^ out.
Therefore (as I said this science is not by the K. condemned as vain, nor does
he dissuade men from it, but only he condemns man's great ignorance,
idleness, imperfections, and the abuse of this necessary study. Ye have
said (quod Abiather) and I reverently admit, Abiather.
and of esteem of your words. Abiather.
Ye shall hear another objection, to the which, it may please you to answer.
For there be many things conceued and thwarted: and what shall it avail the
Phisician to heal ten maladies of his Patient, if yet some one or more remain
uncured, Another objection.
whereof he dies? The King is said to bind all men under insacietie: for the
eye of a man (says he) is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing. When notwithstanding we know, that men often wax weary of seeing: and
loathsome in hearing of many things, especially of woofull Tragedies, losses,
threatenings, reprehensions, zadok his answer.
scourges, and the judgments of the Law. But what is this (said Zadok) to
that which ye have gathered? The King in that saying, displayeth both man's
curiosity and imperfection. Man's curiosity and imperfection.
Man is willing to hear, see, and find out all things: to behold all strange
matters, news and wonders: he would have all knowledge: he would be like the
most high (as Adam and Hevah thought to be) he thinks he can, or may do all
things: Genesis 3.5.6.
but he is restreined: his ability affoordeth him not that perfection: nor
has the Lord appointed him in this his estate, capable of those things so
far above him. In the mean time, he continues insaciate and without perfect
contentation in this life.*Here let man learn to know his own ignorance,
weakness, and imperfections in this world. Let him contain himself within the
bounds of his vocation, place and ability, and let him neither lust after, or
desire to comprehend those things, which are neither revealed, nor incident to
man's nature. But in all modesty and reverence let him seek the Lord, who
only is the God sufficient, perfiect wisdom, omnipotent sacietie, Abiather.
Another objection.
and life eternal unto them that serve him in humility and holiness of
heart. Again, (said Abiather) it is objected against the kings words, that he
has denied that any thing is new. When in truth and experience, it appears
that things are daily renewed, and many new things are done, and brought to
pass in the world every day: how therefore should this be understood, to
sound acceptable to our knowledge? It is true (said Zadok) that the King has
said: zadok answers.

Eccles. 1.9.


What is that which has been? that, that shall be: and what is it, that has
been done? that which shall be done: And there is no new thing under the
Sun. Or is there any thing, whereof one may say: Behold, this is new? It has
been already in the old time that was before us. Nothing is new.
But in these words, the king speaks not of the works of the Creation, as
if they should be made again: so it is enough, that those things be only
conserved in their kind: nor of the works of God, for God does work daily
new and strange things: nor of those generations of man, which are past: but
of the occupations, devises, counsels, drifts, purposes, Man and his vanities
are eber the same.
and works of worldly men, which are ever wrapped in misery and vanity, and
are ever like, and the same, which have been of old in the children of men.
Genesis 6.12. and 8.21.
As man was in the old time evil from his youth and all the imaginations of
the heart wicked and vile: so is he now, and so shall be: as his devises have
been of yore, so are they in this time, as the ungodly thought and endeavored
then, so do they think and endeavor now. Genesis 4.6. genesis 6.2. genesis 10.9. genesis
19.26. Exodus 7 13. Judge. 9. 5.
I need not gather up particulars of this time to match Cain in his envy: the
daughters of men in their lusts: Nimrod in his pride, Lots wife in her
apostasy, Pharao in his hardness of heart, Abimelech in his bloody cruelty,
and such like: they are easily noted and pointed at with the finger in every
place. And that the king means those things, it is apparent by the place
wherein he finds nothing new, namely under the Sun, that is, in vanities
kingdom, in and among worldly men, which herein remain the same still,
howsoever they be scholed and instructed, and therefore as vain, they are
forgotten and pass away with the privilege of vanities dominion. Howbeit, The
remembrance of the righteous.
the righteous are had in an everlasting remembrance with their virtues, in and
for whom the Lord works new and strange things to their necessity and
consolation every day. Abiather obiecteth again,
* I have both heard you (most reverend Father) and well understood the
meaning of those the Kings words. I have heard another objection that the King
should dislike the searching and finding out of wisdom, which is so much
commended in the holy writings, and among all good men, and he says, that it
is a sore travel given to the sons of men, to humble them. zadok answers.
The King (said Zadok) seems to correct himself and his own studyes, when
he would adventure or assay to do and perform that of himself, which he
should have obtained and waited for from the Lord to whom be first prayed for
wisdom, and knew, that she came from him: yet does he not condemn the
ordinary labors and studies of them which (in the fear of God) assay to
attain to knowledge. For as he commends wisdom before all things: so he
condemns the idle fools, which (because the study and search after wisdom
is laborious to the body) sit still and continue ignorant. But let us consider
the Kings words, and observe these things in order. He said not: Thus the
Lord taught me or commanded me, Eccles. 1. verse. 13. The meaning of the king,
is to condemn man's wisdom of worldly things.
or enabled me to do, to perform, to bring to pass but thus I have given
mine heart to search and find out wisdom: how? by the things that are done
under the Sun. The King speaks not of his present endeavor, but of that
forepast, when he was carried away from the Lord in the lusts of his eye and
lusts of his flesh. At what time respecting not what God had said, nor what the
divine spirit had taught him: but after his own wit and human reason, he
entangled himself in the studies of the world, and thereby made search
curiously to be passing wise in the things of vanities kingdom, where, when
he thought to find wisdom indeed, he found naught besides afflictions and
griefs of mind. For what should a man expect of thorns, but to be pricked?
and what is their to be learned under the Sun of ungodly and foolish men, and
their devises, but ungodliness, foolishnes and sorrow? And surely thereof only
the K. acknowledges yt he made himself most worthy, and therein to be
punished, as they do, which neglecting the meditation of the law of God, are
distracted in the fables of untruths, and receiving not the fear of the L.
are wholly busied and vexed in the affairs of this world, wherein they travail
as in a most painful Labyrinth without any perfection or end, thereby to be
tried and humbled under the mighty hand of the Almighty, whose wisdom, words
and direction, they have both forgotten and neglected. The kings confession of
his imperfections.
Moreover in this, the king makes a kind of confession of his imperfections,
being a part of his true conversion and repentance. Thus the King has not
condemned the search after the true wisdom: but that vain wisdom, or at
least the indirect manner of seeking after that which is commended in the word
of God.

CAP. XXXVI.
The correction of things, the experience of wisdom knowledge and high
learning.
ABiather the Priest (being willed by the Princes of King Solomon to proceed
and to produce any other argument which he had heard to be objected against
the words of the precher) stood forth again and said. Cap. 1. Verse. 15.
Then let it not be grievous unto you (my Lords) that I produce here before
you, those other things which I have heard. It is objected, that the King
denies that any thing which is faulty or amiss, can be corrected or amended?
The crooked cannot (says he) be made straight, and yt which fails cannot be
brought into proportion. To what end then are all instructions, lessons, zadok
answers. what faults may be amended, and what may not.
arts, sciences, doctrins, admonitions, labors; counsails, laws? The King
has so said indeed (said Zadok) But yet he entendeth it not of any particular
faults or trespasses, or of any the things which are by nature cureable. But
of that one general malady of mankind and man's affairs being busied and
vexed within the kingdom of vanity: for the errors, slidings, imperfections,
faults, offenses and defects of man cannot be amended: The end of
circumcision.
worthily therefore was circumcision commanded not only to the fathers but to
the sons also: and yet yt cutteth not off the concupiscence of man's nature, but
shows that it should be cut off and suppressed by * him which has no
concupisce^ce at all. That is Messiah.
The office of a prince and magistrate.
for it is one thing to endeavor to amned private faults and things curable:
and it is another thing to assay to correct those general griefs which are by
nature incurable. Ca. 1. verse. 17.
J gave mine heart (said he) to know wisdom and knowledge, madness and
foolishnes: I knew also that this is a vexation of the spirit. Note this.
It is doubtless a thing praise worthy in a Prince by his wisdom to
endeavor to correct and amend things that are amiss in his common wealth: But
it is a mere folly in a Prince, to think that by his proper wisdom and
industry he shall amend all things that are faulty. Princes are bound to do
their best endeavor, but they may not imagine so much as that they can perform
all things. This cure is proper to the Omnipotent God to effect, and it is not
committed to the power of any man. Therefore that which man is able to perform
in this let him do it in the fear of God, and that he cannot effect and
compass, let him commit to the will and power of God, to whom all things are
possible. Abiather obiecteth.
But yet (said Abiather) it is said, that the king condemns the experience of
that wisdom and knowledge, whereby a man (especially a Magistrate) should
discern between truth and error good and evil, without the which a magistrate
shall never be able to judge or do well in his place, according to Iethroes
rule for (...), Exo. 18.21.22.
signifies science, knowledge, cogitation, notice and experience of the
things both good and evil. zadok answers that Solomon condemns not the
wisdom of a Magistrate.
Indeed (said Zadok) Solomon asked for wisdom and science and the Lord gave
it him. But if Solomon had staid himself, and have used this notable gift (as
he did some times when he plased God) he had done well but exceeding his
lymits he both ouercharged and confounded that wisdom in himself, he sought
out not iudgem^et and mercy but things profane common and polluted, (as I have
said before) yea things only delightsome and pleasant to the sense of the
flesh, Genesis 3.
and this he did not only know, but prove indeed as Adam and Heua did the
taste of the forbidden tree. It is good to know both good and evil
It is a good thing to know both the good and the evil and to discern
between the one and the other: but to follow the evil, and to leave the good,
it is an evil thing. Adam knew both: but he chose the evil and left the good:
so did Cain: so did King Solomon to his pain and dishonor. Well therefore
might he call this a vain thing in himself and a vexation of his spirit and
yet not condemn that divine virtue. * But the King (said Abiather) is supposed
to dislike and condemn high learning, and much knowledge: Abiather obiecteth.
Verse 18.
from the which he terrifieth and disswadeth men, saying that in much wisdom
is much anger, and that he which multiplieth knowledge, multiplyeth sorrows.
But if ye conclude so of the words (said Zadok) I will deny your consequence:
for here I find a fallacy of equivocation: for the King in truth does not
condemn the best and highest learning nor that knowledge, for in this place he
spoke either of the earthly and fleshly knowledge and wisdom: or of the divine
and natural wisdom of a man in respect of the things objected to the same. As
for the former which is taught men by the old subtle Serpent, the King well
knows, that it is very vanity, for this wisdom respects not the things
that be pure, peaceable and divine: but the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of this life, being terrene, sensual, zadoke his answer.
Genesis 3.
and diabolical, of this kind are all the lusts, guiles, subtleties,
policies, deceits and crafty conueiances of men, whereby one man circumuenteth
and beguileth another in this life. But where this promises most pleasure and
contentation, it soonest casts a man into pain and miseries. The wisdom of
the Serpent does not direct men to paradise.
The King therefore perceive, yea, he proved it too true in himself, that
therein offending God, and abusing nature, he gained nothing besides affliction
of his Spirits: for he could never thereby attain that perfect end of man's
life, nay rather he wandered and departed from the same further and further
every day, for it cannot be, that the wisdom of the Serpent may conduct them
to Paradize, who by the same are thence expelled: but rather to the gate of
perdition in the way of wickedness. Genesis 3.24.
The wise man fears man dangers, when others sleep in quiet beds: he
sees himself to want many things, at the least he lusts after all
things the which he thinks he can purchase and get into his hands and
possessions by his own power, policy or device: howbeit he is prevented and
cannot obtain the greatest part of his gredie desire, so he is never
satisfied, his mind remains discontent, and himself is tormented with an
hell of troubles, even then, The divine and natural wisdom is necessary.
when he thinks himself in the highest grade of this wisdom. But let it
be, that the king spoke of that other wisdom either divine or natural. Yet, as
neither of these can be obtained without study and pain of body and mind: so
being had, it causes a man to descrie, behold and consider that, sometimes,
which occasioneth him to be troubled, and to lament. He that has it not is as
that man, which closing his eyes, or being a sleep, sees not either that
which is like to hurt his body, or offend his mind: and so may unhappily be
annoyed before he knows thereof, howbeit the whiles, he rests himself
secure: But he that has wisdom, is as the man which has his eyes open, or is
wakefull, and thereby both sees and endeuoreth to eschew the danger. In the
mean time, he is indeed sore troubled and vexed with fear. And of this kind
are they which behold the great vanities of men, and the more wisdom a man
has, the more he beholds it, considers of it, wayeth it, and is much vexed
therewith in his heart not that his wisdom is evil, but that by that his
wisdom, he sees and discerns, and is greiued with those things that be
evil in this miserable and vain world. Therefore, well he said the more
wisdom, the more grief. In all those things I have not found that the King
has sinned with his lips. Therefore his words thus far forth may not in
any just censure be disliked nor in reason rejected. Then said the Princes: The
Princes assent to zadoke, they approve the kings words
ye have thus well answered those objections which Abiather has produced (most
reverend father) Neither think we, that the K. in this his constitution, will
exhibit unto us, or to any others before us, any words, but such as be right
grave, wise and sauering of the truth of Gods spirit, the which (we persuade)
at this time possesses his mind, whereby he is fully devoured with holy
zeal. If yet Abiather has any thing else to object, let him proceed, in the
name of God, and we beseech you (my Lord Zadoke) to give him an answer.

CAP. XXXVII.
Of the gladness and pleasurs of men, and of the works of Princes. etc.
ABiather being requested by the princes to bring forth whatsoever he had else
heard objected against the kings words answered again and said: I have heard
yet many other things, whereby some would endeavor to deface the authority of
his Sermons. But I am sure that your wisdom (most reverend Father) will easily
stop their mouths, and satisfy us and others, Cap. 6.
which have not a desire to wrest the kings meaning, and thus they object, that
the king is not only pensive and sorrowful, but also that he much speaks
against all kind of gladness of other men: yea, he condemns all pleasant
things and delights, all mirth and pastime with the use of the creatures: for
he has said (indeed) Go to, let me prove thee in gladness, Cap. 2.
and take thou delight in pleasant things: but lo, this also was vanity:
Again he said I have esteemed laughter, for an accustomed foolishnes and of
mirth, I said Then answered Zadok: As we have heard the kings words: zadok
answers.
so it is meet that we consider how best to understand them. Surely we may
not thereof gather that the king condemns all kind of gladness and all
delights: Solomon condemns not all kind of gladness. etc.
nor that he holds all the creatures profane, which the L. has made for the
use of man: we may not think, that the king in so deuoid of reason and natural
sense, But thus we may understand him: that as before he had proved by many
substantial arguments, that man's felicity, and so his contentation is not
contained within the limits either of the labors, wisdom or devises of the sons
of men: so now in like sort, he proves by those his words, yt the same is
neither found nor indeed consists in the pleasures and delights of those sons
of men, the wc are such pleasures and delights as are thoroughly pondered with
wickedness and many lewd lusts, that often ouerwhelme men in perdition.
Therefore all men are to beware (the rather by the Kings example) how they
follow after their own lusts in the ways of their sinful affections. And
their are to respect this, that the thoughts of their hearts and desires
consent with the spirit and word of God, The true contempt of the world.
the which will neither deceive them nor occasion them to repent the same. And
this is the true contempt of the world when being guided by Gods spirit they
abstain from prosecuting and effecting their own lusts, pleasures and
delights. Solomon's vein in his lusts
But to draw more near to the objection: The time was (and that lately) when
the king would exceed beyond his bounds, and so he abused those good things,
which he might have used for his solace and recreation: for he said to his
soul I will prove thee with joy and gladness: or (as it may be said) J will
swim in those delights, I will dedicate my self to those pleasures, nor will
I desist, or omit any occasion whatsoever, until I have fulfilled my desire:
yea I will wholly regard how I may live in ye world most pleasantly, and
provide, that nothing may be interposed to hinder those my lustful delights.
This was (indeed) his purpose in that fleshly conceit of his: but he saw, No
contentation in worldly pleasures.
that this was also a vain devise: for in the preparing of those pleasures,
there was more cost then comlines, much more labor then profit, and (to be
brief) he found that in all those delights (when the just reckoning was taken)
there was more pain then p^easure, and no contentation at all: for one labor
brought in another, one study and devise another; one pleasure required
another, and for the most part determined in sorrow and grief. Now this is
that which the King here conde^neth and not that honest and lawful joy and
recreation which is either incident to man's nature, whereof he is called a
risible creature, or proper to the Saints of GOD in this life, wherein they
rejoice in the LORD and praise him for his benefits (as David used with
instruments of music: Howbeit, as in the former, so neither in this is
contained man's highest felicity which is not found in this life: But the
word which the King uses, notes (as ye well know) rather a lightness of
the mind, and an immoderate and unmeasurable laughter to express the same,
then that pleasure or mirth which is proper to man's nature. And such persons as
are light minded, and excessive and unmeasurable in their sportes and
laughters, he might worthily call mad persons or fools: For as they are
profane and foolish indeed, so they bewray themselves especially to the wise
and contrite in heart, as mad and most unwise. For by this, they unfold the
leuitie of their carnal minds, they hinder in themselves and others the
studies of things profitable, they shut out from their hearts the fear of
God they forget their own condition in this life, they be made mere unfit for
true repentance: and to be short, they commonly finish those kind of sportes
and laughters in pain, sorrow and lamentation. Pleasures are pronostications
of future pains.
For it is often seen that such unmeasurable sportes and pleasures are
pronostications of imminent troubles and great afflictions, the which besides
daily and ordinary experience, is taught and signified by many examples and
arguments as well of the brute Creatures, as of others so worthy
consideration. The Delphins in the Sea will sometimes play and leap so high,
as they will skippe over the hulls and bodies of Ships sailing in the same:
But soon after that will follow a great tempest, wherein their pleasure is
recompensed with deadly pain. Thus our Fathers the Israelites played and
sported in the wilderness and leapt and danced before the Calfe which Aaron had
made: but within a whiles after followed on them a great slaughter: Exo. 32.27.
for every man slew his brother, every man his companion, and every man his
neighbor. Thus the young men played in the time of David, in the presence of
Abner and Ioab, 2. Sam. 2.14.
and thereof many men fell and perished: Thus the Philistines laughed and
played with Sampson, Judge. 15.
and they were destroyed in their sport. Thus the children of Job feasted and
sported and the house fell on them and killed them all.*Here should we learn
to settle our minds and laughters in things that be more profitable, and not to
exceed in pleasures of those vanities. And truly if a man did duly consider and
remember from whence he came, what he is in this world and whether he is to go
from hence, he would rather lament his condition and misery with abundance of
tears then to seek to satisfy himself in those vain delights: according to yt
wc is framed out of Moses song in yt part. Oh if thou waighest from whence thou
art, how placed in dangers deep, And finally whereto assignde: Deuteronomy. 32.29.
thou would not laugh but weep In the like meaning the king has spoken of
Wine. For he condemns not the use of the creature, which in it nature is to
be taken and used as other the creatures appointed for man. The use of wine and
strong drink.
But he reproves and condemns that immoderate drinking and quaffing, whereby
men be made drunken and insolent, and that kind of life which they accustom to
lead with delight, in wine and pleasures of the flesh. This was the same which
the Kings mother disliked chiefly in a king, when schooling him (yet but a
child) she said: pro. 31.4.
It is not for kings O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for
princes strong drink: and she adds the reason lest he drink and forget the
decree and the judgment of all the children of affliction. Otherwise it is not
unlawful for kings and for princes to drink wine in the true use thereof, and
strong drink may be taken moderately, as other the creatures. Therefore she
said again to him: Give the strong drink unto him that is ready to perrish
and wine unto them that have grief of heart. Let him drink that he may forget
his poverty and remember his affliction no more: It was lawful for righteous
Noah to drink of wine to comfort his heart after his travails on the stood:
but it was not lawful for him to be drunken therewith: the like may be resolved
of Lot and of Solomon our K. Therefore in his godly confession he said not, I
will drink, or use wine: but that he said as unto his heart, I will power thee
out in wine, yt is, I will apply my self to the lust of wine, Judge. 9.13.
and swim or abound excessiuely therein. This is yt which the K. conde^neth in
himself as unlawful and not the true use of the creatures, which cheareth God
and man, as lotham said. But this one thing I may remember with the former, yt
the K. found by his experience (as he confessed) that impossible it was for him
to lead that kind of life, piety and voluptuousnes may not concur.
and nevertheless retain the divine fear within his heart. For as GOD would
not permit, that one and the same altar should serve for himself and for ye
Idol Dagon too, so will he not, that voluptuousness and sin should be set
to be adored there where his Spirit inhabiteth, for he is a jealous God.
Therefore as there is placed a division between light and darkness: so is
there set a great difference and space between wisdom and wine in that
abuse, between godliness and carnal pleasures, between piety and impiety,
righteousness and sin. Neither let any man imagine, that together with the one
he may hold or retain the other no more then our fathers could relish both
Manna and Egypt fare in the desert, ye have then answered sufficiently to this
objection, most reverend Father. the effecting of mighty works, the building
of great houses, the planting of fruitful vineyardes, the making of pleasant
Paradises and fair gardens, the framing of Cesternes of water to water the
woods that grow, with the trees, the multiplying of servants and maids, and of
children to be borne in his house: to procure great store of Beefes and sheep
to gather silver and gold, and the chief treasures of Kings and provinces: to
get men-singers, and women-singers, Eccles. 2.4.11
and the delights of the sons of men etc. For he has said, when he looked
on all those things: Behold, I have found all vanity, and there is no profit
under the sun. To this answered Zadoke: As I have said before of the true use
of Gods creatures: so say I in this, that lawful it is not only for kings
and princes: but also for other men (after their power and place to have and
use all those things: but the limited bounds being transgressed, the vanity
thereof appears, and that indeed not seldom, seeing there be very few, who
having them at full can measure their appetites, and be contained within the
limits of their vocation. Hereof we know, that it is not enough for men to have
riches, wealth, honors, pleasures and such like: except that they also measure
themselves well, and apply the things to their right ends. For God has given
and disposed his gifts diversely to diverse persons, to this end, that they
glorify him in the use of them, do good therewith one to another, and
discharge their proper duties in their places. A cooling card for worldly men,
who seek felicity of these things
Lastly, the King having learned the lesson of true consideration, did in the
end confess, that in all those things he could find no contentation, and so
neither felicity: but that indeed he found great vanity and vexation of his
spirit. Alas then what should other men hope to find? Might not this stop
the mouths of them, who say, that then they should be happy had they the
wealth, the riches, the power, the honors, and the pleasures of glorious king
Solomon? as if, forsooth that in those terrene and transitory things the true
happiness of man consisted. But truly as they bewray their corrupt judgment and
error in and about this chief principle: so if (by the will and pleasure of
God) they had therein their desire, it is not only possible, but most certain,
that they would transgress and offend far beyond the transgressions and
offenses of King Solomon: and wanting that wisdom which he had to guide and
direct them, they would quickly declare themselves the greatest fools in the
world. For man being in honor, without understanding, is compared to the
Beasts which perish, as King David said, when he beheld both the vprising, and
down falling of many such persons, as having the things of this world at
will, could neither use the same to their own good, nor with the same defend
and preserve themselves from evil, albeit, (esteeming the same above God and
all goodness) they placed therein their highest and chief felicity. In
regard whereof, the pleasures, honors, glory and prosperity of this world are
compared to a shining candle, which for the time it burns gives a glorious
light, but the substance whereof it is maintained being consumed, the same
comes all to smoke and stinche: for the time will come when thou shall grant
and confess with the King, that all these things are vanity, and vexation of
the soul, and that not so much in regard of the things themselves, as of
thine own abuse and erroneous thoughts in and concerning the same.

CAP. XXXVIII.
Abiather produces 17. objections against other the words and doctrines of the
preacher: to 4. of the which Zadoke answers in this chapter.
THen Zabud the Kings friend, zabud.
a man that very much tendered both his honor and prosperity, having thus far
listened to the former disputation and conference, stood forth and spoke to
this effect. Howsoever I am right sorrowful for the Kings fall and
affliction, yet am I glad the rather for the Kings sake (which has ever been
and yet continues so good a Lord unto me) that my Lord zadok has not only
answered in this presence, for his majesty, but also has cleared him and
those his words of all the things so hardly conceited, and strongly objected
against either of them. And we may thereby the sooner persuade, What the
malicious gains in the end.
that whosoever henceforth shall cast forth his venomous darts against either
the King or his words shall rather hurt and annoy himself by the rebound of
the same (as those do which shoot against the hard rocks) then any way
discredit the one, or disgrace the other. This is that they often purchase to
themselves, which take pleasure to malign and slander others chiefly their
superiors and betters, according to yt which the Kings father said: the
ungodly be entrapped in their own devises, and taken in those snares which
they had laid for others. And this we see verified on the old serpent, not
only in the case of Adam: but in that of Job, wherein his own devises to
confound them was cast on himself. But has Abiather heard any thing else
objected that he is willing to unfold and lay forth here bebefore us?
Abiather. princes offenses are not rashly to be spoken of.
Yea (said Abiather) I have heard many other things of the which to hear I
have bin very sorrowful in mind, neither knew I until this time how I might
find a fit occasion to reveal it, or to whom: for as the causes of Princes
are not to be heard or debated, as are the causes of other men: so neither
may the subjects be so bold as to talk or reason thereof without fear,
especially in the court so near the kings presence. And here ye shall
understand (my good Lords) that they which object, do not so much respect and
of those his gestures, words and sayings, which he either declared or expressed
in his prosperous days and time of his dignity, then when he well pleased and
blessed the Lord (for those do all men, yea, even the kings enemies approve
and commend, nor those dare they to malign or disgrace) nor call they into
present question any of those his words or gestures which he either uttered
or delivered to and among his strange wives in the time of his trespass when
nothing else besides vanity (after his own confession) might be expected to
come from a person so vain: (for neither those we esteem, nor regard to
collect) but they are the same which are, and have been in action and question
after and ever since the time of his contrition and sorrowful affliction,
ordinarily uttered and declared in his common and daily gesture, talk, and
conference esteemed among his wise sermons and which as holy oracles and divine
sayings, ye have ente^ded with full purpose to collect, to commit and leave unto
ye church in posterity. I think not otherwise, but yt they are mere unjustly
conceited and most hardly construed against his excellent majesty, and his true
meaning. For whiles (as a King) he speaks in right courtly phrases the rude
country people scarcely understand him in any thing: Solomon in his words was
Courte-like and brief.
and in yt (to eschew tediousnes, which is loathsome to the learned) he is very
brief, he seems in many things the more obscure, especially to the simple
and ignorant which commonly do not only much mistake the things they
understand not, but also soon overthrow the right sense and true meaning
thereof unadvisedly. But it were to be wished, that not only those, but all
others, when they come to consider of the Words and affairs of Princes, but
chiefly when they begin to scanne the things which are holy and appertain
to GOD and his Church, would follow that counsel and advise of the King,
Eccles. 5.1.
where he says: When thou come into the house of GOD, keep thy foot and
draw nigh, that GOD which is at hand may hear, that thou give not the
offering of fools: for they know not when they do evil. Be not hasty with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart speak any thing rashly before God: for God
is in heaven, and thou on earth: therefore let thy words be few. For surely, in
those things which are either doubtful, or unknown unto us, we should rather
modestly stay and suspend our judgment, then rashly give censure or opinion
without advise. But that neither our selves, nor any others may happily
mistake, or misconstre the kings words, it shall be needful that those things be
both well reconciled and expounded: otherwise, there be, which think, that they
hardly deserve to be gathered, co^serued, and placed in the holy Canon among
the divine writings, and so nether to be committed to the Church, for the
instruction of Gods people. Many things? zadok.
(said Zadoke): Alas, I am right sorry to hear that Abiather should say so.
It grieueth me not a little, that Words so wisely conceived so princely uttered,
so agreeable to the verity, and so well applied, should be understood so
fondly, co^ceited, so mailtiously, considered of so ignorantly, and wrested so
injuriously. Let us hear (Abiather) what those matters are which are objected.
Note, that the things hereafter spoken of are but as briefly touched, in
respect of what may be said of them,
But * I pray you to be brief, and I will promise the like in my resolutions
and answers, for we have bin here a great whiles. I fear me the K. has (yer
this) asked often for some of us, and we are found wanting and faulty therein:
for it is not meet we should forget our dutiful attendance, And for mine own
part, as I have been ever willing and ready to attend and serve my Lord the K.
and the rather, because his most noble grace has been well pleased to accept
of my poor service: so would I not willingly absent my self from his presence
too long: for my whole desire and endeavor is (as in duty I am bound) that
which my best counsel and ready attendance I may (next to the Lord) gratify
and pleasure my Sovereign, and comfort him in this his estate. Say on
therefore Abiather. But why stagger ye as though ye were fearful? fear not at
all: for there is not any of us (I dare say) that does so much as imagine, that
any of those objections or hard censures against the king and his words, has
or may proceed from your own head. Ye affect the King and his words better
than so, we fully persuade: An Author and reporter in sort.
and ye are herein rather the reporter of other men's opinions and speeches:
then the Author of any such thing, which may either hurt the Kings person, or
empeach the authority of his words. And surely, we may in this rather commend
then dislike you or your words, though all words of all persons (especially of
kings and Princes, how true soever they be) are not to be uttered or spoken
before all persons, in all places, at all times, without difference, wise
consideration, or due regard. For by this we shall not only know what is
conceited and spoken abroad of the king and his words: but also consider of
the^, and consult how to withstand those inconveniences which may grow, follow
and ensue thereof in posterity. And this shall be the sooner performed, by the
true understanding of the Kings meaning, and the right exposition of his words.
Abiather first clereth himself and then obiecteth.
Then answered Abiather, (my Lords all) I hope ye judge of me, as of a true
subject to my Lord King Solomon, and I adventure to stand for the perfect
trial of my dutiful alleagea^ce and fidelity in this respect against al me^,
wherein I know, howsoever it be imagined, I may not be resembled to that
Abiather the Priest, whom the King worthily deposed and put from his place for
his infidelity. But now hearken, my Lords: It is objected (besides all the
premised) First, that the King has combined the wiseman together with thee
fool without difference in the same condition and estimation.

2 He conioyneth man in the like condition with the beast.

3 He seems to define man's felicity in eating, drinking, and fleshly
pleasures.

4 He prefers (as it appears) death before life, and the dead before the
living: yea, and him who is yet unborn before them both.

5 He is noted to discourage men from the perfection of wisdom and Justice,
which are two most excellent virtues in men.

6 He condemns the man that loves quietness and peace better then trouble
and vexation: and therein contrarieth his own words else where delivered.

7 He is supposed to condemn and abandon woman's Sex, the which the Lord has
framed and made meet and profitable for the man.

8 He has taught Ambiguitie and despair of the divine love and mercy, to
the horrible anguish of conscience even in the wisest and holy men.

9 He seems to cast into suspense the substance and being of the soul of
man.

10 He denies plainly the life and sense of man's soul after death.

11 He judges a man so deuoyde of reason and judgment that he knows not,
what is good for himself in this life.

12 The King himself being a transgressour, deemeth the like of all men,
condemning them of sin and unrighteousness.

13 He ascribes all that to Time and chance, the which we justly attribute to
the divine Providence.

14 He encourages men to a prodigal wasting out of their provision, wealth
and substance.

15 He has set no difference between the righteous and the wicked, the holy
and profane, as touching their conclusion, ends, and reward.

16 He holds, that a man has no power of his own life, when yet it is
seen they many men having power, murder themselves, as Saul did.

17 He has intised young men to take their delights of youth, and to follow
after their own lusts.

Lo these and such like things are objected.

And is it (indeed) so? said Zadok: Howbeit, zadoke answ. to all the former
objections.

1. Touching the combination of the wise man with the fool. Eccles. 2.14. and
9.2.


I nothing doubt how to resolve those doubts and answer those objections to
your content, viz.

First, it is objected (as ye said) that the King has combined the wiseman
with the fool in the same condition and estimation. Of what words of the King
should that be gathered, as ye suppose? Of these (said Abiather) that
speaking both of the wiseman and of the fool, said by and by, I know that the
same condition falls to them all: and thereupon he resolved: It befalls
unto me, as it befalls unto the fool: wherefore then labor I to be more
wise? Is this (answered Zadok) the ground of that objection, and will ye so
conclude of the Kings grave words? Alas the gross ignorance of vain men! and
yet how hasty are they to judge of that they neither know nor are able to
apprehend. Thus the blind-man is said to judge of colors. Howbeit, ye shall
consider with me, that the king has not said it absolutely or simply that the
wiseman is no better then the fool, but in this sense and meaning: First, as
we use to say, that Fools have fortune: meaning that a wiseman by his proper
wisdom, study, and power can effect nothing more, then does a fool of any
thing he takes in hand, without the will, wisdom, power and providence of God:
because things are not placed in the will and abilitle of man, but as most
meet remain for ever in the will and power of God, who often gives the same
Lot to the fool, as he does to the wiseman of this world. Next, that there
is one and the like end (as touching the body) and the like condition in
riches, health, poverty, sickness and such adventures of this life, both of the
wise and unwise: otherwise the K. has said it, and no man can deny it, that
there is more utility in wisdom, then in folly: as the light is more desired,
then the darkness, and that the wiseman is preferred before the fool: for
the wise-mans eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness. And yet
here we may note, that the King speaks not of the wisdom of Gods spirit,
but of that humane wisdom belonging to the reason of man which it in it self
(as now under sin) is comparable to the vanity of a fool.

Abiather out of those words which the K. lately vtted, viz. I considered in
mine heart the state of the children of men, Eccles. 3.18.19.
that God had purged the^: yet to see to, their are in themselves beasts: for
the condition of the sons of men and the condition of beasts are even one
condition unto the^: as the one dies, so dies the other: so they have all one
breath, and there is no excellency of a man above the beast, for they are al
vanity. Now, this urges many men's consciences, that a man which has a
reasonable soul, should be made equal with the beast. Ye have said (answered
zadok) yet have ye not told me, nor can tell me indeed, Man differs from a
beast.
when or where the King ever said, that a man differs nothing from a beast.
It is true that he so compared them as touching the body which is of the earth
subject to corruption, mutabilitie, misery and death (as before it is said) for
a memory whereof the Lord God made garments for Adam, of the skins of
beasts. Also as touching any foresight or knowledge either of the day of his
death, or of that which comes to pass after him, she which (as said holy
Job) who knows. among the children of men? Otherwise the King has said,
that the Spirit of man goes upward, even to God that gave it: but the breath
of a beast falls down into the earth. Again, he has spoken most profoundly
of man's true felicity, and directs him the way to the same.

Thirdly, of man's felicity. Eccles 2.4.
ye said that the King defined man's felicit in eating, drinking, and carnal
pleasures: where is that definition found? There (quod Aabiather) where the
King has said: There is no profit to a man: but that he eat and drink and
delight his soul with the profit of his labor. And therefore (said Zadok)
does the king define the felicity of man in eating drinking, sporting etc.
That is no perfect consequence, and ye utterly mistake him. For contrary to
that beastly behauior of carnal and voluptuous persons, he shows the true
use of the creatures, according to the divine ordinatio^, the which yet no man
living can enjoy to profit without his especial grace and blessing, being all
that a man may expect or look for in his life. For this is Gods gift (as the K
has often said) howsoever a man by his own wisdom, wit, reason, power and
agility seems able either to effect or comprehend the same in time and place:
and therefore should be use and esteemed with thankfulness to God. 4. Ye said
further, The living and the dead. Cap. 4.2.3.
that the King seems to prefer death before life and the dead before the
living etc. Yea, said Abiather: for the K. has plainly said: I have praised
the dead which now are dead, above the living which are yet alive: and him
better, then them both, which has not yet been. And this is very absurd, for
all men know, and it cannot be denied, ye life is better the^ death. For God
has made life, Life and death.
and death is the privation thereof, and guard of sin. Yea, himself has said, at
a another time, that a living dog is better then a dead Lion, in regard of
the excellency of life before death. zadok) has said it not simply, or in
that he absolutely commends death, or condemns life, but by the way of a
comparison, namely, The dead be freed of the troubles of this life. Job. 3 13.
in respect of the great evils wherewith men are commonly tormented in this
life. For why they that be dead, are now freed from those intolerable
afflictions, and do rest as quiet, and at ease in their bodies: alluding to the
words of Job, who through the vehemency of his afflictions, and infirmity of
his flesh, wished he had been dead: saying, For so should I now have lain and
been quiet, I should have slept then and been at rest, with the Kings and
counselors of the earth, which have builded themselves desolate places etc.
Again, The wicked have there ceased from their tyranny, and there they that
labored valiantly are at rest. The prisoners rest together and hear not the
voice of the oppressor. There are small and great, and the servant is free
from his master. Again, wherefore is the light given to him that is in
misery? and life to the^ that have heavy hearts? In this respect speaks also
the king of life and death, And he means the life of this world, and the
death of the body, and not the deserts of them that live, nor the sins of
them that dye, and that after the manner of men. Otherwise, we may not think but
that the godly, The righteous that be dead are at rest.
the faithful and the righteous which be dead, as Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, Samuel, Joseph and such, are in better case, then they which yet
live. For they be blessed and no pain can oppress or touch them. Therefore
this is the desire of them that here live in the Lord That they may be
dissolved to die, and dwell with the Lord in eternal happiness. In the like
sort has the king spoken touching him which is not yet borne. For he says not
absolutely, that he which was never, He that is not yet borne is happier.
nor he which shall not be borne, nor he that is not and shall never be, is
happier them he which lives and is, but, that after the judgment of men, in
regard of those mighty troubles that overtake men in the world, it seems to
be better not to be at all, then to be made subject and thrall to those
troubles. And yet, who knows not (which has wisdom) that the King might
speak so touching the wicked which now live in the world, and are appointed
to eternal torment and misery after death. For in this respect, the poorest
wretch that ever lived in the world, now by death translated into Celestial
happiness, is by thousands preferred before the highest Potentate, or Lord
that lives on the earth, and (by his Tyranny, oppression, and heinous
iniquities) is by the just judgment of GOD ordained for the fire of Tophet and
perpetual misery. Otherwise I know well, that the King prefers not death
before life, nor the dead before the living, knowing that GOD has made life
for his glory, and men in this life to set forth the same. Neither is he
ignorant of this (as he is most wise) that as the righteous which be departed
from this world are happyer then they which yet live and sustain and feel
the miseries of the same: so is it much better for them to be as they are,
notwithstanding oppressed in this world, with all the miseries thereof, in
full hope and assurance of eternal felicity, then that they should not be at
all. Finally, if the words might be taken without respect or relation to the
miserable affairs of men in the kingdom of vanity, who will not believe,
that those holy Patriarchs and Fathers, which are laid up in peace, are more
happy then any of us which now live: and that the holy Messiah whom the King
prefigureth, not yet borne, but to be borne hereafter, is far to be
preferred and extolled for happiness and honor before either of both?
Therefore the Kings words truly understood, need not to offend any, but
rather to instruct and comfort all, as well them which are present, as those in
posterity.

CAP. XXXIX.
Zadoke answers to Six other objections for the King. 5. Of Justice,
wisdom. 6. Quietness. 7. Of women. 8. Of Gods love. 9. Of the Souls being.
10. Of the sense of the soul after death.
ZAdoke proceeding, said again to Abiather: ye have said (as I well
remember) that our Lord King Solomon in his words has discouraged all men from
the perfection of wisdom, and from the exquisite Justice. of the discouraging
of men from wisdom and Justice.
Out of what words of his, is this presumed? can ye tell me? yea (said
Abiather) and of these his speeches lately uttered in your own hearing: Be
thou not just overmuch: neither make thy self over wise: Eccles. 7.18.
wherefore should thou be desolate? If ye gather from hence (said Zadok)
then I may well deny your consequence: For ye should have distinguished of
these words Justice and Wisdom. For there is, the Justice and wisdom of
God: and these is, that Justice and wisdom of men. The King in those his
words has not dissuaded any man living from the inuestigation and searching
after the Justice and Wisdom of God, for the which a man should ever hunger
and thirst, and never be weary or faint to seek to obtain the same, as most
divine graces and virtues in this life. Neither does the King desist from this
desire and continual exercise, although he be passing wise, knowing, that no
man in this world shall yet be able to attain to the full perfection thereof,
and therefore may yet strive and endeavor every day to come nearer, and so near,
as he can with all kind of studyes and exercises before his death, persuading
yet, that the better he shall be furnished in these virtues, the more he
shall be able to set forth the praise and glory of God among men, and prepare
himself for the company of the holy Angels. But in this saying of the K. is
meant the political, or civil wisdom, Not to be over wise nor too just.
the like Justice, the which is used in the governing of a Commonwealth, or a
family, or the external life of man. And herein, he would that men should not
seem to be more wise, then the wisdom of God requires: that is, that they
be not wise in proper conceit, not to be subtle Sophisters, nor crafty
disputers, nor deceivers, nor circumuentors of others, nor wise to the world,
nor such as the Serpent was, which tempted and beguiled Hevah: but rather, that
they be wise to sobriety. Again, he would that men should not be over
just, that is, that they be not too quick censors, nor hasty accusers of
others nor too severe exactor of the extremity of laws against every offender,
either in his own house among his servants, or in the Commonwealth among his
citizen. But rather, Equity is of request.
that Equity should be respected: for he that will be either so ever wise to
see all things: or so over just to correct, punish or control all things, and
neither to wink at some things, nor to mitigate the rigor of the law in other
things, shall never be able either to rule happily, or to live quietly, either
in the commonwealth, or within the gates of his own house. Now I hope ye
well understand the King in this point: of quietness.
But ye have objected again, that the King condemned him that loves
quietness, and flies from toil and trouble: wherein (as ye say) he
contraryeth himself, commending elsewhere the quiet life. Where have ye
found that? I understand well the Kings meaning by your words in the former
(said Abiather) and this latter objection is taken from that where he said:
The Fool foldeth his hands and eats up his own flesh, Eccles. 4.5.
and says: that better is one morsel with quietness then both the hands
full with labor and vexation of the spirit. Here he calls him a Fool that
rests him content and quiet: and yet he said before in his Proverbs: Pro.
15.16.
Better is a little with the fear of GOD, then great treasures and trouble
therewith. To this Zadoke answered, The answer.
denying the consequence for that the King intended another thing in that his
Proverb, then he does in those his latter wories: For there he spoke of the
godly mind which is content with whatsoever it shall please God to give it,
and esteems more of that little with quietness in the fear of God, which
(indeed) is great riches to the godly mind: but here he speaks of the idle
and sluggish person: or of him that is weary or discouraged in the performance
of his office or duty, by reason of the common emulations, enuies, crossings
and thwartings of his adversaries, and the afflictions and troubles which are
incident to his calling and place. Such a one he calls a fool, and that
worthily: for whereas the Wiseman (notwithstanding all these things) gives
not over, nor is faint-hearted, but continues his calling to the end and is
happy therein: the other being daunted and yields which the foolish Maryner
to every contrary wind, and so perishes to his diffame and endless misery. In
this saying therefore, the King is not to be reproved. But in the seventh place
ye said, of women. Ca. 7.29.
that the King was thought to condemn women's Sex. May I also hear from
whence this surmise is taken? from that (said Abiather) where he said. This
have I found seeking one by one, to find the count: and yet my soul seeks
but I find it not. I have found one man of a thousand, but a woman among them
all have I not found. Zadok) that a woman therefore is not found among the
Saints? He condemns not woman's sex.
or that woman's Sex is profane, and an evil thing? I deny the consequence,
for ye wander far from the kings meaning therein. It is very plain, that
howsoever the K. knows that he has bin deceived and polluted with wicked
women: and himself has spoken against the ungodly and strange women and their
vices: yet did he never condemn the sex or kind of women, He speaks by
comparison
nor the godly woman and her virtues. But he has spoken by way of comparison,
as thus: If of men there be found as few as one man of a thousand, which
understands and considers of the course of man's affairs, and of his
vanities under the Sun, and of the carriage of things in this world (according
to the will and providence of God) surely of women there is not found one,
within that number: for if men have not that wisedo^, how should those weaker
vessels, I mean women? Howbeit, we may not for all yt think that by this number
certain, which he takes for a number uncertain, and by this hyperbolicall
speech, he utterly excludes all women from the life of the saints and number
of the wise. The^ might he be found indeed to condemn Sarah, the wife of
Abraham, and Rebecca the wife of Isaac, and Hanna, the mother of Samuel, and
the wife of Manoah the mother of Sa^pson, and Ruth the Moabitesse, and Rahab of
Ierico, and Abigael, and Bethsabee the kings mother, and others of the
generation of the just, which are so much commended in the holy write. But the
King in his wisdom knowing the excellency of such women, has worthily
praised them and their virtues: saying: Pro. 31.
The woman that fears the Lord shall be commended: give her of the fruit of her
hands and let her own works praise her openly. And he said again, that such a
woman shall be given by the Lord for a good portion to such a man as fears
him. *8. of the doubtfulnes of Gods love, and mercy. Chap. 9.1.
the King has taught a doubtfulnes of the Love and mercy of God. But let me
hear of what words ye have taken that? The king has often said (quod
Abiather) that No man knows either love or hatred of all that is before them.
And both this (said zadoke) teach us a doubtfulnes of the love and mercy of
God toward his children in this life? No truly, for by this he speaks of
an other thing, as first, yt considering the manifold confusions of man's
affairs in this world, no man in the view thereof, or of any other external
thing, can take censure of matters divine, nor truly discern, No man can
judge of divine things by these external things.
what things he ought either to choose or refuse in this world. For the Lord
sends both prosperity and adversity as well to the wicked as to the godly.
Next the King knows, that albeit the souls of the righteous be in the hand
of GOD, so that none evil may touch them: yet such is the corrupt judgment of
flesh and blood, ignorant of GOD and of his ways, Men consider not who^ God
either loves or hates.
that he never so much as considers what kind of men the yare which God
loves, and what kind of men they are which God hates: and therefore are they
no more loving nor thankful unto the godly whom the Lord loves (howsoever
they have well deserved) then they are unto the ungodly, 9. Oiection of the
soul. Cha. 3.21
which neither fear God, nor endeavor to benefit his Church. *Ye further
objected that the King has cast into doubt the being of the Soul. I pray,
what has he said to occasion this conceit of him? he has said (quod
Abiather) Who knows whether the soul of man ascends upward, and the
spirit of the beast descends downward to the earth? As who should vehemently
affirm, that no man knows the life, or being of the soul? Ergo he doubts
thereof. Man's judgment of the soul of a man.
I deny that (said Zadoke) for albeit the natural man neither knows, nor
understands this by his reason: yet the godly man by his faith believes and
comprehends it. The purpose of the King therefore in these words is to set
forth the imagination of the children of men, which cannot conceive by any
wisdom or reason of man, that the soul of man is immortal, and ascends up
into heaven after his dissolution: no more then does the breath of a beast. Ye
have said also that the K. doubts of the life and sense of the humane soul.
10. Obeiction of the sense of the soul* Chap. 9 5.9.10.
Yea (said Abiather) for he says: Whosoever is joined to the living, there is
hope: for it is better to a living dog, the^ to a dead Lion, for the living
know that they shall die, but the dead know nothing at all. Neither have they
any more a reward: for their remembrance is forgotten. Also their love, and
their hatred, and their envy is now perished, and they have no more portion for
ever in all that is done under the sun. Zadok, I marvel what should move any
man to think by these words, that the king doubts of the life and sense of
the soul after his departure, as therein to give aim to the opinion of them
that think the souls do either die, or sleep until the judgment which is
to come, so contrary to the holy Scriptures and belief of our Fathers: for
Solomon has no such aim nor meaning. All men are admonished to use the time
of their life in the works of their vocation
But he speaks of the dead and not of the souls which live for ever: and
wishes all men to use the time of their life and present opportunity, for the
exercising and performing of the works of their vocation for the benefit of
the Church, the good of the Commonwealth, the discharge of duties, and the
glory of GOD. For that by death (which daily draws on them) all men are
deprived of all sense, work and labor of this life, to do thencefoorth
therein either good or evil. For they have finished their course, played their
parts, and cannot return, either to perfect their defectes or to supply their
wants in the performance of that duty whereunto they were both created and
called: but must from hence-foorth let all alone for ever, that so the tree
might lie, whereas it is fallen. Therefore the king would that men should
respect the end of their Creation and calling, Respect the end.
and not to neglect or pass over the fittest times of working and effecting
their duties in the same. This is the kings purpose, and not, that he either
denies or doubts of the immortality or sense of the soul of man, whereof I
have heard him say, that departing hence it goes to God, which gave it: and
that the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, Eccles. 12.
and there shall none evil touch them. For though in the sight of the unwise
they apeare to dye, their end is taken for misery, and their departing from
us to be a very destruction: yet are they at rest, and their hope is full of
immortality. The just shall live for ever. Moreover the King as he had well
learned and understood: so he likewise remembered Jobs resolution, where he
said: I am sure that my Redeemer lives, Job. 19.25.
and that I shall rise out of the earth in the latter day: and shall be
covered again with my skin, and shall see God in my flesh: whom I my self
shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, This my hope is
laid up in mine heart. Thus have I answered ten of your Objections (Abiather) in
which mine answers, let me know whether your mind be satisfied. To this
answered Abiather; ye have well satisfied me (most reverend father) therefore I
will not reply, and I doubt not, but that ye have also pleased all the Lords
assembled. And we (said the Lords) hold our minds well resolved in those
doubtful points, and are thankful for the same.

CAP. XL.
Zadok answers to four other points objected: viz. 11. Of the ignorance of
man, 12. of his imperfection: 13. of time and chance, 14. of liberality and
prodigality.
ZAdok yet proceeded, and said to Abiather I yet remember that further ye
objected, that our Lord king Solomon, judged a man so deuoide of reason as that
he knows not what thing it good for himself in his life, of man's ignorance.
Eccles. 6.11.
yea (said Abiather) and thus I have hard him to expostulate. Who knows what
is good for man in the life, and in the number of the days of the life of his
vanity, seeing he makes them as a shadow? And well might the king thus say
(said Zadok) in this respect, that no man knows in what estate to live, The
world has so many confusions that the natural man cannot find what to choose
or refuse in the same.
wherein to find perfect peace, quietness and contentation in this world, for as
the world is set on mischief so is every kind of estate and condition of man
in the same, oppressed with miseries, and exposed to vanities. Besides that it
is true enough, that the sensual man (after his natural foolishness)
prefers those things that be evil, before the things that be good:
neither is he able to judge with an upright judgment or to discern between
the one and the other, being blinded through his concupiscence as a beast of
his own knowledge, and in his whole life, made subject to vanity. And as
diverse diseases require diverse medicines, as the desires of old men require
one thing, and the lusts of young men another thing, and either age passes
away as a shadow: so the affairs of men are ever changed and carried to an
uncertain end, themselves being ever uncertain of future events. Attend the
present things and be not vanquished of vanity.
Therefore they should learn to attend the things present with diligence,
weigh them with wisdom, and commend to the Lord those things that are to
ensew. And albeit they cannot eschew all vanity, they should not yet be
conquered of vanity but be wise in God strong in his power, and endeavor to
lead a just and an honest life without the excessive care of that which shall
or may betide them thereafter so far forth, as they neglect not to leave a good
report with the posterity. Of man's imperfection and sin. Cap. 7.22.
*Ye have further objected (Abiather) that the king being a transgressor
himself, condemns all other men of transgression? Indeed said (Abiather)
the king has said it openly: that there is no man just on the earth, that
does good and sins not. And yet we know by the testimony of holy Scripture,
that Habel, Noah, Abraham, Job, and others were just men in their times. It is
true (said Zadok) that the king has so said, as he might very well say. The
occasion of his words was taken from the consideration of the^, No man is just
and sins not.
which being either wise in their proper conceits, or too quick censors and
correctors of other men, see not into their own sins, imperfections and
infirmities, neither consider they of the imperfections and infirmities of
other men: for he that is an offender himself, should not exact th'extremitie
of the law against other men which be offenders: for it is a shame for the
teacher or corrector of others faults to be found guilty in the same faults.
That men therefore should not be too severe exactors against others, he says:
There is no man just upon the earth who when he does well, does not sin, or
offend also. Therefore, let no men forget themselves and their own
imperfections, whenever they take in hand to reprove, punish, or correct
others, neither let them do to others which they would not that others should
do unto them. At the least, let them not dissemble their own faults, to their
own consciences (as thinking their own sins to be no sins at all) whiles
they censure, judge, condemn and punish others. Moreover, if the sentence
should be taken or considered absolutely without any respect of that former
ocasion, we shall nevertheless find it true enough that every man is a sinner,
and that there is no man living on the earth able to justify himself before
the Lord, as both the K. father in his holy songs, and also the patient man Job
in his sayings have testified.

There shall no mortal man compared with God of might, Psalm. 143.3.

Be justified: because no man is righteous in his sight.
Nor can he answer well, if with him he contend, Job. 9.2.

One of a thousand fold thereby himself for to defend.
Therefore we find that Habel, and Noah, Abraham, and Job, being but men
(although they were justified by their faith, and called righteous men both by
that, and because they were more just in comparison then many others: were
nevertheless sinners: yea, and even then whiles they did that which in nature
was good, either by reason of original concupiscence, or for the defect of
some circumstances in or about that good. For the saints and the best man
living on the earth (put Messiah apart) cannot possibly be clear, and without
sin, so long as they carry about them their earthly tabernacle, nor are they
able to do or effect that which good is. Now if the iustest man is not only
accused, but condemned, and his best works blemished: Alas, what an heavy dome
shall be cast on the unrighteous? and ^ugly shall his deeds be in the sight of
God, howsoever he glance in beauty before men? Well therefore might the king
accuse all men, and condemn sin in the^, and yet not therein justify
himself, but with and among them both accuse and condemn himself, as every
man in that respect should, thereby the sooner to beware, that he censure not
unadvisedly, or too rashly condemn others, lest therein he bring judgment on
his own head: that he consider of other men by himself, and pray to God with
an humble mind, that those imperfections and sins both of nature and action may
be either purged or pardoned for the sake of holy Messiah, who (indeed)
supplyeth all such wants of perfection and gives grace and beauty to all them
that by faith depend on him, according to that promise made to our father
Aabraham saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed:
Further ye have objected against the K. that he has ascribed all things to
Time and Chance. of time and chance. Eccles. 9.10.11
Which we justly attribute to the divine providence. I pray you, what said ye
K. to occasion this conceit? He has said (quod Abiather) that he saw under the
Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet
bread to the wise, nor also riches to men of understanding: neither yet favor
to men of knowledge: but Time and Chance comes to them all: for neither does
a man know his time; but as the Fishes which are taken in an evil netie, and
as the birds that are caught in a snare: so are the children of men snared in
the evil time which it falls upon him suddenly. Indeed (quod Zadok) so
has the King said. Nowbeit he said not that the Gods Fortune rules or
bears sway in the affairs of men: nor that all things in the world happen
and are carried by chance, nor teaches he men to embrace that cyclopicall
security which some of the heathen fondly embrace: Nor has the king
understood this time and chance in that sort or sense wherein worldly minded
men call Occasion and Fortune Goddesses, and to them attribute the total guide
and carriage of all men's affairs, contemning the whiles the most profitable
doctrine of the providence of God, and the true observation of all those
ancient histories, by the which the Lord of heaven has been witnessed to
work his work according to such predictio^s and purposes as he had before
declared unto holy men in the due time: But the king being most wise of all
men, by this saying so pithie and patheticall, teaches and that profoundly,
that howsoever God in his wisdom and providence decrees, works and
compasses all things in good method, measure, All things come to men, as by
chance.
time and place: yet in respect only of mortal man's wisdom, providence, or
forecast, al things come to pass, as by chance or Fortune (as they call it)
for why, men foresee not, nor know before hand what shall succeed or come
after them in their life: therefore they are often snared and caught before
they be aware, neither will they take heed, although they be admonished,
because they have neither faith, nor the fear of God, which men very seldom
entertain within the limits of vanities kingdom. Thus Cain, though otherwise
subtle and envious not foreseeing his own destruction, nor taking admonition
by the Lords commination, which told him, that if he did evil his sins
should be laid at the doors to be seen, he proceeded in the compassing of
his mischievous devise, and so was cursed from the earth and afterward slain.
Thus, the old worldlinges, whiles they did eat, drink, marie wives, build
houses and sported, deuoide of faith, piety and foresight of the general
deluge, were suddenly and unawares over whelmed in the days of Noah: whereof
notwithstanding the Lord God certified Noah some hundred and twenty years
before, and he omitted not to admonish the^ of the same in his ordinary
preaching: now this thing considered, that plague might seem to betide them
(which would neither foresee, nor believe it) by chance: howsoever it was
certainly decreed and appointed by the Lord. In semblable sort, the Sodomites
and Gomorheans had their destruction falling on them, not expecting nor fearing
thereof, as by chance: I say by chance in respect of their want of
foreknowledge, or fear: So godles Pharao the Egyptian King, and his host were
overwhelmed suddenly in the red Sea, Judge 9.53. 1. Sam. 17.49. 1. King. 2.34.
Abimelech was unawares killed by a Woman that cast down a piece of a millstone
on his head: great Goliath was soon cast down by the Kings father: Shimei and
Ioab were, by an occasion not thought on, brought within the snare and caught
(as the Lord appointed it) for their sins. Many such examples are daily
before our eyes to be seen, the which howsoever the unwise and foolish little
observe and consider of, are nevertheless well noted of the wise to profit and
good use. By this therefore the King neither denies the working, nor
infringeth the force of the divine providence, by the which he knows that all
things in the world are both disposed, carried and ordered in a most perfect
method, howsoever they be hidden and conceiled from the knowledge and reason
of them that inhabit within the dominions of vanities kingdom. And truly, in
this, that the working of God and his ways are far above and beyond the wit,
wisdom and reach of all men, the power, glory and majesty of the almighty
is advanced in all the world, and his Saints have and retain no mean
instruction in their lives, and consolation in all their afflictions. of
prodigality.
After this, (my L. Abiather) I call to mind another objection of yours, as
namely that the K. in some his late words, should encourage men to a prodigal
wasting and spending out of their wealth and substance, without regard what
might thereof become. But let it please you to tell me what those the kings
words are, whereof this doctrine might be gathered. It is a strange thing, to
see, how the simple truth is often inuerted and mistaken. Men in public places
should therefore be well advised, what words they utter, and explane obscure
sentences by wise expositions. Thus (said Abiather) spoke the K. Eccles. 11.1.
Cast forth thy Bread upon the face of the waters and after many days thou
shall find it. Give a portion to seven and also to eight: for thou know not
what evil will be on the earth. Alas (said Zadoke) how peruersly they wrest
the kings good meaning in this singular metaphor? cast forth the bread on the
face of the Waters will ye conclude, ergo he encourages men to prodigality:
and dissolute wasting away of their wealth? God forbid, foe he has no such
meaning: But he exhorts men to be liberal and charitable: two excellent
virtues: and he would yt therein they should extend of their wealth in either
part without respect of persons, or of reward, or hope of gain, or glory:
that men should help such as be in need, trouble, misery, and that cannot
recompense or requite: and to commit the success and the regard of all
retribution to the Lord without all fear or distrust: In the doing whereof, is
shall come to pass, that men shall find again that which they had laid out in
one sort or other: For such things are but as lent to him that will in due
time repay. The Lord himself will augment and bless the basket and the store
(as Moses has said) to them that keep the Lords commandementes. Deuteronomy. 28.
Therefore according to this saying, men in the bestowing of benefits or in the
giving of their Alms, should do like unto those which cast forth their things
on the fleeting stream: the things are thrown forth, and they be carried
away, and there is no care taken thereof, nor hope of recovery again: So men
ought to give and dispose of their riches in this life, especially to the poor
and needy without hope of recompense or reward: knowing well that the reward
thereof is with the Lord, who forgets not them that have thus bestowed of
their wealth and things that the LORD has given them, and in the due time will
duly recompense them. Psalm. 103.2.
This the Kings Father remembered whem he said Bless the LORD O my soul,
and forget not all his retributions. Moreover, by the face of the waters, we
may not unaptly understand the wet faces or weeping eyes: and namely the poor,
the needy, the miserable, which in regard of their hard lotts and afflictions
are constrained to mourn: And further to show that the end of our good work
or charitable action should be ye beginning of another yt should succeed, he
wills men to give and bestow a part not only the 7. day (which is the end of
one week) but also the 8. day (wc is ye beginning of another and so forth.
Wherein also he would that men which have abundance should resemble the full
clouds, which pour down the rain without any respect of places, or hope of
receiving thereof again and should be also like the trees, which in the autumn
or harvest time let fall their fruit for such as will gather thereof, and
regard not the return of the benefit. Lo, this is the meaning of the king in
his words, which are indeed right worthy the memory and praise. Then replied
Abiather. In truth (most reverend Father) ye have also in this fully satisfied
me, and I trust that ye have no less contented al these the Kings, Princes
and servants. And we (said the Princes) are very well pleased in these
resolutions. But if there be any thing else to be objected, we would that ye did
now remember it, that it may be in like sort answered: for our hearty request
is, and the same shall be continued, that it would please this most reverend
Father in presence to answer and resolve the doubts: that as well the
posterity and others, as our selves hearing both the one and the other, may be
the better instructed and occasioned to think ruerently both of the King and
of his words. And truly, we esteem him a meet defender of the truth, who when
he thinks well, does neither fear nor is ashamed to speak.

CAP. XLI.
Zadok answers to the three last objections. 15. of the difference between
good and evil. 16. man's power of life: 17. the young-mans lesson. Moreover
Solomon's words are approved for verity.
of the holy and profane.
ABiather proceeded to ratify his objections and said: But wherefore (I pray
you) has the king put no difference between the righteous and the wicked,
between the holy and the profane? I might peradventure answer you (said
zadok) if ye could certify me from the which of all his words they have taken
this to be objected. They have taken it (said Abiather) from those his words
where ye have heard him say without retractation or correction: Eccles. 9.2
It happens to the one as to the other: it goes with the righteous, as with
the ungodly: with the good and clean, as with the unclean: with him that
offers, as with him that offers not: like as it goes with the virtuous, so
goes it also with the sinner: as it happens unto the perjured* so it
happens also to him that fears an oath. Among all things that come to
pass under the Sun, this is a misery that it happens to al alike. And this
is a cause that the hearts of me^ are full of wickedness and madness is in their
minds as long as they live until they die. To this answered Zadok. Truly,
wisdom would persuade, that before they had conclude against the King they
had wisely considered one thing with another, Cap. 7.25.
as the king has also counseled. For he has often said to overthrow the
strength of their argument, that he thinks in his mind that God shall
separate the righteous from the ungodly, and then shall be the judgment and time
of al counsails and works. Again he says: Cap. 3.17. Cap. 8.12
I know that it shall be well with the^ that fear God and do revere^ce before
him. But it at shall not be well to the wicked, neither shall he prolo^g his
days: but even as a shadow shall he be, because he fears not God. Wherein he
speaks much like his father, who said the L. knows or approves ye way of
the righteous, and he shall prosper: but the way of the ungodly shall perrish,
now shall he be able to stand in judgment, nor in the congregation of ye just.
Now therefore (Abiather) let these things and places be considered together, and
ye shall find yt the K. has a double purpose therein as else where he has said:
Answer not a fool after his foolishnes: again: answer a fool after his
foolishnes: wherein, he would, yt an answer be made meet for the question, but
not according to the fools expectation: so the K. has said the just is as the
unjust: again, the just is not like the unjust: for in somethings they be
compared in this world, but not in all things. As touching either man's
mortality, or the sundry accide^ts and eue^ts of this life, they are not much
unlike. For as it was before said touching ye co^pariso^ of man with the beast,
or the wise man with the fool, so may it be said in this that it happens to
the just as to the unjust. Job. 21.23.
And in this he seems to allude to that saying if Job: One man dies in his
full strength being in all ease and prosperity: his breasts are full of
milk, and his bones run full of marrow: Another dies in the bitterness of
his soul, and never eats with pleasure. Nevertheless, they sleep both a
like in the earth, and the worms cover them. Thus are they both confounded,
and worthily combined together. Yea, here Thersites the deformed, and Nircus
the most beautiful (as the very Greek Poets say) are worthily compared, as
touching their bodies. Next to this, such are also the confusions and events of
this life, and human affairs in this words, yt in the judgment of the
carnal man there is not discerned any difference at all between the good and
the evil the just man and the sinner, to either of the which the temporal good
things of nature, fortune and life are often alike. Abraham our Father was
rich: so was Pharao, Abimelech and the king of Sodom. Again, Cain was an exile
from his Fathers house, so was Abraham and Jacob, and Joseph. Moreover Sarah
was fair and beautiful: so were the daughters of Cain. Shem was preserved in
the Arc with his Father Noah: so was Cham also within the same. But it may be
so, that the Lord would therein teach, that his children should serve him not
inregard of those temporal and worldly things: and again that the ungodly
which also have and do abuse the same, might be left without all excuse of
their unthankfulness: that the justice of God might be acknowledged and his
word believed, which commends and promises the future judgment and full
retribution of all men's words and works, and that the worthiness of faith
might be increased. Moreover it is so, that the true virtues of the spirit
divine (which are so well known of the king) do not externally appear to the
carnal minded man. Therefore the men of this world esteem no more of the just
and godly, then of the wicked and impious: yea, they persecute the godly and
most virtuous, and constrain them by their cruel tyrannies and oppressions to
suffer and endure those bitter torments and pains which are only one, as well
deserved to malefactor and transgressors of the law. This thing was noted in
the death of Habel whom Cain slew: in the persecution of our father Jacob by
Esau by Laban, and others whereof he could say to Pharao, that his days had
been few and evil: in the accusation, the selling away, the imprisonment and
afflictions of Joseph: in the afflictions of our fathers in Egypt, in the
contempt of Lot in Sodom, in th'xtremity of poor Naomi and Ruth, and in the
sorrow of Hanna with others. Such is the entertainment of the godly and their
common estimation in the world: and this is the nature of vanities kingdom!
Now, what is that which ye disliked in these the kings words No man has power
over the spirit to keep still the spirit nor has any power in the time of
death? Is it not a true saying? man's power of life. Cap. 8.8.
For has any man power either to live as long as he lists: or to put away
his soul from his body at his pleasure? Surely it is true (as Job said to this
purpose: The days of man are determined and as the King said: The days of a
man are numbered: that is sby the Lord who only has power either to give, or
to take away man's life at his will and pleasure, at all times: and that neither
this, nor that lies in the will or power of man: therefore, as he may not cast
himself rashly into danger: so neither should he promise himself long life.
Though Saul slew himself he had not therein power of his life: for his days
were determined and now expired, he was showed the day before, 1. Sam. 28.19.
that he should die, and in the manner of his death, he was, by the justice of
God, made his own executioner. As he could retain his life no longer, so
neither could he forbear to perform that on himself, which he was in this
judgment constrained to perform. If worldly men had this power either to
retain life, or to put it off, when they lifted, they would then often renew
themselves and old age would not be much dislike: yea, death, which is so
bitter to the wealthy men of this life, would not be so much feared, as it is.
But now it falls out otherwise: for why neither can the courage and strength
of body preserve the strong warrier, nor the industry of art, nor the devises
and counsailer of man withstand death, when the Lord takes away life, nor can
force death on them, whom the Lord is willing so preserve in life. Thus when
Saul in his trouble was slain of his own hands for want of another
executioner, David on the other part was preserved, the young man's lesson.
nor could he be slain by them which were his mortal enemies, because the
Lord did keep his life. * Finally ye have said, that it is objected against
the King, that he should in his words, counsel young men to take their
delights of youth and to swmime in their lusts. Let me hear the Kings own
words, as he spoke them, and upon what occasion. He said (quod Abiather)
Though a man live many years and in them all rejoice, Cap. 11.8.9
yet he should remember the days of darkness, because they are many, all that
comes is vanity. Then thereupon he said again: Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes.
Then he added indeed: But know, that for all these things God will bring thee
to judgment: therefore, take away grief out of thine heart, and cause evil
to depart from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity. Then answered
Zadok: how have they here considered one word with another: Yong-men are
counseled to beware. For they also have their Judgment appointed.
and how is the manner of the kings speech marked? When the king had advised
men in the highest grade of their proserity to think upon affliction, trouble
and adversity, and to endeavor to eschew it: he comes to behold the guise and
condition of young men, yea of such as did sway in wordly and fleshly lusts and
wantonness without regard of the judgments of God, which is wont to overtake
such persons in the time appointed and he derideth their folly (speaking by the
figure Ironia, in the which, the contrary is ever intended) as who should say:
Go too, go too, thou young man: if thou will not be advised nor restrained, nor
reclaimed by these instructions and lessons take thine own mind, follow thine
own will, walk in thine own ways, if thou think it good: But he leaves him
not without a commination or threatening: And think thou, that there is none
account to be made for these things: and will not God bring thee into
judgment? thou art deceived (thou foolish young man) for there is a judgment
which a waits but the time appointed, wherein thou must enter, not only at
the last, when al men shall stand before the Lord to be tried after their
deserts: but also in this life (if death prevent it not, which yet may be thy
particular judgment here) and then will the Lord recompense thy sins with
scourges and thine iniquities with rods. Now thou art willing that the lust
pass through every pleasant field, Sap. 5. Eccles. 12.
and that thou solace thy self with the delights of the children of men: But
then shall God speak to thee in his wrath and thou shall say: what good has
those pleasures and lusts brought me? Alas, these days are evil, they do
nothing delight me. Lo, does not this explane the former words against the
lusts of fond youth and men yt abuse the creatures in their prosperity? To use
things so as we forget not the reckoning we must make for them in the end.
yes doubtless, and withal does school and advise men, that they neither
contemn nor abuse the creatures which are appointed for ma^s use in this life,
but use them so, as they never forget what account they are to give either for
the use or for the abuse of them in time to come. Thus ye have heard, what I
have answered to all your objections: have ye any thing else wherewith to
charge either the king, or his words? If ye have let us hear. Abiather.
Alhough I am sorry (said Abiather) that men should be so foolish and ignorant
of the kings true meaning and purpose in the premises: yet am I glad of this
occasion: for thereby the sooner, not only the King and his words are cleared
of this suspicion, but also both my Lords that be present, and my self with
all others may be fully satisfied in those points before so doubtful.
Therefore I will object no further, but put mine hand on my mouth and be
silent: yea, rather shall my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, then that
I will with the same either blaspheme my Lord the King, or derogate from his
Words the deserved authority and worthy estimation. The princes.
Then said the Princes with one mouth and consent: Surely whatsoruer haths
been said and heard we conclude (with reverend zadoke) for the defense of
the king and his words against all malign mouths and sclanderous tongues.
Neither (indeed) can we but well commend that which we well understand of
those his Sermons and words, nor think we but that the holy Ghost will both
bring to our remembrance whatsoever thereof shall be most profitable and
convenient for the Church of God, and will teach us also the true understanding
and meaning thereof. zadok.
Very well said and resolved my Lords (said zadok) therefore the sooner upon
this occasion, I will tell you what I think generally of those words of the
King which we now mind to collect, and so conclude our present conference,
Summa verborum. Eccles. 2. points
thinking the time too long, ere I be with his Grace. The whole drift of the
Kings words may be digested into two general points, the first whereof is,
that the world is to be contemned, the other is that the chief Good is to be
pursued. In which two points consists both wisdom and understanding: as
God said to man in Job. Job. 28.28.
Behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom: and to depart from evil is
understanding. Job. 1.1.
This he peformed when he feared God and eschewed evil. For in the world
(which he maeneth by the place under the Sun, The world
and whereas he places vanities kingdom) he descrieth vanities, of the which
collecting many, The chief Good.
he frames a certain catalogue, and thereby shows his perfect understanding:
In the chief good, he finds man's highest felicity exempted from all vanities
and miseries, to the which he directs men by diverse good prescriptions and
rules whereby he displayeth perfect wisdom. The two tables of the law.
And in these two parts, he singularly alludeth to those two tables of the
law, wherein is commanded and set forth what the things are which men ought
to fly, and again what they be which they ought to do and perform, as well
for their own health as for the glory of God. What he finds in vanities
kingdom to be abandoned.
In vanities kingdom, he displaieth the vanity of man in his devises,
studies, counsels, policies, delights labors, sins, imperfections and
infirmities: next he displaieth good to make thereof a Catalogue (as I said)
and there withal has in the same here and there prescribed and appointed
sovereign salues and remedies against those noisome maladies, Remedies against
those noisome maladies.
that thereby the sooner, those great evils being avoided or abandoned, there
might a ready way be made and prepared for all them that are willing to tend
toward the chief Good, and so to the highest felicity. And these remedies
are contained generally either in Corasives or Comfortatives. The former
consists Solomon as a cunning phisician.
the king (as a good Phisician) has not omitted any one thing, that the wise
and cunning Phisicians have accustomed to practice and use in the cure of man's
body, for here are prescriptions of Sweates, of vomits, of diets, of
ointmentes, of minutions, of cauterizings, of clysters, of slepes, of exercises
and of portions: whereof, if time would permit, I could speak more amply: but
here, I only point to the things which I might speak touching the wisdom
and cunning of our King in and about the cure of those great maladies. Howbeit
as every medicine helps not every nature, nor cures every patient (seeing
against the strength of death there is no physic available) the king could
not (as himself confessed) cure all things: for many things remain
imperfect, defective and incureable in vanities kingdom, All things cannot be
cured in this world.
neither (howsoever the medicines are compounded and applied) may any man
imagine that they can be salued and recured. But this fault is not long of the
phisician and his medicines, but of the evil constitution and nature of the
patient and his griefs. * In the second general part the King proposes the
chief The chief good to be pursued.
which is The fear of God and the keeping of his commandementes, and is
indeed the duty of every man, and that which by the law of Gods is required
of all men. (as I said before). And as in the former he showed what things
most increase man's vanity and miscry: so here he teaches what they are which
further him toward his felicity: And they are certain virtues which he
opposes to those former vices. Certain virtues commended which further men
toward happiness.
As namely the wisdom of God spirit, prudence whereby a common wealth is
governed, Justice, obedience to laws and magistrates, modesty, temperance,
industry, diligence, charity, patience in troubles, sobriety, humility,
fidelity, truth, prayer, liberality, judgment, and to be short, piety and
the right service of God. And because all those things are required of a man
in the opportune time, at the least within the compass of his humane life: The
benefit of time.
therefore he is careful to counsel and advise him to take the benefit of the
time, and not to defer or put off from day to day to do and perform that which
is required of him, lest he be suddenly taken away and perish, nor can at any
time thencefoorth find the like opportunity to work, and effect that, which
he should have done, and now at length (though all too late) he is most
willing to do, if he might have a grant of that liberty and time again.
Therefore he has said, and says it often to them that stand before him to
hear his wisdom: Whatsoever thou take in hand, Cap. 9 9.
do it with all thy power: For in the grave whereunto thou go, there is
neither work, counsel, knowledge nor wisdom. As if he said, there is no
time allotted for men to work and do the works of their vocations after this
life. They therefore that be willing to serve GOD in their several functions
as they ought, must be right diligent therein and observe their times in this
life at the least, and not defer it to the life to com. Again he says:
Remember now thy maker in the days of thy youth: whiles the evil days come
not, nor the years approach, Cap. 2.1.
wherein thou shall say I have no pleasure in them. And to the end he might not
only teach the great vanity of man's life in this world, but also take away
from him all delays which commonly follow the hope of long life, he sets
forth man's Old age, and from thence defines his death, and lastly teaches
the immortality of man's Soul, the consideration whereof being set before man's
eyes does often contain him within the bounds of his duty, as wise to God,
wary of the world, and careful for himself. And this the King having said and
strongly proved his former general proposition, he concludes with the same
thus. The conclusion of the book
Vanity of vanities and all is mere vanity. Lo, thus has the king spoken, and
such is his purpose in those his words, which some would so perversely constre
against him and his good meaning, crown and dignity. And of this sort is even
his ordinary talk, and such are his sentences, sayings and words which he
daily utters. In the which (as they are right consonant and agreeable in all
things to the sacred verity and holy scriptures) whosoever hears, and
considers, aright, shall find here and there applied such and so many
excellent doctrins, resolutions, sentences, The excellency of Solomon's words
contained in the Ecclesiastes.
proverbes, parables, examples, counsels, consolations, exhortatio^s,
admonitions, comminations, reasons, arguments and conclusions, with such change
and variety of times (though as yet on one instrument and on one ground) to
draw from vices and to persuade to virtues, that they which read, hear or
understand the same (if they be not enchanted with some erroneous spirit)
shall therein and thereof very easily find out the heavenly wisdom, with no
small comfort of heart, and reap no little co^tentation of Soul, when thereby
the sooner (the holy spirit assisting them (they shall be enabled to contemn the
deceivable vanities and lusts of the world, they shall be encouraged to use the
creatures of God thankfully, to walk in their vocations wisely, to live in
this world honestly, to behave themselves worthily, to bear afflictions
patiently, and to pass in the same victoriously through the bottomless
profundity of the horrible confusions of this wretched life, toward that Best
Good, and highest felicity.

CAP. XLII.
The Princes having examined and approved Solomon's words for verity, agree to
collect the same into a book: to the which they prefixe a fit title, and
declare the reasons thereof.
ZAdoke having thus answered to all the former exceptions and objections taken
and opposed to the king and his words: the Princes and Lords which were thus
assembled in counsel, and hitherto listened to the disputation and conference
between Zadok and Abiather, answered and said to Zadok. Ye have both learnedly
and right godly answered and resolved all those doubts (most reverend Father)
whereby the sooner, as both we and al others are and shall be moved to esteem
worthily of the K. as of a Saint of the L. and no less of those his Sermons
and words so consonant to Gods truth, and profitable to instruct and teach all
men; so now let us consent in one mind, to collect those Sermons and words, as
we may best call them into memory. Ye have well said (my L. said Zadok) and it
shall be good and profitable both for our selves, and for many others, that we do
as ye have said. But first, it may please you, that we agree on some fit Title
to be prefixed, and ye Helioreph and Ahiah the kings scribes, or one of them,
would write the same. With a very good will (said the Scribes) and what shall
we write: Write thus (said Zadok Eccl. 1. (...) The words of that Koheleth (or
the preacher) the son of David K. in Jerusalem. The title of Solomon's last
words.


And thus have we written (said the scribes): But (my L. said zadok) how like
ye this title? we like it very well (answered the Princes) May it please you
also it be examined, that the reasons thereof being declared, all others may
likewise be satisfied with us; Yea (said zadok) it pleases me right well?
howbeit, with convenient brevity: for we have been here talking very long,
and it is more then time we were with his majesty to give him comfort in his
afflictions. Debarim.
The first word in this title is (...) Debarim, the which (as ye know)
signifies not only bare words, speeches, sermons or orations: but also
matters, things and causes, yea and such as are not vulgar ordinary, or
common, but rather, grave, profitable, memorable, and of price, as such where
of the kings father sometimes modulated saying:

Mine heart is willing to disclose
a goodly thing: Psalm 45.1.

For in my works I will report
of Iah the King.
Such words uttered Moses the Lords servant before our fathers: when he said,
hearken O ye heavens and I shall speak, Deuteronomy. 32.^.
and let the earth hear the words of my mouth. And the like words the divine
preacher in his public Sermons is wont to utter and declare unto the people
with great wisdom and gravity, for those indeed are the things, which the
king has lately uttered and spoken of, in the audience of us and others,
(...). Concinator.
and the which we purpose to gather and commit to writing.

The next word is (...) of the Preacher, or that Preacher This is made (as well
ye know) of (...) to congregate, to assemble, and call people together, to make
a Church, and is a participle rather feminine then masculine, howbeit in this
place let it be used for both, that it may be referred as well to the person as
to the things or matters by him uttered. Solomon a preacher, Eccles. 1.12.
And first as it signifies a preacher or one preaching we may apply the word
to the King, who notwithstanding his great royalty and glory, disdaineth not
this name appellatiue, yea, he has willingly admitted it by his own choice.
For albeit he be no public preacher or teacher in the Church which is a
thing rather appertinent to the priests and Leuits, yet in either gender the
the Lord having granted him wisdom and understanding exceeding much and a
large heart, even as the sand that is on (...)
that this gendre is applied to such a person who (though masculine) we find
to be called Shelomoh (as a person feminine) tender, delicate and peaceable,
or a fair and chaste virgin, whom a man affects and woweth in honest love.
Howsoever it be that some men, not acquainted with our tongue may esteem this
title to be imposed on him for his unmeasurable love of women, by the which he
was effeminated Choheleth, or Preacher in that he spoke not to one or to a
few, but before many great personages and others of diverse nations. For as he
has spoken in the great assembly, so are his words fit to instruct Messiah
which gathers to himself, teaches and preserves his holy church, he has a
special care (with that wisdom which the Lord had given him in his time) to
call together and to assemble the people into the same, to the hearing of the
law of GOD and performance of his right service, as to him (indeed) it
appertained. The right office of a K. in 2 points.
Besides that the office of a King (as ye well know) is not only to defend and
rule the people, but also as well by himself, as by his prophets, priests and
ministers (by his commandment) in their several functions, to teach and
excite his subjects wary. * In the second place the word (...) may not unaptly
be applied to the matter or cause it self which is handled, The matter of the
Book or Words meet to be preached openly.
and then it sounds as thus: The words of the Sermon (or preaching) of the
son of David. For (indeed) as those words were vttred before and
appertaining to many, as a public Sermon or Oration, or matters or causes: so
are they right excellent and worthy, not only to be read and heard in the
Churches, or Congregations, but also to be preached and published in open
sermons, as the word not of man, but of God and right profitable to instruct
and teach all men, on the one side how to know and to esteem of the world: how
to live and order themselves in the world: how to contemn and eschew the
vanities of the world: on the other side how to know the right Good, and how
to walk in the world, and to attain the highest felicity. Therefore although
the King be no public Preacher, yet shall those his words be preached,
heard, and esteemed of the people of God in the Church with all reverence for
their better instruction, to the glory of God. Thus have I said of the person,
The difference between Solomon and other preachers and their words with an
emphasis.
and of his words. Howbeit, to make difference as well between him and all
other Preachers as between those his words and the words of others, as also to
add the more emphasis to either part, have we prefixed this particle ((...))
ha, the which (as ye know) besides the note of a prepositiue article, points
expositiuely to that special person and thing, whereof there was mention made
before, as the King himself did, when pointing to those things which he had
descried within the limits of vanities kingdom said: And all that, or that
whole, is vanity. Again, this particle being prefixed to a Nowne appellatiue,
adds unto it a singular emphasis or force, as it is to be seen in the first
Psalm, where the Kings of father pointing to some excellent person said (...)
Blessed is that man. So we say here: The words of That singular Preacher or
Congregator: or of that right excellent Sermon. *The third word of the Title is
(...) The Son of David. if it be asked, 3 The son of David. Solomon's name
is concealed. Eccles. 1.
why the Name of Shelomon is here concealed: It may be answered. First,
because it pleased the King to entitle himself the Preacher when he
acknowledged not himself for king of Israel, but only said, that he had bin
king. And albeit we hold our Lord the King yet honorable in his place (as true
Subjects ought to do, and neither to discover his faults and imperfections as
Cham did the nakedness of his father, nor to conceal that with the envious,
which may give a light to the glory of the worthy) yet, considering the Kings
cause, and the humors of men, we had need to walk warily in this matter. And
we know that howsoever the king shall be honored or suspected with the^ that come
after us, The estimation of the words.
the words (being indeed the words of truth) shall stand and be received of
prize, as those which proceeded not only from this person: but from the true
Solomon the son of David, by whose spirit the king has abounded in wisdom
and spoken those words. For it is well known, and the king himself has not
concealed it, that by his transgressions he has provoked Jehovah his God to
anger (as it is before declared) whereby he is deprived of that excellent
Peace and Dignity, which his Name Shelomoh imports. For the time was that
the Lord favoring him, Eccles. 47.13.
gave him a glorious reign, when he had made all quiet round about him, that
he might build an house to his name, and prepare the Sanctuary for ever, and
for that his peace, he was beloved. But now, there be stirred up against him
diverse great enemies, Solomon himself concealeth his name Solomon, because he
had transgressed. Ruth. 1.20.
whereby in steed of peace, he is forced to embrace wars and troubles:
moreover entering into the reckning of his own demerits and condition, he
acknowledges himself rather an occasioner of wars, then a procurer of peace,
and to be called rather afflicted and vexed, then delicate and tender,
according as once Naomi said to her citizens: Call me not Naomi, beautiful,
but call me Marah, bitter. For the Almighty has given me much bitterness.
Therefore it might be, that some (though not any of us) hearing those words
published under the title of Solomon, whom they know to be a transgressour
and causer of wars, may unhappily suspect and doubt of the authority
thereof: for things are commonly esteemed according to the credit of their
Authors (as Abiather before said. A Lesson for preachers.
) Therefore it is meet, that they which take on them to preach to others, or to
teach others, be themselves first of all reformed and conformed in life and
conversation, lest whiles they endeavor to save others, they remain themselves
cast-awayes, occasion their words to be derided, and their doctrine rejected.
And that these words might be understood, and so esteemed as the very words of
truth, and of that excellent * Prophet, and Pastor, That is the Messiah.
which shall be raised up in his time to preach, and to feed the people of God
with the heavenly Manna, they are entitled Of the Son of David. Howbeit, to
put difference between him, and some others of that Name, and there withal to
retain the right honor and dignity of the persons, whom it pleased the Lord
in love and mercy to advance and set on the throne of Israel, we have added in
the fourth place, 4. King in Jerusalem.
King in Jerusalem, which may be understood of King Solomon, and holy Messiah:
And although the Name be not Solomon Pro. 1.1 1. King. 1.35.
yet the godly learned shall well perceive the Author of these words to be
the same which in the title of the Kings wise Proverbs is named Solomon. For
this person (beyond all David's sons) was only preferred to the throne of
Israel, on the which he sits and rules all the twelve Tribes; for the most
part has dwelt in Jerusalem, which City his father David constituted the
Metropolitan and chief seat of the Kingdom, and therein ruling the people of
God in equity and righteousness, he bears a type and Figure of the holy
Messiah the son of David, that King of righteousness and peace who reigns
and shall reign over the house of Israel for ever (as I have said) from whom,
The author and authority of holy scriptures.
as from the chief Pastor and author, the authority and credit of those words
is to be derived, as is the authority of all the holy Scriptures, by
whomsoever the words and Doctrines thereof have been, or shall be written,
preached, or taught. Lo, thus have I spoken for the better understanding of
this Title, which we think good to prefixe to those the Kings words, by us to
be collected. Now if it please you (my good Lords all) let every one of us
call to mind. what we have heard the king to utter in this time of his
Repentance: the which I would should be simply and plainly gathered and
registered without any addition or diminution of any thing, How the words are to
be collected and written,
that so the Words as they be indicted by the singer of the holy Ghost, may
remain the same sound and whole to be remembered, understood, expounded and
learned by the^ only to whom the same spirit shall give both wisdom, utterance
and capacity the same to perform in posterity.

* Very well spoken, (said the Princes) and turning themselves toward
Helioreph and Ahiah The Kings Secretaries, they requested them to write
according to that every one of them should call to mind and deliver of those
the Kings last words: The Secretaries write the words.
to whom they answered, We are hear ready, and as ye shall remember and relate
the Kings own words: so shall we receive the same with all willingness and
faithfully register them. zadoke begins the Collection.
Say on (my Lords in order one after another. They give good ear (said zadok)
and I will begin to report what I have heard. The matters are weighty and
grave, they require both attention, trust and diligence. Write, and begin thus:

Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) vanity of vanities all is
vanity.

Verse. 3. What remains unto man in all his travel which he takes under the
Sun? etc.

Cap 2.1. I said in my heart Go too now, I will prove thee with joy:
therefore take thou pleasure in pleasant things: and behold this also is
vanity. etc.

The Book of the Ecclesiastes or the Preacher distinguished into 12. Chapters.
Cap. 3. To all things there is an appointed Time, and a time to every purpose
under heaven.etc.

Cap. 4.1. So I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought
under the Sun, etc.

Cap. 5.1. Be not rash with thy mouth: nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a
thing bofore God.etc.

Cap. 6.1. There is an evil which I saw under the Sun, and it is much among
men.etc.

Cap. 7.1. Surely there be many things that increase vanity: and what avails
it man.etc.

Cap. 8. Who is as the wise man? and who knows the interpretation of a
thing?etc.

Cap. 9.1. I have surely given mine heart to all this, and to declare all
this.etc.

Cap. 10.1. Dead flies cause to stincke and putrify the best ointment of the
Apothecary.etc.

Chap. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after many days thou shall
find it.etc.

Cap. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.etc.

Verse 8. Vanity of vanities says the Preacher: and all is Vanity.

CAP. XLIII.
The Conclusion of the Book, containing the declaration of the Princes and
Collectors, concerning their approbation of Solomon and his words, with their
Affixe to the same.
THe Secretaries having written the Words of King Solomon according to the
former collection, they said unto zadok and the Princes. Behold my Lords, all
these words have we written with diligence: Is there any thing else, that ye
would, we should also write? Solomon spoke much more then is here remembered.
Truly (said the Princes) the King has spoken in our hearing many other
things, right worthy both the remembrance and the writing: yea and so many, as
we neither could bear away, nor can now report: and the Kings wisdom and
diligence has yet far passed and exceeded. It is most true, in very truth)
(said Zadoke) And although the Lord his God has wonderfully blessed him with
wisdom, knoweldge, understanding and many rare graces far beyond that any
other man now living does enjoy: yet he omitteth not, Solomon yet studieth and
searches for more wisdom.
nor neglects his daily study, and diligence, to search for, and to obtain
and get more wisdom, more knowledge, more understanding and more graces, and
he yet learneth and ruminateth that both night and day, which he minds to
produce and teach unto the people. Neither does he adventure to speak or
utter any thing, before that he has with wisdom conceived it, and with a
perfect judgment digeasted it in his heart. For he knows, that as in the
ordinary course of nature, the conception goes before the birth: so learning
ought to go before teaching in him which is the teacher. First therefore, he
has learned, yea and yet he continues a learner, that thereby he might the
better know all things and frame himself a Teacher. And to that end, he has
been a diligent searcher of all Antiquities, and the worthiest monuments of
the ancient Fathers, hearkening therein to the counsel of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
where he faith: Remember the days of the world that is past: consider the
years of so many generations, Ask thy father and he will show thee: thine
Elders and they will tell thee. Genesis. Exodus. Levit. Number. Duet.
And therefore he has commonly in his hands the Books of Moses, as namely,
Bereschith, Velleschemoth, Vaichrah, Vaiedabber and Ellehaddebarim. Also the
Book of Job, the Book of Iosuah, the Books of Shemuel, the writtings of
Nathan, of Gad, of Asaph, and of his father David, with the volumes of other
Prophets and wise men: neither abandoneth he the writtings of Homer, and other
learned monuments of the Gentiles. From, and out of the which, he has
gathered, and yet gathers of learning, knowledge, and wisdom more and more
every day. Nor is the King ignorant of this, that as the herb Moly, which is
so good and sovereign for medicine beyond many others, is very hardly dug
or drawn up from the earth: so those things which are excellent (indeed) and
of special choice, come not to men without exquisite study, wisedo^ is Gods
gift, yet must men study and labor for it.
and great and hard travels: and that albeit the excellency of wisdom,
knowledge and judgment is not atchiued or gotten by any the wit, wisdom,
power, policy or agilitie of man, but comes from the Lords goodness and
mercy: yet does not the Lord ordinarily give or bestow any of those things
without the lawful exercises of reason, studies, and diligence: but he is
right willing to help and further the true laborers, to instruct them which
read advisedly, and to further them which have a desire to proceed faithfully
in the way of his commandments: to, and for the which, he makes his word a
Lantern unto their fecte, and a light unto their paths. To this purpose, he
gives them Seers, wisemen, Prophets, Priests and goodly Princes: and he
powers forth of his divine spirit, whereby they be made apt and capable of
those singular graces: Whereof we have many worthy examples, as namely, in
Noah, in Lot, in Abraham, in Jacob, in Joseph, in Moses, in Samuel, in the
Kings father, and lastly, in the King himself, who in his youth (as the Lord
by his spirit had disposed him) prayed unto the Lord for wisdom, exercised
himself in the things which thereunto appertained: hearkened to David, to
Bethsabe, to Nathan, to Gad, to Asaph, and to his noble Counsailors: and used
the reason and wisdom which God gave him, as a talent increasing. So God yet
more and more prospered him from day to day: he taught him: he advised him, he
blessed him, and wisdom was found of him that sought for her. And thus uses
the Lord in his mercy and love, to admonish such as think of his goodness,
and to comfort them which early enquire for him: he teaches them that desire
to learn: he hears them that pray unto him: he lighteneth them that dispute
of knowledge, he opens to them that knock, and he gives to them that ask,
that in things that be profitable, holy, and appertaining to the glory of his
Name, to the good of his Church, to the benefit of his people. This the King
(as he is most wise) knows right well. And having thus gotten and attained
the excellency of wisdom, he burieth not those his Talents in the earth, The
use of talents and gifts which God bestows on men.
but employeth and occupies the same: not like unto that niggard, who for
fear of loosing his wealth would hide it, though without all use: nor like the
envious, which would not that other men should be partakers of knowledge: but
as the right libeberall and charitable man, he labors and endeuoreth to make
all other men partakers of his wisdom and divine graces, and hides her riches
from no man. For he sees, that as wisdom is an infinite measure unto men, so
shall his diligence and study be acceptable not only to them, but to the
Lord, Sap. 13.14.
who has filled his soul with divine treasures moved him to speak what his
mind has conceived, and to use his graces to the edification of his pepole.
Therefore has he spoken according to the fulness of his spirit the sooner,
because he saw, that those good things, by how much the more they were
imparted and made common to others, by so much they appeared the better in all
just estimation. * Moreover, to the end that his wisdom and knowledge so
imparted might be heard with the more delight, The best ways and means to
instruct, teach and edify others.
the better conceived and the deeper imprinted in the minds and memory of the
hearers, and by the^ the more exquisitely discussed, he has invented, and does
daily invent, compose and set forth many rare and excellent Riddles, Proverbs,
and similitudes, taken from the very nature and truth of things: yea, he
seeks and frames such words, Sermons, and Sentences, which he knows to be
most profitable and fit for the purpose: he lays ever before him those Books
and Monuments of the wise and godly men of yore (as it is before said) whom he
knew were illuminated and taught of GOD, and the things which they spoke and
left to the Church, were indicted by the finger of the holy spirit. For he
knows and has so taught and told us often, The use of the Books of holy
scriptures.
that the Books, words and writings of those ancient holy men are right
profitable in the Church to stir up and provoke men to piety, and to walk
in the way that leads toward the highest good, and chief felicity: and also
to confirm any doctrine or opinion, that shall be either taught or delivered
to the Church, for Gods glory, and the profit of the same. For therein is to
be seen and gathered the same verity, which it has pleased God by the
inspiration of his spirit to exhibit unto his Prophets, and servants, whom he
has made in this respect the Masters and Authors of those holy Books and
godly collections, worthily entitled the Word of God. Psalm. 1.
These be the things which the King wonderfully affects, and is never wearied
in the holy meditation thereof. Here is that doctrine and learning, unto the
which, he would, that all men should listen and give attentive heed, All men
must take heed of strange doctrines and opinions.
and that in regard thereof, they should eschew and abandon all other doctrines
and opinions whatsoever, which sound or any way savor contrary, or not like
unto this. For it is certain, that as the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor the ear with hearing; and man's curiosity being unmeasurable, the
doctrines and opinions of men do exceed in multitude and diversity: so both
the inuenting of those doctrines and opinions, and in the making of those
Books, which are neither agreeable, nor any way comparable to this one doctrine
so given and approved by the chief Pastor and Teacher, and also in the
reading, studying, learning and exercises thereof, are nothing else, but a
labor of the flesh, and a vexing of the mind: And so much the more, for that
therein (among other things) this is holden and plausibly accepted, that the
chief felicity of man, did consist either of honors, or riches, Men have
placed their chief felicity in those things of the world.
or of pleasures and men's delights and such like, the which therefore most men
studied to attain, in the reading, hearing and observing the precepts and
rules of the same. Wherein, nevertheless, whiles men are busied, they resemble
those foolish people, which being diseased, do seek for remedies of the things
which are brought from India, Aethiopia, and the furthest parts of the world,
happily not so well fitting the constitution of their natures, when the whiles,
they contemn or neglect the good things which grow in their own gardens. *
But as for that doctrine and those words, which are indicted and given by that
chief pastor, approved by those grave masters of authority, and collected,
taken, and taught by the King, as well in this, as in other his Books, and so
we find them to shoot harmonically to this chief scope or mark, The end
of the holy scriptures.

Eccles. 12.13. 1 Gods glory. 2. Man's happiness.

Psalm. 50.23. Exodus 20.


namely that men might thereby learn and be persuaded to Fear God, and to
keep his Commandments. In the which are respected those two things, namely
the glory of God, and the highest happiness. To the former whereof is
required, the praise and thankfulness unto GOD for his benefits: a duty
enjoined to man in the first Table of the Law: In the latter is required a
godly life and holy conversation, or duty enjoined us in the second Table of
the same Law. For in the first thereof is prescribed our duty to GOD: In the
second our duty to man. In the former we learn, Duty to God. Duty to man.
what GOD requires and what he abandoneth as iouching his own honor and
service: In the latter, what he requires, and what he condemns in our
behavior one toward another. For there is not any one singular Precept, but
respects both what is to be done, Note this in the ten Commandments. Exodus
20.
and what is not to be done. And this we must observe therein, that where any
virtue is commanded, in the same Precept that vice which is her contrary, is
forbidden: and so there, where any vice is forbidden, that virtue which is his
contrary is commanded. Eccles. 12.
This is that fear of God and the observation of his commandments, which is
required of man, and to this ought every man (by those holy doctrines) to frame
and apply himself. Besides these, all the studies, God has prepared a
judgment for these things Psalm. 50 1.3.
labors, devises, and endeavors of man are vain, and nothing else, but labors
and vexations of mind, drawing men from good unto evil, from God to the
devil, from heaven to hell. Neither may we think, but that for either of
these ways, a man shalll be called into judgment, to make his reckoning, and
to cast his account how he has either used or abused them. Yea, men shall
have not only their particular judgments here in this world (wherein happy
is he that shall find mercy and forgiveness): but also in the end they
shall stand before the tribunal Seat of Messiah, when he shall come and
sit, to pronounce a just sentence against all men, whether they be good or
evil. Then all things shall be revealed, yea even those which have been
concealed, psalm. 2.5.
and in a great part left unpunished, since the beginning of the Creatures.
Then, for every idle word there shall be made a reckoning, every idle deed
shall be discerned, and every secret thought of the heart shall be made
manifest. Then shall Gods chosen he cleared and called into glory with the
holy Messiah and his angels: and then shall the profane reprobates be thrust
out into utter darkness, to toil and moyle with the serpent and wicked Feendes
for evermore. All these things in effect, and many more, with singular wisdom
and great gravity, has our Lord the King uttered and taught (as we must
acknowledge and witness.) Therefore I think it good (if it shall please you my
Lords) that these our right trusty and faithful frinds Helioreph and Ahiah do
add this also, as an Affire to the Kings Conclusion of ye book, which is
written: vz.

Verse. 9. The preacher was yet more wise, and he taught the people knowledge,
and caused them to hear: and he searched forth and prepared many Parables.

Verse. 10. The preacher sought to find out pleasant words, and an upright
writing, the words of truth.

Verse. 11. The words of the wise are like Goads and like nails fastened by the
masters of the assemblies, which are given by one Pastor.

Verse. 12. And of other things, besides these (my Son) take thou heed: for
there is none end in making many books: and much reading is a labor (or
weariness) of the flesh. The Affixe to to Solomon's Book of Ecclesiastes Ecc.
12


Verse. 13. Let us hear the end (or scope) of all (the sermon) Fear God and
keep his commandments: for this is that (which belongs) to everyman.

Verse. 14. For God will bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good or evil.

CAP. XLIIII.
The common consent and subscription of the Princes to this collection, and the
conclusion.
THe former Words being so written and finished, and the two Secretaries
having read over the same in the audience of the Princes, they asked whether
they all well liked of those things, with the manner and carriage thereof? To
whom they all answered with one voice and consent, that they liked all things
right well, and were very glad that those matters were so happily rememembred
to be preserved for posterity. Moreover they said: And we nothing doubt,
but that the King himself when he shall either read or hear those Words of
his with the manner of the report and collection thereof, he will both like,
allow, and ratify the same. Neither will we omit or defer to solicit his most
noble grace therein: for as it concerns the King himself, and the truth and
authority of his words: so it does and shall for ever express our hearty
desire to exonerate our selves, and to express that duty which we owe and
must yield both to his highness and the holy Church. Finally we most heartily
thank you (most reverend Father) for this your paineful diligence and willing
readiness in the plain resolution of those things which were or might be
holden suspensiue concerning either the Kings person or his words: neither
are we unthankful unto you the Kings most trusty Secretaries, and to you
(Master Recorder) for the writing and recording of all those matters so
needful to be known and profitable for posterity.

Against them which sclander the King and his words.
* After this Zadok spoke again and said. But my Lords, that all these things
with our godly purpose may the better proceed and happily prosper, for the
glory of GOD, the comfort of our most dread Sovereign, and the benefit of his
Church: Let us endeavor (as much as in us liesh) to banish from hence malignant
and froward mouths, and let the lips of all them that seek to sclander the
King and his words be abandoned: But let the eyes of them that fear Jehovah
and love his holy anointed, look hither, and behold only that which is
right: Let their eye-liddes look straight before them, and let the right be
heard and considered in wisdom. Thanksgiving to God.
Finally in the conclusion and vpshot of this our council and conference let
us turn our selves to GOD in holy invocation Jehovah our GOD, for all those
excellent blessings the which he has powered forth on us under the happy
government and noble ministry of our Sovereign Lord King Solomon, for the
which (being so abundant in his loving and large mercies) we are not able
sufficiently to be thankful: yet let us provoke our selves to that measure
we have, psalm. 103.
as the kings father did when he said Bless the Lord O my soul, and all
that is within me praise his holy name. Bless the Lord O my soul, and
forget not all his retributions. Next, let us beseech his most Prayer for the
King.
and renew the same, as the Eagle, that he would consolate his Soul and
keep him in welfare and peace: that we also may yet live and prosper under
him, as we have done these forty years, in the right God's service,
tranquillity and peace.

Thirdly let us pray to the Lord of heaven for our selves

Fourthly let us heartily beseech him, that this our Collection words so
rightly correspondent to those ancient, Eccles. 1.1.
and learned authors from whence he has taken them, to be thus conueighed
unto us, may from hence proceed with happy success among the Lords people,
as whereby not only the Pastor, in the Church, but the Magistrate in the
Commonwealth, may take instruction and comfort even in the midst of all the
crossing adventures incident to either place.

Lastly, let us humble entreat the Lord GOD psalm. 1.i.
the ways of the wicked and the seats of the scorners, we may truly and
timely convert our selves to the divine Majesty, and be wholly dedicated to his
honor, in his fear. All these things being performed, let us again repair
to his highness presence, who doubtless by this time, museth very much of this
our long absence. To this all the Princes and Nobles assented, conjoined in
most holy and reverend prayers to the Lord, from whose spirit they received
no small consolation and gladness, and thence mutually bestowing thanks, they
brake up, and conueighed themselves (in all dutiful manner) to the royal
presence of King Solomon, their Sovereign Lord.

(...) FINIS.

