A Preparatiue to Contentation: Containing a display of the wonderful
distractions of men in opinions and strange Conceits: And of the several
Discontentations which are incident to every particular vocation and condition
of men in this life, with the causes and inconveniences of the same: Also how
they may be either salued or qualified, pacified or eased.

Confected Applicatorie, especially to this people and time, as an Argument
most necessary and profitable to be urged.

By John Carpenter.

2. Pet. 2.17. Love brotherly fellowship. Fear God.

Honor the Prince.

Prou. 24.1. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

TO THE MOST Noble Theophilos, the friend, and well-beloved of God: I. C. wishes
the right happy increase and continuance of the Grace, love, and peace of God,
and the highest felicity in Jesus Christ.
AS he which regards the wind, shall not sow: and he that respects the
clouds, shall not reap, (as says Solomon) so, Eccle: 11.4
if every wel-willing mind that would gladly benefit the Church and common
wealth, should be discouraged by the partial censures of strange conceited
heads, and the stinging obloquie of vncharmed tongs (wherewith the ungrateful
world is replenished) many things which be both profitable and necessary for
either state, would be couched in thriftlesse obscurity: and, as a thousand
learned wits have bin thereby the sooner occasioned to fling from their
fingers, both the pen and the paper, enterring most unhappily their Lords
Talent: there would presently be seen too to many of those negligent fools,
which perceiving that all travail, and the perfection of works do purchase
emulation and envy of one man toward an other, do fold their hands with
this sorry resolution: Yet one morsel with quietness, is better, Eccles. 4.5.6
then both the hands-full with labor and vexation of spirit. And as for mine
own part (most Noble Theophilos) although I speak of peace, and prepare for
Contentation: yet have I no less cause of care and discouragement proffered me
therein, when I assure my self to meet with them which are Enemies to peace,
and (in their Discontented hearts) prepare themselves to war: for as the most
unnatural maladies and venomous humors do most strongly wrestle and strive
against the sovereign salues, and wholesome medicines which are discreetly
prepared and applied to expel and purge them, and to restore health unto the
patient: so is it the nature of the vain men of this world (especially of such
as are Moriones Diaboli, I mean the diriders of religion) to strive and
struggle against the^ which prepare to purge and heal such passionate persons:
Neither will they like well of any medicine, how good and sovereign soever it
be, that shall be applied unto their maladies. Howbeit, because The Truth is
strong and prevails, and the Author of Truth has taught, that whosoever he
be which has received either one Talent, or two Talents, or five Talents,
after his ability, he is to employ and occupy the same accordingly: and has
also willed all them who mind to be worthy partakers of the Supper of the
great King, to eschew all excuses and delays: I have thereon presumed and
adventured in this sort to cast fourth my bread as on the face of the waters:
Eccles. 11.1
yet in this good hope, that in the length of days it shall be recovered, and
that my labors in the Lord shall not be in vain. Next, for as much as it is
the bounden duty of every liege Subject, 1 Cor. 15.58
so to tender and regard the safety of his Prince, and the welfare of his
Country, that when he perceives either the foreign enemy to prepare his
forces and endeavor to invade: or the unnatural Subjects to withdraw their
obedience and incline to rebellion: he withstand the one and suppress the
other to his power: defending and preserving both his Prince and Country, I
thought it no less my duty to do the like. Therefore, when I considered how
Nimrod that mighty Hunter before the Lord, on the one side had called
together and mustred his forces and assistants toward the reedifying of the
confused Tower of Babel; Psalm. 137
and that the dissembling Edomites on the other side, had assayed to raise and
pull down the repaired walls of Jerusalem: and had taken unto them in that
Action, the Ismalites, the Moabites, the Hagarenes, Gebal and Ammon, and
Amalek, the Philistines, and them that dwell at Tire, with Assure, who have cast
their heads together, and are confederate against the Lord and his holy
Anointed: yea, and that some other, pretending to new build with Zorobabel and
the principal fathers of Israel, 1 Isra. 4.23.
have rather hindered, then any way furthered the Lords work, and have
practiced without ceasing to reduce our State, and so well ordered
Commonwealth into an heedelesse Anarchie, and lawless liberty, Want of
government.
which engender naught else, but a monstrous Ataxie and woeful infelicitie
(from the which, A confusion or disorder.
I beseech God in his mercy to keep and defend us): I was thereuppon
vehemently provoked and stirred up to stand forth and to acquit my self
(though as the meanest of others yet) Zorobabel, Nehemiah, and other the
principal Builders under our most redoubted Lord Jesus, to set hand to the
Lords work, the which being begun, he would should be urged: being in hand,
he wills to be furthered: and being accomplished, he commands the same
to be maintained accordingly. To, and for the which purpose, I have taken in
the one hand an Instrument to build for and with, Israel: and in the other hand
a Sword to fight against the foes of Israel: being right well assured, that
the wisdom of God (the which Ireuerence and highly esteem) is better then
the weapons of war: and that the valor of his Grace is preferred far above
all the power, prudence, and policy of man. And seeing that it is that
naughty humor of Discontentation. (engendered in Ambitious heads, and in
distracted minds) that so much enflameth and agonizeth the state of our church
and Commonwealth, the which it labors to load with such inconveniences, as
are not only dreadful and dangerous, but most miserable and remediless. I
thought it good in this time, and upon this occasion, to display on the one
side, the horriblenesse of that humor, and to dissuade men from the same: on
the other side, to show the unspeakable good of Contentation) the which
springs up of the fear of God, and combineth with true obedience to the
Prince and brotherly love) and to persuade all men to embrace it, as that which
is not only commanded and commended in the word of God, but also esteemed,
honored and observed of them that be the Lords. For this cause I have both
framed and entitled this discourse, A Preparatiue to Contentation. This having
finished, and perpending to whom I might chiefly dedicate the same, I happily
thought on thee ( Most Noble Theophilos) to whose Nobility before all others,
I both present and commend it, moved to this worthiness being (indeed) the
friend and well-beloved of God, and therein preferred to all others, as is the
soul to the body and things caelestiall, to the things terrestrial.

2 Next, I am not ignorant that these and such like things Luke well
considered, and therefore having composed two learned Volumes of the
Evangelical History, he dedicated them both unto his dear Theophilos. Luke
1.3. Acts 1.1. Thirdly, it is certain that the most reverend Name and note of
thy Nobility, does add such an Admirable Grace to the things, which to the
same commended thy worthiness, vouchsaueth to accept, that in regard thereof,
they are the sooner admitted and embraced, as those, which were sometimes
offered in the Temples, and consecrated to holy uses, have been esteemed for
precious Iewelles, as Plynie said, writing to Vespasian the Emperor.

4 Thy right willing and grateful heart, in the ready

5 Being the faithful of the Lord, and of him so wel-beloued,

6 As it has pleased god in his love and mercy, both to grace yet justified
of her Children: the Truth and her lovers approved and defended of them that
love and fear the Lord.

7 Finally: I have been most willing (most worthy Theophilos) in this sort to
signify my hearty affection and good will toward thee: for whose happy
increase and perseueraunce in the love and grace of God, with all prosperity I
pray daylit unto his Divine Majesty, and that by thine happy Ministry he
would vouchsafe yet to help, sustain and edify his Church, and promote and
further that true, ancient, lively and Catholic faith and holy Religion
within this realm and Church of England: the which has these many years of
our peace bin worthily defended in the same, by our right Christian and most
Sovereign Princess Queen Elizabeth, whose most excellent Majesty, the most
mighty God long prosper and preserve to reign over, us, for the comfort of
his Church, and his high Glory. And thus I commend this Preparatiue unto thee
(most Noble Theopilos) and thy self unto him who has both loved, graced, and
blessed thee in his Son Jesus Christ: to whom be praised and glory for ever
more, Amen.

The whole book is distinguished into 26. Chapters, the Contents whereof are
these, vz.
CHap. 1. Of the misery and discontentation of worldly men, with the author and
cause thereof. Chap. 2 The practice of the enemy trobling the church and the
commonwealth of England The ingratitude and discontentation of Englishmen
Chap. 3 Themal-contented Papist his practice, purand daily expectation: how he
must be pacified Chap. 4 The Papist has taken a bad cause in hand Chap. 5 The
B. of Rome is plainly deciphered to be that very Antichrist, Apo. 13 Chap. 6
Mahomet was not that Beast, which John noted under the number 666: but the
number is found in, certain words which concern the B. of Rome, etc. Chap. 7
The punishment of traitorous Papists is justly inflicted, their sufferings, and
their confusion with Antichrist Chap. 8 The foolish zeal and singular conceits
of certain which justify themselves, and contemn others: their desire of
reformation of that they conceyt to be amiss. Chap. 9 The malepertnesse of
certain private persons which presume to censure the Prince, the Magistrates,
and Ministers Chap. 10 Of certain proud, curious and discontented heads, which
disdaining the plain sense of holy scriptures, and the judgment of all the
ancient and learned Fathers and wisemen, do daily hatch strange opinions, and
thrust them into the Church, which they endeavor to rob and throw down, etc.
yet under a good pretense. Against Polypragmosyne. Chap. 11 We may not dream
of better events of our studies, then others have had before us: against
Innouasio^s. Chap. 12 The ambitious persons, wanting preferment, begin to
slander, condemn and contemn the Magistracy and the laws: the Prince is to
be honored, and the laws to be abeyed of good subjects Chap. 13 Sedition is a
vile and noysomething: every good man knowing the danger thereof, does wisely
fly and eschew it. Chap. 14 Stop not one inconvenience with another, be
thankful to God, and prevent mischiefs timely. Chap. 15. Happy be they that
protest well, and walk accordingly. Three kinds of Protestants Chap. 16 The
examination of some particular parts of title Protestants Chap. 17 The former
Argument is continued. Men, being at peace under a peaceable Prince, wax weary
of well doing: contemn Religion, etc. Neither can they take heed by other men's
plagues Chap. 18 An instruction for all Christians. A caveat for Englishmen
Chap. 19 There is no state nor condition of man, free of his crosses and
troubles in this life. Of the Prince, of the Magistrate, and discontentation of
those high States Chap. 20 The troubles and afflictions of the Minister, of the
Householder, of the Schoolmaster, of the Scribe, and of other faculties and
conditions of men Chap. 21 Many men are distrasted in the consideration of the
disorders of this world. Men are in these days ungrateful for good deserts.
The necessity of instruction and good admonitions Chap. 22 The best medicines
for the cure of man's maladies, must be made of the word of God. An especial
Comfortatiue for the Magistrate
Chap. 23 Consolations and instructions for the Pastor Ca. 24 Comforts to
content the Householder, the Scribe, and other persons, in their several places
Chap. 25 Every man is to take the benefit of Time, to keep himself within the
bounds of his own vocation: to depend on the divine Providence: the unlike
ends of piety, and impiety. Chap. 26. We ought to acknowledge and submit
our selves to the power, mercy, and will of God: to eschew Contention, to
retain Contentation, and to pray to God for strength and opportunity to
perform our duties.
The Argument of this Preparatiue, composed of the words of Christ.
The Elder Brother was displeased,
and stood without, and freated:
Then therefore came his father forth,
and gently him entreated.
A Valeto to the Praeparatiue.
God guide thee well my Praepratiue,
to peace and Contentation:
Thus now at length, as needful is,
composed in contemplation:
The Turk and Pope will freat and threat,
the glorious Pharisee:
The Sectaries, and Scismatikes
will burn and banish thee.
The Epicures Cyclopicall
will grunt at thee like Hogs:
And all the godless Atheists will
against thee bark as Dogs:
But fear them not, whiles truth and faith
and reason can thee stay:
And for thy good success, to God
the Christians true shall pray.
Adieu therefore, prepare the minds
of men, to Contentation:
Especially my Contrymen,
I mean, the English Nation.
Vale.
To the true Christian and indifferent Readers, Peace, Contentation, and
Salvation in Christ Jesus, the Author and worker of the same.
THere is no man living under the Sun, which feels not the painful effect of
Adams sin, in the bitter sense of woeful miseries. But the godly and best
disposed persons, in whatsoever time, place, or calling they live, are
constrained with Simon of Cirene to bear the Cross after their Master
Christ. For why, there be not only ministered unto them many mighty causes of
Discontentation, through those grievous oppressio^s urged on them by the
ungodly, whom the Lord makes his rods to correct and punish his own when
they offend him: whereby the very heart of Mary is pierced with the sword, as
Simeon prophesied: but also the holy spirit in them is moved, through the
horrible sins and grievous offenses of the ungrateful against God, to drive
the mestiue mill of lamentation, with floods of weeping tears. All the which
(nevertheless) the Lord of mercy, and God of consolation, mittigateth and
moderateth in them that fear and love him, both by the inward comforts of his
spirit, and by the external ministry of his word. But as for the ungodly
(which are mere strangers from the womb, and naturally deuoyd of peace, like
the raging waves of the sea that cast out their own filth) the Lord suffers
Satan to rule them at his pleasure: he gives them over, to be destroyed in
their own lusts, as such of whom he has no regard, and suffers them to
speak lies, to profane his holy religion, and to sway in their abominable
sins, until their wickedness be full, when he is willing to require them
with his just judgments in displeasure. In the mean time, waxing proud, and
climbing on high through hautie presumption of the Lords long suffering (which
should rather draw sinners to repentance) they take no mean pleasure and
glory to oppress and offend the Lords little ones, and daily devise and
endeavor to disturb and trouble the profitable tranquillity and peace of the
Christian Commonweal: whereas placing the Lord Jesus on the high Pinnacle of
the Temple, they assaie how they might cast him down headlong, to the great
grief of the godly thereby offended, the dishonor of Christ, thereby
contemned: and the provocation of the God of heaven, thereby displeased and
urged to power down his terrible vengeance and unhappy woe upon them by
whom those offenses come. The state and condition not only of other times and
nations, but also of this our own, yield us too many pitiful examples of
this Argument. Wherein, we see how the rough raging waves of humane devises,
suggested and provoked by the high blustering winds of devilish Ambition, have
not a little molested and perplexed (I say not those Mariners that embarked
Jonas toward Tharsus only, but also) Noah and his family in the Arc: the
Apostles of Christ in the ship, and such as are passengers even in the same
vessel with Christ toward the Haven of happiness. Besides that, we may see,
how that on the very maine land, little David has very much ado to rescue the
seely sheep from the hungry Lions teeth. An house is much sooner thrown
down, then reedified: a City is not so easily reduced into unity and
concord, as it is divided. And surely there, where the distracted minds and
wandering opinions of ambitious heads, have not only contrived and commenced,
but also drawn forth and twisted the odious threede of Discontentation, we
may expect none other thing thereof, but utter subuertions of Towns, Cities,
Countries, Churches, Kingdoms, without speedy prevention. Therefore, this is
that, which in the account of all wise men is unhappy, and after the judgment
of all the godly, most ungodly, and the occasion of greater courage and
boldness to the foreign enemy, then the feeblest resistances of them that be
combined in true concord and peace.

But what is that to us? I would (indeed) that these things did neither touch
us, nor were found rowsting in our houses! but, when the vizard of hautie
conceit and proper integrity, is removed from our bleared eyes, we cannot but
plainly perceive, that the Church (notwithstanding the sincere preaching of the
word of God in the same) is intollerably burdened with Sects opinions, and
dangerous Scismes: and that the whole Commonwealth is no less unhappily
pestred with discords, dissentions, seditions, and many other huge enormities
and euilles of this last age and wane of the world, wherein the band of
Christian Charity is broken, he Truth (though so strong and above all) is
entertained but as a wandering Pilgrim on the earth, even with them that fawn
on her presence: the right faith is sorely contemned by them that have taken up
weapons under pretense to defend her: and the Prince of darkness grows
stronger and stronger without resistance, toward the end of his reign in the
world, who has vehemently enflamed and strongly provoked the enemies of the
Church against the Church: to the which they threaten fire and sword, and daily
endeavor destruction. And this to compass and effect, they have joined hands
with mighty Potentates, they have armed well waged soldiers, they have
prepared their strong barbed Horses, their swift Chariots, and a thousand
warlike engines, to the terror of the weak in spirit, to the affliction of
poor Joseph, and to the dishonor of the name of God: who laugheth them to
scorn, and knows well how to confound them in their own devises, when it
shall please him to express his displeasure toward them, and his love to his
children. But what inconveniences may ensue the present mischiefs, who knows
not, that has wisdom to discern thereof? and what good Christian would not
endeavor to stop and prevent the same? Therefore (though after many others, yet
with and among some others) to meet with those desperate maladies, and to
assay to prevent whatsoever greater evils may thereof ensue (according to that
mean wisdom and ability the Lord has given me) I have confected A
Preparatiue to Contentation: and made the same Applicatory to this our time,
Nation, and the present occasion. An Argument most necessary to be urged, and a
thing in earnest expectation of all good minds, within whom the holy spirit of
discipline is made sad and sorrowful, through the considerarion of the
manifold disorders and huge inconveniences of noisome Discontentation, and to
whose good natures, the true Contentation, is every way both profitable and
acceptable, in the fear of God, and honor of the Prince, (howsoever harrish
and unpleasant it seems to the taste of him that is oppressed with the humor
of singular conceit) as those potions which are in taste bitter and sour, may
be more wholesome for the distressed patient, then such as are sweet and
wallowish. And (indeed) although I could not be so brief as Phocian was in the
City of Athenes: nor (if I could) would I be either so copious as Demosthenes
with the Graecians, or so eloquent as Cicero with the Romans, to whose learned
immitatours I refer both the lapping up of plain things in obscurity, and
the handling of public controversies in ample discourses: yet have I wished
and endeavored to be rather modest with Paul, and charitable with John, then
impudent with Tartullus, and curious with Peter: hazarding al my credit and
ease, in regard of your profit and peace. Moreover, albeit I know well, that to
many of you, this my present Preparatiue shall be but like the glimmering light
of a Candle set in the bright Sun shining, having (indeed) little need of this
mean help: yet I persuade, that ye which love brotherly fellowship, fear
God, and honor the Prince, will not disdain it, but rather, that ye will be
the more ready upon this, and such like occasions, to stand up in the defense
of the truth against all erroneous opinions, vain devises, and synister
practices of man, as it best becomes you with all such as be of the household
of faith. Neither doubt I, but that also the sooner by the force of this
Preparatiue, the rage and rygour of the Discontented will be assuaged, the
domestical enemy in part, terrified, the seditious Adversary of our state
quailed, or at the least made ashamed, and the foreign foe the better observed
and resisted: that so, both in the one and the other, the Lord of heaven may be
worthily glorified. For these causes have I the rather published this
Preparatiue, the which also I pray and beseech you (Christian Readers) before
the Lord Jesus, and his holy Angels, to take in good part, and to construe
thereof indifferently, to apply it discreetly, and to use it in all points
charitably, for the better quiet of conscience, the peace of the Church, and
safety of the Commonwealth, in the fear of God: unto whose goodness, let us
daily pray for the true Contentation.

More yours then his own, in the Lord Jesus. I. C.

An Admonition to the gentle Readers.
WHereas it is said in the 6. Chapter, that the Number of the Beast is
contained in certain Hebrew and Greek words and voices etc. ye shall
understand, that the said Number, is to be gathered and made of the letters
and characters of the same words after the manner of the Hebrews and Greeks,
which use their Alphabeticall letters and characters for Arithmeticall figures.

Faults escaped.
Moreover, because it was not my good lot to be present at the printing of this
Book, there be therein too many faults escaped, for the which I am sorry, and
do beseech you gentle Readers either to constre all in the best sense, or else
to read or correct them thus.

In page 6. lin. 2. read thus Clh. mlc. ail. or thus, Calah. Melech. ael.

In page 64. lin. 1. supply these words omitted H Aitalih. cschr. chuh. which
ye may thus read ha Italy ceschar: chehunah. 1. lo: Italy is like a Prince of
the priesthood. Lin. 7. read ha. anosch cijhovah. Lin. 23. read Royh quohel ha
Romah.

In page 59. lin. 3.4.5. read it thus, years 666. expired: but chiefly from
the time that the Devil was let at liberty after the thousand years: that is
sithence the year of our Lord 1000.

In page 113. lin. 1. supply (No, thus have I said) etc.

rible confusions and woeful Discontentations.

The miseries of this last age of the world, under the reign of Antichrist.
2. And as all men of all ages before us have seen, and might the same
confess: so we also that live in these desperate and dangerous days, do now
see, and may also the same confess, that not only Heuah by her fall has her
conceptions multiplied, and her sorrows increased: but also the sons of Adam
have conceived opinions, travailed with mischiefs, and brought forth
iniquities, whereof (as such which have ploughed wickedness) they have reaped
wretchedness, drawing not only from Adam, by descent naturally, but also from
the Angel apostate, by immitation wickedly, the cankered humor of
Discontentation, to the provocation of the God of heaven, to the disquiet of
the Church, and to the shame of their own faces. Whereupon, the godly are
moved to ruminate Salomons conclusion, Eccle. 1.2. and 12.8.
Vanity of vanities: yea, and enforced they are to confess, that against the
inhabitours of the Earth, and of the Sea, there is a roll of a Book written
without and within, Eze. 2.10. Apo. 12.12.
full of Lamentations, Mourning, and VVoe: for that the Author of all
Discontentation, the Devil, is come down unto them, and has great wrath,
(yea more then ever he had) for that his time is but short.

3. For although this disco^tented devil, ever envying the state of the Saints,
has been long time (even from the fall of Adam, unto this day) busied, tripping
on the heel of the promised Seed: yet is he nothing weary, he gives not
over: but he continues as nimble, as subtle, as strong, as diligent, and as
terrible, as he was in the beginning of the world: and this waning age too
well proves the deepenesse and extremities of his most pestilent practices:
wherewith (poasting from coast to coast, Job. 1.7.
and compassing the earth round about) he strugleth with tooth and nail most
eagerly, and that often under the fair face of a bright Angel, to seduce,
draw away, and keep captive (as for his own) the Souls, which Jesus Christ
the king of righteousness by his conquest has redeemed. Such is his mighty
force! such is his mad fury! such is his eager bent! and to this purpose, he
uses such bottomless devises, as thereby (if possible it were) he would
deceive the holy chosen people of God.

So it pleases the Lord of heaven to permit and suffer (for a time) this
instrument of his wrath to rage in the world: Why God suffers the Devil to
rage in the world.
partly for the exercise of the Church in this her pilgrimage through the huge
wilderness of this world: that the godly being tried, may run unto his
mercy for comfort, 2. Tim. 3. Apo. 2.10.11.17.27. Augustine.
and by the same resist the enemy, and resisting, may get the victory, and
having the victory, they may be crowned: for were there not an enemy, there
could be no battle: Were there not a battle, there should be no
victory: and were there not a victory, there would be no Crown: Eccle.
1.13. and 2.26. Romans 1.21.
partly, has the Lord thus suffered this Enemy to reign over the children
of disobedience, and to rage in the world for the punishment of transgressions
and sins, for a scourge to beat and to humble the children of men, chiefly
them which knowing God, do neither glorify God, as God; nor be thankful in
their hearts for the benefit of his Son; but waxing full of Vanity in their
carnal imaginations, do walk their own ways in the lewdness of their
minds. But above all, that the highest God might be glorified, as well in the
horrible confusion and destruction of his proud enemies; as in the wonderful
delivery and salvation of his elected Saints.

4. To let pass the recital of a thousand subtle seductions and mighty
encounters of that grand enemy, which here to tell would be tedious and
irksome: what is he in all the world, that has not in one time or other of
his life, either felt or perceived his practices, his devises, his bent against
Christ, and his rage in the world? Beyond all other, his ways and means to
assault and annoy the Church of Christ, his Satanical shifts and devilish
conueyances, practiced by those his two mischievous miscreants, Covered.
Gog and Discovered. The two mighty enemies of Christ and his Church in the
world Reu. 12.1.
Magog: that is to say, the Pope, and the Turk, are plainly discovered. These
two, though they be enemies the one to the other of them, have yet consented,
the former covertly, the latter openly, to persecute and pursue with all
bloody cruelty, the mystical Woman and her son, now little less then a
thousand years, according as the Prophets, the Apostles, and Christ himself
have most truly foretold of them to come in this latter age and wane of the
world. Lo! such two outcast hands has that direful devil, to contend and
strive for him in his deadly quarrel! These, and such like Antichristian
persons (says Chrysostom) are the very weapons of the damned devil: for as a
man cannot do any thing against his enemy without weapons or instruments, so
neither can the devil without the ministry and service of such ungodly and
wicked persons, vex, persecute, and trouble the Saints of God in the world.
Lodolf. de vita Christi, Cap. 5.2.
These ungodly and wicked miscreants be indeed the powers of the devil,
without whom he cannot sow his wicked seeds in the world: for in the Saints
he finds no place. Neither has this subtle Serpent invented any fitter way
to combine Gog and Magog in league, and to reconcile Herod with Pilate, then by
the persecuting, the crucifying, the blaspheming, the tormenting, and vexing of
Jesus Christ in his members. Psalm. 2.1. and 83.56.
And therefore he has vehemently suggested, and furiously provoked the Heathen
to rage, the People to imagine vain things, the kings of the earth to stand
up, and the Princes to assemble together against the Lord, and against his
anointed.

5. But, to the great terror of all the ungodly, that thus oppose themselves
against the Lord and his Saints; and to the endless comfort of all his holy
Elect, we hear what he says: He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to
scorn: the Lord shall have them in derision: he shall speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure: yet have I set my king upon my
holy hill of Sion. Thus, Genesis 11.1.
though Nimrod that mighty hunter before the Lord, with his folowers, do
incite and stir up one another in this sort: Let us make brick,
Laterificemus. aedificemus.
and therewith let us build us a City and a Tower, whose top may reach unto
heaven: and let us make us a name: and will not be restrained from that, which
they have imagined to do: yet will the Lord God himself come down to visit
and confound them, with this meet allusion to their incitation: Descendamus.

Confundamus.


Let us go down and confound their language: and he will scatter them from
that place upon all the earth. Thus has the Lord God derided Sennacherib,
Pharao, Herod, the high Priests, the Roman Potentates, and all others, that
have exalted themselves and raged in the world against his Church. The whiles,
as the ship in the Sea, which after many tempestuous storms arriueth into the
haven of peace: and as the travailing woman, after many woeful throws, is
delivered of a son, to her exceeding consolation, so the Church of God,
stands; flourishes, and obtains at length that eternal peace which the
Son of God has purchased for his Saints, mawgre the tyranny, the
hypocrisy, and the Sophistry of the wicked world: and the horrible rage and
fury of that damned and discontented devil.

CHAP. II.
The practice of the enemy troubling the Church and the Commonwealth of
England. The ingratitude and discontentation of Englishmen.
WHy should we note only the general griefs, and point at that which seems
so far hence? Let us rather (as we be justly moved) draw homeward, and we
shall discry many miserable Vanities, Vanities in England.
(I say* not under the Sun, but) even here in this particular part of
Europe. I doubt not, but that the wise Christian will (as the wise Patient)
permit me with the Physician, The enemy (...) entered on our (...) Church, and
Commonwealth, and therein sown the seeds of discontentation and trouble.
first to display, and then to prescribe medicines for man's maladies.

Man's mortal foe, has too boldly intruded himself both into our Church and
into our Commonwealth, and by an usurped tyranny, daily disturbeth and
troubles the tranquillity and peace of the same. And therein men being
enflamed, are become in steed of reasonable and Christian, brutish and
profane: they are grown contentious, haultie, vainglorious, ambitious,
wrathful, envious, contumelious, gluttonous, covetous, faithless, and as
says the Poet, An unprofitable Charge of the earth, Telluris invtile pondus.
Homer.
whom neither one simple and right Religion can content or please: but, as
among the Philosophers, some Stoikes, some Epicures, some Academikes, some
Peripatikes: and, as of the Lawiers, some Cassianes, some Sabianes, some
Proculianes: and as among the Jews, some Iustitiarij.
Saduces, some Legis expositores.
Pharisees, some Operarii.
Essees: and as in their Universities, some Libertines, some Cyrenians, some
Alexandrians, some Cilicians, some Asians, etc: so now they excogitate and
invent diverse heresies or Sects, in their choice, of strange conceited
opinions of some certain persons, into the which, they like well to divide
themselves, Luke 15.28.
and travail therein (as in most intricate Labyrinthes) without any end or
perfection at all. In the mean time, they do (with that glorious Clergy of
the Jews) chower against the Church of Christ, and like unto that discontented
and most disdainefull Elder Brother, they will not vouchsafe to enter into the
house of joy and gladness with the yoonger Brother, there to rejoice in right
concord and contentation: though the Good Father himself come forth and very
gently and friendly entreat them to come in.

Eccle. 13.19. Hyena, is a subtle wild beast, that by counterfeiting ma^s
voice beguileth him. Luke 2.35. Lytta is the worm in a dogs tongue, that makes
him mad. Prou. 30.15.
For this purpose, Hyena tries every man's nature to the uttermost, Satan
sifteth Peter as wheat, and the very soul of Mary is so deeply pierced with
the sword, that except this mischief be timely observed, and the inconvenience
thereof wisely prevented, lewd Lytta will breed mad melancholy, and the
Horse-leaches two daughters that know not to cry ho, will devour and consume
altogether. For Lucifer being cast out of heaven, and having no power left him
to ascend thither again, lies like an unprofitable branch in the depth of
the earth, where he has enkindled such a fire, as cannot be quenched with
mighty streams of water.

2 In truth, we Englishmen (far beyond all other nations under the Sun) are
worthily occasioned with glad hearts and appeased minds to praise the name of
our most merciful God, for this so good a state of our Church and Common
wealth, as we have had, and yet do enjoy, under the most happy government of
our most Christian Princess Queen Elizabeth, whom the preserver of Princes
long prosper and protect: And we may pray, Isay. 39.8.
with King Hezekiah, that this Truth, that is to say, this quiet and peaceable
State wherein the light of Israel shines, may be continued accordingly. And it
cannot be denied, but that many good men in many ages (whose blood has
confirmed their witness of Christ) have groned for, and yet could not see such
blessed days: and that, when by the goodness of God, the godly in their times
did happily see these and such like heavenly commodities and blessings granted
to men, they were most glad, and congratulated in the same, with right heavenly
praises unto the Lord.

Alas, why is it then, that now men wax weary of prayer? weary of Gods
service? weary of the word of God? weary of true obedience? weary of peace
and quietness? weary of goodness? weary of God? and how comes it to
pass, English men be not content with their great blessings.
that English men in lieu of foreign pleasures, do disdain their home
commodities? How is it, that so many of them have such unquiet consciences,
such strange conceits, and are never contented with whatsoever good thing the
Lord God in his mercy enricheth them? May they be accounted a chosen
generation, an holy priesthood, and the children of the most high, that so yern
and murmr against him in their hearts every day? But unto them (me thinks)
I hear one applying this fable: The Ass and the Ape do both complain: the
one, for that he has not horns: the other, because he wants a tail: to
whom, the Moule or want thus answers: But if, that ye did well consider of
my miserable blindness, ye would not so complain of such your want. Such as
never felt the bitterness of thraldom and bondage, do not acknowledge the
rare benefit of freedom and liberty. But if these persons did well think on
the misery of the Nations and Countries near about us, and of the infelicitie
of our forefathers, wanting indeed those blessings which we have, or might in
this our time enjoy, and they with us; they would gladly content themselves in
peace, and express their grateful minds to God our heavenly father; for all
the great goodness that he has granted unto us, and to them, in the
abundance of his mercies: yea, they would heartily praise the living Lord for
his benefits, Psalm. 107.8.
and preach of the wonders that he has wrought for the children of men. Men
be forgetful of benefits, and also of old afflictions.

Genesis 3.1. Luke. 16. 2. Pet. 2.4. Jude. 6.


But they remember not the wife of Loath, which was turned into a pillar of
Salt, nor Adam and Heuah, which were both thrust our of Paradize, when they
began to be discontented with those pleasures which the Lord had allotted
them there: nor the rich-man in hell, who at length wished to be eased when it
was too late: nor the Angels, which forsaking their first estate (in the rage
of their discontentation) were cast down headlong and reserved to the
judgment of the great day, in everlasting Chains of darkness: All these
examples are blotted out of their memories. They have also quite forgotten all
the afflictions of Joseph, and all the ever he did for them in Egypt: as the
men of the third and fourth generation after, know not their former friends
and benefactors, nor make any inquiry of their ancient good deeds showed to
them and their Fathers. And they have clean banished from their minds, all
those great good works and notable wonders, that the Lord has declared on
their fathers, and on many of them also, in leading them safely through the
Marian floods with the preservation of their heavenly food and spiritual
provision, to see and enjoy these calm Halcyon days of peace and Christian
prosperity. But, Iuuenal.
being pearked up with the present long leagues, tranquillity, peace and
prosperity (which as we see has also inconveniences) they be grown therewith
so wanton, Omnes cum valemus bonum consilium aegrotis damus. Ter.
that, as they which be in health do give good counsel to them that be sick,
which counsel themselves in any their extremities can scarce follow: they can
easily promise now being in health (as they think) not only to themselves
continual rest, quietness, and a defense against all dangers: but also to
others that be in trouble, they proffer the like security without God: as if
themselves were Lords of Hell and Death, and had all prosperity, and all
troubles in their own propper power to dispose: then the which, nothing can be
more foolish, nor more repugnant to the wisdom of God.

3. Now, in equal censure, Afflictions be sometimes meeter for men, the^
prosperity. Scipio.
what may be thought meeter for such persons, then bitter wars, hard
afflictions, miseries at home, enemies abroad, (as once Scipio judged of the
case of the Romans, for whose better prowess and diligence, he thought it
right necessary, that Carthage remained an enemy unto them.) Neither has the
Lord God himself permitted his people so to stincke on the dregs of
prosperity, but has rolled them with many afflictions upon such occasions,
as thereof he has said, by the Prophet Hoseah: Hos. 6.14.
I will be unto Ephraim, as a Lion, and as a Lions whelpe to the house of
Judah: I, even I will spoil, and go away: I will take away, and none shall
rescue it; I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
fault and seek me: In their affliction, they will seek me diligently.

Of these things, if they once tasted but one dram of the bitterness, They be
fools that acknowledge not present benefits, but negligently let them pass
away.
(with those other Nations) they would soon change their minds and opinions,
as in a case suddenly altered, and acknowledge of what great blessings they
have deprived themselves, through such their monstrous ingratitude. Till then,
they shall be numbered up among those fools, that confess not a good thing
whiles they have it in their hands, but, being thereof deprived, they do most
earnestly (but all in vain) crave and desire it. Ier. 8.14.
The Lord God grant this, that we be not put to silence, and that we have not
water mixed with gall to drink, because we have offended him in these our
discontentations: then may we seek for comfort against sorrow: but sorrow
shall come upon us, and heaviness shall vex our hearts, that the health of the
people shall not be recovered with the help of all the Physicians or triakle
in Gilead (as the Prophet says) The wise will ponder these things, Psalm.
107.43.
and they only shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord toward them
and their children: Genesis 49.14.
but Isachar, though a great boned Ass, shall couch down between two
burdens: and being deprived worthily of that good thing which they sometime
unworthily possessed, they shall be moved to confess, that God was among
them, and they knew it not. Genesis 28.16.


CHAP. III.
The mal-contented Papist, his practice, purpose, and daily expectation, how he
must be pacified.
THe maleuolent disposition of the traiterous limbs of Gog; lurking here in
secret (as the cursed Cham, between Shem and Iaphet) is such, Genesis 9 25. Iud.
14.15. and 16.5.
that with the Philistines, they do not only plough with Samsons Cow, to
find out Samsons riddle, but also do labor to persuade Dalila, to search out
the strength of Samson, to shave off his hairy locks, and to betray him into
the hands of his mortal enemies. Under a cloak of civil obedience, Mat.
22.21. Ioh. 19.12.
they pretend Caesar's wealth; but yet, Brutus and Cassius were the chief
conspirators and murderers of Iuli-Caesar, but Octauius revenged it on them.
Plutarch. Sueton. Luke 19.14. Genesis 29.41.
reteining in heart their inueterated malice against the Religion, government,
and the state of Caesar, they do with Brutus and Cassius contriue shrewd
matters, not considering, that God (when it shall please him) will raise up an
Octauius, to reward them in the end. But this thing being least thought on
(whatsoever they show) they like and love Caesar, as they did their lawful
Lord, who sent a message after him, saying: We will not have this man to
reign over us. And their love and affection toward their brethren, well
rese^bleth that of Esau toward his brother Iaacob, who wished for his fathers
funerals, that he might be revenged on Iaacob his natural brother. To effect
and hasten all these matters, 2. Sam. 15.
Absolon with his fair flattering tongue, begins to steal away the hearts
of the people from David their lawful King. Achitophel with his craft and
subtlety, is ready to counsel unthriftily, the high Priests offer largely, and
finally, Judas Iscarioth is the man (or rather the devil) which is appointed
the executioner of this tragedy, and he (for his own filthy lucre) intends
to betray his liege Lord (yet with a kiss, under a show of love and
friendship) into the high priests hands, to be crucified. This is that they
gape for, this is their expected Iubelie and golden day, wherein they determine
as bloud-thirstie butchers, to embrew their servile hands in sovereign and
innocent blood: and thereupon to become pricks in out eyes, whippes to our
sides, scourges to their own Nation, and destructions to themselves, and their
own mothers children. These be (indeed) the fruits of their holy vows and
religious profession! With these and such high points of diuellsh service,
they adulate their most holy father, and think that therein they please the
most high God, and merit to themselves eternal life.

Zopirus.
Zopirus the Persian (as Herodote reports it) though an Heathen man, was
contented to sustain the cutting off, of his nose, his ears, and his lips, to
further the enterprise of his liege Lord Darius, against proud Babylon: the
like (in a manner) is said of that famous Ulysses, Ulysses apud Homer.
for the behoof of his Country men against the Troyans: But these persons,
being enemies to God, rebels against their Prince, and false Traitors to
their own Nation, are pressed and ready, Dolon Verg. li. 12. Aeneid. Psalm. 137.
rather with Dolon the Troyan, to betray all, and with the dissembling Edomites
to provoke the enemies of Israel against Israel, (when an opportunity shall
be offered them) then to sustain any loss, or to do any good for any of
them all.

The Papist his obedience.
2. Albeit these crafty Foxes so long as they be tied in Chains, seem
familiar and tame: yet let them once catch an opportunity of escape, and they
run with all haste to the wood again. And although these ravening Wolves
being fast haltered to the tree, can counterfayt the little scholars in the
School, Obedientia vulpina, and lupina, non columbina.
and learn to spell P.a.pa^.t.e.r, te^r: yet when they shall see the
harmless Lambs leaping within their reach, they will quite forget to join
sillables, and to say pater: but they will cry out, Agni, Agni, Lambs,
Lambs, and catch them for their pray.

Isa. 29.15.
But woe unto them (says the Prophet) that seek deep to hide their counselles
from the Lord: for their works are in darkness, and they say, who sees us?
and who knows us? your turning (in your devises) shall it not be esteemed,
but as the Potters claye, and that within a very short time? Yea, I doubt not,
but that the Lord will so work, that they shall be, (as they have bin
heretofore) prevented of their bloody purpose, by this, that the Lord our God
will persuade Samson to take these Foxes, Judge. 15.4.
and to tie fier-brandes to their tails, and to send them home to the spoil
of these uncircumcised Philistines: that thereby they may feel the force of
that fiery law. Deuteronomy. 33.2. Judge. 15.16.
For one Samson (one true Nazarite, having the assistance of Gods spirit)
shall do more with the seely Iawe-bone of an Ass, then a thousand of those
uncircumcised Philistines, with all their worldly power, fleshly devises, and
devilish practices. Neither shall their devises prosper, so long as God is
with us, as to whom the Prophet says in the name of the Lord: Isa. 8.10.
Break down (O ye people) and ye shall be broken down: hearken to, all ye
of far Countries: Muster ye, and ye shall be broken down: Prepare ye, and ye
shall be torn in pieces. Take your counsel together, yet shall your counsel
come to naught: determine the mattter, yet shall it not prosper: for God is
with us.

And if that the horriblenesse of our own sins, and a general Apostasy
from the Lord, We are to beware that our own sins occasion not our enemies to
triumph over us.
provoke not his justice to a deadly hatred of us and our lives (as the
transgressions of Ephraim and Judah, before the Babilonicall captivity provoked
him, (which the good Lord in his mercy forbid) the Rusticus expectat d^^^
defluit (...)
Rustic may gape long enough for the stay of the stream, which yet will
run without fainting. Isa. 29.9. Romans 10.19.
So let them wait (being provoked to envy by them that fear God, and that
live in true obedience to his Anointed) until their spightfull eyes fall out,
their yearning bowelles break, and their faint souls be swallowed up with
vain dreams and frivolous expectations. In the mean time, let them not
imagine, that their close iuglings in hucker-mucker, Isa. 29.16.
can cover their treacherous devises and conspiracies from the Lord, when he
sees all: nor can bleare the eyes of his Anointed, when Elisha deciphereth
all: nor may couch that in secrecy from the sight of all men, when they
themselves (much like unto them which dance in nets) demonstrate all.

It is more hard to root them out, then it is to find them out.
3 Though Caesar said of the Scythians, that it was an harder thing to find
them out, then to vanquish them: yet of these may we say, it is nothing so
difficile to find them out (notwithstanding their great dissimulation and
monstrous hypocrisy,) as it is to root them out, or to expel them. For as
the Iebusites presumed to dwell with the children of Judah in Jerusalem, Joshua
15.63.
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem could not cast them out from among them: so
presume these Gogites to inhabit among the true subjects, and are so friended
and favored, so rooted and established, as they cannot easily be expelled and
cast out. Howbeit, whether they be in preferment before many others, as Hama^
was in the Court of Ahasuerosh, or be put under tribute, as the Canaanites
were under the children of Manasses and the Ephramites, How to know them.
they may easily be discerned (as I said) and that partly by their faces, and
partly by their languages, besides their common practices, in like sort as the
trees are known by their leaves and fruits. For first their cankred hearts
cannot but yield forth at time and times such a countenance as Cayn sometime
expressed toward Abel his brother, Genesis 4.
when the Lord said to him: Why art thou angry? and why is thy countenance
abated? If thou do well, shall thou not receive? and if thou do evil,
lies not thy sin at the door (to be seen?) The Samaritanes knew that
Christ was a Jew by his face, which was full bent toward Jerusalem. Luke
9.53.
But on the other side, we know these Gogites to be not Jews, not true
Christians, but bond men to Pharao, and captives to Nabucadnezar, by that that
their faces are not bent toward the land of Canaan, nor toward Jerusalem,
but they look backward toward Egypt, and toward Babylon, as such as rather
love bondage before freedom, and captivity before redemption. And that some
which have been happily drawn from thence against their wills (as those Jews
who having liberty granted them to return home with Zorobabel, did set the
land of the living at naught) they do yet look with stern faces and eager
countenances against their brethren, and wait but for pasports to be sent
packing. And surely an happy thing were it for the right Israelites, if they
were once gathered and cast out, being as noisome to the true subjects as
stones, brambles, and bushes, in the Lords vineyard, Isay 5.
and as tares that grow in the field among the corn.

4. Besides this, they decipher themselves by their tongues: for when they
should say Schibboleth, they say Sibboleth, and their languages be mixed with
Asdod, Judge. 12.6. 2. Esr. 13.24.
Ammon, and Moab, neither are they able pronounce in the right Jewish language.
Whereas the talking of the right Christian is wisdom, Eccle. 27.11.13.
their talk is abomination, for thereby they endeavor to profane the glory
of the Gospel, to blemish the credit of the Lords anointed, and to corrupt the
manners of the true subjects. By the which our most noble sovereign Princess
is justly moved to complain of them, as Moses did of those old Israelites,
saying: I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck, while I am yet alive with
you this day, ye have been disobedient to the Lord, and how much more will ye
be disobedient after my death? Such (indeed) are they found to be, and known
well to be, howsoever they change their suits to dazzle men's eyes, of whom we
may beware, for whiles they be not expelled, by their unhappy example and
leaven of ungodliness, many simple souls laden with sin, stand suspensiue in
the matters of religion: and others make question, whether it were better for
them, either to lurk at home in hope of longer life, Verg.
or else with Achilles to batter the walls of proud Troy in the ieopardie of
life. Others think, that though Nabucadnezzar which captiued them, is cruel
and grievous to be served, yet he which comes after him (namely Baltsazar)
may be a bon companion for their purpose. 2. Cor. 39.22
And all the whiles they consider not that God will stir up Cyrus the Persian
to invade proud Babylon, and to destroy Baltsazar with all his lascivious
concubines, and carnal companions. Neither is there any wisdom, strength,
The desire of the true Protestant, for the pacification of those papists.
counsel or policy against the Lord God. To strive against God is to labor
against the stream.

5. Oh that the Lord would yet persuade them as he did Iaphet, to dwell and
serve gladly with good contentation within the happy Tabernacle of Shem. Oh
that he would either in his justice extirpate and root out all cankered
Cananites from his vineyard, Genesis 9.27. Mark. 7.26
or that he would grant them grace in time to reuert and repent with the
Syrophenissan, and quiet their giddie heads, if not for any love to the Lord
and his anointed, yet (at the least) for fear of that fearful lot which he
casts forth for their choice and heavy portion which will not repent. Oh
that the learned and wise magistrates in the commonwealth, and the faithful
pastors in the church, would both join together, duly to observe, rightly to
detect, and timely to expel these blasphemous Gogites, that the glory of the
son of God be not derogated, and the safety of his anointed be not
endangered through the pestilent practices of such troublesome tares, neither
that the sound sheep be infected through the contagion of scabbed Goats.

This is Solomon's counsel, or rather the advice of the holy ghost in such a
case. Cant. 2.5.
Get us the foxes (and to teach that this must be done betimes, yer much hurt
be done, he says again) yea the little foxes that hurt the vines. Also Paul
perceiving that certain false Apostles were crept in among the Galathians whom
he had now long time taught in the truth of the Gospel, and that they had
corrupted the pured doctrine to the offense of the church, Gal. 5.12. Mar. 9.43.
he prescribed them this medicine. Would to God (said he) they were cut off
which disquiet you. And our savior teaches. If thy right hand hinder thee,
cut it off and cast it from thee. Such a thing respects the Poet.

With knife cut off (dispairing cure) the foistred sore: Immedicabile vulnus
Ease recidendum, ne pars syncera trahatur.

That it those parts which yet are sound, may hurt no more.
In this business, if both the magistrate and the minister shall be negligent,
yet will the highest of all come down to visit his Church, and send
deliverance to the same by some other means (as Mardochai said to Hester) when
they and their families shall no be holden guiltless. Hest. 4.14.


CHAP. IIII.
The Papist has taken a bad cause in hand.
ALbeit that my purpose be not to handle controversies, yet would I with all
mine heart, that the folly of them that hang on the train of Antichrist should
be decyphered, that thereby the sooner (if it please God) some of those
seduced souls may change their opinions, repent and pray to the Lord to grant
them now at the length to know the truth, 1. Tim. 2.25 26.
and that they may escape the snare of the devil, and be turned from the power
of darkness unto the father of lights: that they may no longer trust to the
hypocrisy of him that mustreth himself as an Angel of light, Act. 26.18.
and by that art (which Cyprian calls deuilish) seeks to deceive the
heedelesse: I have therefore thought it good to say somewhat else,

The cause of the mal-content papist is wicked.
2 As for their cause (as it shall be both proved and plainly seen (God
willing) it has in it neither any authority of the word of God, nor
probability of truth: for their striving and struggling is to extol the Bishop
of Rome, and to defend the Supremacy of his usurped authority, against
Christ, his Apostles, Martyrs, and truth. Indeed the Apostle says: Let every
soul be subject unto the higher power. Romans 13.1, 2.
But what power means he? the power of the Pope, or of any other Bishop? No,
but such a power as of right has a sword to take vengeance, and to the which
tribute is of duty payable, (as by the words of the same Apostle following in
the same chapter may be proved.) But the right of the sword and tribute belong
only to Emperors, Kings, Princes, and civil Magistrates in their places, and
not unto the Bishops, Priests, and ministers of the word, as both by the
doctrine and example of Christ, Ioh. 18.11. Mat. 22.21.
and the doctrine and testimony of his Apostles Peter and Paul may be easily
learned. Therefore it follows, that every Soul, that is to say, every person,
whether of the Laity, or of the Clergy, and so every Pope, and every Bishop
of Rome, ought to be subject to the Emperor, to the King, to the Prince, and
to that civil magistrate especially advanced and authorized to reign in and
over that province or place where he dwells. This is that power (says
Chrysostom) to the which the Apostles, In Romans 13. hom. 23.
Prophets, and Evangelists are subject on earth. Who are they then, that would
exempt the Bishop of Rome from his subjection to this authority. The sword of
the minister.
The minister of the word of God (who in the Primative Church was called a
Bishop or a Deacon) has a sword also to fight with: howbeit, the sword of the
spirit only, Chrysostom. in ep. ad philip. hom. 2.
that is, the word of God, a meet weapon for the ministers of Christ thereby
to strike their enemies, and to defend themselves. The ministers weapon Ephs.
6.17.
And to take away all color of that usurped power which the Lord did foresee
they would in time affixe to Peter's authority, he sharply rebuked Peter,
because he had drawn a sword, Mat 26.52.
and commanded him to put it up into the sheath. Bern. de consideration. ad
Eugenium. Com. super decr. Car. d. 10. c. Quoniam.
This thing Bernard the Abbot well noted, and therefore when Pope Eugenius,
whom the Romans had expelled, would for that injury in all have be revenged
with the temporal sword, calling them serpents, dragons, and beasts, he advised
his holiness to use more moderation, writing unto him (among other things)
thus: Aggredere verbo, sed non ferro: that is: Set on them with the word, but
not with the sword. Again he said: If thou will have both the swords, thou
shall have neither of them, declaring thereby that his right weapon was the
word of god, and not the Emperors sword, and that it was all unmeet for him
to use the^ both. Howbeit, these mal-contented persons, taking on them the
guide of others, as the very ministers of Antichrist, Antonin. par. 3. tit. 22.
ca. 5. de max. pont. papa.

Aug. Selenchus de primatu.


do endeavor to seduce and lead away the ignorant souls from God to the
devil. And this that they may the sooner contriue and compass, they be
incited and provoked by the father of lies, not only to extol and advance the
Bishop of Rome above al other Bishops, patriarks, and ministers of the word,
and entitle him the universal Pope, In the twelfth year of King John, the 2.
legates of the Pope did assoile all English men of their homages to their king.
So Pius quintus the Pope entending the same sent his Romish Bull
the vicar of Christ, the successor of Peter, but also to prefer the same
bishop to all kings and Emperors, yea, to all the angels of God. To his
holiness they labor to draw away the minds and hearts of al subjects from their
lawful princes, and to take away al obedience of the members of Christ from
their true head, who in regard of the popes honor, are promised by him to be
assoiled, not only of al homages, services and fealties that they owe, and by
the word of God and their own oaths, are bound to yield, and to do unto their
lawful kings, princes, and governors, but also from their obedience to the
Gospel, in such sort as they do, into England by John Felto^, the which he
placed on the Bishop of Lo^dons gate, importing the excommunicating and
deposing of the Queens majesty, and other traiterous conspiracies against her
highness person. Deuteronomy. 17. Mal. 2.7.
which labor to pull away souls from God to the devil. And they would, if they
could, draw down those Saints that be placed with the Lord in heaven, and set
them not only thrals on earth to serve to their madness, but also with the
devil in the depth of hell.

3 It is true, that the priests mouth shall keep wisdom: that the people are to
enquire the law at his mouth: that the apostles be sent forth into all the world
to preach the gospel to every creature, that they be the ministers of Christ
and disposers of the secrets of God, and that they are in their places to be
heard, reverenced and double honored of al them to who^ the benefit of their
functions and labors do appertain: howbeit, that the priest have bin preferred
in authority to their kings, and that bishops have governed, Act. 1.26. Romans
10.15. 1. Tim. 5.17.
or may lawfully govern and bear rule in all things above emperors and
princes, it cannot be proved in holy scriptures, but the contrary is found.
Aaron the priest was his time most beautiful, having that right Vrim and
Thummim, Priests are not preferred to princes in the word of God.
he shined in knowledge, perfection, and glory, wherein therefore he might be
preferred to all the priests that succeeded him, unto the time of Christ, yet
did he not exalt himself in government before Moses, Moses was preferred to
Aaron.
who in that respect, was glorious before Aaron. Moses was not only the prince
and Lord of the people, but the prince and lord of Aaron too, notwithstanding
that only in ye priesthood, being his peculiar office, Aaron did excel. Moses
appointed and substituted under him judges and officers in their places: he also
anointed Aaron ye priest and filled his hand with the book of the law, Exodus
28.41.
and full sacrifices to be offered to the lord. And, as touching the authority
and office of either of the^ in their places, the lord said to Moses, Thou
shall speak unto him, that is, Exo. 4.15 16.
to Aaron. and put the words in his mouth. Again, he shall be unto the people, as
thy mouth or spoksman, and thou shall be unto him Lelohim, for God: that is to
say, thou shall be his prince or captain, or a wise cou^seller and full of the
spirit of God, 1. Sam. 10.6.9.
(for indeed the Lord furnishes and beautifieth the right godly Princes and
Magistrates with many rare ornaments and divine gifts, far before other
persons.) So likewise in another place God said to Moses: Lo, I have made thee
Pharaos God, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet. Which Rabbi Abraham
thus expounds. Act. 7.1.
Thou shall appear before Pharao like an Angel in dignity, and Aaron shall
be thine interpreter: then not his head, nor his king. Besides this, Aaron
submitted himself to Moses.

Exo. 32.24


when Aaron had offended about the Calfe that was made, and perceived that
Moses was very angry for the same, he humbly submitted himself, and said: Let
not Adoni, my Lord, or my Master, be angry. This was in those days when the
Priest was most glorious in his place, and to whom all the rest in succession
should be conformed. Deuteronomy. 17.15 2. Cro. 29.20.23.
Moreover, that the Priests have bin placed by their Kings, and that they have
been subject unto them in all things next unto God, and that they have not
been preferred before their Kings and Princes at any time, in rule, power, and
dignity, in the days of Iosophat, Hezekiah, Josiah, David, Solomon, and such
other, the Histories of those times do sufficiently witness. According to the
which, and after the writings and examples of Peter, Paul, and the ancient
fathers, as well in the prime as in the chief sway of the church, the lawful
prince enioied his authority, he was chiefly heard and obeyed in all things
next under God: and that, whenever the Bishops, priests, and ministers of the
word neglected their offices, and offended against God and the laws, it
apperteined to their Prince to reprove them, to correct them: to whose Censure,
they have been likewise contented to submit themselves, after that example of
Aaron, who yielded himself to Moses. Fabian. Cornelius. Bishops of Rome. Greg.
B. of Rome, submits him self to the Emperor. L^. 3. ep. 61. ad Maurie lib.
3. ep. 64.
Thus Fabian and Cornelius, both Bishops of Rome, submitted their lives to
Decius the Emperor: So Gregory the first of that name, was contented to
submit himself unto the Emperor Mauritius, whose humble servant he called
himself, and granted himself obedient to his commandment. And further he
said in a certain Epistle, that Christ had given power to the Emperor to
bear rule, not only over soldiers, but over Priests also. This was a little
before the time that Boniface the third aspired to the Popedom. And long after
this, Pope Leo 2. yielded himself unto Jews the Emperor, Leo. 2. q. 7. Nos si.
and said, that also al others under his jurisdiction, should be judged by his
Majesty, for the correction and redress of all faults and disorders, knowing
well, that the Emperor was in authority the next unto God, and less then God
only: Tert. ad Scapul.
For so (says Tertullian) is the Emperor greater then all men, while he is
less then the only true God.

4. This is that chief Power (indeed) to whom the charge of all the people is
principally committed. The obedience to this power, the Apostle calls a
good-worke: but they that obey not, do contemn this good-worke, and are
contrary to the will of God. 1. Tim. 3.
Peter the Apostle says: Submit your selves to all manner Ordinances of man,
for the Lords sake: he speaks this, 1. Pet. 2.13.17.
as well to Bishops and Ministers, as to others: and he shows the
pre-eminence of the Prince before all others, when he adds: Eite Basilei, os
Hupereconti. Whether it be unto the King, as having the pre-eminence: either
unto Rulers, as unto them that are sent of him. And this he shuts up with
this reason. For so is the will of God. 2. Chro. 24.20.23.24.
He says again, Fear God, honor the King. And this is according to that
example of the priests, Levites, and the people of the old time, being
obedient to the commandment of their kings. There is none example in the
scripture for the popes supremacy.
If in all the holy Bible, there were any such pregnant example, testimony, or
argument, for the defense of the Supremacy of the Pope above the emperor, and
of other clergy men above their lawful Princes, oh God, how they would
triumph then! But we find not any such matter, and therefore their courage
might soon be allayed, if they were not too impudent. Moreover, it cannot be
denied, but that many wise and godly Kings and Princes have gladly preferred
and advanced beyond some others, many learned, wise, grave, and divine
Prophets, Bishops, and ministers of the word, for their own better
instruction, counsel, and comfort. Great. ca. 24. quaest. 1. offic.
Howbeit, that therefore the Bishop of Rome only should be preferred to all
Kings and Princes in the world, advanced above all other Bishops in the Church,
yea, and exalted indignity beyond the Angels of GOD, (as if he were very
God. Anton. in part 3. Sum. mayor. ti. 22. c. 2. de potest. papae.

E^. ca. 3. de Iur. and 4. de potesta. clauium, and ca. 5. de. maxima potestate
papae.


) Surely all the reasons that Antonine and others whatsoever, have yet produced
for the confirmation thereof, are weak and frivolous. There has been no
little adoo to contriue and bring this to pass, that the Bishop of Rome should
be the only head of all other Bishops and Priests, and that the Church of
Rome should be the mother of al other Churches.

Great contention arose and continued between the Bishops of Constantinople
and Rome, about these matters, for an hundred and twelve years at the least,
until that in the end, Boniface the third of that name, a man too ambicious
and crafty, Phocas made the bishop of Rome supreme head above all other
Bishops.
obtained the pre-eminence under that bloody Phocas, (which had a little
before killed his Lord and Master Mauritius the Emperor, with his wife and
children, and so gotten possession of the empire) about the year of our Lord
605. A very meet author for so godly a practice, which has also in none
other wise been continued, then it first commenced and took his original,
that is to say, Vrspergensis in Phoca. Sabellicus. li 6. M. Palmerius.
by cruelty, murder, and hypocrisy, to the final ruin and decay of the
Emperors honor and estate.

5. If this authority be fathered on Saint Peter, who sees not how far
they go astray from all truth, and that they would also dazzle the eyes of them
which see full clearly? The authority of the Pope cannot be fathered on S.
Peter
If Peter had been the chief among the Apostles in order, yet who can prove
that he was so in office? And if he had been preferred to all the other
Apostles both in order and office, (as we find it not, but rather that he was
only equal with them) yet, who can justly say, that Peter was ordained of
Christ to be the universal head of the Church, that Peter had authority
given him to make the Bishops of Rome chief Bishops over all others by
continual succession: that Peter himself was at Rome, and was the Bishop of
that City, and that he dyed at Rome. Surely all these things they shall
never be able to prove. But if they could prove all, yet with what face
presume they to extol their Pope above Kings, Princes, Emperors? It is
certain, that Christ Jesus commanded his Apostle Peter to pay tribute to the
Emperor, and commanded that Caesar should have his due: Saint Paul in many
places exhorts men to be obedient to the Emperor, and Ordinances: 1. Pet.
5.2.2.
and S. Peter has not only taught submissio^ to the same as before is said:
but also sharply reproved them, that, being placed in the Church, would seek to
govern and rule over their brethren, as Lords of the Heathen. Lact. de diui.
praemio, li. 7. cap. 25.
But the Pope, notwithstanding this, being advanced by crafty, indirect, and
devilish means, far above his worthiness, as that Tyrant, which of all
others is to be detested and abhorred, (as it shall be further plainly proved)
does usurp dominion over all Bishops and Churches, and above all Princes and
people, in such tyrannical sort, as yet never any Tytan or Heathenish Tirant
has don, sit hence the creation of the world. And surely, so both Paul, and
also Peter, would boldly tell him to his face, if they were now living on the
earth. Phocas. Boniface 3.
When Phocas for his own safety, profit, and glory, yielded to this, that
Boniface the Bishop of Rome, should be the chief Bishop of the world, he
little thought of the inconvenience that would grow thereof: or, if he had
thought thereon, yet regarded he rather his own present honor and gain,
then the good of them that succeeded him. And albeit, that the Germane Emperor
Otho. 1. had given his oath, Otho. 1. Platina. Pope Ioh. 13.
and made fair promises to Pope Ioh. 13. to be dutiful and beneficial to
him and his Church, upon this condition, that he would be a means that he
might be received into Rome, and there crowned Emperor, with the title of
Augustus: yet, when afterward he saw the pride of the Pope, and considered into
what thraldom he had cast himself, he could hardly bear it in the time of
Pope John: but afterward, perceiving that Benedict the 5. which succeeded John,
Benedict 5. Summa. Conc. fol. 320.
would not willingly yield and surrender one inch unto the Emperor, of that
which his predecessor had arrogated, he made no more of the matter, but quite
expelled him the Sea, and constrained the Clergy to admit and receive Leo 8.
into his place. Leo 5. Otho. 3. Grego. 6. R. Reynold de vit. imparat.
The like mind retained Otho 3. who having preferred Gregory 6. to the Sea,
and hearing that John had expelled him, and usurped by the counsel of one
Crescentius, he levied an Army, entered into Italy, took Rome, killed
Crescentius, put out the eyes of the usurper, and restored Gregory again.

6. Although the Nicene Council (for orders sake, Nicen. Con. ca. 6.7. d. 65.
quoniam. and Mos antiq. Item. in Antioc. Con. ca. 9. q. 3. d. 6. per sing.

Hier. ad Euge. d^st. 93. ca. Olim.


and for the better government of the Church) thought it right good, and
permitted that Metropolitanes and Archbishops should be placed in and over
diverse provinces: yet was not that in any other meaning, but that
nevertheless, every Church should retain and enjoy it own honor. But that
one man should be exalted in the Church above all Patriarchs, Bishops,
Ministers, yea, above all Kings and Caesar's in the world, to whom only all
persons of whatsoever estate, condition or order, should yield and obey, as to
their universal and Supreme head, the said Council never gave one lote of
consent. There were constituted 3. Patriarchs in the 3 parts of ye world: Asia,
Africa, Europa, and the B. of Rome was, but as one of the three Patriarchs.
Eccle. hist.
In this Council was the Bishop of Rome numbered among the Patriarchs, as one
of them, but not above any one of them. And it was decreed, that he should
have no greater authority nor jurisdiction in his own Province, then either
the Patriarch of Antioch, had in his Province, or that the Patriarch of
Alexandria had in his Province. And besides that, if he did not perform his
duty in his place, that he should be reputed for neither a priest nor a
patriarch. The great Aphrican council worthily rejected the proud petition of
that ambitious Prelate of Constantinople, Aphrican Conc. apad Carthag.
which sought to exalt himself so contrary to the word of God, and expressly
decreed, that the Bishop of that See, though he first spoke in sundry
Councels, and used to take the first seat in the congregation, should not (for
all that) be called Princeps Sacerdotum, aut Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid
huiusmodi, that is, Did. 99.
the Prince of Priests, or the chief Bishop, or by any like title, but
only the bishop of the first See. Neither, that the Bishop of Rome should be
called the Universal Pope or high Priest. And thereunto Gratian adds the
words of Pelagius, Pelag.
to all other Bishops. Nullus Patriarcharum, Vniuersalitis vocabulo vnquam
vtatur: The title of universal pope or bishop was odious in those days.
quiasi summus patriarcha vniuersalis dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen caeteris
derogatur, Sed absit hoc a fidelibus, hoc sibi velle quempiam arripere. Let not
any one of the Patriarchs (says he) at anytime take on him the name of
Universality: for if the chief Patriarch should be called the universal
Patriarch, the name of Patriarch would be taken away from all other. But God
forbid that any Christian man should be willing to take on him this title.

Aug. li. 3. ca. 3. de baptismo contra Donatist. Neque enim quisque nostrum,
etc.
And Augustine against the Donatists to that end, recites the words of
Cyprian, spoken in the Council of Carthage: for neither has any of us (says
he) made himself a Bishop of Bishops, or a chief Bishop, nor constrained
our fellow brethren to the necessity of obedience with a tyrannical fear.

Gregor. 1. withstood this title. Epist. 35. ad Joan. epis. Constantinop.

et epist. 38. li. 4.

in An, dom. 590.


Gregory also (sometimes Bishop of Rome) very sharply reproved John the
Bishop of Constantinople, for that he presumed to usurp this Title, well
near a thousand years ago, and said in an epistle which he wrote to him,
that the King of Pride, namely Antichrist, was near. Moreover, he reproved
Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandra, for that in the preface of an epistle
which he had written unto him, he called him the Universal Pope, he charged
him to do no more so, for that his desire was to prosper and excel in
virtues, and not in Titles. Neither accounted he that thing to be to himself
an honor, wherein he acknowledged that his brethren did loose their honor.

7 Howbeit, they would willingly recure this deep wound that Gregory has
given them that so proudely aspire: but how? Note (says one) the humility of
Gregory, whiles he reprehendeth the Patriarch of Alexandria: Comment. super,
decret card. Alex. d. 96. Ecce.
he might have added* mark the ambition of our Popes, which impudently aspire
and advance themselves not only in all titles of worldly glory: but also in
all power, rule, and dominion over their Churches, above Kings, Princes,
Emperors, and all that is called GOD. He says not so, but Note Gregory's
humility: yet thus he says. Instruit Gregorius ad humilitatem Romanos
Pontifices, He teaches the Roman Bishops humility.

And hereof was it, The Pope is called a servant, yet holds he authority
above kings
that the Pope (though fore against his will) yielded to be called Seruus
Seruorum Dei, and to call the other Bishops brethren. But so accepted, partly
for the conformity of Name, as Christ called his Apostles his brethren, and
said that himself was their servant: partly, for the equality of merit: and
partly, for the condignitie of order (as they say) and not in any wise
concerning the authority of jurisdiction, which yet he reteineth wholly to
himself. But yet, Gregory him self made it not so light a matter, as that
the gloss or glaunce of a Commentor, or any such accidental tytles (for only
shows) could appease so mighty a tempest. For he said plainly, and denounced
it with no small vehemency of words and gesture, that the title of Universal
Bishop, was A proud, a sacrilegious, a profane, and an Antichristian Name. And
he said moreover, that whosoever takes on him that name, he is Grego. his
opinion of this Title: Universal Pope.

Nomen arrogans, sacrilegum, profanum, Antichristianum est.

This Gregory spoke when the B. of Constan. would be so called: and therein he
prophefied of the Pop. of Rome, that after him should indeed arise and be that
very Antichrist, whose forerunner this B of Constant. was, as this title
declared him, by the testimony of Gregory: About the year of our Lord, 600.
Aeneid. li. 3.


the Prince of Pride Lucifer, an Apostate, and the heraulde of Antichrist.
These words he uttered at what time Mauritius the Emperor would that the
Bishop of Constantinople should be entitled (as he would be indeed) the
Universal Pope. As if he would have said in a word: This is Monstrum and
portentum Mundi, That Monster, and only miscreant of the world. Neither has
Platina let so to entitle some of the Roman Sea, in regard of their
Satanicall doctrines, and abominable lives: as unto whom, that hobling verse
which sometimes Vigil composed of that huge Cyclops (a very semblable Monster)
may not unaptly be applied, howsoever the Poet seems by way of prophecy to
point at this person.

Monstr' horrend' inform' ingens,
cui lumen ademptum.
A Monster, ouglee, from shappen,
huge, and starke-blinde.
8 And as he has been entitled, Papa.
so has he revealed himself to all the world in the time appointed. At the
sight whereof, men may call him, as well worthy, not Pappas which is a father:
but may well say of him with admiration in his own language, Papae, noua
figura oris: Behold that strange and new formed thing, such, as the like was
never seen before! And so is he termed by some of his own, Admirabilis Papa,
and stupormundi. The Pope admirable, John Ianuen. Peter Egid. in dict. Papa.
Anorlicus. What is meant by a monster.
and the wonder of the world. That is called a monster, which either much
differs from Nature, or that which is far degenerated from the natural
form. But lo; what can be more strange, and further off from the nature of a
true Christian, then that a man professing Christianity, should (in contempt
of the word of God, and of all holy Religion) challenge, exact, and usurp
among Christians an ungodly power, both over the Church, and the Common
wealth, with more then a tyrannical or heathenish force? Is not he therefore
a Moster? What can be more monstrous, then that a man should be
metamorphosed from an humble person, to a proud tyrant: from a father of
peace, to a worker of wars: from a pattern of honesty, to a myrrour of
luxury? to be changed, from a meek sheep, to a ravening woolfe: to be
turned from godliness to Atheism: from Christianity to Epicurisme: from the
child of God, to a member of the devil? If the light become darkness, Alas,
how great is that darkness? What husbandman, would not wonder, that after
his great labor, the best Grape that he planted, should yield him sour
Grapes, and the cleanest seed that he sowed in his field should be overcome
with tares? Amongst who^ Antichrist was borne. Eras. in 1. John 2.
And who can but marvel, that Antichrist, that is, a person contrary to
Christ in life, in doctrine, and studies, should have been begotten,
conceived, borne, and brought up in the Church among them (before all others)
that professed the holy Religion of Jesus Christ? If the holy Apostles, and
Disciples of our Lord wondered not a little when they perceived by the doctrine
of Christ, that the Scribes and Pharisees, which were said to sit in Moses
Chair, did very little or nothing resemble Moses: but rather were contrary
to him in their lives, doctrines, and studies: then worthily may we wonder at
this Universal person, which is said to sit in Peter's Chair, and is called
the Vicar of Christ: when we see, that he is so contrary to Peter, as ever
Simon Magus was, (except only in this, that he denied his Master; would have
hindered his Master; did sleep when he should have watched in his curious
noting of John; and in such other his sins and imperfections) yea, and so
contrary to Christ, as Judas was, which betrayed him? Christ said of Judas,
that he was a devil, though Judas came to kiss him: and he called Simon
Peter, Satan, and commanded him back behind him, when he would have hindered
him in the performance of his duty. Now, what to judge of such a person, which
resembles the Jews in their hypocrisy, and Judas in his treachery, and
Simon in his worldly devises, and Magus in his sorceries, we may resolve
without long deliberatio^, having thoroughly viewed the image of his counterfeit
holy life, and so we may call him a monster in deed.

9 Again, The Pope teaches a contrary doctrine and law.
what place has the doctrine of Christ in that new formed persons mind? what
more oppugneth the law and the gospel, then his erroneous and false glosses,
decrees, Canons, traditions, doctrines? Christ teaches Truth: but the Pope
diuulgateth unwritten fables and lies. Christ requires faith to justification:
but the Pope extolleth man's merits. Christ preaches peace, charity,
brotherly love: but the Pope moves up discord, wrath, hatred, wars, murders.
Christ commands us to be obedient to the law of God: but the Popes following
the hypocritical Pharisee, makes void the law of God, through his own
traditions. Christ expressly forbids, that any man should either ad unto the
word of God, or withdraw any thing from the same: but the Pope most
presumptuously now adds, Irenaeus. li. 4. ca. 25. de tradit. sen.
now detracteth, and thereof gives such interpretations, as his own fantasy
affoordeth, as the ancient heretics have accustomed to do. Christ commanded
his apostles and disciples, to search the scriptures, to write unto the
churches, to preach the Gospel to all creatures, and to publish that openly,
which he taught them in secret: but the Pope forbids the translation of the
Bible into diverse tongs, wherein the people may read the same: he inhibiteth
the preaching of the gospel, and shuts out the people of God from the
reading, hearing, and co^ferring of the scriptures and word of God: and
imitating that ungodly Antiochus king of Graecia, and that profane Julian the
Apostate: he straightly charge, that the common people shall neither read, nor
write, nor talk, nor sing, of Religion, or of any part of the word of God,
excluding them out from all participation of those holy mysteries and precious
jewels, as dogs, and swine, making houocke of Christian people, whom he
proffereth to Satan to be led blindfold into errors and damnation. Our
Savior Christ has both by his word taught, and by his own example commended
unto his Apostles, and Disciples, 1. These. 2.4.
all due obedience to Princes, and a willing subjection to all manner
Ordinances of man for the Lords sake: But the Pope, exalting himself above
all that is called GOD, binds all Kings and Caesar's, to yield and submit
themselves to his Censures, to be ruled by his Canones, and Decrees, to
follow his devises, his Traditions, his Councels, his Laws, yea, to kiss his
foot, and to humble themselves under his footestoole. A special note of
Antichrist, in that he exalts himself above Kings, and Princes, which in
regard of their high place and dignity next unto GOD, are called gods.
Finally, Christ has taught and commended unto us, all Christian virtues, as
fasting, prayer, humility, chastity, holiness, religion, and the true
worship of GOD in this world: The Pope under pretense of Religion,
overthrows all religion.
but the Pope being choked with that subitle evil, that secret poison, that
hidden venom, that show of virtue, that moath of holiness, I mean hypocrisy,
under a cruel Art, he heweth down virtue, with virtues sword: under a show of
fasting, he overthrows the true fast: under color of prayer, he abolisheth
all holy invocation: under the name of humility, he fostereth the hautiest
pride: under a shadow of virginity, he banisheth all chastity: under the
title of holiness, he practices all abomination: under the fair face of
Religion, he assayeth to throw down all Religion: and under the profession of
Christianity, he persecuteth Christ in his members. Is this that Successor
of Peter? is this that Servant of the servants of God? is this the right Vicar
of Christ? Nay rather, this is the persecuter of Peter: this is that
abominable Tyrant, the which (as Lactantius once said) only imagines
mischiefs, Lanct. de dion praem: li: 7. ca. 25.
and banisheth that light which sustaineth the world: this is that Antichrist
pointed at by Saint John, Apoc. 13. Therefore we may thus argue and conclude
against him.

Who so is most contrary to Christ in doctrine, in studies, in life,
especially of them that pretend the greatest holiness, and are chiefest in the
profession of Christianity, the same is that Antichrist. Apoc. 13.

But the Bishop of Rome, amongst all them which show the greatest holiness,
and are cheifest in the profession of christianity, is most contrary to
Christ in his Doctrine, in his studies, in his life.

Ergo, the Bishop of Rome is that Antichrist. The Mayor cannot be denied:
and the Minor is sufficiently proved by that which has been in this chapter
produced. Therefore they also that strive to support him, are the very
ministers of Antichrist, as their own Gregory would tell them, Greg. li 4.
Epist. 30. and 38.
if he yet lived among them.

10. And it is likely enough that the ancient Sibyle, whom Lactantius
remembers, expostulating the old Graecians for their Idolatry, in the
exaltation and worship of earthy Tyrants in the place of God, did therein also
by the way of prophecy, point at them and their folly, which extol, proppe
up, and honor this monster.

O Graece: thy Gods of Tytanes proud
what mean thou thus to feign?
Why dedicatest thou thy gifts
to dead men thus in vain?
To Idols thou do sacrifice,
Alas: what fury brought
This erroer in? the great Gods Law
the whiles contemned for naught!
Psalm. 12.9.
But this is most certain, that the holy Psalmist accounts the Children of men
most worthy of rebuke and shame, for the exaltation of such ungodly persons.
And the Lord God himself deriding their folly, and abhorring, their great
madness, feeds them with wormwood, and drencheth them with the water of
bitter gall. The tempest of the Lord goes forth against them in his wrath, and
a violent whirlwind falls down upon their heads. Ier 23.15.
And this have they gotten for their reward in the setting up and defending of
this their Idol. It shall be good for them therefore, who have bin dreanched
with those venomous dregs of the fornication of Antichrist, to forsake him in
season, to purge out the venomous humors of their abominations, by a true
repentance, in the blood of Christ, and henceforth yield themselves obedient to
God, and dutiful to his anointed (our most Sovereign Princess) in all
gratitude and right contentation, and that before they feel the intolerable
effect of the heavy curse of almighty God, and be constrained to bear their
open reproach and shame among men.

CHAP. V.
The Bishop of Rome is yet more plainly deciphered to be that very
Antichrist which was revealed to Saint John. Apoca. 13.
THe Bishop of Rome (as before it is declared) making the greatest show of
holiness in the world, as if he were not only a Saint, or the son of God, but
even God himself: has entitled himself with many holy, high, and wonderful
names, and set himself fourth, as one most ready and best able to help and
relieve the Church of Christ, both in the world and out of the world at every
need: Howbeit, when he is thoroughly considered of, and wisely observed touching
his doctrine, his studies and his conversation, the former semblance and show
of high holiness, shall be so shadowed and blemished in his person, that
nothing shall be found inhabiting and resting within him indeed, besides deep
hypocrisies, great abominations, and horrible sins. And that this fair show
of Angelical holiness is nothing else, but a guile to deceive the Saints of
God, as the Woolfe which is cladde in sheep clothing, the sooner to take and
devour the seely sheep. But as the ravening woolfe be wrayeth himself by his
voice, by the manner of his feeding, and by other woluish evil qualities, to be
no sheep, but a wolf, an enemy to the sheep: even so I say again, has the
Bishop of Rome sufficiently deciphered himself by his false doctrine, by his
devilish practices, and his abominable life, behauior, and fruits, what he is
indeed, that is to say, that very Antichrist, to the horror and dread of all
Christians. Neither were al men so blind in the time of his appearance, Ioh.
Hus in An. Dom. 1415.
but that by many of them he was plainly perceived and abandoned. When
Johannes Hus in his time had found him, he could not be silent: and when
Erasmus had descried him, he pointed at him directly with his finger, Erasmus.
as who would say, I have descried that hidious monster, and lo there he
sits in the Temple of God, They espied. Antichrist,
as a God. Having spoken of the dignity of Christ our high priest, he says,
Cum huius dignitate, compone vnius Templi Pontificem, qui Sacerdotium vnius
anni, Inparaph ras. In marc. 1 1.
ab impio rege turpi precio redemerit. Confer nudum Jesus caput, cum huius auro
gemmisque Lucente Tiara. With the dignity of Christ, compare a Bishop of one
Temple, which has bought a priestood lasting but for one year, of a wicked
King, for a filthy sum of money. Compare the bare head of Jesus, with his tire
or Myter, all glistering and shining with gold and precious stones, etc. But
when that Martine Luther in the same age, Luther.
being about one hundred years after John Hus, and in the year of our Lord
1515, had espied the Romish iniquity, Bulleng. in Apoc. 11. heming. Euchir:
ca. 10. de Ordine. Ecclae.
he did not only point at, and discover him, but also very earnestly
thencefoorth pursued him in hoate chase, maugre the loud lowing of all Romish
Bulls, and the mad malice of Apollyon that destroying Devil.

And thus have John Wickliffe, and Zuinglius, and Ochinus, and Bucer, and
Bullenger, and Munster, and Calvin, with many other right learned and famous
men in the Church, judged of the Bishop of Rome, and written against his
abominations, nothing fearing to depaint him forth as that Antichrist so much
spoken of, and to pursue him to the death, with the most profounde Arguments of
Gods word. Neither may we think that any of those men before named, have
been the first Authors of this opinion: but that Irenaeus, and Arnulphus, and
other holy Martyrs and Fathers of the Church, which lived full many years
before them, have in their times considered and after a sort revealed the same:
whose words and testimonies thereof here to write, would be too tedious, and
to no purpose, being by others already so often and plainly noted.

Moreover, it is certain, that Baptista Mantuan, Laurentius Valla, Franciscus
Petrarchus, Marsilius Patauinus, Hieronimus Sauanorola, and Ioachim Abbas, who
led their lives in the City of Rome, even in the face of the Pope, and his
Cardinals, and were sometimes partakers of the same faith and Religion, have
in their wrytings much complained of the wickedness of the Church, and did not
only under certain similitudes, and dark speeches covertly, but also
sometimes in plain terms openly declare to the World* that Antichrist
reigned in the succession of the Popes, or among the Bishops of that Sea. And
of this we also are not ignorant, that from the Popes holiness, there is
gone forth a far greater hypocrisy into all the world, then that which
went forth from the Prophets of Jerusalem into all the land of Judah. Ior.
23.15.
Howbeeit the most part of all men (having their eyes enchaunted with his
sorceries, and their hearts hardened through unbelief) can neither feel, nor
perceive such a thing, until that they, with the Kings of the earth, and
earthly minded men, have deeply pledged him in the venomous dregs of his
fornications.

666 The number of the beast.
2 Others also having good understanding, have reckoned the number of the beast,
and have found it to be (as John said) Arithmos Anthropou, The number of
man, that is to say, either such a number as may be by man's reason
understood, or such a number, as concerns man, as that Antichrist should
be a man, or in and among men. And that his just number is, six hundred
sixty and six. In the which number indeed is contained, not only the Time
when Antichrist should be borne, when he should be revealed, and how long he
should reign in his might and great pomp: but also the nation, the place, the
pride, the ingenie, the power, and nature of Antichrist.

How to reckon the number of the beast.
Some have taken the time to commence, from the Conception of Christ, and from
thence to be reckoned unto the year of our Lord, 666. And this reason they
have for it, that as every virtue has to it a vice opposed, and against the
light is set the darkness: so Christ finds his Antichrist. Christ and
Antichrist are in the world at one time.
Christ was no sooner conceived by the holy Ghost, but by and by Antichrist
was conceived by the spirit of the Devil: the one in the womb of the
Virgin: the other in the hearts of worldly men.

Indeed, it is true, if this place be understood of that general
Antichrist. For there is not only a Christ, to save, but also an Antichrist
to destroy, as the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent. But it is
certain, that Saint John by prophecy poynteth at some special and notable
Antichrist to come afterward. Bull. in Apo. 13. con. 611 Aret. in. apo. 13.
And in that respect, the learned have taken the supputation of the time from
the Revelation of this mystery to Saint John in the Isle of Pathmos, the which
was (after the judgment of Irenaeus) in the latter time of Domitian the
Emperor, who was a mighty persecutour of the Christian Religion, and a
contemner of Christ. A Christ not. anno. 97. ad anno. 764.
And this was (as Eusebius says in his Chronicles) about nintie and seven
years after the Nativity of Christ. Now from thence, if ye reckon 666.
years, that is to say, unto the year of our Lord 764, The begetting
conceiving, etc. of Antichrist.
and divide those years into six several ages, or times, (accounting for
every time 111. years) ye shall find, 1. How that Antichrist was begotten: 2.
How he was conceived: 3. How he was formed: 4. How he was quickened: 5. How
his Dame groaned toward the birth: 6. How he was borne and brought forth.
Then from thence again, if ye reckon 666. years, that is to say, unto the
year of our Lord 1430. and part that number into six other ages or times, ye
shall perceive therein: 1. The noursing: 2. The growing up: 3. The policy: 4.
The practice: 5. The power: 6. The chief pomp and triumph of that Antichrist.
And so ye shall have for his begetting and conceiving 222. years: for his
forming, and quickening 222. years: for the groaning and birth, 222. years:
for his nursing and growing, 222 years: for his policy and practice, 222.
years: and for his power and chief glory, 222. years: being in the whole
1332. years. And I think my conjecture probable enough, that the Angel in
Daniel, 12, 12. speaking of the two times: and also of the 1335. days, rightly
aimed to the end of those 1332. years, being about the year of our Lord
1429. For if from this number 1335. ye take 3, and then divide the remainder
into 2. parts, according to the rule of Mediations, ye shall find the very
number 666. in either part. Thirdly, that which remains of the time, whether
half a time, or the dividing of the time: The declination and ruin of
Antichrist.
or part of a time (as the Lord in his secret council has decreed it)
concerns the detestation, the pursuing, the wounding, the languishing, the
waning, and the ruin of that Antichrist. And this, who so waiting comes to
behold in the end of those 1335. days, is accounted happy, Dan. 12.12
by the testimony of the Angel. Therefore, as we doubt not, but that we are
happy whom the Lord has reserved to these times, wherein that Antichrist is
loathed, is pursued, is wounded, does languish, droope, and run daily
toward his ruin and utter decay: so do we also expect in faith, that (as the
Lord has promised) for the chosens sake, the time of his reign shall be
shortened and that his final destruction is near at hand.

That Antichrist whereunto John poynted is found in Rome.
3 What things have been wrought and done in the Empire, and Sea of Rome, as
manifest notes of that Antichrist, and well worthy the observation, within
every one of those several times or Ages, I mind not here at large to
discourse: but after a few words thereof, to refer them, that are willing
to understand the same, unto the general Councels, the Centuries, the
Ecclesiastical histories, the Chronicles, and writers of those times. It is
most certain, When the mystery of Iniquity began to work.
that this mystery of iniquity began to work effectually, even then, when
S. John saw these things revealed unto him, and wrote of them unto the seven
Churches in Asia, and said also in his Canonical Epistle, that even then was
that last time, wherein that Antichrist (before prophesied of) should come; and
so from thence continued working from age to age, unto the year of our Lord
764. At which time the monstrous Babe was borne at Rome, The birth of
Antichrist.
and (after a sort) revealed in the world with no little wonder. And then
forthwith the Bishop of Rome began to forget all Christian humility, the
former poverty of the Saints, the ministry of the word, and such like; and
(being enriched with those great rewards which king Pipine, and other princes
bestowed on him) he exalted himself beyond measure, and gladly embraced that
proud name Universal Bishop; which was given to Antichrist by the tyrant
Phocas, Phocas named the child.
whereof also Gregory had before prophesied, when he said, that the Bishop
of Constantinople which before that, usurped that Name, was the forerunner or
herald of Antichrist: meaning that he, that should next after him accept of
the same title, was indeed that Antichrist. Neither has there been any other
(besides the Bishops of Rome) sithence that time, that has challenged and
retained this Title. From thence forth the Pope exalted himself more and more,
in the church above al other Bishops, Decret. Nicol. 1. papa. D. 21. in tant.
and Nunc. D. 22. c. 1. d. 9. S. 1. Rom d. 96. vniuam.
Patriarks, priests, ministers, preachers: and also departing from that
obedience which belonged to the Emperor, he usurped on the seculer and civil
power: so much that the Emperor decreased in authority, which the Pope
arrogated to his own holiness, and in process of time, presumed most impudent
(as a malepert babe) to face his Lord the Emperor, De Maiorat and obed.
Solit. Carrion in Juno.
to thrust down his crown with his foot, and by way of an odious comparison,
to prefer himself to the Emperor, as the Sun is preferred to the Moon in
beauty and brightness, with the abuse of that place of Scripture: The Pope
would no longer obey, but rule over the Emperor. Genesis 1.16.
God made two great lights: a greater light to rule the day, and a less light
to rule the night. Yea, beyond all this, he advanced himself in all things
above Peter, whose successor he is called, and whose sword he would bear,
above Christ Jesus, whose vicar he is supposed, and, (if not above, yet) equal
with God, a servant unto all, whose servants he was named. Lo here was that
departing of which saint Paul prophesied, 2. These. 2.3. For now the christians
for a great part revolted from the faith of Christ, and from their obedience to
their kings and Emperors, and willingly yield themselves thrals and bondmen to
the bishop of Rome: that is to say, to Antichrist, that child of Perdition,
their rebellious head and Captain.

4. Surely, if we consider those 111. years which immediately followed ye
former 666. years, The noursing of Antichrist.
and were referred to the noursing time of Antichrist, we shall perceive how
prettily he pearked up, and began to discover himself in the church of Rome.
And by that age and time we shall easily consider and judge of all the ages
succeeding: that is to say, by the consideration of this noursing time of
Antichrist, we may conjecture of his power, policy, practice and pomp. About
the end of those former 666. years, Adrian 1. An. 764.
in An. Do. 764. Pope Adrian the first, occupied the Sea of Rome, and held the
same about 23. years. As this Pope exalted himself above his brethren, and
hunted after the riches and glory of the world: so also he was a great
Idolater. In this Popes time was holden the 2. Nicaene Synod, Worshipping of
Images.
which the Greeks call the 7. general Synod, in the reign of Irene and
Constantine her young son. In this Synod by the commandment of the Pope,
fortified by the power and authority of the Emperor, Basilius, the Bishop of
Ancyra, Theodorus Cyrus, the B. of Myron, and Theodosius the B. of Amorie, Sum.
con c. fol. 277. Basilius Theodor. 9.
and some other bishops, were constrained to recant their opinions against ye
worshipping of the Images of Saints. And in the said Synod it was decreed,
Theodosius Bishops of the Ephesians.
by the commandment of the pope, and the consent of the said Irene, that
Images should be restored and placed in the churches, that saints should be
worshipped as the sons of God, that their relics, and the ashes of the
martires should be reuere^tly honored: that also was then and there confirmed
by a general consent, which Phocas had before that time commanded: namely, that
the B. of Rome should be the highest in authority over al other bishops, and yt
the church of Rome should be the head of al other churches: and that whosoever
spoke or taught contrary to this decree, he should be anathematized and
condemned. Terasius patriarch of Constantinople,
In considerato^ thereof Terasius, then patriark of Constant. which was present
at that Synod being demanded by the popes commandment, whether we would consent
to these and such other matters which were contained in a certain epistle which
the Pope had written to the Emperor and Empress: he, fearing what would ensue
the contrary, answered in these words. Nos patrum, praeceptis imbuti, Sum.
Council. fol. 277.
sic confessi sumus, and confitemur, concordamus, and vim, Literarum Lectarum
confirmamus, and Imaginum picturas, secundum priscam patrum traditionem,
recipimus, and has desiderto nostro adoramus. That is, We being instructed in
the precepts of the Fathers, have so confessed, and do confess, concord, and
confirm the force of the Letters, which have been read: and the pictures of
Images, according to the ancient traditions of the Fathers, we do receive,
and the same with all our desire we do adore. These and such like notes of
Antichrist, appear in the Roman Bishop, even in the noursing time of the
Babe which (as ye heard before) was commended in the days of Pope Adrian,
Adrian. 1.
the first: 666. years from the act of his conception, and was continued unto
the 777. year of the same, about the year of our Lord and Savior, 875: that
is, unto the latter time of Pope Adrian the second, Adrian. 2. John. 9.
and at the beginning of Pope John 9. which succeeded the said Adrian 2. Both
these Popes hunting eagerly after the kingdom and honor of the world,
worshipping strange gods, usurping authority over all Bishops and civil
magistrates whatsoever, Cent. 9. ca. 10.
stirring up and broaching bloody wars, commanding diverse errors,
idolatries, and superfluities to be used and observed for their own honor and
filthy Lucre, did rather increase, then any way let or diminish the iniquity
of that place. Neither unlike unto these, were all the rest that succeeded them
in that See, as namely Martine 2. Agapetus, Adrian 3, Basile, Stephan 5.
Formosus, Boniface 6, Stephan 6, Romanus, Theodorus 2, John 10, Benedict 4, Leo
5, Christopher Sergius 3, Anastasius 3, with others: unto the year of our
Lord, 986. and the year of Antichrist, 888.

5 All this was yet in the noneage of Antichrist, The time of the thousand
years.

Apoc. 20.23.


and within the compass of those thousand years wherein Satan was bound up
from seducing the Saints of God. Apoc. 20.2. But it seems very strange that
Antichrist could be gotten in the Church and brought forth into the world,
within this time of Satan's restraint and thraldom: were it not that the Lord
had permitted this Deceiuer to work the mystery of iniquity, and to seduce
by strong delusions, them that would not believe the Gospel. And if that
Antichrist presumed to be so malepert in that time of his nonage, what may we
think that he did then, when he was come to his full growth and power? that is
to say, the end of those 1000. years, at what time his cursed Sire was let
loose to deceive the world. Although by the 1000. years, may be understood all
the time of the free preaching of the Gospel, and light of the word of God,
whereby the devil is restrained his liberty: yet may we not imagine, but that
as the Lord has appointed years, days, and times, in yt which he has
wrought and does work, and bring things to pass for the comfort of his chosen
people: so by 1000. years, and 1335. days, and by this number 666. and such
like, he would stir up the godly to a due consideration of his providence, and
a diligent searching out, and trial of the truth of his word, which performs
al things yt he has foretold us by the Prophets in the due time. A notable
stay to our faith, and comfort to our souls. And indeed, after the full
expiration of a thousand years, being reckoned from the birth of Christ,
which bound up the devil unto the time of Pope Siluester the second,
Siluester 2.
who (as it is written of him) gave himself to the devil to be made a Pope,
and by wicked Arts aspired to the Popedom, wherein he never served God, but
daily served the devil: then the devil raged indeed in the Papacy, like a
ramping and roaring Lion, lately let loose from out of his Den, and so
continued (by the sufferance of the lord) for the little season, Apoc. 20.3.
that is to say, unto the end of those latter 666. years, about the year of
our Lord 1430. In and by all the which time, to the end that he might seem
holy and most glorious, and not to do any manner of hurt then, The policy of
Antichrist.
when he did most harm and villainy; and that the deceived world might not
perceive his treachery and legerdemaine, he took away from the people the
light of the Gospel, without the which the world could not but perish, that
being blinded and nooseled up in ignoance and gross errors, they might not
be able to discern between truth and falsehood, and being terrified with his
excommunications and tyrannous cruelty, they might take on them the mark of
the Beast: and then hearing none other doctrine delivered to them, but that
only which tended to the exaltation and worship of the Beast, and the
destruction of Christian souls, they might believe that not Jesus Christ, but
the Pope only, could shut up the Gates of hell and death from them, and open
unto them the door of heaven with Saint Peter's keys, which they thought he
alone had in his power and possession. Hereof it ensued, that the seduced
souls worshipped him with all holy reverence, Names and Titles attributed to
Antichrist.
honored him as a God, and accounted him worthy these and such like high
Titles: vz. The most holy Father, the head of the Church, the Prince of
Priests, the Universal Bishop, the Popes holiness, the Lord of Lords, the
Kings of Kings, the Vicar of Christ, the Successor of Saint Peter, the God of
the Earth. And he has been taken among them of that Religion, for his
Primacie, as Abel; Bernard. cons. li. 2. ad Engen.
for his government, us Noah: for his Patriark-shippe, as Abraham: for his
order, as Melchizedech: for his dignity, as Aaron: for his authority, as
Moses: for his judgment, as Samuel: for his power, as Peter: and for his
anointing, as Christ. Whereupon his Legates also and proud Cardinals and
Prelates were advanced, not only in the seculer affairs equal with Kings and
Princes, but also in the Church above them and all others. And hereof was it,
that the Clergy gave him their first fruits and tenths, and daily remembered
him in their Masses and Orisons, that every man that had fire made within his
House, was contented to pay his Romescot and Peterpence to his holiness, and
that the more part of all persons, then deemed their lands, Money, Plate,
Jewels, and such things as they had, best bestowed, devised, and disposed,
(cheefely at the time of their departing out of this world) when with the same
they could be persuaded by their ghostly Fathers, to purchase from the Pope,
Indulgences and pardons of their sins, and promises of releases out of the
feigned fire of Purgatory, by Masses, prayers, and superstitious observations
after their death: then the which there was never any deceit and treachery more
heinous and devilish: whereat the devil laughed, and was most glad, that by
such a mean he could so multiply his members, and enlarge his kingdom with
the service of so many dammed souls.

The wounding of Antichrist.
6 Now within this age, and toward the latter end thereof, that notable member
of Christ, John Hus the Bohemian, and that worthy preacher of the Gospel, John
VVicliffe the Englishman, John Has Ioh. VVicliffe
did both preach and write against those enormities and abominations, Sir John
Oldcastle.

Lord Cobham.

Anno Dom. 1413.


for the which they were both condemned for heresy, by the counsel of
Constance, and most unjustly martyred. For the like Sir John Oldcastle, the
Lord Cobham was martyred. And very near unto this time, Hierome Sauanarola
taught in Italy, that the pope of Rome was that very Antichrist, for the which
Alexander 6. caused him to be cruelly burned at Florence. Hierome Sauanarola.
Yet the Lord let not to stir up others that should (as faithful
witnesses) declare his truth, Anno. Dom. 1499. An. 1517.
to the discovery and wounding of the man of sin, and to the shame of the
devil. Among others, Martine Luther preached against the Popes indulgences and
pardons, Martin Luther.
he wrote an epistle to pope Leo 10. concerning the same argument, and called
many things in question, touching the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome: for
the which he was also troubled and condemned most falsely for an
Arch-heretike, who nevertheless preached the Gospel, wrote many-bookes, and
prospered under the happy defense of that noble Frederike Duke of Saxony.
Frederick the Duke of Saxonye.


Soon after this, not only the said duke of Saxony, Philip of Hess.
and also Philip the Landgraue of Hessa, Germany.
with all Germany, forsook the Bishop of Rome, and refused any longer to obey
unto his false and erroneous traditions: and the whole state of religion was
altered among them: but also Clement the Pope, Pope Clement.

Charles 5.


grew contemptible in the hearts of the Emperor Charles 5, and other Princes:
for about that time the said Pope (notwithstanding his pomp and glory) was
assaulted by the duke of Burbone, Duke of Burbon. Polid. Virg. de prodi. li. 1.
and driven to the Castle of Angelo, where he was besieged, and constrained as
a prisoner; in the conceit whereof, and through some other such pearcing
wounds, he shortly after ended his days, and gave a farewell to all
happiness. England also, about this time, England.
groned to be eased of his intolerable yoke; and in the year of our Lord,
1533, and the 25. year of the reign of that most worthy king of happy
memory Henry the eight, Henry the eight king of England.
King of England, in his high Court of Parliament, an estatute was concluded
and made, which authorized the said king, to be supreme head of the Church of
England, Graft. in Chron.
next under Christ: whereby also the Pope, and all his College of Cardinals,
with all their Indulgences and Pardons, were utterly abolished out of England.
In this Parliament were given to the Kings highness, the fruits and tithes of
all dignities and spiritual promotions, which before that the time were paid
to the Pope and his Clergy.

7 Thus the beast was daily pricked, The fall of Babylon.
and pierced, and Babylon was ruinous, and fell more and more. For, many other
mighty pensions and payments, taxes, and exactions, were withdrawn and
detained from the Popes holiness; diverse Monasteries, Frieries, Abbaies,
Nunneries, Colleges of Idolaters, and Cells of Superstition, were thrown down
to the ground, and made desolate: the pomp and glory of Antichrist now being
at the full, by these and such like means, was wonderfully abated: whereby he
languished, drooped and drew toward his death. For in this time, the clear
light of the gospel being preached, which had so long time bin shadowed with
obscure clouds of errors, Satan was seen where he rousted in the church of
Rome, to the loath of all good men: and that old Serpent which had deceived
the world, was by ye powerful word of God haltred up again, and that child of
perdition was pursued, and in eagre chase so near tired, and the chase so
continued, that he shall (I hope) shortly be forced to give over, and yield to
utter confusion, and Babylon shall be laid waste: which the Lord in mercy
grant for the comfort of his people, and his own high glory.

The continuance of the reign of Antichrist. Mart. in Chro. Sigebertus.
Platina. Ranulph. li. 5. cap. 32.
8 There be some which by this number 666. have noted the continuance of the
reign of Antichrist (and that not without sound arguments) from the time of
Pope John 8: otherwise Pope Johan (being indeed a woman, which dissembling her
sex, and at length (by the wicked society of a carnal Cardinal) was
begotten with child, in the travail and delivery whereof, she died in the
open assembly) in Anno dom. 857: unto the days of Pope Leo 10. in An. do.
1523. Others have accounted the time from the days of Pope Benedict. 3, in
Anno. dom. 860. and the beginning of Pope Nicholas his successor which both had
in them notable marks of Antichrist (as in their doctrines and lives contained
in history it appears) unto the latter time of the forenamed Leo 10,
Platina. Baleus did. 96. lib. pontif. Granzius. Cent. 9. ca. 10.

Antichrist was fully revealed.


and the beginning of Pope Adrian 6: about the year of our Lord 1526.

In or about this time, Luther, and Oecolampadius, and Zuinglius, and Erasmus,
lived, and spoke, and wrote many things touching this Argument. And before the
which time (especially within the compass of 222. years) the Roman Bishop was
plainly displayed to be that very Antichrist: the Popedom was become a very
carnal Priesthood: Rome was a filthy Cage of all unclean birds, and the
Church of Rome was thoroughly stained with all Idolatries, and wicked
fornications, wherewith also the kings of the earth were polluted. At the sight
whereof, the right godly men of that time yearned in their hearts, and could
not be silent to the death.

9 Lastly, if we should account the whole time of the reign of Antichrist,
from the loosing of Satan, The end of the 1000. years when Satan was loosed.
which was (after our account) in the days of Pope Syluester 2, being now
about 596. years ago, at what time the light of the Gospel was shadowed; the
word of God was not preached, but neglected of them that had chief places in
the church: whereat Satan had liberty to break forth, and to work this
mystery of iniquity: yet, cannot his time be continued full three score years
now to come, which are nothing else but his drooping days, and time of his
travel and sorrow, and the which also, the Lord may (if he will) divide and
shorten, for the comfort of his Saints that daily cry, How long will it be, O
Lord, holy and true, ere thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the earth?

CHAP. VI.
Mahomet was not that beast which Saint John notes under the number 666. But
the very number 666. is contained in certain Greek, Hebrew, Latin, and
English words, and sentences, which concern the Church of Rome, and the
Bishops thereof.
IN the former chapter we have seen the time and reign of Antichrist, under
the number 666. Now also in this Chapter by the same number (being well
counted) we shall easily find out the Nation and place, The time when Mahomet
died.
the power and pride, the ingenie and qualities of this miscreant. Albeit Lyrae
reckons that Mahomet the false Prophet of the Sarasins or Turks died in the
year of our Lord, 666 whereof some would that he should be that Antichrist of
the which Saint John had prophesied: yet cannot this prophecy be properly
referred to Mahomet: for this number may not be reckoned from the death of
Antichrist: but rather from the time of his conception, and rising, as it is
before declared, and so to be continued for the whole term of his reign in
the Church. Secondly, Where Antichrist should be borne.
Antichrist was to be borne in the Church among the Christians, in the which he
should occupy a chief place, and be accounted of the Christian believers:
and that afterward, He should apostate and depart from the same, according to
the words of S. John, in his first Epistle and second chapter. And as Paul
said, 2. These. 2.3, Apoc. 13.11. and 17.9.
that he should sit in the Temple of God, as God: and that his seat, or the
City of his Sea, should be the seven headed beast with the ten horns: which
(as S. John prophesied) rose up out of the sea, upon whose horns were ten
crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. But it is certain that
Mahomet (although he be indeed another great Antichrist, or a mighty member of
Antichrist, as Nero was in his time, or in respect of the cause, as were in the
former times, Nimrod, Nabucadnezar, Antiochus, and such like: yet was he never
in the Christian church, nor did he never show him self as a member of the
same: but has been always estranged and separated from that number.

Besides, that the Throne of Mahomet and the Turk is placed far off from the
seven headed beast with the ten horns, Rome is that beast with seven heads
and ten horns.
the which all the best learned have expounded of the City and policy of the
Romans. For indeed within the walls of that City are seven several hills or
high places, bearing so many sundry names: as Palatine, Capitoline, Tit. liu.
Plin. 3. ca. 6.
Auentine, Exquiline, Caelius, Viminalis, Quirinalis. The former four of those
hills Romulus enclosed, The names of the seven hills.
and to enlarge the City, Seruius Tullius enclosed the other three, whereof
Rome was made the seven headed City. To this, concorded the policy of the
Romans, The policy of Rome.
who were governed first by kings: next by Consuls: thirdly by December viri:
fourthly by Dictatores: fifthly by Triumviri: sixthly by Caesares: seventhly by
Emperors: to whose gouenrment were also subdued ten kingdoms: as namely
Neapolis, Hispania, The ten horns of the Beast.
Portugalia, France, Polon, Bohem, Hungary, England, Denmark, Suedia.
Therefore this prophecy cannot so well be expounded of the Turk, nor of his
Mahomet, not of any other Heathen Potentate: nor (indeed) of any other
Synagogue or Church, as of the City of Rome, the Church of Rome: the Bishops
of Rome in that See, so far degenerating from the holy sincerity of the
Apostles of our Lord, whom nevertheless they would seem to resemble in an
external show of holiness with their apostolical titles and grace. Gratian.
Ca. 24. q. 1. Officii.

2. Now it shall be convenient, that we examine some certain words and voices
containing the number 666. which is the number of the Beast, Words containing
the number. 666.
and the number of his name. Apo. ca. 13.17.18. And first, those words, which
others both of yore, and in this age, have found out, and thereof counted the
said number.

Irenaeus a very ancient writer has found the number in this word, Latinus
666. Ire. li. 5. contra. here is. ca. 15. li. 35.
Lateinus, a man of Italy, a Roman, written in Greek letters. The bishop of
Rome (indeed) is both of that Nation, an Italian Priest, and the same which
both in his Church, and in his Courts, etc. prefers the Latin and Roman
tongue, to the Hebrew and Greek tongues (in the which the word of GOD was
first and best written.)

The same number was deciphered in this word Teitan, Teitan. 666.
the title of the ancient Tyrants: unto whom rightly alludeth the policy of
the Pope, who (as it is said) has healed up the deadly wound of the former
Beast, Apoc. 13.12.
that is, of the ancient Empire of the Romans, and has renewed his old
cruelty against the Saints, surpassing the tyranny of all the ancient
Tytanes and Tyrants, that ever reigned and raged before him, as the Histories
which are extant sithence the former years 666. expired: that is, from the
time that the Devil was let at liberty, after the thousand years, but
cheefely sithence the year of our Lord, 1000. do plainly testify. Some
others have counted the number, Apoc. 20.2. Romiit. Aret. 666.
in this Hebrewe word Romiit, that is, a Roman: and likewise: in this voice,
Romanus, written in Hebrew Letters. By the which they assure themselves of the
splace and seat of the Beast. Roman. 9.666.
After this, they find him within the Church of Rome: for Ecclesia Italica,
written in Greek Letters, 666. Aect. in Apoc. 13. and Nichol Collado. 666.
yields the number. The Italian Church, or the Roman Church: and then by one
other sentence wherein they reckon the said number, they discern his
Luciferian pride and ambition, as, (...): that is, I am a God upon the earth.
But unto whom can this sentence be better applied, then to the Bishop of
Rome, which exaleth himself (as it is before said) against all Kings and
Caesar's, Princes, Magistrates, and powers in the world. Yea, he sits in the
Temple of God as God, and would as God be worshipped.

This thing Franciscus Zarabella the Cardinal perceiving, said plainly: Papa
facit quioquid libet, etiam illicita, and est plusquam Deus: that is, The Pope
does whatsoever him lists, though it be unlawful: and he is more then a
God.

Lo! what is this person then, but that very Antichrist and who besides that
Antichrist, extolleth himself in that abominable pride?

3. Furthermore, after diligent search and due examination of words and
sentences (as the holy Scripture, The number 666. found out in certain words
and sentences which concern the Bishop of Rome, and his ministers.
which opens man's understanding, has directed) I have found out certain
other words, voices and sentences, containing not only the like argument, but
also the number Six hundred, sixty and six, and that not alone of the Greek
tongue (in the which Saint John wrote both his Epistles, and also the
Apocalypse, wherein he left a note of this Number and argument unto the
Church, but also of the Hebrew and Latin tongues. And I do verily believe,
that the said number and name is contained in some certain words and voices
of the like argument, of every other language and tongue in the world. And for
their sakes which are willing to count the number of the Beast, The Greek
words and voice, of the number of the Beast. 666.
thereby the sooner to eschew him and his destruction, I presently note (among
others) that follow. vz.

(...), That is, I am a Roman, as spoken by that Antichrist, displaying his
nation and cheese Seat.

666.
(...), that is: The God-like Pope. Thus (indeed) that holy Father the Bishop of
Rome mustereth forth himself, and would that so al men should esteem him, a
divine power, a God-like father: the vicar of Christ: the head of the Church.
There follows another like voice.

666.
(...). that is: The Pope-like God. This is to be understood in such sort, as
that which Paul speaks of the devil, which Transformeth himself into an
Angel of light. For how soever he would show himself, he is found to be
such an one, as the next word declares him to be vz.

(...). That is: The Catholic man, 666
is a plague or infelicitie. His chair therefore is worthily called the Chair
of pestilence, wherein whosoever sits, finds no mean destructions and
woes awayting on him. Apo. 16.2. Moreover, he is not only descried to rise out
of the earth, as wholly earthly minded, but also to be in very deed that Beast
which Saint John saw to rise from thence, by the which he would (without all
doubt) that we should understand Antichrist. Apo. 13.11, 12.

(...). That is, The Sacerdotall Emperor, 666
and King for ever.

In every one of those former several voices, I have deciphered (...). that
is, six hundred sixty and six, which is the number of the Beast. Apo. 13.11:
of the which argument, I could produce yet many more: but these shall here
suffice.

4. After the premised, Hebrew words and voices of the number of Antichrist.
having examined certain Hebrew words, and voices of the like argument, I have
from thence happily deciphered the foresaid number: vz.

(...), That is, As a God, or, God-like. 666
But who aspireth to this dignity, as does the Pope? he would be worshipped as
God: he would rule over all kings and Ceasars, as God: he sits in the
Temple of God as God: and he says in his heart: 666
Anchicalh bmyzith, I am as God in munition and strength: alluding to that
place in Dan. 11.38. He shall honor the God Maysim; that is, the God of
munition or strength.

Another word tries him to be of or among the Tyrants of the earth: as
namely, (...). That is: 666
Those Emim or Giants, so called, for that they are a terror to their subjects
whom they oppress with cruelty. With such (indeed) the Pope has shaken
hands, to the honor of true Christian hearts. Neither has he only daunted
mean and poor persons, but terrified the mighty Potentates, who has bin
forced both to stoop to his unmeasurable cruelty, and also to pledge him in
the unsavory dregs of his filthy fornications: wherein (no doubt) appeared
a fearful judgment of God upon the inhabiters of the earth, and of the Sea,
unto whom it pleased his Majesty to send forth that ungodly Tyrant, as a
just recompense for their sins, and therefore he is called in another word
of the like number, Marath Jehovah, That is, The bitterness, 666
or plague of Almighty God: as the instrument of his wrath on the earth.

And because the Emperor himself has been compelled to stoop unto his
holiness, as overwhelmed with the terror of his mighty cruelty, to the
decay of the Imperial honor, we have another Hebrew word of the same
number, which says: 666
Clh. mlch, Almighty King decays: as then, when the Pope aspiring, exalted
his throne to the abasing of the Roman Emperor, his Lord and Master, and as
then, when the people gave that unto the Pope, which (in very deed) was due
unto Caesar. This is that Departing whereof Paul prophesied. 2. These. 2.3.
Unto the which they unhappily adjoined their faythlesse Apostacy, attributing
that also to the Pope, which was proper and due unto Christ, the true bread of
life, the which is also bewrayed in other Hebrew voices following.

666
Lchm hchih: The bread of vivification: or, food of relief. An horrible
blasphemy, in that the people esteemed ye Pope for their everlasting food,
which came from heaven, derogating the honor of Christ.

Moreover, this voice is not unaptly applied to the Popes VVafer-cake, the
which they taught to be transubstantiated into the body of Christ, which
therefore the blinded people adored and worshipped as their very maker and
Savior.

Another voice notes his damnable Apostacy, from the faith of Christ, how
soever he show himself, Srtho: His turning away: or, his abomination: 666
For notwithstanding the pristine purity of the Bishop of Rome, the latter
Bishops being called the universal Popes, have wonderfully degenerated and
apostated, forsaking not only Paul, with Demas, and Peter with Magus, but also
Christ Jesus with Judas. Howbeit, with the Angel Apostate, they give fair
semblances of holiness, whose egregious hypocrisy therein, another word
bewraieth.

(...): This word with the Hebrews, 666
signifies Hiding, keeping secret: Also, an Hider, and by translation an
Hypocrite. The Caldeans by the same, understand a destioyer, a waster: but the
Greeks by the like voice (as (...)) note a Savior. Although there be in this
one voice contrary significations (after the diversity of tongues), yet may
the triple signification thereof, be aptly applied to him that has that triple
Crown: who notwithstanding that he be indeed a waster and destroyer of
souls, and a disturber of the Christian peace, sets forth himself as a
Preserver, a Savior, dissembling to be that which he is, and sembling to be
that which he is not. Further, he is found within the borders of Italy, yea,
and among the Priests, as this word imports, vz.

There be some other words and voices which rightly decipher, not only his
proud exaltation, but also his chief seat: in the view and consideration
whereof, we may point at the Roman Prelate, and say: Lo, there is that
Antichrist.

666
Ha a nosch, ciihorah beromi, That wretched man, which is likened to the
highest Lord, is in Rome. Yea, another says. Neged maschiach Romah,
Antichrist of Rome, or, the Romish Antichrist. Unto this may be added an other
like sentence: 666
as, Hoiah cozeb maschiah Beromah: Antichrist is in Rome: or, a false Christ is
resident in the City of Rome.

666
By another word he is found among the holy Fathers: as, Abboth Haromah: The
Abbots: or, Fathers of Rome.

666
Another voice finds him in the Church, as the chief person: (...), That is:
The head of the Church or Congregation. And who is he which usurps on this
title and dignity? Even the Romish Bishop. Therefore another voice discrieth
him, not only in the Church, and in a principal seat, but in the Church of
Rome: 666
as Royi chahal Romah: The high Priest: or, principal Prelate of the Romish
Church. I am sure the Pope will not abandon this title, howsoever he acquit
himself in the place.

In every one of those several places, I find 666. being the number of
Antichrist. Moreover these Hebrew letters being transcribed or converted and
placed after the Hebrew order, (...): have affinity with a word which
signifies an elevation, 666
a lifting up, an offering: whereof (as it seems) was borrowed the word
Missa, or Mass: which is the note of the Popes Idol. Now, of so many words
proposed, the reader may take the meetest, and apply them with right judgment.

5 There be also found certain Latin words and sentences of the former
number and argument, whereof I only note those that follow, to be likewise
considered.

Dux Cleri, The Captain, the Leader, or, Latin words and voices of the number
of the beast. Doxlvi.
the Head of the Clergy.

Carduus Latinus, A Latin thistle.

Calix Deus, The Chalice God.

Lucrodoxi: Gain worthy: or, Glorious through lucre.

Doctoris vniuersalis initia: The beginnings of a Catholic Doctor.

Pontifex, altus Sacerdos: The Pope, an high Priest: or, The filth of the Sea,
an high Priest. The Pope is as the excrements of the Roman Empire: (which is
that beast that rose up from the Sea, Apoc. 13.1, 11.) yea, and of the same Sea.

Pseudo episcopales vsus: The false Bishoplike Masters: or, The use and
conversation of the false Bishops. Such are the Popes and his Clergy.

Socerdotale surrexit: A sacerdotall thing is risen up.

Vicarius titulo Christi, fell sansta a Ecclesiae: he, who is entitled the
Vicar of Christ, is the gall of the holy Church.

Also this Monostich following, is of the like number and argument.

Icon, pax, pixis, crux, lux, fex, cantica, Cleiri. Thus englished.

The picture, Pixe, and Paxe,
the Cross and lights:
The drowsy dregs and Canticles,
of Clergy wights.
Further, to show in what place, and amongst what persons Antichrist was
borne, bred, and maintained, we have this sentence of the like number. Per
Episcopos vniversals sanctae Ecclesiae, surrexit Antichristus, (...). What is
meant by this word Antichrist.
Rex, seruus, superbus. Amongst the Catholic Bishops of the holy church,
Antichrist is risen up, both a King, and a proud servant. And here we may
note, that this word Antichrist, is not the proper name of any one singular
person, but a name common to all them that be contrary to Christ (as it is
said before:) but beyond all others to them who when they be contrary to
Christ, do seem to be for him. Therefore the Roman Bishops have worthily
merited this title, who notwithstanding their holy semblances of virtues, do
both usurp tyranny, Lordship, and dominion, over and above all Kings and
Caesar's, the which our Lord Christ never attempted, nor taught. And in studies
and doctrine are to him opposed and contrary. Neither can it be, but that this
is that notable Antichrist, the which John in the spirit of prophecy descried
in the Roman Monarch. Nor is that prophecy to be expounded of any one Pope*
or of any one particular person: but of all those wicked and ungodly
miscreants, either consederating in one conspiracy against Christ, and his
Saints, or succeeding one another in that Antichristian Sea, and Church of
Rome. So that, though one Pope die, Antichrist is continued in the world yea,
in the sea of Rome.
or be removed from that Sea, or Church, it follows not, that therefore
Antichrist is dead, or that Antichrist is removed wholly with him: but that
Antichrist, is nevertheless continued and fostered in the same Sea, by them
that retain this proud title of universality, and worship a mortal man in
the place of Christ.

In every one of those Latin words and sentences, we may also gather the
number of Antichrist, (...). Pap'est. 666
Delx vi.

Moreover, this voice Pap'est: that is, he is the Pope: or Papest, written in
Greek letters, and reckoned, yields the foresaid number.

6 I hope that the true Christian will neither disdain nor condemn this my
plain dealing, nor judge the paper combred with curious and unnecessary
inventions and devises: but rather, as he is willing with wisdom to count the
number of Antichrist, thereby the sooner to abandon him, and fly from his
destructions, so will he gladly embrace those means which are to him
exhibited to that end, by the help of the divine spirit, in the fear of
Almighty God.

7 Moreover, the seat or place of Antichrist, The seat of ^ Antichrist.
is well known, partly by the title, partly by the description of the same.
The title of his Sea is after the name of his City (...), Rome, and is
interpreted pride, exaltation, elevation, mightiness, sturdinesse,
abomination, and by them of yore, called Ungodly Rome. After the which his
Church is entitled, Ecclesia Romana, the Roman Church: which is as much to
say, as the proud, the stately, the strong, the hautie, and the abominable
Church, Christ has not set forth his church in proud titles.
as opposed to the holy Catholic Church of Christ. For Christ has not set
forth his Church before the world in proud tytles, but under the notes of
humility, meekness, and sobriety, as a little flock, an oppressed people,
a deformed Spouse, the poor, the Lambs, the Doves, little children, little
ones, and such like: and has commended unto them humility, sobriety,
simplicity, innocence, patience, watchfulness, fasting, obedience and such
like. Therefore not only Daniel, Dan. 7.8. Reu. 13.1. and ca. 17.9.
when he speaks of the 4. Monarke, being of the Romans, and Saint John when
he tells of that Beast which rose up out of the Sea, Antichrist was
discovered as soon as he was borne, and pointed at in every age following.
with seven heads, and ten horns, do plainly point at the City and See of
Rome: but also the ancient Martyr Irenaeus, now little less then a thousand
five hundred years ago, and Gregory a Bishop of Rome, and Hierom, and
Augustine, and Haymo, and Hylarius, and Tertullian, and Lyra, and Thomas, and
Bernarde, with wany others, both godly and learned in their times, have
consented in this, that Rome is that mystical Babylon, and the seat of
Antichrist.

8 But because that of this Argument, both they, and many others, both of
yore, and in this present age, have written both learnedly and largely:
therefore unto that which has been said, I will add only that ancient
prophecy of Sybilla Erithraea, This Sibyll prophesied to the Greeks when they
besieged Troy. Bull. in Apo. 13. con. 61.
who lived many hundred years before the birth of Christ: briefly
comprehending the things premised, and so conclude this argument. This Sibylla
having fore-spoken of the taking, the ransacking, and the burning of Rome,
which was performed by Totilaes king of the Goths, in the time of Justinian
the Emperor, did also prophecy of fifteen dilicate Kings which should reign
there after that: and that then immediately, there should rise up one other
king in such sort described and set forth, as best beseems the Popes
holiness. Sibyll. Erith. in li. 8. Sibyl. oraculorum.
The words of her prophecy being Englished, sound much after this sort.

In time to come (O bragging Rome)
on thee shall fall from hie:
Celestial plagues, as scourgesiust,
for all thy tyranny.
Then shall thy neck bow to thy doom,
and groueling to the ground,
The fiery flames that knows not hoe
shall fiercely thee confound.
From thence when fifteen kings succeed,
(So dilicate) the rest:
And have with cruel servitude
The world full sorely pressed:
A king shall rise, whose white hoare head,
shall shine and glister gay:
His title sounding like the Sea,
(as Pontifex men say.)
Respecting wholly earthly things,
and promising men bliss:
With putting forth his filthy foot,
(to them, the same to kiss.)
According to this prophecy, Ri. Reynol. in his Chronicle of the Empire.
if ye number up 15. Emperors, or Caesar's, after the reign of Justinian, ye,
shall come into the reign of Irene, with her young son Constantine, Adrian 1.
in Nicaen.Synod. 2. al. 7.
at what time Pope Adrian occupied the Sea of Rome, who with the consent of the
Empress, commanded that wicked decree in the Nicaene Synod, for the
restoring and worshipping of dumb Images, as it is before declared.

9. Lo, this is that Dagon whom they strive to stay up! this is that Baal, for
whom they contend so eagerly, and therein much disquiet Ioas, and Cedeon, with
their families, and utterly disturb all godly tranquillity: and this is their
cause, wherein they do not only resemble, but exceed those old Israelites
which the Lord destroyed: yea, those heathen, whom he cast out before the
children of Israel, after that he had long suffered them to walk their own
ways, in the lewdness of their minds.

CHAP. VII.
The punishment of traitorous Papists is justly inflicted: their sufferings are
desperate: and finally they are confounded with Antichrist their Prince.
AS the secret Papists savor most odiouslie of wicked conspiracies, and
dangerous treacheries against the Lord, the Lords anointed their own
Nation, and the whole church of Christ: so, having no better arguments to
defend the cause they plead, then had those Idolatrous Baalites, which pleaded
for Baal, in the time of Gedeon: they do no less deserve that reward which
Ioas did award them, saying: Iud. 6.30.31.
He that will contend for Baal, let him die ere the morning. Neither can it
be, that they shall be freed from that trouble, which Moses, David, and the
Prophets said to be due unto such, as contemning the right worship of the true
God, do run a whoring after strange gods: God will not neglect to punish
traitors.
the which trouble, albeit neither the Prince, nor the civil Magistrate (which
is the minister of God to do justice) either by favor or by negligence, inflict
not, shall be yet justly paid the^ in their day, with full measure, by him that is
much higher then the highest upon the earth, and that will not give his honor
to another.

2 Besides that, as their cause is both wicked and damnable, wherein they
justly deserve to be afflicted: so is the manner of their suffering no less
desperate and without all comfort of the spirit of God, 1. King. 18.28
which has included them within the compass of those Baalites that launced
themselves with knives, till the blood ran forth in abundance, but all in
vain: and within the number of those hypocrites which say to god: We have
punished our selves and thou regardest it not; being reicted thus: Isay 58.3.
But who has required these things at your hands? For as they suffer not for a
good cause, so they suffer not as they should, nor to that end for the which
the godly endure afflictions. Indeed, they suffer not as Christians, The manner
of their suffering.
but as malefactors, and transgressors of good laws: as busy bodies in other
men's matters, as workers of evil: yea, as rebels, as traitors, as thieves, as
murderers, in such sort as Saint Peter forbids that Christians should
suffer. But look on those Baalites: behold, what turmoyles take they? what
troubles endure they? what dangers incur they? what mischief broach they,
under the benedictions and dispensations of their most holy fathers? how
wickedly conspire they, and consult against the Lord, and against his anointed?
how often devise they to murder true Christians; to steal away the hearts of
subjects from their lawful Princes: to depose Kings and Emperors: to
ouerturne all good governments? how bold are they, to deal in matters of
state, to meddle with Princes affairs? how impudent are they in the exaltation
of their most holy father, to control them and their laws? yea, how
presumptuous are they to assault them, and cowardly to murder them, and to
censure them to eternal torments? Be these Christians? nay, rather devils
incarnate. Are they in these their devises and practices tolerable? Not at
all: should they not be punished, or rather plagued among those Baalites? Right
worthy, and that unless their cause were better, it were good their courage
were less. For albeeit that suffering be the common recognisance of Gods
children, who ever bear in their bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus: yet they
who suffer not in the Lord, How Christ suffered,
that is, in a good cause, and for his sake, and in such sort as Christ by his
example has taught us to suffer, are never the near to the cross of Christ,
though they be tossed and crossed never so much. Christ died, the just for the
unjust, when there was no guile found in his mouth: he died innocentlie: he
suffered patiently: he died to redeem us from sin, and to reconcile us
unto GOD. To this suffering aimed the Psalmist, when in the person of the
afflicted Israelites, he said unto the Lord: For thy sake are we killed all
the day long: and are accounted as sheep appointed to be slain! And thus
said the prophet Jeremy in his suffering: Know that for thy sake (O Lord) I
have suffered rebuke. So Zachary the son of Iehoida, being commanded to
death by Ioash King of Judah, he patiently sustained it and said: The Lord
look upon it, and require it. Unto these, and such like examples looked
Augustine, and therefore being grievously afflicted, he said not, Lord look
on my punishment: but he said, Respice in causam meam domine: Lord respect my
cause.

3. Unto these sufferers has the Lord Jesus promised peace and happiness,
when the others are left without all comfort. As, Matthew. 5.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution, or bear affliction patiently for
righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Again: Blessed are
ye, when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you falsely, for my sake. Iam. 5.10.
Therefore Saint James counsels us to take the prophets for an example of
suffering adversity, and of long suffering, which have spoken in the name of
the Lord: as if he might have said to them under the cross: Look on the
cause and patience of Isayah, of Jeremy, of David, of Zacharias, of Amos, of
Daniel, of Moses, of Michaeah, of Vriah, of John the Babtist, and such others,
which have been persecuted, and patiently suffered afflictions in the good
cause, for the Lords sake. S. Stephen in his sermon, charged the Jews, that
they had murdered them, Acts 7.
that had foreshewed them of the coming of that just: that is, of Christ Jesus
our righteousness. This was the cause of the prophets, the same was Stephens
cause, and Paul pleading the same cause, waxed both bold and cheerful at the
bar. For having declared that he moved the people to repent and turn to
God, and to do the works worthy the amendment of life, he said: For this
cause the Jews caught me in the Temple. Moreover, touching the end of his
suffering, he thus protested with no small joy of Spirit: I would that ye
understood brethren, that the things which have betided me, Phil. 1.14.
are turned to the furthering of the Gospel: so that my bands in Christ, are
famous throughout all the judgment Hall, and in all other places: insomuch
that many of my Brethren in the Lord, are emboldened through my bands, and
dare more frankely speak the word, etc. Thus, that old Eleazar, 2. March.
6.24.28.
having pleaded this good cause, he would suffer in the defense thereof, not
only. to declare his faithful constancy, and discharge of duty, but also to
give a good example thereof unto the younger sort: and so he endured the pains
of Martyrdom, with patience and great comfort in the Spirit.

The like we read of the woman who died with her seven sons in the Machabees,
the law of the Lord. 2. Match. 7.
Thus James, Peter, John, and other holy Martires of the Lord, have with no
mean comfort of the Spirit, suffered and borne the Cross of their master
Christ, and are blessed in their death. But woe unto those miserable caytiffes,
VVo to them that suffer in an evil cause.
whose punishments and sufferings are neither for righteousness: neither for
speaking in the name of the Lord: neither for declaring of that Just: neither
for moving the people to turn unto God: nor that others by their bands should
be emboldned, more freely to speak the word: nor for the Lords sake: nor for
any good, but all contrary. For lo! the Lord of heaven is risen up, and
stands against them as a swift witness, and a severe judge to condemn them,
and to destroy them for ever, except they repent. Therefore it shall be good
for them to learn truly to repent of their rebellions and sins timely, and
to pray unto God in the spirit: yea, and to desire others also to pray for
them, that the thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them: for as their
hearts are not right before God (a cause of their worthy judgments with Simon
Magus) so run they forward in the high way of perdition. Now, if these and such
like words move them not, but as enemies unto the true contentation and peace,
they will with the deaffe adder stop their ears, prepare themselves to
battle, and continuerebellious; it shall said unto them by the true
protestants, as Iosuah once said to that theeuish Acha^: Inasmuch as ye have
troubled us, the Lord does trouble you this day. Neither shall the walls of
great Babylon protect them, nor the Prince Nimrod defend them: for neither shall
the one, nor the other of them, be able to escape destruction, when the Lord
God of heaven, which makes wars with Amalech from generation to generation,
Exodus 17.16. Gal. 5.10.
shall force them to bear their just condemnation for troubling the Lords
people.

4. For as God decreed, and his decree did stand, Nom. 16.32. 2. Sam. 17.23.
and. 18.9.
that Agag should be destroyed: that Chore and his confederates should descend
down into hell: that Achitophel, Hama^, Absalom, Judas, and such like, should
swallow up their mortal morsels: so has he decreed, and it shall be performed
in time, that Babylon mother of whoredoms and abominations shall be confounded:
that Antichrist shall be cast out, and his lovers and friends shall be laughed
to scorn. And in the consideration thereof, not only they that be yet living
(whom they have deprived of peace and tranquillity) shall enjoy their desired
rest, quietness and gladness, but also the very infernal Sprits and Hell,
shall be moved at their sudden fall and coming down, no less then they
were moved at the fall of the King of Tyrus, and of the King of Babylon, to
whom tauntingly, Eze. 28.2. Isa. 14.
and in division, they shall say, Lo! Antichrist is divided of the infernal
spirits.
are not ye also touched with infirmities as other men? and are ye not made
like unto us? yea, thou also, which (being blinded through malice, pride, and
magnificence,) haft thought thy self to be a God, and not a mortal man, and
far more excellent then any Emperor, Prince, King, Caesar, or Potentate on
the earth: and sitting in the temple of God, would be worshipped as God:
even thou art fallen from heaven, and become one of them that dwell below.
Therefore, we justly take up against thee, in steed of salutations, bitter
scoffs and reproaches. And seeing thy naked soul, and most feeble spirits now
deprived of all glory, pomp, and power, not able to oppugn the spirits
infernal, but compelled perforce to yield, not only to the common lot of other
damnable miscreants, but to a torment so far greater then the torment of
others, by how much more thine abominations have exceeded others: and having
put from us all fear of thy bloody tyranny, and beholding the reward of thy
great hypocrisy, we are now worthily moved to deride thee. Bern. de consider
li. 2. ad Engen.
Ha, ha, Art thou that Abel for Primacie? that Noah for government? that
Abraham for Patriarchship? that Melchizedech for order: that Aaron for
dignity: Antonin. tit. 22. ca. 2. d. petistate Papae.
that Moses for authority: that Samuel for judgment: that Peter for power:
that Christ touching annoynting? yet lo, thou art cast down and covered with
confusion: Art thou he, whom al men feared? Art thou he, that ruled in heaven
and in earth, and in hell? Could thou loose and bind after thine own will?
haft thou been taken for the most holy father, the Prince of peace, the head
of the Church, the God of the earth, the king of kings, the Lord of Lords,
higher then the Heavens, harmless, undefiled, most perfect, separate from
sinners, and inuinceable among the Gods: yet behold, thou art come down unto
the depth of hell! And there, there, thou lie!

5 Thou art fallen into a place not of pleasure, Note here a great alteration
and change.
but of pain: not of joy, but of anguish: not of solace, but of discomfort:
not of happiness, but of extreme wretchedness. Thy Balsame and thy Mirrhe has
not been able to preserve thy body from corruption, nor all thy Riches, pomp,
power, and glory, can save thy soul from eternal torment! The worms of the
earth devour thy body, the worms of an evil conscience bite thy sinful
soul, and all the infernal spirits torment thee in both, without remiss for
evermore. This that is declared have I heard of the Lord of hoasts, the God of
Israel, Isa. 21.10. Eccle. 12.13.
which brings every work into judgment, and will be well known in the
judgment, Ezec. 28.10.
and therein highly advanced, for he is the same God, to whom the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory belongs. Isa. 14.27.
So it is decreed, and it is so determined in the time appointed.

CHAP. VIII.
The foolish zeal and singular conceits of certain, who justify themselves
only, and dislike all others: with their eager desire of hasty reformation, of
that which they conceit to be amiss.
8.4.2. Socrates. In many things the mean is best
ALthough in proportions Geometrical, the less number is nearer the middle then
the more, and therefore in regard thereof, to do sometimes less then should be
done, when the whole cannot be done, is more incident to the virtue in many
things, the^ it is to exceed it. Eccles. 7.18.
And that also, not only the wise Preacher counsels that men should not be
oueriust, nor ouerwise: but also the Apostle advises them, not to be wise in
their own conceits: yea, and Christ himself condemns the hypocritical
righteousness of the Pharisees, that esteem so much of themselves, and
contemn other men, from whose society, they are separated and divided: yet
lo, there be found even among us, such kind of persons, as, whiles they seem
to detest the pope and his damnable doctrines, and pretend a singular zeal or
jealousy, tending to reformation beyond al other me^, do nevertheless far
estrange themselves from that right Christian zeal, which combineth with
perfect knowledge and christiaen love. Therefore they cannot yield themselves to
be either content, or contained within their due bounds and duty of life, or
to be friendly admonished by any others, to observe and perform the same. But
as they which have their brains busied with some strange enchauntment, These
renew the Sect of the Parisees in their strange conceits and hypocrisy,
they are most singularly conceited, and are become more pharisaicall. I mean
not in this, that they yield tithes of Mint of Anice, and of all that they
possess for there be none which tithe their commodities to the benefit of the
labourors in the lords vinyard, worse then some of them: nor in this, that they
fast twice in the week, for there be none which gurmandize more the^ they: nor
in this that they express a kind of civil justice in their life and demeanure:
for in no persons is there found less good conscience, and more deceitful and
cruel dealings in any trades, then there is well approved to be in many of
them. And would to God they did not also doubt of the Resurrection of the dead,
which yet the Pharisees believed, nor did think that the doctrine of
immortality is but a pleasant error to hold men in a vain hope, as some
heathen men have fondly imagined* But in this they display their sect: namely,
Tuse. quest.
that they esteem themselves only wise, righteous, holy, and perfect, and in
this their pleasant conceit, they dislike, disdain, and contemn al other men,
of whatsoever order, calling, or degree they be, whom they give over to Satan,
and censure to the Pit of Hell, as fools, Publicans, and profane
worldlings. With the Egyptians, they think it abomination for them to eat
with the Hebrews: Egyptians. Jews.
with the Jews, they hold it not lawful for them to meddle with the
Samaritanes, Genesis 43.32. John. 4.9. Act. 10.28.
or to have any fellow ship with them which are of another nation. And therefore
spread they this proud banner of defiance unto all others: Depart from us, for
we are more holy then ye, more just, more pure, more perfect then ye are: and
that which is lawful for us to do, is not lawful for you.

2 Thus fly they would from Charybdis, but they fall on Scylla: they fear the
fire, and are drowned in the water: not considering how good and commendable a
thing it is, to keep the kings high way in the fear of God, and in the peace
of a good conscience. From hence they fall into high dislike of the present
State, the time, the persons, the place, and as lettle children of variable
affections; and as the fool which changes with the Moon, they desire
novelties, they hunt after innouations, they are much busied in words, in
endless genealogies, in vain questions, and in such matters, as are both
unprofitable and unnecessary: about the which (in the heat of their
contentions) they veritfie Homers sentence.

The hasty man condemns the same,
Which does at all deserve no blame.
Whereby, with the indiscreet, they forsake the honor, Eccl. 5.14.
and take on them the shame of the tongue, and so draw on themselves judgment
and destruction. In their opinions and censures, they resemble well nigh the
foolish Masons of Lesbia, who (as the proverb is) having leaden squares, would
rather bow them to their works, then work unto them: for they presume without
blushing, to draw the laws, the statutes, and constitutions, to their proper
conceits: yea, they wrest the holy Scriptures (as he did which called them a
nose of wax) to their selfe-wils and fantastical opinions, notwithstanding
the perrill of that terrible woe threatened unto them which cold evil good, and
good evil: and unto them, which presume to add unto, or to diminish from the
pure word of God. Job. 13.7. As in the 2. Chap. 1. Luke 15.27. Bern in cant.
ser. 73. A.
Isay 6.20. Revel. 224.18. But they pretend the defense of Gods cause, and
therefore think that they may therein speak at their pleasures. Lastly, they
very notably resemble that angry Elder brother in the Gospel, as did the
former sort: for through pride; envy, and disdain, they rather choose to
stand and stay without the door in most miserable manner, then vouchsafe to
come, and enter into the house of joy and gladness, Psalm. 133.
there to prove how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity, though they also be there unto both inityted, and gently
entreated, by a most loving and merciful Father.

3 Mistake me not (charitable Brethren) God forbid that I should condemn or
dislike the godly zeal of the faithful Christian, The life of Religion.
which with a good conscience I do reverence and singularly esteem, as the
very Life of Religion, and the right Ornament of them that fear the Lord. It
is good to be zealous in a good cause: and the servant of God is even
ravished with the zeal of the Lord* between the which, and, that Evil zeal
which is not according to knowledge, it must be distinguished.

The Good zeal, or the zeal of God is, The good zeal.
that affections or desire ^oman, whereby he is indeed and with all his heart,
zealous for the Lord, according to knowledge. And this is an ardent love of
the glory of God, of righteousness, of judgment, of wisdom, of piety, of
chastity, and other godly virtues. A vehement displeasure conceived against
unrighteousness, oppression, foolishness, ungodliness, filthiness and sin,
whereby the glory of God is deformed, and the Church of Christ offended: also
a fervent desire to punish the transgressors of the law of God, to withstand
ungodliness, to depresse and abolish sin.

4 This virtue shined in measure in Abraham, in Moses, in Daniel, in Loath, in
Jeremy, in Phinez, in David, in Eliah, in Paul; and without measure in our
Savior Christ. And they in this outrage do express the same: who, believing
in the Son of GOD, are marked with the note of contrition: which are sorry
for Joseph's affliction: which are grieved for the common and daily
transgressions of the Lords people: which do earnestly desire the
advancement of Gods glory, and the abolishing of sin: which do groan for
the delivery of the Church, from those horrible persecutions wherewith she is
daily oppressed: that do hunger and thirst after righteousness: that pray for
an end of those days of sin, and wait for the joyful coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile bodies, that we may be conformed to
his glorious body. This affection is ingendered in the heart, Whereof this
zeal is engendered.
or in the concupiscible part of man, by the effectual operation of the
Spirit of God: the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and fortitude, the spirit of knowledge; and of the fear of God. This zeal
ensues faith and hope, and is so combined with charity, that though between
them we may distinguish, yet divide them we may not: Cant. 5.8.
for the zealous Christian is even sick with holy love. Therefore August. says
thereof, Qui non zelat, non amat; and e contrario, qui non amat, non zelat:
That is, He that is not zealous does not love: and again, he that loves not,
is not zealous. And this virtue has both affinity, and familiarity, with
that vehement affection of love which is called (...), or Jealousy, The godly
jealousy.
as that of a man to his wife, or of a wife to her husband, when either of them
is sorry and displeased for some unworthy or ungrateful action or thing which
is perceived in the other of them. For this affection is not able to bear the
hurt or contempt of the thing loved: and it is right sorry, that the thing
which is only proper to it self, should be made common to others. The Lord
God himself, though he be not touched with man's infirmities, nor subject to
passions, speaks (...), after the manner of man, for the instruction and
comfort of man, and says, that He will be jealous over his land: that is,
Joel. 2.28.
that he will not suffer his own children which repent them of their sins to
be any further vexed and troubled as they had bin: as of who^ he said also in
the same affection. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. And
the same Lord being a jealous God, bears not, that his people should run
a whooring from him, and give his glory to another. Neither could his Son
abide this, that his holy house should be made a den of thieves. Unto this
also belongs that zeal which is defined a sorrow conceived of that good
which we see to be in some others, which we our selves do want: so that
therein we do not envy that good in them, nor do wish that they had it not,
nor sorowing for that they be in better case then our selves are, (though they
be not always worthy the same): but only, we are grieved and do lament the
want thereof in our selves, and in some others also, whom we would should
enjoy that good thing with them and us: yea, and it congratulateth with them
their good lot. And hereof is it, that we be so sorrowful, because some other
men are holier then we are: that is, because we be not so religious, so devout,
and so perfect as they be. Again, we are joyful when we see, that such as are
worthy for their virtues, are honored accordingly: but yet we be sorrowful,
that we ourselves, and some others are either not so worthy as they, or being
worthy, are yet in contempt, and not esteemed with them in those things which
appertain to the glory of God. The Lord God make us all right zealous and
jealous for his glory, according as himself in his word, his dear son in the
Gospel, and his holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, both by their
diuined doctrines, and worthy examples of life have taught us. For it is
certain, that the God of the Spirits of all flesh, Psalm. 51.17. Nom. 25.11.13.
does never despise the woeful and troubled spirits, and the broken and contrite
hearts of his people, as a most pleasant sacrifice unto himself, and he
accepts their zeal and holy jealousy, as a virtue worthy the remembrance
from one generation unto another.

Cacozelia, Evil zeal.
5 But there is a Jealousy which is not commendable: and there is a zeal which
is not according to knowledge: for if it were not so, then might we neither
condemn them that crucified Christ, nor reprove them that persecuted the
Apostles and holy Martyrs of Christ, which did therein they knew not what. And
there is a kind of zeal, and a kind of Jealousy, wherewith they be
enflamed, which censure and condemn all other men, and only clear and
commend themselves, with those their chief heads and authors whom the word of
God condemns. These be they, who in the heat of their passions, and carnal
affections, pretend reformation of things which are amiss, and make great
semblances and shows of religion, honesty, and virtue: when as (that
notwithstanding) they hunt after the wealth, estimation, and glory of the
world: they would gladly be enriched before others: they would be preferred to
al others: they would be praised in their actions beyond all others, as they
conceit themselves to be better then all others. And for this purpose they
labor to invent, diuulgate, and thrust into the church, singular and strange
opinions of their own heads, which they would should be esteemed, established,
and defended, as equal with the sacred word of God. Such were the Epicures,
the Pharisees, the Anabaptists, and Heretics of the former times: such are the
Scismatikes, and discontented heads of this time, which so much trouble the
Church with their opinions, and endanger the peace of good Commonwealths,
with their sinister practices. And yet they are not pleased (as indeed they
know not the right Contentation) but they break forth unorderly into a
vehement grief of mind, and angry countenance against the co^digne preferment
and good of such other men, as far surmount them in learning, godliness, and
virtue: neither can they conceal, but are moved daily to utter and express
their longing desire of the hurt and shame of those men, not respecting their
preferment and good, but only that evil and hurt they wish them, for an
object: Luke 15.
and so they apprehend that Good, not as Good, but as Evil, with that angry
Elder brother, of whom our Lord speaks in the Gospel. And this is that zeal,
and that kind of jealousy, which has none affinity nor fellowship at all,
with faith, hope, and charity, nor any part of knowledge and the fear of God:
and therefore, it is either blind zeal, and doting jealousy, Gal. 5.20.
or rather that very wicked Envy, hatred, fury, and work of the flesh: yea,
the tyranny of the soul, and partinacy of the heart, which is engendered of
that Luciferan pride, and devilish ambition grafted in man's corrupt nature by
the subtle serpent, by the which a man thinks himself better the^ other men:
and therefore would be in all respects not only equal with others, but also more
excellent, and above them al. A vice, which the Lord abhors from his heart,
and tieth them which are therewith provoked, in punishment among the hollow
hearted hipocrites.

Note this.
No doubt such kind of zealous persons were these friends of Job, who pretending
the glory of God, disputed with him wickedly in the cause of God: for the
which he sharply reproved the^ in these words: Will ye speak wickedly for
Gods defense: Job. 13.7.9.10.
and talk deceitfully for his cause? he will surely reprove you. As if he should
say: will ye presume in the display of your zeal, to reason rashly and
foolishly of the holy and divine things of God? do ye think that the Lord
needs the wits and arguments of such persons for the setting forth of his
glory? No, no, ye grate too much on his divine justice, and take his name in
vain: for the which doing, he will not hold you guiltless.

6 But yet, Some have a deep contest of their own zeal and purity,
howsoever it be.
there be some that would (if they could) persuade us, that there is no zeal to
their zeal, no jealousy to their jealousy, no wisdom to their wisdom, no
justice, no temperance, no charity, no faith, no virtues, to their justice, to
their temperance, to their charity, to their faith, to their virtues, and that
if their discipline were once practiced in our Church, and their invented laws
provided for our Commonwealth, and al things ruled and ordered in points as
they have devised, and could direct through the abundance of their spirit, They
dream of such a purity, as yet never was, nor shall be seen among men in
this world.
then the Moon which is so oftentimes obscured, would shine in the night, yea,
and also in the day, without the apperance of any cloud or blemish: until then,
she is justly to be shunned (in their conceit) nor be they disposed to take in
good part the benefit of such light as she yields. They imagine that the
Church, which is yet but black, and deformed (as she is compared with Christ
her glorious head) would then have in her neither spot nor wrinckle, nor any
such thing. And this purity, they expect to be yet ere they die, even here in
this life: until the which time, they be not willing to serve God (as it
seems) in that holy Communion. As if they would say to God: well, let all
things be thus, and thus perfected, or else will we not honor thee, nor serve
thee, as thou would that we should honor, and serve thee. Yea (as the
Bethulians that appointed God a time at their pleasure, Judith 7.31. and 8.11.
within five days) they dread not to tie the wisdom of God unto their
devises, and to their appointed times: Let this thing thus be done shortly:
we, we will hasten reformation, and do it our selves speedily, and not wait
any longer for the performance of words and promises. As if (forsooth) it were
not only lawful for them to make, alter, and change laws, and reform al
things at their own pleasures: but also, that it were possible themselves could
reform all, and constrain every action of man to answer to right perfection in
this world, wherein the very best things that be, do savor of imperfections,
through the contagion of man's concupiscence and sin: Eccles. 3.16.
neither can they be corrected, as Solomon complained. They imagine, that if
they did once attempt it, they were well enough able with Aratus Eudoxus,
Aratus.
to number the stars in the firmament of heaven: the which is a matter so
soon, and so easy to be done, as it is to count and to number the sand by the
Sea shore. Wherein they deal far more impudently then ever that Aratus, or any
other skillful Mathematitian in the world durst, to defend his knowledge and
ability therein. Diogenes trampled with his foul feet on Platoes clean bed
clothes, when he said so.
They pretend with Diogenes to tread down Platoes pride: but yet, with a more
hawtie pride, then ever harbored in Platoes heart, howsoever Diogenes, and
they in outward appearaunce would seem to be. Howbeit, dreaming
(nevertheless) of Platoes Commonwealth, they wax both extreme wise, and
extreme just, not considering the whiles, how much they decipher themselves
therein, Extreme wise
both extreme foolish, and extreme wicked: as, not only Ageselaus, but also
Solomon, judges of such persons, to whose most grave censure, Saint Paul
condiscendeth, when he would not, that men should be wise in their own
conceits. Thus wandering at large in and through many matters, both strange and
extrauagant, they leave the body, and take the shadow: they depresse the truth,
and maintain errors: they go from the matter, VVhiles men strive in opinions,
they neglect the preaching of Christ Jesus.
and take hold of the trifles (as Hierome once said of such vain persons)
would to God they would consent with us, that Jesus Christ be preached
sincerely and plainly: for it is too manifestly seen, how this necessary
argument is neglected, between them that strive and contend to maintain,
opinions God help us.

7. But there is no consideration with them (the whiles) that extreme Law is
mere wrong, Summumius.
as the common saying is, or that the Laws regard rather general then private
and particular things, One thing must be considered with another.
which are often referred to the equity and wise moderation of the
magistrates. Neither do they remember, how that the wise man also offends
sometimes as the fool does: and that such an exact justice and discipline, as
they labor to establish, sauouring little or nothing of Equity, has decayed
many kingdoms, and troubled many Churches. It is easier to throw down, then
to build up.
We are bound to bend to the best in every deliberation (wherein the Lord in
mercy fill us with the graces of his spirit) but it is no point of wisdom
for a man which has a well builded house already, to pull the same down,
before he has made his reckoning, and be assured of his ability, and means
to build the same better. It is much easier to throw down, then it is to build
up: to kill, then to cure: to rent asunder, then to set together: to move
wars, then to procure peace: though the fine thereof be not so profitable.
And to trouble a City (said Pindare) it is a thing quickly done; Pindar.
but to reduce the same City into a quiet state, it lies not in the power of
man, but in the gift of God. Paul is very peremtorie in this, that we should
not do evil, that good may come thereof. We must do good things and do them
well.

G. Nazan. de Y. beol. li. 1. Arist. eth. 2.


Good things are forever commendable: but these good things ought to be done
directly and well: least whiles we bear men in hand that we do just things,
by dealing in and about them, most unjustly we deprive them of their proper
graces. Of this mind was learned Aristotle, who used also to say, that he was
not just and wise, which did such things, but he only which ordered them well.
And of this Argument Johannes Gerson (if it were not some other) brings in
two Soldiers disputing: Io. Gers. in dial. duorum militum.
They that have made of men Martyrs (said the one of them to his fellow) have
made a good thing? to whom answered the other, yea, but yet they have not made
that good thing well: Et Deus remunerator Aduerbiorum, non Nominum, And God
rewards not Nownes, but Aduerbes. That is: God does not so much regard what
things men do, God respects rather the quality then the quantity of works
and faith.
as he does in what sort they do them. The death of Christ was a good thing,
when as through the same al them that believed are freed from death and
damnation, which Christ in his death overcame and destroyed: howbeit, the
Jews, the high Priests, Pilate, Caiphas, Annas, Herod, Judas, and the devil,
have consented together, and dealt therein most wickedly, ungodly,
traitorously, and diuellishly. Wherefore they have their judgment and heavy
condemnation, taken from the manner of their labors therein. Therefore, as we
are willing to do good, so let us have this regard to retain the right
grace of good deeds: that is, as Nazanzen said, To do them well. In li. 1. de
Theolog.
And this shall we do indeed, if we deal in the fear of God and with a
good conscience, according to the method and rule of the word of God, which
shall neither deceive us, nor cause to to repent our travails bestowed about
the same. And this is that which Zachary intended when he said, that we
being delivered from the hands of our enemies, should serve God, in holiness
and righteousness, all the days of our life.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Malepertnesse of certain private and ignorant persons, which presume
to censure the Prince, the Magistrates, the Ministers, etc.
IT is right and meet that faults should be reproved, corrected, Every man
is not to be a corrector or reproouer of other men's faults.
or contemned, so far, that neither heinous sins in persons, nor horrible
inconveniences or mischiefs in laws, should under terms of honesty and
justice, be defended. Amici vitia siferas, facistua, If thou suffer the vices
of thy friend (says Seneca) thou make them thine own. He speaks of those
vices which no man by the Law of friendship, should wink at in his dear
friend. And Erasmus in his Moria, will that the faults of our friends should
be corrected, In lib. de amicit.
alluding unto Cicero, who in his book of friendship, will have nothing
dissembled in friendship. And indeed, he that in such a case so winketh at the
heinous offenses of others, Leuit. 19.17.
that he yields obsequie to the sinner, commits a double sin. This is
the general law: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer not
sin to rest upon him: but thou shall not hate him in thine heart. Every man
is not meet to be a reprouer of others.
Howbeit we be also taught, that it is not meet that therefore every private
person should be a fault finder, a reproouer, a correcter, a judge of every
law, of every person, of every offense, in every sort, in every place, and
as him lists, without discretion and difference: for then, how should the law
be answered, Honor father and mother? how should Peter's rule be observed:
Love covers the multitude of sins? how should the words of Christ be
followed, Judge not: condemn not? how should James be vndestood, Be not many
masters (my brethren) knowing how that we shall receive the greater
damnation: for in many things we sin all? P. Berthor. in. 1. Sam. 24 5, 6.
Item, de orig. Council Nicen: sub Constan. histo. Eccl. li. 10. ca. 1.
The Emperor Constantine holding it unlawful for private men or inferior
persons, to censure or judge the Magistrates and Bishops, caused all those
Libelles to be burned, which contained the accusations of certain Bishops in
a general Council. Indeed there be not many called to this function, much
less every person. Therefore albeit that Mardochai the Jew, was an especall
instrument appointed by the Lord to work with Hesther, the reuersion of the
kings commandment, Exo. 18. Nom. 16.1.
yet did it not become Haman to face her presumptuously. Though Iothro was
heard in his good counsel which he gave to Moses, yet Dathan urged him both
untimely and unjustly. And notwithstanding the Prophet Nathan, and the prophet
Gad, were specially raised up and sent to David by the Lord, Luth. in Eccl. ca.
10.20.
to reprove him for his faults: it became not Michel (for all that) to mock
the king her husband, and to call him fool. Nor was it meet and right, that
malicious Shimei should so irreverently rail at the Lords Anointed, and curse
and check him. For this business belonged not only unto him, nor did he
deal therein discreetely. Moreover, to teach how unseemly a thing it is,
either for children to note or display their own fathers faults, or for the
inferiors to be judges and correctours of their superiors, the Scripture
tells, that Shem and Iaphet, Shem and Iaphet winked at and covered their
fathers faults.
the two sons of Noah, did so dissemble their fathers faults, that they did
not only care, not to behold them; but also had great regard to cover and
conceal them and therefore they went toward him to cover him, their faces
being turned away. And the same Scripture says, that because Cham had
irreverently revealed his fathers fault, Cham revealed his fathers fault.
he was much disliked of his brethren, and of his father. Also the Poets tell,
that one Actaeon for such a thing was devoured of his own dogs; Actaeon
descried the nakedness of Diana.
as a punishment meet for him that takes pleasure to descrie and display
other men's faults, especially of them whom he ought to reverence, honor, and
obey.

2. Next, as we should not speak wickedly though for Gods cause, so also in
those causes, In what sort faults must be reproved.
in those places, and of those persons, wherein it becomes well Moses himself
to be jealous, and Paul to be zealous, there should be no cursed and ungodly
speeches used among true Christians, either of them in authority and office,
or of any other whatsoever. It is expressly forbidden in the law, that any man
should rail upon the Gods: that is, upon the princes and magistrates, or to
speak evil of the ruler of the people. Eccl. 10.10.
Which also Solomon intends when he says: Curse not the King, no, not in thy
thought: Neither speak evil of the rich, that is of the magistrate, in thy
bedcha^ber.

What to esteem of the Laws, and how we should deal one with one another.
According to the true meaning of that law, the Apostles of our Lord, Peter,
James, Paul, and the Lord himself have most prouidently taught and advised us,
as well by example, as by word, that we should speak, judge, and esteem of the
laws, magistrates, and ministers of the word, with great reverence and regard.
And with whomsoever we strive, or of whomsoever we talk, our words should be so
seasoned and tempered, yt no note of bitter cursing pass our mouths: and this
Michael our chief captain has also taught us in his contention with the
devil, by the testimoby of S. Jude. Iudae. ver. 9.
And that, as touching the infirmities and offenses of private persons, we that
be Christians, and should immitate our master, Private offenses.
must take heed, how we take on us hastily to judge of them, and so to
condemn them: nay rather we should by charity cover the multitude of sins, and
knowing our selves to be spiritual and stronger then some others, we ought
neither to quip them with bitter scofs and unseemly taunts, Gal. 6.1.3.
nor too rigorously reprehend and reprove them: but (as it is the property of
the righteousness of faith and spiritual justice) to bear with the weak, and
gently to inform and assay to restore them, as the Apostle Paul advises,
whereto he adds this reason, Least thou also be tempted. He that observes
not this rule, had need to fear, least the Spirit of God reprove him of
judgment: and that out of his own words, there be not gathered against
himself, Ioh. 16.8.
matter both to judge and to condemn him. So dangerous and so dreadful a thing
it is, to be a censour, a judge, a reproouer of others.

3. But (this notwithstanding) curious Calisthenes disliketh all things in the
Court of Alexander, It is the nature of some persons to dislike all things, and
to check the best men, but to amend nothing in themselves. Sen. li. 3. de Ira.

Iuuenal. sat. 8. Homer. Il.


and talks thereof his pleasure without wisdom, reverence or fear.
Demochares also that saucie Parrhesiastes of Athens, is ouer-bold with king
Philip of Macedonia, and that impudent and deformed Grecian Thersites,
blusheth not to taunt and prattle most malepertly against noble Achilles and
other mighty men of his Country. Yea, the very base Seriphian (that cannot
live though he were an Athenian without shame) obiecteth, as it pleases him,
to Themistocles the Athenian (who though he were a Seriphian, would not live
without honor.) And who perceives it not, how well this is digested of the^
that emulate others, that some private persons, Job. 30, 8, 9, 10.
ignorant me^, yea, such as are distained with whoredoms, dronkennes, usury,
theft, piracie, murders, and other vile sins, should presume to censure the
prince, the judges and magistrates, the bishops and pastors, with open mouths,
and that (which is most horrible) they should blaspheme the prince, the
magistrates, the minister, the laws? Be these zealous persons? be these
reformed people? have they been schooled and learned the true discipline? Nay,
Iudae. 4.16, 19. 2. Pet. 2.10. Shem and Iaphet turned away their faces, as not
willing to behold it.
rather they be the same (among others) of whom S. Jude speaks in his
Epistle* and such of whom Saint Peter prophesies, which have a pleasure (not
with Shem and Iaphet, to dissemble and to assay to conceal their Fathers
fault, but irreverently with Cham the father of Chanaan to discover and
divulgate the same) to speak evil of them that be in authority, to walk
after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, being persons presumptuous, and
such as stand in their own conceit. To yield unto the provision of any good
Law, or to exhibit any grateful assistance or obedience to the wisest makers
and best executioners of Laws, they be far behind all others, whatsoever
they make show of; and who sees not what they be contented to yield unto for
the good of the Church and common wealth, without bitter murmur and grudge?
Besides that, in their common censures, Mat. 24. Luke 19.
they express such charity toward their brethren and neighbors, as those
latter times, whereof Christ prophesied, do afford: and yet they would show
deep devotion, Iam. 1.26.
not considering what Saint James had said: It is the nature of charitable
christians, to be sorry for other men's faults and infirmities.
If any man among you seem to be devout, and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's devotion is vain. The right charitable
christians, seeing that the Just man falls seven times in a day, that the
very Judgment Seat sauoureth of oppression, and that the Fathers and Elders
of the Church have had their particular faults, do rightly consider of man's
nature; Eccles. 3.16.
incident to slidings, and they be most sorry, not only for the falls of
their brethren and friends, with Moses, Nehemiah, and Paul: Dolendum si quis
inter nos m^lus.
but also for the transgressions of their mortal enemies and strangers* with
David, Daniel, the Apostles, and their Master Christ: having the like
simpathie and compassion that one membe^ has suffering with another. Bucer in
Mat. 26. ^^arra: Sect. 4.
Above al, they lament the imperfections of them that be in authority and
public places, as of Solomon, of Peter, of David, of Iehosophat; which are in
them (though they be otherwise gods servants) as the pain of the head
enflaming the whole body and as oughly spots in a tower of excellent beauty,
to the unspeakable grief of the godly.

But, as for these vncharmed, Uncharitable tongues.
and uncharitable persons, which have not yet learned to speak well of any,
Pindarus.
they esteem slanderous words for most daintre morsels (as Pindar said of
such) when coming together they cannot only cut with their tongues (as with
sharp rasors, Job 30, 8, 9, 10
that pierce and divide asunder) but also, as hungry Ravens which feed on the
carcasses, they devour the^ that be absent with gredinesse and delight: But if
that a personage of account or name fall into their mouths, oh God! The play of
the Cat the death of the Mouse.

Boet. de cont. sol..

Philo. li. 2. Met. 7.


how he is tossed, turned, gnawne and rent in pieces among them, with iolitie
and pleasure? They play with him as the Cat plaieth with the Mouse, and they
draw him to the extremity of that second death; whereof Boethius speaks,
whereby (to their power) they deprive him of al good name, honor, and
authority, both in his life, and after his departure also, with all
greediness.

In the manner of this judgment, Hasty and rash judgment touching other men.
Alexander.
Alexanders example is set a side, for he would commonly stop the one of his
ears, when he heard and accusation against any man, until the party accused
could come to answer for himself. But with them, impudent Actaeon can no
sooner descry naked Diana, Inscius Actaeon vidit sine vest Dianam. Ovid.
and shameless Cham discover his own fathers fault: but by and by, there be
mighty occasions proffered as they think, to Momus of reprehe^sion, to Zoilus
of railing, to Timon of detestation. So Doeg accuses, Nabal slaundereth, and
Shimei curses the Lords anointed: the viper hangs on Paul's hand, assaying
to hurt and sting him to death: and the vnnurtered boys mock Elizeus in great
sport and play. As if they would say: There, there, for so would we have it!
Now is his holy life brought to light! Of such David complained in his days.
Mine enemies speak evil of me: when shall he die, and his name perish? And if
he come to see me, he speaks vanity, and his heart conceiueth falsehood
within himself, and when he comes forth he tells it. Is this religion? Is
this charity?

Punishment of slanderers and mockers.

2. Sam. 16.9. 1. King. 2.8.


5 But this kind would be better advised (in mine opinion) if David would but
hearken to Abishai: or if his bent against Nabal were perfited: or if his
charge which he gave to Solomon touching Shimei, were in every such case
severely executed: or if every true Christian had that ability and will (with
Paul) to fling the viper into the fire: or, that the Lord did ordinarily
execute his vengeance with shee-Beares on such mockers now, as he did on those
unnurtured boys then. Neither would they be half so malepert in this malice,
if every such viper incurred the imprisonment, Aristogeton.
condemnation and end of Aristogeton the Athenian, for his faucinesse against
Phocian, and for his disturbance of the Citizens: or at the least, if but only
that sentence of Calipho (whom Plaute brings in speaking to Pseudolus) were
exacted of the^ by some lawful officer. Plaut. in Pseudol.
Homines qui gestant, quique auseultant crimina, etc. Let both the slanderer
(says he) and the listner to the same, be hanged up, the one by the tongue, the
other by the ears. And well worthy: for (says Bernard) as the one carries the
devil in his mouth: so the other carries the devil in his ear: And they both
being execrable offenders, Psalm. 15.3.
are denied the right of Paradise.

But, forasmuch as this sentence wants an executioner; Hypocrites epsy
moates in other men's eyes, and perceive not beams in their own.
neither is Peter ever ready with his sword to cut off Malchus ear (which is so
open to receive sinister reports) in the defense of his Masters innocence,
they wanting all charity to cover the very manifest sins, presume yet so to
pry most curiously with eager emulation on other men, in whose eyes they have
a delight to epsy little thin motes, when yet they perceive not the big beams
in their own. Such an one (once pointing to a married Minister) said of him in
scorn: lo, this is he, that has married a wife, Luke 14.26.
and therefore he cannot come: not considering the whiles, that himself had not
only married a wife too, but had also fined a farm, and bought five yoke of
oxen, and was so gone to survey the one, and to prove the other, that he came
not indeed: Howbeit, is the eye sees all thing saving it self, so could he
not see into himself, though he gliked at his brother, Mat. 4.
with the wreasting of Scripture in such a disdainful sort, which is a part of
the devilish divinity.

6. So curious are they in noting the lives of other men, secretly to accuse
them, bitterly to rip them; Their vanity
Gregor. hom. 36. super illud Iuga beum emi quinque.
and most negligent the whiles to see into themselves, and to clear themselves
of al their filthy abominations! Of all the vanities under the Sun, this is
not the meanest (by the judgment of Saint Augustine. In libro. confess. 10.
) But how near they come to the nature those hypocrites, of who^ Bernerd
speaks, let themselves (when they have well searched and examined their own
hearts and consciences) be the judges: Volunt esse humiles five despectu, etc.
They would appear humble, but not in contempt: they would seem poor, but
without any want: well clothed, without carfulness: they would have ease
without labor: flattering some: backbiting others: biting like Dogs:
deceiving like foxes: proud as Lions, and inwardly as ravening wolves. As
bears they seek the sweetness of the honey of vain glory, and secret
delights. They will be Judges without authority, witnesses without sight,
false accusers without all truth. As if he said in one word: These be very
Neroes, which yet would be esteemed Catoes. Might not David say in this part
of them, as he said, when he expostulated with the counsailours and
flatterers of Saul, who had secretly accused him, and openly slaundered him?
Psalm. 58.1, 2.
Is it true? (O Congregation) speak ye justly? O sons of men? Judge ye
vprightlie? yea, rather ye imagine mischief in your heart: your hands execute
cruelty upon the earth: And worthily of them speaks Agur in the Proverbs of
Solomon. Pro. 30.11, 12.
There is a generation that curse their father, and bless not their mother.
There is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, and yet are they not
washed from their filthiness. Our Savior in the Gospel reproves such
hypocrites; Mat. 7.
and a very heathen man (not able to sustain this currish kind) flingeth to
the^ this opprobrious stone Horat. Cum tua peruide as oculis mala lippus in
vnctis: cur?

Good counsel. Plato.


What meanest thou with Serpents sights,
so sharply to descrie
Thy neighbors faults; since thou may see
thine own with bleared eye?


7. But as he which reproves, should not give a just occasion to be reproved,
least in reprehending others he condemn himself: so by Platoes advice, if one
find another man committing a fault, he should look by and by into himself,
and say secretly: Am not I such an one?

Thus also counsaileth Syracides. Ecclus. 5.15.
Be thou not a privy accuser, as long as thou live, and use no slander with
thy tongue: for shame and sorrow goes over the thief, and an evil name over
him that is double tongued: but he that is a privy accuser of other men, shall
be hated, envied, and confounded. Above all, Christ commands: Christ,
Judge not, condemn not. Cast out the beam of thine own eye. And James his
holy Apostle, James.
would that we should not backbite one another. This is the rule of the
Gospel, this is the Law, this is the Prophets. K. Henry 8 Graft. in Chron.
An. H. 8.37.
And this thing respected that most noble King of famous memory, Henry the
eight: when in open Parliament he said among other things: Behold, what love
and charity is amongst you, when the one calls the other Heretic, and
Anabaptist: and he calls him again, Papist, Hypocrite, and Pharisie? Are
these signs of fraternall love between you? No, no. Again, Alas, how can the
poor souls live in concord, when ye Preachers sow amongst them in your
Sermonms, debate and discord? Again: ye of the temporaltie be not clean and
unspotted of malice and envy: for ye rail on Bishops, speak slanderously of
Priests, and rebuke and taunt preachers, both contrary to good order, and
Christian fraternity. If ye know surely that a Bishop, or Preacher erreth, or
speaks perverse doctrine, come and declare it to some of our Council, or to
us, to whom is committed by God the high authority to reform and order such
causes and behauiours: and be not judges your selves of your own fantastical
opinions, etc.

CHAP. X.
Of certain proud, curious and discontented heads, which disdaining the
plain sense of holy Scriptures, and the judgment of all the Ancient and
learned fathers and wise men, do hatch strange opinions, and thrust them into
the Church, which they rather rob and throw down, then any way benefit, or
hold up: yet under a godly pretense. Against Polypragmosine.
Good menare heedfull not to offend others. Tit. 3.9. Excles. 18
THe charitable good men, being well schooled by Solomon, and the holy Apostle
Paul, are very wary of strange doctrines, and of such kind of questions, as
do offend the weak brethren: neither desire they to deal in such actions, as
rather annoy then profit the Church and Commonwealth. But in these days,
many making show of zeal and understanding, do nevertheless far estrange
themselves from both. Ecclus. 5.10.
And whereas they should stand fast in the way of the Lord, and be steadfast in
understanding, should abide by the word, and follow peace and righteousness:
should be gentle to hear the word of God that they may understand it, Psalm.
58. Some presume to argue very rashy of God and move up unnecessary and
perilous questions.
and make a true answer with wisdom: they notwithstanding are most froward (as
it were from the womb) they go astray, and speak lies. Among these, there be
found the hatchers of many strange and fearful opinions, the mouers up of
matters most unnecessary, the brochers of many curious and dangerous
questions: and they presume to touch even the high majesty of our most gracious
God, whom only, that a man should name without great reverence and fear, is
sin: and of whose causes, that any man should presume to argue, without
humility and Christian wisdom, it is well worthy of a heavy judgment. But
they, as blind men, run toward the pit of perdition, ready to fall into the
same before they perceive it: neither will they withdraw their unwashed hands
from polluting the most holy things. And albeit this be most plain, that all
power both in heaven, Apoc. 1.
and in earth, belongs to our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the man Christ
Jesus is our mediator, and Lord over all the kings of the earth, the which
also has bin gladly granted by those Christian Emperors, Constantius,
Constantinus, Theodosius, and Justinian: yet, there be, who in their
contentious disputations about words and questions (in their unsavory
distinctions) dread not to abridge the kingdom and power of Christ, and strain
courtesy to admit him into Samaria, because he is apparelled like a Jew: no
marvel then, if they contemn his ministers, and faithful servants.

2 These men (as those ancient Gnostikes) being exalted in the conceit of their
own singular wisdom, Gnostici, a kind of heretics, so called of their
singular conceited wisdom. Cap. 24. q. 3
decipher themselves to be such, as are ashamed of our simple Jesus, whom they
have tied up; and of his plain doctrine, which only edifieth. For they study
to utter rather lofty things, then meet things, and in the pride of their
hearts imagine themselves to be rather kings reigning with God in heaven, then
men living among men on ye earth (as August said of some such in his time).
Hanibal. Phormio. Cicer. 2. de orator. Homer.
These do nor only think (with Hanibal) that the old philosopher Phormio
d^reth, when he tells of a captains duty and yt among the Poets great Homer
noddeth and also that Sanct^s Bernerdus non vidit omnia: Bern.
Saint Bernerd was ignorant of many things: and that other the holy Fathers,
and learned doctors of the Church, have doated in their Sermons, opinions, and
divine writings exceedingly, (whom indeed in all things (I say) we may not
justify, forasmuch as they being mortal men have had their errors) but they
proceed also to think that even those Apostles of Christ, whom the holy Ghost
had replenished, have in their doctrine doated also: and were it not for shame,
the corner stone and author of all wisdom and truth, should not escape their
partial censures in this case. In the mean time, it is apparent, that
themselves doat deeply indeed. But they will not have it so: being better
conceited of themselves, Marcion. Montanus.
learning their wisdom (as it seems) of the two Heretics, Marcion and
Montanus, who (as it is reported of them) used to say, that themselves knew
many more and better things, then either Christ, or his Apostles ever knew. If
it be so, then would they, that men should honor them, and keep them on line,
Least that whenever they depart the world, Job.
wisdom should also depart and perish together with them.

The end of their knowledge. Bern.
3 Oh Lord, that ever men should be so impudent! It is apparent to what end they
have hunted after that knowledge which they have: for seeing they utter no jot
of wisdom, in that they have thereby instructed themselves, nor any sparkle of
charity, in that they be not desirous to edify others, nor be any thing
zealous therewith for the Lord of hosts: it is plain, that either with a
covetous mind, they shoot at the wealth, riches, promotions, dignities,
friends and favor of ye world, or with a vain curiosity they strive and
contend to answer their proper conceits, or in vain glory expect the
singular praises and commendations of worldly men, whom they would should
extol them with high titles, though the Poet be justly moved to point at
their folly.

Scire tuum nihil est: nisite scire hoc, sciat alter?
By knowledge thine have thou no name:
Least others know thou know the same?
Socrates, who was so excellent among the philosophers, said of himself, that
he knew nothing but this, that he knew nothing. But these men, Reuelines Ladder
to knowledge.
although they never ascended the full grades of Reuchlins Ladder, know all
things. This Ladder has ten steps or stays, as namely, the Object, the
discord, the sense exterior, the sense interior, the imagination, the
judgment inferior, the judgment superior, the reason, the understanding,
and the mind her self, from and by whose light, all other inferior virtues
are directed and governed. This is the Ladder, by the which a man ascends to
the knowledge of all things, which are either by sense, or by knowledge, or by
faith comprehended. They that have not discreetely gone through all these
grades, are most unable to discern and judge between truth and falsehood,
betwixt good and evil, and more unable to teach and instruct others. Neither
could these persons without the fame, contriue and compass any thing, were it
not that they are so well conceited of their own supernatural speculation,
and inspirations, Bucer. in Mat. 4.
to the admiration of the ignorant, wherein they do most proudly tempt the
Lord God.

Many ignorant men adventure to reason rashly of the highest mysteries,
4. Very near to the former comes another crew, the which, albeit they never
read over in their mother tongue (I say not the Bible, but) that common
Psalter book which the younger children read in the schools, do yet
(nevertheless) nothing blush to exalt themselves in learning and knowledge
before others, of whom in reason they should be contented to learn: and
presume most arrogantly and proudly, to argue, reason, and dispute of far
higher matters, then their knowledge can extend unto, and beyond that it
pleases God to utter, not only unto them, but unto any man living, and that
in this conceit, that themselves are well able both to understand and argue of
such matters, with all kind of dexterity. indeed, this kind is not newly
conceived and brought forth, as in this age, or of late: for it has been of
old, of the which a certain learned man thus spoke: Petr. Rau. in sermon.
Quidam antequam disciplinis clementartis, imbuantur, etc. There be some, which
before they know their letters, enquire of a point, of a line, and of the
superficies and quantity of the Soul, of destiny, of charge, and freewill,
of the matter and moouings, of the beginnings of bodies, of the propagation of
the multitude, and the section of greatness: what thing time is: what is that
ina^e^voyd thing: what thing place is, and of the flowing and e^bing of the
great Oceans of the sundry secrets of hidden nature: of the diverse figures of
causes: of the beginnings of things: and of many other such like matters.
Indeed these things require a more full knowledge and understanding, then the
most in number have attained unto. And yet none more ready to talk argue, and
dispute of this and other such high matters, other they are yea, every
alehouse and tavern, every market place and feast house, and to be brief (as
Nazanzene once said) every company of men, Greg. Nazan. in de Theolog. libro. 1.
every assembly of women is filled with their divinity, whereby our faith and
the holy religion of Christ begins to wax nothing else, but as it were a
sophistry, or a talking craft. And therein every of the^, hunteth after strange
devises, and new coined conceits of his own head. Eccles. 12.


5 We are warned in the word of God to abandon such proud conceits of our own
wits, The word of god teaches modesty and not curiosity nor rash judgment
of Scriptures.
and such curiosity, and al irreuerent and rash disputations of the holy law
of God: for the doctrine of the Spirit, does not edge on curiosity, but
enkindleth the fire of charity: therefore Christ sent forth his Apostles, not
to spread singular opinions of their own heads, but to preach the Gospel.
Bern. in Cant.
And to prevent their vain boastings, and their haughty minds of their own
integrity, he put them in remembrance of Satan that fell from heaven, after
that he had vaine-gloriously exalted himself in his pride. Luke 10.18.
The wise Syracides gives good counsel when he says: Eccles. 3.22.24.
Seek not out the things, that are above thy capacity: and search not the
ground of such things as are too mighty for thee: wherein he would not that men
should be negligent in that which they ought to exercise themselves in, nor that
they should leave one jot of that, which they are commanded to search and learn
in the word of God: but his meaning is, that they should beware that they
presume not to enter into the secrets of God, which his will is not to reveal
unto men in this life, and that they take not on them to argue rashly of those
divine things, which yet they know not: for, as it is not good to eat too much
honey, Prou. 25.28.
so curiously to search out the glory of heavenly things, it is not
commendable. Saint Paul teaches us this by his own example. Albeit he had
been taken up into the third heaven, and being in Paradise, 2. Cor. 12.
heard and saw many wonderful and secret things: yet knowing how unable man's
infirmity was to declare them, being neither showed unto him for that end,
he did not strive to utter them, not to dispute of such things among men: but
said, He would refrain, least any man should think of him above that he saw
of him, or heard of him. And when he had at large disputed of the casting out
of the Jews, and the receiving in of the Gentiles; and perceiving how far
the wisdom and knowledge of God therein surmounted his capacity, he stayed
himself, and shut up his disputation and admiration. O the deepenesse of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments, Romans 11.33.
and his ways past finding out! for who has known the mind of the Lord, and
who was his counselor.

6. Now albeit these testimonies and examples be made perpetual, and may well
be learned of them in our age, Some be never the better for the preaching of
the word.
unto whom the same things are preached and made apparent by the light of the
Scriptures: yet all this serves not their turn, they are never the better, as
those Carions, that stink with the heat of the Sun, which to the creatures
is so comfortable. For (as Bernard said) Sol non omnes quibus lucet, Ber.
super. Cant. ser. 23.
etiam calefacit: Sit Sapientia multos quos docet quid sit faciendum, non
continuo etiam accendit ad faciendum, etc. The Sun does not warm all them to
whom he shines: so neither does wisdom straight ways inflame them whom she
teaches, to perform that which they should do. It is one thing to know what
riches is: it is another thing to have riches in possession. Neither does the
knowledge of riches make a man rich: but the possession of riches. But such is
the arrogancy of these persons, that because they have seen the Sun, They
think better of themselves then they deserve.
they think they be sufficiently warmed by his light only: because they have
heard tell of riches, they imagine themselves right rich: because that
Wisdom has sent forth her maidens in the highest places of the city, Prou.
3.9.
and invited them unto her though they came not, nor would be instructed:
therefore they be (as they conceit it) so well furnished, that they need no
more teaching: yea, that they be so wise, as wisdom her self. Hereof it is,
that in their proud conceits they are led and carried away with the wind of
vanity, and wander in every bie-path with the double tongued sinner: they
rather delight in fables and endless genealogies, which breed questions more
then godly edifying, then in the words of the wise, Eccles. 12.
which are like goades, and like nails fastened by the masters of the
assemblies, and given by one Pastor: that is, they be led about with new and
strange devises, and their words are like the scumme upon the water: they
regard not those words of the wise, nor those wholesome books of the learned,
which are accepted and authorized by the fathers and rulers of the Church of
Christ, nor desire they to be as a flock of sheep under the true Pastor and
head of the Church Christ; whereby they knowing not the right way to the City,
do err, and wander egregiously, not considering the whiles what evil they
commit. For notwithstanding all their arguing, reasoning, disputing and talking
of God and those divine things, it is apparent by their fruits, and by those
effects which follow that such is their faith, their hope, their charity, that
they never yet saw the Lord Jesus so clearly, as even that blind Burtimaeus
saw him when he cried on him for mercy: Mark. 10.46.
that they never apprehended him, as the very thief did, which hanged on his
right hand: that they never received him as Zacheus did: that they never
followed him, as Leui the toll-taker did: that they never heard his words as
Mary did: neither mind they to die in his truth as. Stephan did. Therefore,
except they change their opinions and truly repent, they shall be placed among
those foolish virgins, which have neither light nor oil in their lamps: and
then though they say unto the Lord: Thou have preached in our streets, and we
have eaten and dronken in thy presence, Luke 13.26.
therefore open to us: he will nevertheless thus reject them and their
petition: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not whence ye are.

7 Now therefore, seeing it is not for all persons, and in any sort to reason,
Who are meet to dispute of divine things, and in what sort, and how far.
dispute, and talk of the matters of God (as Gregory Nazanzen says) let us
in this place consider to whom this belongs, then, at what time, in whose
presence, of what things, and how far. The same Doctor both in his former
book of divinity, and also in his book of the Arrians, Grego. Naz. de
theolog. li. 1. Et in libro de Arriaenis, quod non liceat semper and public de
Deo contendere.
speaking of this argument, has the like matter and words in effect. And thus
he says. It belongs not to every man (O ye wise and Christian men) to
reason of God: it is not meet for all men to discuss the divine Nature. This
thing is not so base, that such as creep on the earth and are busied with
terrene affections and worldly cogitations, should take it in hand. But this
appertains to them only, which beyond others declare themselves meet for
the matter, by deep contemplation and study, and which have cleansed as well
their souls as their bodies from filthy affections, or that at the least have
a desire to be cleansed in the use of the same. For like as the sore eyes
takes harm by gazing on the Sun: so he that is unclean, cannot without
danger presume to touch that thing which is most clean. Next, The time.
the time must be considered: for it is not meet to argue of those things at
all times, but then indeed, when we be reposed and at rest from the gross
and troublesome cares of worldly affairs: otherwise, as it is for an eloquent
man to write in crabbed Letters, and to mix precious ointment with filthy
Dirte, so shall it be with us, if without regard the chief faculty of the
mind, which is capeable of the divine contemplations, should be confounded
with the filthy and guilefull imaginations of vain things: He must therefore
take his time thereunto, that handles these high matters, and know God.

Thirdly, this must be done in the presence of those that reverently esteem
of these things, In whose presence.
and take not a pleasure to trifle therewith, as men accustom to do in
worldly matters, or as those men which after the regard of their Horses, after
their games, after their songs and delights, after the care of their bellies,
and of those shameful things under the same, do at the least betake
themselves for recreation and exercise of their wits, to the reasoning and
disputing of the things which are most high, beyond their ability and
knowledge.

Fourthly, it is to be considered of what things and how far to wade in these
disputations, namely of those things whereunto every man's own capacity is
able to extend, Of what things.
and so far as the condition and understanding of the hearer shall be able to
bear: least that, as too great a noise harmeth the ear, too much meat
annoyeth the body: too heavy burdens oppress the bearers thereof, and
overmuch rain hurts the ground: fo those hearers be grieved, and both the
one and the other be confounded by such high and more then sound disputations.
Let us not attempt any thing beyond the highest strength of man's frailty: that
is, beyond that it has pleased God to enable man to conceive.

8. Howbeit, I would not that men should so understand me herein, as if it were
a sin for any man to remember God always, This is not spoken to discourage
any man from reading the word and talking of God with reverence.
for in my mind, we should ever be mindful of God: yea, more often then we
draw breath: and I think it good for a man to spend all his life therein, and
in nothing else, if it were possible for him so to live. For I am one of that
number, which allow that in the law of God should be the chief exercise of a
man both day and night, as the scripture teaches, and that he ought to praise
and bless the lord in the evening, in the morning, at noonetide, and at all
times: and as Moses says, lying down, rising up, going by the way and
whatsoever else a man does, he should have God, and the memory of God fixed in
his heart. I forbid not any man (I say) to remember God, but I forbid him to
reason of God: neither dislike I that a man should reason so far as that
godliness be not neglected: but I like not that, which is done out of season:
(...) as if I shunned this part of doctrine, but that it be done with measure,
and reverence. For a man may eat too much honey, and what is sweeter then
honey? To be short: I am of Salomons mind in this, that there is for every
work an appointed time. And we see, that the things which are of themselves
good, do lose the grace of their goodness in them which handle them evil: as
when a flower is out of season in the winter, and the apparel of a woman
becomes not a man, nor the man's apparel beseems a woman: neither is mirth
meet at funerals, nor mournings at marriages, etc. If therefore we can observe
and keep that which is comely and timely in other things, should we not then
do the same in those holy and divine matters? Gregory Nazanzen says again.
Let us keep our selves within the bounds of our calling, and let us not go
either too far on the one side, least we return into Egypt again, or too far
on the other side, least we be carried away into Babylon: Let us not sing the
Lords song in a strange land. Psalm. 137.
That is to say: Let us not argue and reason of the word of God at all
adventures, as well there where it is not to be reasoned, as there where it is,
and as well the ears of them that be not fit for the same, as of them that be
fit, and the same likeneth those rash and vnreuerent disputers and talkers of
the holy Scriptures unto mad men, that destroy their own houses, kill their
own children, and beat their own natural parents, taking them for other men.

9 But all this cannot satisfy those hawtie conceies. For Gregory Nazanzen
that learned Diuient (in their opinion) doateth among other doctors. For do
not these wise persons know as much as he? Can they not give as learned an
interpretation of the hard questions of divinity as he has given? Are they
not inspired with that Spirit which does teach them all things, and lead
them into all truth? Indeed (as I said) this is their imagination: they take
on them the knowledge of all things, neither is their any thing so difficult
in the holy Scriptures, which they esteem not easy and ready enough by
themselves to be discussed, when yet they know not whereof they speak, nor
whereof they affirm. VVoulde to God that they knew also this one thing, to
keep silence (as, Job wished that his friends would) then happily they
should be taken for wise men: Job. 13.5. Pro. 17.28.
but that will not be: therefore against them we may conclude, esteeming them
fools, as they be indeed, and such as are willing to decipher their folly
in their untimely and erreuerent verbositie. Yet that notwithstanding, Peter's
head is full of Proclamations, Peter's vein.
yea, and he is so far in, that whiles he should in reason hearken to his
Master, he deuiseth to build Tabernacles, and he meets with such as are
willing to shake hands with him, no less ready then those that with one
mind attempted the buylding of Babel, after the flood. But to bring this to
pass, they endeavor to raze and pull down the little Chamber which the noble
Sunemite erected and prepared for holy Elisha to lodge in. 2. King. 4.10
And observe this who that will, he shall soon epsy, that Dionyse (though an
Heathen Tyrant) has no small number of immitatours, even among these in title
Christians, which under a cloak of zeal and pretext of reformation, do
without all scruple of conscience rob the Church, and dispoyle her of her
lawful treasures. Neither care they whether God be honored, or not honored
in the assembly of his faints, so as they may be permitted as greedy
Cormorants to prey on those little Chambers, or those lands, livings, rentes
and revenues, the which by the providence of God, and the good regard of
Christian Princes, have been provided and appointed for the maintenance of the
house of God, which ought not to be neglected (as says the Prophet) and the
relief of the Ministers of the word, who thereof should live and reap
reward, as the Apostle says. But what did the Tyrant Dionyse? He robbed and
spoiled the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, Dionyse robbed the Temple of Jupiter.
Cicero de Not. deo. lib. 3.
when he thirsted after the Treasures of the same, and defended his sacrilege
therein by a fair pretense and show of honesty. First, entering into the
Temple, he beheld the Image of Jupiter, which had on it a coat of pure
Gold, of great weight, and value, wherewith the Tyrant Gelo had adorned the
same, of the spoils of the Carthaginenses. This coat Dionyse took away with
this saying, That it was too heavy for Jupiter in the Summer, and too cold
for him in the VVinter. Therefore in stead thereof, he put on him a coat of
Lynsie-woolsie, as more meet for either season of the year. Next, looking on
Aesculapius Epidaurus, and perceiving to have a long bearde of Gold, he
bereaved him also thereof, saying, It was not meet that the Son should have
such a beard whose father in all Temples was painted beardlesse. Lastly,
looking on the other Images within the Temple, and seeing them to have some
golden crowns, some tables and dishes of silver in their hands stretched forth,
he took them all away, and said, that he yet did not take away any of these
things violently, but only received them gladly of their hands that
proffered them unto him, and that it was a mere folly for a man, not to accept
those good gifts of their hands, to whom he prays for them, when they shall
offer and give them unto him. This was the devise and practice of Dyonise, when
he would enrich himself by the spoil of a Temple! We speak not here of the
Idolatry of the heathen beautifying those Images: but of the covetous mind of
the Tyrant, which putting all Religion apart (notwithstanding his pretense and
show of justice and honesty, thirsted after those treasures which were
dedicated to holy uses. I would the like were not in practice among title
Christians: but it is so common, yea and so manifest, that every one that has
wit cannot but perceive it. Alas that ever such persons should so fowly
disgrace the honor of so noble a title.

10 But when this comes into examination, and upon complaint into
exclamation, then the answer of Julian to the poor afflicted Christians is by
them renewed, The Emperor Iulians answer to the persecuted Christians, that
complained and came to him for justice.
It is your Masters commandment that ye should suffer these things with
patience. Your master wills you to possess neither silver nor gold: and
Peter and James confessed that they had not so much as one cross of coin to
bestow on a poor lame man. Such is their madness, and such shifts have they
to defend the same in the horrible abuse of the holy Scriptures: they
remember not that the will of Christ is, that as his servants should patiently
bear afflictions: so also they should be right far off from oppressing one
another of them. But this is the devils policy, which he also used against
Job. For having gotten leave of the Lord to deprive him of his children, health
and wealth, he thought that Job feeling the want of those things wherewith the
Lord his God had blessed him, he would soon faint, he would murmur against
God, he would swear and deny him, and all charity, almose deeds, and godly
virtues decay in him. This practice has he taught to many of those title
Christians, so well contented to imitate him therein, who ever disdaining the
state of the church, and of the ministers of the word, and envying the
blessings that by the great zeal, regard and benefit of good princes, it has
pleased God to exhibit unto them, and thinking that the little chamber which
the noble Sunemite prepared for Elisha the man of God, is too large for him, 2.
King. 4.10.
and the furniture thereof too magnificent: they stir most eagerly to
diminish this portion, to pull down the chamber walls. Neither make they any
scruple at this, that the spoils of sacrilege fill their own coffers: nor
care they for this, that the poor Leuite being cast into a low ebb, be
constrained to serve with Micha the Idolatour, The Levites hard lot. Judge.
17.10.
for a thin yearly stipende at his bare need. To be plain, as they rob
Christ of his power on the earth, so would they waste his inheritance, and
defraud his laborers of their lawful wages, thereby compelling them either to
give over, or to use many hard shifts, which yet they rather wish them to do,
then that any of their maintenance should rise from those things which they so
thirst for, and eagerly pursue.

11 Oh my dear brethren, let Dionyse, and Julian follow their own bents: Ios.
24. John 4.23. Mat. 7.24.
but let us that be the Lords, serve the Lord in spirit and truth. Let us hold
fast the anchor of our faith, and build upon our rock Jesus Christ. God forbid
that men should presume so much as to think to profane the most holy power of
God, through their vain studies and fantastical conceits. The holy spirit is
ever the same, he is never contrary to himself: to oppugn this spirit, is of
all other sins the greatest, and most fearful. And howsoever he inflame
men's minds, he instructs them ordinarily by the holy word of God: Act. 10.5.
else why was Cornelius commanded to send to Ioppa for Peter? All that labor
might have bin saved. But this serves not: for though the word teach men never
so well, Some men's good pretense and their own conceits make any thing lawful
for them to do without fear.

2. Chro. 18.1. and 19.2. 2. Sam. 15.9.


and the wise charmer do his best endeavor: yet if they so conceit it, they
assure saftie to Pliny, though he approach never so neat Vesuuian hill: and
Bellepheron, upon this warrantise, may boldly presume to mount the flying
Pegasus: yea, Iehosophat the servant of God, shall of them have dispensation to
join hands with wicked Achab: and Saul (under pretense of godliness) may
lawfully preserve wicked Agag, the Amalekite, against the Lords express
commandment, for they pretend well: yea, it makes no great matter, Genesis 19.8.
though Loath in his extremity, offer to prostrate his two virgin daughters to
the lust of the filthy Sodomites, Number. 22.28.
under a color to defend the two Angels from their beastly fury: And Balaam
also at the earnest request of Balack, and the Lords of Moab, may deal
partially, and make show of that, which could not be performed, hoping (for all
that) that his death shall be with the righteous, and his last end like his.
So in like sort, may Vzzia take on him the Priests office: And Vzzia may touch
the Arc to this end to hold it up from falling. For all these things are
lawful for them (as they take it) though not lawful for other men. But Peter
(alone) thinks, that this prerogative is his own, and therefore perceiving
that even the best beloved Apostle of our Lord, is willing to follow his
master with a single heart, he looks on him with a curious eye: John 21.20.
saying, And what shall he do here? Yet Peter and the rest pretended well.

12 But behold! so approached Pliny to the hill, The reward of foolish
presumption. Sueton. in li. de illust. vir. Hom. Iliad. lib. 6.
that he was smoothered with the fume and smoke ascending on the same: neither
could his warrantice help him. Thus also mounted Bellepheron on Pegasus the
flying horse, that suddenly he is unhorsed by him that disdaineth to bear such
ambicious heads. The holy Scriptures also tell us how that Vzzia was stricken
with leprosy, 2. Chro. 26.16
and the priests drove him out of the Temple. And, that Vzza was plagued, so
that he died. Besides that, 1. Chro. 13 10
the wrath of God which fell on Saul for his disobedience in the case of Agag,
is manifest to all posterities, 1. Sam. 15.3.9 Nom. 22. and 23.10.
as also the anger of the lord toward Balaam for his halting. And had not the
Lord by his especial grace miraculously preserved his two servants, Loath and
Iehosaphat, they had both perished also in their trouble: for howsoever they
pretended, apparent it is, that their devises and practices pleased not the
Lord. The pretense of the Jews. John. 11.50.
It seemed to the Jews that the high Priest pretended right well, when he
said: It is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and not
that all the nation perish. But was it expedient therefore, that they should be
the betraiers and murderers of Christ? Act. 2.23.38.
Then would not Peter have reproved them, and willed them to repent of that
their deed. Hazael. ^. King. 8.15.
Thus Hazael being certified by the Prophet Elisha, that he should be King of
Syria, would hasten the same by his wicked device: for under pretense to
refresh Benhadad the King of Syria (his Lord and master) he stiffled him with
a thick cloth which he dipped in water, and spread on his face.

David.
13 But David (that servant of God) was of an other heart, and of a better
resolution: for though he were anointed to be King over Israel, by Samuel the
Prophet, and had diverse opportunities offered him to kill Saul then king, he
yet refrained and said: God forbid that I should lay mine hands on the Lords
anointed. 1. Sam. 24.7.
It had bin better for Absalom also that he had bin of the same mind: Absalom.
but he, aspiring to the kingdom in the life time of his father, with another
mind could glaunce pleasantly before the people, saying unto them, 2. Sam.
15.4.12.
Oh that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man which has any plea and
matter in the law might come to me, and that I might do him justice? A fair
pretense! and many no doubt believing him, and expecting the performance of his
words, did in the time of David's trouble shake hands with Absalom, David's enemy.

Apud Terentium.
This unthankful people wist not, that Absalom spoke much like him, which
said, Me Regem esse oportuit, Meet it were, that I were made King. For now, if
Absalom had been preferred according to their desire, as Hazael was in Syria,
the perverse government of Roboam had too soon succeeded: not much unlike that
of Hazael in Syria, wherein he would so oppress the children of Israel, as the
very consideration thereof, made the Prophet to weep. But it was the Lords
pleasure this to prevent by the continuance of David's government, and of that
of Solomon in succession, to the great joy of the true Israelites. For, A time
for every thing.
as Solomon says, as every thing has his time which may neither be prevented
nor passed over, so we which are but mortal men (says Aratus) have not
learned all that is in Gods mind: Arat. solensis
but (as yet) there be many things closed up from us, some part whereof God
will, when his pleasure is, hereafter reveal unto us. In the mean time, it is
no easy matter to give newness to old things, authority to new things,
brightness to rustie things, light somenesse to dark things, Plin. in
praefac. ad Vespac.
and favor to ougly things, (as Plyny wrote to Vespasian.) But this time, the
vanity of man's mind thinks to prevent, and, in the glorious pretenses,
imagines, that if that could be permitted which he has devised, all things
should soon be ordered, and perfected so in points, as yet neither our
sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, nor her worthy brother king Edward, Solomon
did complain, not so much that impieti was found in the place of justice, as
of this, that impiety cannot be fully corrected.
nor King David, nor King Solomon, nor King Iehosophat, nor King Hezekiah, nor
King Josiah, ever saw in government, nor that any Prince or magistrate
whatsoever, has yet compassed.

But, as he that searches the divine glory beyond his capacity, is oppressed
with the same: so these men, urging so far beyond the limits of their vocation
and ability, in matters not only of Religion, but also of State and civil
government in their good prete^ces, do worthily draw ruin and decay on their
own heads, and hurt to many others: as whereof (besides the holy Scriptures)
even the histories of the profane Gentiles, are stored with examples.

Cicero with all his wisdom, eloquence, great dignity, and small consent of
people, assaied to restore the Roman commonwealth to the pristine state, but
he took not the Lords counsel and devise with him: The vain labor of
Cicero and his lamentation.
therefore could he accomplish nothing of his desire. But this he was sure of,
that he drew danger to his own life, and hurt to many others. There was a time,
wherein he glorified himself in this sort: O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam!
O happy Rome, thy Consul that I am! yet afterward such a time ouertooke him,
wherein he was justly occasioned to acknowledge his folly, and to sing this
sorry song. O me nunquam sapiente^! In Epist. ad Octauium.
etc. Alas, wise was I never in all my life! and yet sometimes was I vainly
esteemed to be that, which indeed I was not. O ye Romans, how much has your
opinion bin deceived concerning me? Thus also Pericles provoked the
Lacedaemonians, Melanth in Proverb.
Agesilaus and Lysander the Theba^es, Demosthenes the Macedonian king, and
Solon the Athenians, declaring thereby, how dangerous a matter it is to stir up
the sleeping lion, without possibility of the effecting of any worthy thing.

Polypragmosyue.
15. This enterprising of matters that appertain not to our calling, of a
singular curiosity, is a very pestilent thing, even in conomical and private
affairs; but much more noisome it is proved to be in polyticall and
ecclesiastical matters. Neither can it be assured, by any sufficient
testimony, example, or argument, that God either blesses or helps such kind
of practices: but rather, that he rewards the contriuers and dealers of and
in such actions, with an hell of torments and troubles. Besides that, let a man
do his best, and prevent the worst with all his wisdom and circumspection: yet
his own imperfections and natural pollutions make those things, which are of
themselves pure and unspotted, The best things seem impure to man by reason of
his sin: how much rather are man's own devises vnpure.
to seem polluted and unclean. As clear as is the sun, as bright as is the
Moon, either of them, by the means of terrene exhalations, is often so
shadowed, as they seem blemished to our eyes. So is ye church in this world:
so is the government both Ecclesiastical and civil, by means of humane
infirmities: and, as the latter age of man is weaker, and so less apt to
virtues: so, The world is feeble and perishes. Isay. 24.4.
this latter age of the world abounds with vices, and is less apt for love,
charity, peace, and contentation.

In regard thereof, the Church seems black and deformed, and the very seat
of judgment sauoureth of oppression and impiety. Howbeit, Cant. 1. Eccles.
4.1.
God by his ministers of grace, in either state sends his ordinary
consolations, instructions, and helps, so far as it pleases him: wherein men
must be studious, Men must be faithful in their places, and refer the
perfection of all things unto almighty God.
faithful, and diligent in their places, in the fear of God, to strengthen
their faint hearts and weak knees, and to employ the talents to them committed,
referring the fruit and success of all unto the grace of God, who may in all
things (if he will) supply men's wants. But whosoever shall presume to take on
him to correct and amend all things in every point among the sons of men (God
only excepted) he shall with Choraebus that idiot, which could not reckon any
number above five, Choraebus.
take on him to number the waves of the sea, and make that which is badde
enough, to be ten times worse, as one sings. Luther. in Psalm. 120.


Some maladies, in cure of the^, prove worse and worse, we see, Eras. in
Diatrib.

Which therefore not to touch at all, far better might it be.
CHAP. XI.
We may not dream of better events of our studies, then others have dona
before us. Against innouations.
King. 3.12.
AS the Lord himself said and testified of King Solomon: Lo, I have given thee
a wise and understanding heart: so that, there was none like unto thee before
thee: nor after thee shall any rise like unto thee. So every man is contented
to grant, that Solomon in wisdom and understanding, was worthily preferred to
all other Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. Howbeit, Solomon was never able to
conform all things to the rule of the Law.
Solomon confessed of himself, that he was by so much the more foolish, by
how much he sought to establish wisdom, and to expel folly, and to perfect
al things within his kingdom according to the law: yea, and the more wise he
thought himself to be in this devise, the more he bewrayed his own weakness
and infirmities.

Neither can we be certified by the report of any hostorie, either humane or
divine, that ever any magistrate in the Common wealth, or Bishop in the Church
(notwithstanding there have been most good and perfect Laws provided for the
advancement of virtues, and the abolishing of vices) has been able to purge
and expel all manner of corruption, blots, blemishes, wrinckles, maladies, and
imperfections from either state, and so reduce the same into perfect beauty
and purity: but that the best of them all were contented only to amend that
which was curable, and could by their ministry be amended, and to leave and
commit the rest unto that Supreme King, that sees and rules all after his
will, both in heaven and earth. And that such of them as have urged further,
have purchased the torment of themselves, and the hurt of many others, as in
the Chapter before it has been declared.

2 Almighty God himself, God himself suffers many imperfections here
among men, not that he wants power to correct, but in that he will so suffer
them.
notwithstanding his divine laws (which no man was ever able to empeach of
imperfection) looking down from heaven upon the children of men, he finds
them faulty in many things, They do daily run out of the way, and are become
abominable in his sight, there is none that does good, no, not one of them in
this sinful world. And he is justly moved to complain of the ingratitude of
his own people the children of Israel, under the similitude of the vineyard,
and in the parable of the perfidious husband men: yea, Isay 5.1. Mat. 12.
he has bin sometimes moved to repentance, that he has made man on the earth:
and has bin right sorry in his heart (as the scriptures testify.) Though al
these defects the lord God is well able (when he will) to correct and amend:
yet lo, so many of man's faults and imperfections, as he sees most meet to be
punished and corrected, does he punish and correct accordingly: and these are
the same only, which he has made curable, and to be amended, according to
his providence and wisdom; the rest he permits and suffers (through his
great mercy and goodness) for many causes, whereof some be concealed from us,
and some are revealed and made known unto men in his holy word.

3 Alac, why then should men in this our time, dream of bitter events and
effects of their singular devises? and why should they undertake not only to
renew Plato his Commonwealth, but also to warrant a full resolution, and to
restore a perfect purity of all things, both in the Church and in the
Commonwealth, by their devises and practices? They that end^^uour a perfect
purity in this world, do as if they would purge men from sin, wherein they
derogate from Christ, that appertains to him.
What do they otherwise therein, then seem to disdain our godly wise
Princess and her proceedings: to be wiser then God himself: and to undertake
that mortal men should live in this world without sin, as Adam did in
Paradise before his fall, and so should not stand in need of the merits of
Christ and free graces of Gods Spirit? then the which devise and practice, what
can be more proud, more haughty, more arrogant? And what else may we deem
of them, but that they be also thus conceyted, that they are able to say, not
only as the proud glorious Pharisee said in his prayer: I am not as other
men, extortioners, Luke. 18.11.
unjust, or as this Publican: but also, to protest that of themselves and their
families (which the Church of Christ never durst to say of her self) as thus.
We are not black, nor deformed: we are not spotted, nor blemished: we are
holyer then other men: Cant. 1.4.
they are all profane and abominable unto us. We go not aside at any time,
they do err most egregiously: we are as Angels and heavenly Spirits
without sin: for we be elected, but they be carnal, all polluted with
sin, and reprobated: better were it, if they were conformed unto us, or
banished further from us, then that thy should so live and teach, to offend
us. These be their words, and such is their zeal and proud conceit* how much
better were it both for themselves and many others, that as dutiful subjects
and right Christians, they do learn to fear God, to honor our noble
Princess, and to live in concord as brethren, then so to judge and condemn
their brethren in their malice, and to exalt themselves in the pride of their
hearts, and in their conceited wisdom, to prescribe unto the Church their
fantastical opinions and lewd devises, to the disquiet of the right Christian
peace? Surely, of all the nations under the Sun, We are to show our selves
thankful to God for our blessings.
we Englishmen have worthy causes to praise and glorify the Name of God, who
(of his great mercy and grace unto us in his Son) has opened unto us the
gates of the Temple, has unsealed unto us the Book of his holy Mysteries, and
has taught us all the ways and means toward the Kingdom of Heaven. Let
us therefore reverently enter into the holy Temple, let us hear Christ
preached, and embrace his Doctrine, with faithful and thankful hearts: Let
us edify one another of us in holy Love: let all our contentions and
striuings be, how we may best immitate our Lord Christ, and therein run
toward the happy Goal of eternal life, taking the benefit of good
opportunity: and, let us beware, that we offer not any just occasion of
offense, either to the Prince and magistrates, or to the Pastors and Ministers
of the Church, or to any other the right Protestants.

This no doubt the Lord himself did respect, when he said: I charge you,
Cant. 2.8.
O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and Hindes of the field, that ye
wake not up my love, nor touch her, till she be content her self.

The opinions of heathen men, against innouations of laws, etc.
4 The learned and wise men of the heathen, have been of this mind, that there
where every man had free liberty in a Commonwealth, either to change a law
provided, or to make new laws, the credit and authority of the superior Lord
was contemned as vile, and good order was subverted by them, Plato in Pol. 4.
who being diversely conceited, abandon al unity and peace. And they much
blamed such as endeavored to remedy mischiefs by the innovation of Laws, the
which practice they denied to be, as the cutting off of one of the heads of
Hydra, in the the place whereof seven other heads did suddenly spring up:
and therefore they held it much better to bear with some small faults and
imperfections in laws and magistrates, then to endeavor to alter and correct
them to the ruin and decay of the whole state: which is as a great frame made
of diverse pieces, so conjoined and set together, that it is impossible to alter
or take away the least part thereof, but the whole must feel it. Solon. Demost.
Therefore Demosthenes reporting the sentence of Solon against innouations of
laws, deemeth them worthy of death. Octauius Caesar, Octau.
in the cast of Cato the Vticensian, esteemed that man only a good Citizen, a
right member of the Commonwealth, and an honest man, which being well pleased
with the present state of his time, was unwilling to alter or change the same.
With what laws and ways men should live contented.
But to teach us Christians, we hear what almighty God (whose words and
authority is preferred to all men, says by his Prophet: Go into the streets,
consider and make inquisition for the old way: and if it be the good and
right way, then go therein: Consider the ordinances of thine Elders, if they
be good, Iere. 6.16. 2. Kin. 17.15.
and not contrary to that law of the Lord, observe them, and change them
not. 2. Chro. 38.
For though we should not be stiff-necked and ungodly like as were some of
them of yore, whom the Lord in his wrath destroyed: yet should we not refuse
to immitate them that have gone before us in holy Religion: and to content our
selves now with such meet Laws and ordinances as right well pleased them in
the fear of God: and to know, that the honor of the Prince, and the
obedience to laws, and Magistrates, is enjoined us by the King of all Kings
in his holy word, by whom (as he says) Kings do reign, and Princes
provide just Laws.

5 The altering of constituted Laws, The Jews feared the inconveniences of
innouations.
seemed so odious to the Jews, that the high Priests (which pretended the
maintenance and defense of the Law of Moses) was not a little moved, when
the false witnesses had accused Stephen, Act. 6.24.
that he had preached, that Jesus of Nazareth should change the Ordinances
that Moses gave, and this law that was delivered by the ministry of Angels.
Whereof (indeed) Stephen was faultlesse, Act. 7.20.38.35.
as his answer plainly testifies. For Moses (says he) was aceeptable to
God, and was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and mighty in words
and deeds: he was in the Congregation in the wilderness, with the Angels
which spoke to him and with our fathers. And this was he, who received the
lively Oracles (that is the Law and words of the Lord) to give unto us. And
unto the Jews, he said: Ye have received the Law by the ordinance of Angels,
and have not kept it. As for Christ, he came (as himself says) not to
destroy the Law, Christ came to fulfill the Law.

See Cap. 12.4.


but to fulfill the Law. The true sense and meaning whereof, he plainly
opens in the Gospel: and therein he breaks not, but ratifieth the
strength of good Laws, against them, that (with the Scribes and Pharisees)
invent and prefer their own Glosses and Traditions, to the Law of God,
which is the ground of all good Laws. From this Law may no man withdraw any
thing: neither to this ought he to add any thing at all: from the rule of
this Law, we may not err: between the which, and the sentence of the civil
Magistrate, there ought to be a perpetual affinity and consent.

But as the deprivation of laudable constitutions, and well provided laws, is
a thing unjust and pernicious to humane society: so it is most certain, that
such persons do most egregiously offend and sin against God, It is a most
dangerous thing to go about to alter the Law of God.

Apo. 22.18, 19.


and the Commonwealth, that excogitate or endeavor to alter good laws,
especially the Law divine. For thereby they blaspheme God, draw men's minds
from the true knowledge: and cast souls headlong into no small peril and
danger of damnation. Therefore shall God add plagues unto them, and take away
their part out of the book of life. But what has occasioned those
discontented persons to condemn our Laws? They have no reason to descent from
us.
what has moved them to descent from us? what reason have they to distrust us?
why do they thus contemn us? Think they, that we know not good from evil?
or that we would not gladly tend to the best, and aim to that right good, as
they would? Or are they of the mind, that we (Christian Protestants) do not
wish for, Romans 8.19.23.
and would with all our hearts see the adoption of the sons of God, and the
purity of government in either state, as all good men do desire? And are not
our laws made and ratified accordingly? would to God, that in that regard it
might be said to us: Now blessed are your eyes, for they see that, which your
forefathers (from the beginning of the Creatures of God) have longed to behold,
Genesis 3.24. An hearty desire of contentation. Phil. 2.2.
and could not: for that Cherubim stand at the door of Paradise with the
bright blade. In the mean time, would to GOD we could be contented in
thankfulness to God, with the present graces freely bestowed on us, that we
may be like minded, being of one accord, and of one judgment: that noting
be done amongst us through contention, or vainglory: but that in meekness
of mind, every man esteem other better then himself (as the Apostle well
advises us) that so God may be pleased.

6 But now let it be, Eccles. 10.5. What a change we should soon see, if
their conceits were answered. Aurelius.
that all things leaned to their lure: what should we shortly then see?
would none of those evils appear, which Solomon once saw under the Sun?
Surely it is very likely, that we should have a sudden Metamorphosis: but yet
(I fear me) this sorry change, that little learned Aurelius (as one said)
shall be in all the haste made Bishop of great Carthage, Augustine. Arsasius.
Chrysostom. Nicepho. li. 3. cap. 28. Iuet.
when great learned Saint Augustine shall be Bishop in little Hippo: and
ignorant Arsasius shall succeed eloquent Chrysostom: whereat not only
Simeones may woefully exclaim, Pro pudor, quis? cui? Fie for shame! whom have
we hear? what a supply is this? But also, Cicero his exclamation will be
therein verefied: O domus antiqua: quam dispari Domino dominaris? What Lord
unworthy thee posseedes, oh ancient house? Yea, Eliah the Prophet perceiving
it, will not omit thereupon to expostulate against Achab in the name of the
Lord: 1. King. 21.19.
What! have thou killed, and so taken possession?

The inconstancy of these devises and altring of opinions.
Besides that, how long time would the same state be sustained and continued?
how constant? how contented? what perseverance? what stabilitie? It is thought,
that the rule of Isocrates, would sound but profane in their ears, (...):
Affect the state present: Isocrates.
or be well contented with the present things: and that also of Syracides would
seem loathsome: My son (says he) make much of the time: Ecclus. 4.20.
Cleo a busy headed person
For why? the busy headed Cleo cannot be quiet (as the Greek History
tells) he commenceth Orations with ouglie outcries, he renteth his garments,
he heateth on his thighs, he shuffleth with his feet, and runs too and fro
on the stage. So these fools that leave their own nests, Ecclus. 27.11. Pro.
27.8.
will not long abide contented, but unto them (...): Ever irksome is the
present state: Thucidides.
as said Thucidides touching governments: And a very difficile thing it shall
be for them (as Aristotle says) to contain themselves within the compass of
their own decrees. Lib. 3. Eth.


What a stur they make in Church matters.

Their choice of diets.


7 But yet let us further hear, what a shuffling they make in the church:
Apollo is very well learned, says one: Paul is better then Apollo, says
another: but Peter goes for my money says the third man. Again, as for
David, he with a rusticall harp twangeth Pastor-like: but Solomon has a
courtlike phrase. Moses also falls under their censure, and he stutteth
without eloquence: and Amos is but a plain sot, more meet for the Country,
then the Court. Michaeas is too eager against Achab: so is Eliah against
Iesabel: so is John against Herod: but the Prophets of Baal please them both
right well. They proceed from censures to accusatio^s, slanders, persecutions,
etc.
Passhur will not stick to bobbe Jeremy on the face: and Paul being in
dislike, anon is brought to the bar to be arraigned, where he is both accused
by Tartullus, threatened by the Jews, and stricken at the commandment of
Annanias. Neither may they be dissuaded from their opinion (so full of envy is
the Serpents head) though that Boanarges the sons of thunder, should sound
the word in their ears. No, Boanarges. Mark. 3.17.
nor yet, though that very Prophet should admonish them, whose voice not to
hear, deserves an extirpation from the people of God. Is not this good
divinity?

Such shaking reeds declare their weak foundations, when no state, no
condition, no good order can content or please them long. Simon Magus may be a
daily hearer of the Sermons, The tree is known by the fruits.
and words of Peter, and of the other Apostles and disciples of Christ, as a
most fervent lover of the true doctrine: he may also come to the baptism, and
take the external sign of a true Christian, and so forth: howbeit, if he be
covetous and worldly minded, if he chop and change the divine Graces for a
filthy sum of money: if he seek and hunt after the vainglory and praise
of men: If Simon, notwitstanding his profession, have an unquiet spirit, and
be not yet well established in the truth without hypocrisy (which truth as
Philemon writes, has a more fair beauty then that which any painter or
carrier in the world canfeigne) he shall soon decipher himself: for nothing
feigned can be of long continuance. So Caine, so Saul, so Demas, so Judas, so
Nicholas, so Julian the Apostate, are in the end well known by their works and
endeavors, as the trees are by their fruits. Thus also have these strange
conceited persons egregiously declared themselves, notwithstanding their
bombased words and angelical show of holy devotion, that not only wise men,
who have their eyes in their heads, but also little boys and young children may
easily perceive their palpable and gross infirmities, slidings, and fins,
beyond many other men's faults, howsoever they dissemble them to themselves: and
we do plainly discern, that they both much descent from the pure spirit,
meek minds, godly love, humility, and sincerity of Christ, and his
Apostles, Disciples and Martyrs; and also are far estranged from that simple
spirit, and godly integrity of those grateful men that lived of yore in that
golden age of the world, The grateful men of the old time.
the which the most ancient and best Poets and Philosophers have commended with
high praises to the people: persuading them to assay to resemble them therein,
as those which are set forth and remembered for worthy patterns of immitation to
all posterities.

Arat. Sol. 63.
8 The ancient Poet Aratus, writing of that golden age, and of them that lived
in the same, has among other, these verses: Men knew not then pernicious
brawles.
nor that contentious strife:
Nor yet had broacht sedition fell,
the foe to quiet life.


But this golden age is past, and sithence that, a copper world has succeeded
a silver world. It is true and therefore have men the more cause to look to
themselves. Well then, let us give ear to the doctrine, of our chief pastor
Christ, and do that which is commanded therein, then shall we be builded so
sure on the Rock, that all the noisome storms and winds in the world shall
not shake us down. They that observe not this, stand fleeting on the sand:
they be not of any continuance, nor free from great annoyes.

CHAP. XII.
The ambitious persons which want preferment, begin to slander, condemn,
and contemn the Magistracy, and the Laws. Howbeit, both the Prince and
Magistrate are to be honored, and the Laws obeyed of good Subjects.
ARrius the heretic, having a filthy desire of renown, assayeth (though
inordinatelie and indirectlie) to obtain a Bishopprick, about the which, he
attempteth many, both unjust, and unnecessary actions, in the trust of his
own learning, wisdom and power, far beyond the limits of his vocation: but
he is prevented of his purpose therein: for the Lord (by the ministry of
the Ordinance) withstandeth him; and prefers another to the place he most
affected. Therefore Arrius is sorely discontented, he is grieved to the heart,
and vehement lie freight in his guts: yea, and thereto he adds a hateful
dislike of them that prefer, and of them that be preferred, with many proud
words against the place and function he so much desired. The immitators of
Arrius.
This Arrius has too many immitators yet living, who being debarred of their
purpose, and being not of ability (with Julius) to execute their proper
co^ceits, but incurring the pains of their deserved judgments, they lament
their lot, with an envy and contempt of the lawful ordinance, and them which
are by the same preferred, and that so far, that though they be not Caesar's,
yet they will not abide superiors: and though they be not Pompeys, Lucan. Nec
Romae, etc.

Cicer. 11. Off. Manicheus.


yet would they have no peers (a kind of humor in man's mind, which Cicero
calls most miserable). In this they likewise shake hands with the Maniches,
and both teaching and persuading the people, that the Magistrates are not to be
honored in their places, nor the Bishops and Ministers of the word to be
reverenced in their functions, especially, if that they, or any of them provide
against any of their ambitious and seditious practices: or else, if they, or
any of them, be once noted, as touched with any kind of humane infirmity,
the which shall suddenly be pleaded in the highest Court of Augmentation, by
their sinister reports. A fable of the Fox.
Oh how handsomely do they immitate that Fox in the fable? of whom the
Proverb is ordinarily beaten. The Fox will eat no Grape? The Fox having
many times leapt up to catch the Grapes, and yet could not come by them,
because they were to high for him, and himself unable to get them, being at
length tired out with often leaping, and forced to give over, said: Well, it
makes no matter that I have not those grapes: for why? they be very sour
grapes, and scarce ripe. So say they, being forced to give over their suits and
eagerbents, the Magistrates, the Bishops, the Ministers, the Preachers, they be
such, and such kind of persons, etc. And such and such be those offices,
places, functions, dignities, scarce lawful, full of labor, snares to catch
men in, etc. And why? forsooth because they be not carved to their tooth, and
prescribed for their Diet. Now if Christ should be again brought to the bar,
and Pontius Pilate should be persuaded of the innocence of Christ, and should
labor to clear him in the judgment before them all: yet will they be
ready, with those spightfull Jews, to cry out with open mouth (...): Let him
be crucified: he is a very bad man, he has a badde office, he is well worthy
to die. Yea, and rather then their bruit bents should be resisted, they will
not stick to rise up against Softhenes the chief of the Synagogue, Acts 18.17.
cheefely if they once perceive that Gallio cares not for these things. Such a
practice contrived Chorah, Dathan, and Abiram, who rising up, Chorah.
and moving the people of Israel against Moses and Aaron, in their mad
discontented rage upon the like occasion, said unto them. Ye take too much
upon you, seeing the multitude are holy every one of them, Number. 16.3.
why lift ye up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? As if they said
unto Moses and Aaron, ye are usurpers of this authority over the people: they
are all as holy as your selves are, and ye ought not thus to exalt your selves
in any such rule and government over them, neither are we and the people
holden in right and equity, to yield you any such honor.

2 But before we draw authority to convince those fantastical persons from
the bowels of the Canonical Scriptures, let us also here (as we have done in
the former, touching well provided laws and constitutions) not omit to
consider what the very heathen people have judged, taught, and persuaded, What
the heathen people held touching government and magistrates.
touching Princes, magistrates, and government: not in that they shall lend us
authority for the same, but that the very christians might (by their example
the sooner) conform themselves both in mind and manners, to that which not
only the written word, but also nature, reason, and the consent of all wise
and learned men, have received and embraced, Sophocles.
as things good and profitable. Sophocles has these words: It is meet and
convenient that he be honored, whom the Commonwealth has advanced.
Socrates, Plato, Philemon, Aristotle, Cicero, Virgil, Ovid, and other
Philosophers, Poets, and wise men, both Greeks and Latins, have been ever of
the mind, that kings, Princes, Governors, are necessary in Commonweals,
unto the which all men ought to be obedient, and to conform themselves to the
Laws of that City or Commonwealth, wherein they live (the same being
honest and godly) in like sort as good Wives do conform themselves to the
manners and fashions of their own husbands, with whom they are willing to
live and lead their lives. Aesope. (...).
This Aesope considered, when schooling and aduising Ennus, he thus began with
him, (...), that is, My Son, worship God, and honor the King, with all
reverence: for by this is the state of human things maintained, the guilty
are punished, and the innocents defended. And this was holde^ for a sure Axiom
with them, that where no government is, nor obedience to Princes and laws
defended, there neither an house, nor a City, nor a Commonwealth, can either
stand or prosper, no more then that body lives, the which either has no head
at all, or is not directed, governed, and defended by the head. In the
consideration whereof, they have likened the prince in his government, to an
Archer or shooter, 1. The Prince is like an Archer.

2. The people like an arrow.

3. The laws to a bow.

4. The mark, to the common good.


and the people to an arrow, the laws to the bow, and the mark to the
Common-good. For as needful as is the Archer to draw the bow, and to direct
the arrow from the same to the mark, so needful is the Prince, to direct and
order the people by the wisdom of laws to the common good. And as there,
where wants either an Archer and a bow, the Arrows are neglected, and the
mark not pierced, so neither can the people be ordered, nor the Commonwealth
maintained, where government wants: for there neither virtue can be rewarded,
nor evil deeds punished, according to ye rule of justice, the which ought in
government to be defended, but rather many anoies and huge inco^ueniences,
which wait on disorder, will soon be seen, and woefully felt, to fall on that
Commonwealth, on that people. Therefore, when Alexander was dead, Alexanders
host without a captain.
Damades this considering, rightly compared his host unto that huge Cyclops,
which having but one eye, lost the same: and after that being blind, he
sustained many deadly strokes or his huge body, Such: Eurip. Heming. De lege
Naturae.
is the inconvenience that ensues Anarchies and want of government: this also
that Greek Poet perceived, and therefore wrote thereof thus: There is not
seen a greater ill,
then Anarchie: for she does spill
Want of government.
great Cities, and does casting ground
whole families, and all confound.
In wars she makes the Dastards fly,
But contrary, most reverently,
to yield to rule, and laws or dain'd
brings health to them, who else be pained.
Therefore the Prince, for this good end,
ought true obedience to defend.


And as those ancient wise men have holden the magistrates to be both
profitable and necessary for the Commonwealth, Who were taken for good men
among the heathen.
and thought it convenient and necessary that they should be honored and
obeyed: so also they esteemed them only for good Citizens and honest persons,
who yielded themselves obedient to the Princes and laws. Thereof said
Sophocies, (...), that is: It is the part of a good man to be obedient to the
Prince and Magistrates. And thereof Horace proposes this question: Ver bonus
est quis? Who is a good man? and answers himself in this verse. Horat. li.
1. Epist. ad quintum.
Qui Consulta patrum, qui leges Iuraque seruat. that is, He, who observes the
Princes laws, decrees, and rights.

3 And they (I mean the very heathen Philosophers and wise men of yore) have
both observed and taught with no mean wisdom, that Anarchie or want of
government, is worse then a tyrannical state: Want of government is worse
then a tyrannical State.
for though a tyrannical State be both grievous and unprofitable to the people,
yet as of two hard extremities forced on men, the greater should be first
eschewed, and in lieu thereof the less tolerated and borne; Far mine^ ra
vole no grauiora feram.
so easier it is (in such a case) to sustain one tyrant for order, then to
suffer many tyrants to disturb all order. Thus says the Poet, applicable to
this purpose.

The meaner grief would I sustain,
That I might flee the grater pain.
For indeed, where there is no Prince, no magistrate, no law, no government,
The Image of Anarchie.
the vile shall presume against the honorable, the boy against the ancient,
and Homo erit homoni Lupus, One man shall devour another: one neighbor will
oppress another: Plaut. in Asmaria.
a friend his friend, a brother his brother, with all kind of injury. There be
new laws and decrees devised every day, so many opinions as there be heads,
and ordinary destructions of companies be daily seen. They who a little
before were combined in friendly league, are afterward made foes, and they
murder and kill one another: they which have been worthily honored for their
virtues, are now unworthily cast into obloquie and contempt: and they who were
justly contemned for their vices, are now unjustly honored and advanced with
high and glorious titles, and much set by among men. Of such a discorded State
speaks Isayah the Prophet in his third Chapter, verse 2, Verse. 5.6.7.
wherein he alludeth to the miserable time of the Anarchie of the Israelites,
then when there was neither a King, Judge. 2.11. and 21.25.
nor a Judge, nor a Prophet in Israel, and every man did not that which the
Law of God and reason persuaded, but that which seemed good in his own eyes.
Populus sieve lege.
In a word, this is that highest grade of the abuses of the world, wherein the
most wavering people, contemning the holy word of God, and all holy laws,
decrees, and good government, run headlong into the snares of preuarication
and sin, in their erroneous ways, to their horrible destruction: the which,
there is not any thing in the world can so soon hasten, as the want of laws
and government, by the which Justice is administered, and the people protected
and preserved. The same Prophet tells us, Isa. 5.5.
that when the Lord would devour, tread down, and waste his ungrateful
vineyard, that is, the house of Israel, and the men of Judah, he would first
take away the hedge thereof, wherewith he had hedged it, The law is as an
hedge: for as when the hedge is broken down, the vineyard is spoiled of
beasts: so are the people destroyed, when they have no laws to govern them.
Verse. 1.2.3.
and break the Wall thereof, with the which it was strengthened: that is, he
would deprive them of those good laws, statutes, and ordinances, which he had
given them by his servant Moses, and would deface the glory of the Temple,
which was builded for the beauty thereof, and take from them the right service
of God, and his protection, whereof they were unworthy. And thus he expounds
it, Chap. 3, where he says: That the Lord God of hoasts will take away from
Jerusalem and from Judah, the stay and strength, even all the stay of bread, and
all the stay of water, the strong man, and the man of war, the Judge and the
Prophet, the prudent and the aged, the Captain of fifty, and the honorable,
and the Counselor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent man. The
removing away of these things, is the mean to disorder, and so to destruction.
For destruction and ruin follows Ataxie, and disorder, as Ataxie follows
Anarchie, and want of government.

4 But I hear some to object. Christ (say they) have said in his doctrine,
Mat. 5.
To him that takes away thy Cloak, give also thy Coat: resist not evil.
Judge not, condemn not: whosoever will be the Prince among you, let him be a
minister and servant unto all the rest, etc. Ergo, Christ overthrows
government, and polliticke obedience. Thus indeed when Julian the Apostate
heard of these words of Christ in the Gospel, Res. Julian the Apostate
misconstrued Christ's words.
he misconstruing them, did utterly condemn and contemn the same, as naught
and unprofitable: for he thought that by this doctrine all pollitike order was
confounded, that destructions of dominions was taken away from men, and that
all Judgments and deserved punishments were by the law of the Gospel utterly
abolished: then the which, as nothing could be more noisome unto the people, so
is there not any thing in the world more ungodly and abominable, then that a
men should imagine so irreverently, and construe so peruersely of so heavenly
and profitable a Doctrine, as Christ in these words of his, has preached and
taught unto his disciples. But because Julian had not the Spirit of wisdom
to understand Christ aright, as he had the reason to consider what
inconveniences ensued the disorder of Anarchie, therefore he denounced his
rash and wicked censure against the Doctrine of Christ. And in this our time,
that Atheistical Macchiauile has schooled no small company of worldly men to
do the like. But it should be right far off from Christians to judge so
unjustly, and so meanly of the doctrine of the Gospel, as that they should
imagine and conceit, that because it has pleased God to call them into the
liberty of the Gospel, therefore they are free from the censures of the
political law and constitutions of princes, magistrates, and laws. They that
be of this conceit are willing to take the liberty of the Gospel, The
liberty of the Gospel does not deliver us from obedience to Princes, etc.
but they deceive themselves and their followers in the vile abuse thereof. It
is most certain that our Savior has in his Sermon, spoken against rash
censures, and against the revenge of the private injuries of Brethren, in that
sense which Moses spoke, when he said, Ye be brethren, why oppress ye one
another? And he speaks against them that ambitiously usurped authority in
the pride of their hearts, over their brethren, and would teach the effects of
the love, which (as Peter said) covers the multitude of sins. And he was
far off from that purpose (they dream of) to destroy and abandon laws,
orders, and governments, either in the church, Christ came not to destroy the
law.

Se. cap. 11.4.


or in the Commonwealth. And to take away that surmise out of men's minds, he
said plainly in the same Sermon: Think not that I am come to destroy the Law
or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them. Again he
says: Whosoever shall break one of those least commandments, and shall
teach men so, Mat. 5.17.
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. He speaks of that
law both politic and moral, which the Lord gave the Israelites by the
ministry of Moses, the which we are not to reject, but as Christ, the
Prophets, and Apostles have taught to endeavor through faith in the merit of
Christ, to observe to the vttermonst of our power. For we are not justified by
faith to this end, that therefore we should reject good works, The end of our
justification.
and follow after that which God in his law has forbidden; but that henceforth
we express the light of our faith before men through our good works,
especially, those which in the law of god are prescribed. Among all the which,
this is a chief duty (next to the feate and honor of God) that men should
honor the Prince, the Magistrates, and them that be placed in authority,
included within this, Honor thy father and mother. And this the Lord ratifieth
when he said, Yield unto Caesar, that which to Caesar belongs.

In this sort, there be, which wreast aside the true meaning of Christ, John
8.11. The woman taken in adultery, was not freed from the sentence of the law.
teaching that absolution which he gave to the woman taken in adultery, whom
the Jews had brought and set before Christ, and they would, that in the same
the Lord should abrogate the sentence of the Judge, and that penal law,
according to whose conceit, then it must be, that neither whoredom, nor
theft, nor murder, nor any other heinous transgression of the laws, should be
punished by the ministry of the Magistrate. But they are much deceived: for
it is most plain, that Christ absolved not the guilty woman from that
temporal punishment, which the magistrate was to award her for her sin
according to the law: no more then he delivered the Thief which hung on his
right hand, from his execution, though he repented: but referring her and him
to that punishment which the law awarded for their transgressions, he only
absolved them both from that eternal death, the which by their sins they had
justly deserved. As he came not to break, but to fulfill the law: so he
gave this warrantice, that, rather heaven and earth should perish, then that
one jot of the Law should fail.

Saint Peter knowing well, what the will of his Master was in this point,
taught accordingly, Submission to the Prince and laws.
when he said: Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the
Lords sake: Whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior, or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. And he adds a reason: For
so is the will of God, that by well doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of the foolish man. Lo, how excellently Peter here expounds his
Masters doctrine? And of this mind was Paul, Romans 13. Tit. 1.
who, to the Romans, to Titus, and in other places, writes much of this
Argument.

Against this power of the Prince, the Lord forbids any man to rise,
resist, or rebel, by this word in the Law (which David also remembers)
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Psalm. The wrath of God
against rebels, and seditionaries. Number. 16.22.32.
And to witness his displeasure against such as oppose themselves to his
ordinance, he has committed to perpetual memory the horrible destruction
of Corah, with his accomplices, who indeed died not the common death of all men,
nor were visited after the visitation of men: but, The ground cleaving asunder
under them, the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their
houses, their servants and their goods, and they and all that they had went
down alive into hell, and the earth closed upon them.

5 These things if those strange conceited heads could digest, and well
weigh, Men be not borne to live without laws and government.
they would not be so easily carried away, to be of this brute mind, that
men be borne into this world, therein to lope at large without their limited
bounds, as the wandering Birds which fly in the air: but they would
conceive and keep in mind, that, as the nature of man is in no wise framed to
that liberty, so the Lord GOD (who has created man also, has ordained him
to live in this world to his glory under laws and government: and requires
that therefore he be subject, Tit. 3 1. Romans 13.1.
first and principally to his most excellent Majesty the King of all kings:
and then next, that he be obedient unto Caesar, or the King: that is, unto
that chief power, which next under himself he has preferred to all others,
as his holy ordinance, to govern and tule men in that place of the world
whereunto he has chosen and called him by his grace, as himself rules in
heaven. This Maro intended when he composed this Monostich: Jupiter in Caelis.
Caesar regit omniaterris. Virg.


That is.

In heaven God, on earth the King,
Aye rules and gouernes every thing.
Thus therefore says Peter (which he takes from Solomon) Fear God, and honor
the King. Pro. 24.21. 1. Pet. 2.17.
That is to say. I would that (as it is meet and right) ye should first
fear God, honor God, worship God: and then, that ye honor and obey the
King, the Prince, the chief Magistrate. This thing the Israelites observed for
a time, and were therein happy, for the which David omitted not to praise and
glorify the Lord, who had in such sort prepared their hearts, as Chron. 29.
And this, if our singular conceited heads could well persuade, they would
be the more willing and ready, both to learn and to know wherein this Honor
of the Prince consists, that so they might the better yield the same where
it is due. But (alas) there be of this kind that disdain to hear and
learn, for why, they know enough already: well, let their own conceits
satisfy them then, and let them sound the depth of their own errors to
their own woe. Howbeeit, for the sakes of them that will either gladly hear
again, that which they learned and knew before, for their better confirmation
and comfort: or that being ignorant thereof, and would willingly learn, I have
thought good to comprise the same in those four points, vz.

Wherein consists the honor. of a Prince.
1 In reverence, to the Prince. 2 In love, to the Prince. 3 In obedience, to the
Prince. 4 In prayer unto God for the Prince.
1 Reverence.
First it is meet, that we afford the Prince a just estimation of our minds,
with a worthy declaration of his or her honor. And to this we be persuaded
(among others) by these four arguments: namely, Causes that move men to honor
Princes.
first for that the King or Prince is the ordinance and power of God, who
testifies saying: Through me do Kings reign, and Princes make just laws. 2.
For that the Lord God himself through the graces and power of his spirit, is
present with those Kings and Princes, in their Parliaments, in their Councels,
in their Congregations, in their great assemblies, in their places of
judgment: and he is the principal power and judge in the midst of them
all, as says the Psalmest, whose words are these: Elohim nitzab bayadath
oel, bekereb Elohim iischpot, That is: God stands in the Congregation of God:
in the midst of the Gods, Psalm. 82.1.
(or Princes) he is the Judge. And this teaches, that as the authority of the
King, or Prince (which the Lord has ordained, and beautified with that divine
title Gods, is (indeed) a divine authority: so the power of the Prince is
Gods power, the counsel is Gods council, the Senate is Gods Senate, the
Congregation, and the great assembly is the Lords: his seat is Gods seat, and
his throne is Gods throne: God is there present, God sits, God makes laws,
God rules, God judges, God ordreth all things after his will and wisdom,
howsoever the Princes abuse their places, and the people conceit of their
actions: therefore, he that does rauerence to the Prince as to him who^ the Lord
has ordained, placed and beautified, he honors God; he that contemns
this ordinance contemns God, to his own destruction. The Prince cares for
the common good.
3. Thirdly the Prince is to be reverenced of the people, because that he
watches, he warreth, he deuiseth, he counsels, he prays, he cares, he
endeavors every way to help, to benefit, to defend, to rule, and to make
happy his people, even then, when they do sleep and take their quiet rest,
and are negligent and careless, both of the common good, and of their own
safety: verefying that rule of Homer, touching the duty of a Prince.

Homer.
O'uchre^ pannuchion eudein boulephoron Andra: That is,

The noble Prince it ill beseemes all night to sleep. This princely virtue
has been worthily noted in the famous Julius Caesar, who therein immetated
the noble Trojan Aeneas, Virg. Aene. li. 1. and li. 10.
of whose praise Virgil has written at large: or rather that most victorious
King Alexander, whom they of the old time gratefully remembering, would say in
their common talk of him, and his conquests, (...), Claud. Mino. in Alciat
Embl. 3. Psalm.
(...): that is, King Alexander became famous, not by idleness and rest: but
by his bold adventures, hard labors, and actions. But beyond all these, the
Kingly Prophet draws a most worthy example of this virtue, from the King
of all Kings, whom in that respect he calls, The keeper of Israel, who (as
he says) does neither slumber nor sleep: to note his continual care of
his Church: in regard whereof, he deserves to be reverenced of his Saints.

4 The Prince is as a father to his people.
4 Fourthly, the King is to be reverenced, for that he is created a Father unto
his people, and to whom they be as children: therefore they of yore called
their Princes, Patres patriae, The fathers of their country. Now then, if it be
just and godly, that children do reverence their parents: then is it a thing
just and godly, that the people do yield reverence to their princes: but that
it is both just and godly for children so to do, not only nature and reason,
but the law of God also, Exodus 20. teaches and requires. Therefore in right
and all godliness ought the Princes to be reverenced of their people.
Howbeit, Ceremonies in reverence of Princes.
we must be very heedfull, that our Ceremonies in this reverence, be neither
too many, nor too few, nor be superstitious: for if they be too many, they
argue a seruilitie of the subjects, and a cruelty of the Prince. If they be
too few, they declare the small regard and dissoluteness of the subjects
toward their Prince: if they be superstitious, they show forth more barbarity
then true Christianity. Therefore in this thing the just mean is to be
observed in all godliness, Plato.
to declare a moderate government, and a moderate subjection. This is that
first point, wherein (as I said) that honor of the King, or Prince consists.

6 The next point is Love. And it is meet that we affect this divine Ordinance
next unto God, Love the Prince.
with that sweet delectation of the heart, which takes pleasure in desiring,
and joy in well using the thing desired: which runs by a desire, and rests
by a joy: running to that, and resting in this. It is not enough for a man to
say I love, and I affect this or that thing, except that he endeavor to express
this love, this affection, by some external argument. The poet speaking of the
nature or vehement affection of love, writes thus: -- For who can fire hide:
-- Quis enim celauerit ignem? Ovid.

Which with the light bewrayes it self, and is discride?
(...) provided by his majesty for the glory of God, and benefit of the
Commonwealth. It is not enough that the Prince by his power, do defend and
maintain those good Laws, which he together with his most prudent
Counselors has invented and provided, and the which he would that his
learned and wise Judges should discern and execute in Justice, or moderate in
equity (as the things shall require) but that also his Subjects do yield
dutiful obedience, in the right observation of all those good Laws
accordingly. Whereby obedience is discerned.
And this virtue is to be expressed by this, that men do neither grudge nor
repyne against those laws: nor refuse to yield and pay forth all those
Tributes, Tenthes, Taxes, Subsedies, customs, and such other duties, which are
by those Laws exacted, and in good reason required of them: but that they do
with all willingness and gladness yield out the same accordingly. For as the
Labourer is worthy of his wages, so this chief Magistrate should not be
defrauded nor denied his right: who labors night and day by all ways and
means possible, for the preservation, defense, and safety of the people under
him: to whom therefore we should be no less willing, then the people were in
the time of David, to contribute to him of their wealth and treasures, toward
the building of the Lords house. 1. Chro. 29. and so ready, as we be willing
to have our selves, our Wives, our Children, and our goods preserved and
defended from our mortal and deadly energies. For, indeed, by these duties
shall the State and realm be the better desended, the godly on all sides the
better maintained in peace and tranquillity, the noble Princes right worthily
adorned, and the enemy both civil and foreign the sooner suppressed. And
this shall we yield unto in all duty, the rather if we wisely consider,
that whatsouer we shall yield unto our Prince in this case, We owe to the
prince that which is required of us. Mat. 22.20.
is rather a due debt then a gift. Therefore the Lord says, Yield to Caesar,
those things that are Caesar's: Let the King have his own, Pay to the Prince,
the Princes duty.

But thou beginnest to examine the laws which the prince has provided, ob.
Res.
whether they be good or evil, and so doubtest whether they should be obeyed
or not obeyed. Indeed the laws that be provided are either good, or else they
are evil: if they be good, then are they such laws as are either godly or
profitable, either for thy self, Good laws.
or for the commonwealth, or for the whole Church, and to the glory of God:
and of these there is no question, but that they ought to be observed in all
holy and godly obedience. And it is no small happiness unto the people, to
have a Prince that provides those Laws: and no less felicity for a City
(as Xenophon once said) to have within it Citizens, that are obedient to such
Laws. And to such a Prince, and of such a people may it be said by them that
wisely considered thereof, with the Queen of Saba: Happy are thy men: happy
are these thy servants which stand ever before thee, 1. King. 10.8.
and hear thy wisdom. And blessed be the Lord thy God which loved thee,
etc. and made thee King to do equity and righteousness.

Evil laws.
On the other side, if the laws be evil, then are they grievous and
burdensome either to thy body and wealth, or to thy mind and conscience,
being against the righteousness of God and his glory. If those laws concern
only thy body, thy goods, and outward man, they are to be yielded unto for
conscience sake: for all these things, thou may not think, but that the
Prince has power to command and take from thee, as his own, neither are those
afflictions which come unto thee in these things, greater and more grievous,
then that hard affliction which the children of Israel felt in Egypt under
Pharao: and more heavy, then that which Naboth sustained in Israel under Achab
and Iezabel: and more irksome then that which Mephiboseth suffered at the
promotion of Ziba, under David. And what did they? surely we find it not
recorded in the several histories of these three several persons, that either
the children of Israel rebelled or murmured against Pharao their king, Exo 2.23
24.
in the dislike of his Laws (albeit they speak angrily to Moses in the heavy
burden of their double taskes, when they thought that the rather by his means
the king was exasperated against them) but they daily observed his word in the
accomplishment of their tasked works: or that poor Naboth resisted the word
and law of King Achab though he granted not to sell away that part of his
inheritance, 1 King. 21.3.
which by Gods law he was forbidden to sell away. Or that Mephiboseth denied
the word of King David, touching the division of his land between himself
and Ziba: but he said unto the King: 2 Samuel 19.10.
Yea, let him take all, if the Kings pleasure be so.

8 But yet, if the princes being wicked Idolatours, do make and provide such
devilish, ungodly, and superstitious laws and decrees, Laws against the
glory of God, etc.
as tend to the dishonor of almighty God, and the perdition of the innocent
people of God, an horror to the conscience, and a grief to the mind of al good
men: then is the case altered, for now not only nature, reason, and autenticall
examples, but the word and warrant of God, teach men to beware that they
observe not such laws. As the earth is set under the heavens, and man under
God, so is every earthly kingdom set under an higher kingdom, Omne sub regno
grauis ore regnum est. Seen. in Thyest. tragaed. Act. 3.
and all the Kings, Princes, and Potentates in the world, are subdued to the
King of heaven, and he rules over all, in respect of the which, all others are
to be set apart, as we see how in the presence of the greater, the power of the
less appears not, as then, when the Sun shines bright, the light of the
Moon is obscured. Again, Eccles. 1.
as all the Rivers yield themselves and run into the sea, from whence they
take their original, and come by a natural course, so it is, that all duty
should be yielded unto him from whom all duty discendeth: that is to the Lord
of heaven, the which David gratefully remembered in his prayer to the Lord,
saying: 1. Chro. 29, 11. Thine O Lord is greatness, and power, and glory, and
victory, and praise: for all that is in heaven and earth is thine: thine is
the kingdom O Lord, and thou excellest, as head over all: behold, riches and
honor come of thee, and thou raignest over all. Again, All things come of
thee: 1. Chron. 19.14.
and that which came to us of thine own hand, have we given thee. And reason
teaches us, that it is much better for us to obey him and his commandments,
with whom we shall dwell and live for ever, then to rebel against him, and to
keep his laws with whom we can dwell and live but a very little whiles. In
the due consideration whereof, that wise and learned Philosopher Socrates
(though an Heathen man) being requested by his friends to yield unto the
Senate of the Athenians in matters of Religion, wherein he saw how far they
erred from the holy worship of God: that by his obedience, that way he might
escape the sentence of death, Socrat. apud Plutar.
answered them in these words. (...) ((...)) (...). That is: O ye men of
Athens, I do both reverence and love you: howbeit, I will yet rather obey God,
then obey you.

A notable saying of an Heathen, well worthy to be embraced and observed of
all Christians. Eleazar. 2. Mac. 6.19.
The like in effect we find of that holy Eleazar in the book of the
Machabees, who also chose rather to die, then to transgress the law of the God
of Israel, at the commandment of the ungodly tyrant.

9. But in the Canonical Scriptures we have many worthy examples, among the
which we presently call to mind the Hebrew Mid-wiues in Egypt, The Hebrew
Midwiues.
who nothwitstanding they did with their brethren, bear the heavy burdens of
their daily tasks without denial, would not in this yield to shed innocent
blood, against the law of God: and to show that in this they pleased God, Exo.
1.20.
Moses says: That the Lord builded them houses, Daniel.
and prospered them. Also we read of Daniel, who notwithstanding he was a true
subject to the King of Babylon in his Captivity, Dan. 6.22.
as the Prophet Jeremy had before exhorted ye Jews to be, and prayed for his
peace: yet did he worship the Lord God contrary to the rash and ungodly decree
of the king: and to show how well he pleased the lord therein, he preserved him
from the power of the lions. Also Sydrach, Misach, Sydrach.
and Abednego refused to worship the Idol which the king had set up in Babylon:
and to witness the Lords pleasure therein, He sent his Angel and defended them
from the feruencie of the fiery oue^. For albeit, Ier. 27.8.9.
that Jeremy had before exhorted the^ to serve the king of Babylon, into whose
hand the Lord had delivered the^ in his displeasure, and Ezechiel had according
to the same, Ezec. 17.13.
persuaded them to keep their oath and promise of obedience to him: yet did
neither the one nor the other of them give them any aim to commit idolatry,
to profane the glory of god, and to do things abhomiminable in that service.
But rather, according to the contents of that epistle of Jeremy which Baruch
copied our for ye children of Israel which were in Babilo^, Darach. 6.4.5.
this was their charge: Beware therefore, that ye in no wise be like the
strangers, neither be ye afraid of the^ (that is, of their gods) when ye see
the multitude before them and behind them worship the^: But say ye in your
hearts, O Lord we must worship thee. Therefore when Christ had said, Mat.
22.21. Apodote.
Yield ye to Caesar that which is his: he adds by and by, And yield ye that
to God which to God belongs. His meaning is that we yield to Caesar only that
whereof Caesar has right and power: as wealth, lands, bodies, Where of the
King has right.
children, servants, cattle, yea, and our mortal lives to do him service,
without denial or grudge, 1. Sam. 8.11. Neh. 9.37.
if it be by Caesar required: but yet so, as we omit not to serve God: neither
in this, may we cheefely honor and obey the earthly king, and then after that
honor and obey god, he means not so, for he teaches not any such thing: Mat.
6. Eccles. 8.2. 1. Pet. 1.13.
but he teaches that we first seek the kingdom of god and the righteousness
thereof: before al other things: and that in the obedience of our princes we
should order our selves so, as therein we might also obey God. And truly, when
we shall in these two points so wisely concord, we shall soon perceive how
handsomely and worthily one grace will support another, Sophocles.
one virtue will defend another, in a most sweet harmony and consent. Men
ought not to rebel or resist the princes power
But yet, this is to be noted, that as it is a thing repugnant to nature, that
the members of the body should rise up and annoy the head, wherein they
perceive grief and imperfections: so unnatural is it, yea, and against all
law and reason, that the subjects should be in arms against their lawful
Prince, or rebel, or resist his power, notwithstanding that he be an evil
Prince, and his laws are evil also. This intends the Apostle when he said:
He that resists the power, receives to himself damnation: and that justly,
because he resists the Ordinance of God. For though the Lord in his anger
gives such kings over the people, as being wicked, may be scourges unto the^
for their sins, (as Elihu said to Job: Job. 34.30. 2. Sam. 8.
The Hypocrite reigns, and the people are snared) yet must they esteem him
the Lords servant in this place, and yield to him that which to a prince
appertains. We have of this a notable example in David, David obeyed Saul.

1 Samuel 24.6. and ca. 26 1^. 2. Sam. 1.14.


who notwithstanding he was hardly handled of Saul that ungodly king, whom he
knew that himself was to succeed in the kingdom: would not (for all that)
strike him, nor oppress him, albeit he had diverse opportunities offered him.
And his reason was, for that Saul was the Lords anointed, his power was of
God, and David (as yet) was not a King, The Israelites ver^ commanded to serve
the king of Babylon.
but a Subject, owing dutiful obedience to Saul whom he acknowledged for his
Lord and King: and in consideration thereof, when Ezechiel saw how little the
Israelites regarded this, after the king of Israel had given his oath to the
King of Babylon, Iere. 27.8. and 29, 7. Bar. 1.11.12. Eze. 17.13
whom he was thenceforth to serve as a subject, according to the words of
Jeremy: he very sharply rebuked him and them, saying: Shall he prosper?
shall he escape that does these things? or shall he break the covenant and be
delivered? As if he should answer himself, no, no: he shall neither
prosper, nor escape an heavy judgment, that breaks his allegiance, and
rebelleth against his lawful Prince.

10 But I hear some say, what is this? What, may we not observe an ungodly
decree? nor yet resist such laws? nor withstand the power of them that
provide them? What then? May we neither speak nor write against such laws in
the high dislike of them? No doubt, although we neither observe them, nor
resist the power of those that provide them, yet may we lawfully speak or
write against ungodly laws: howbeit, How men may speak against ungodly laws.
with such reverence and modesty before such persons, in such times, in such
places, and with such wisdom, as that thereby the people be not incenced nor
moved against the Prince, the Magistrates, and them that be placed in
authority: yea, and so, that not so much as any little occasion be thereby
ministered to schism in the Church, or Sedition among the people. But yet the
redress and reformation of those things must we commit unto the King of all
Kings, who upon the hearty prayers of the people, Men ought to pray to God for
redress, and not to rebel.
will take the matter into his own hand: we ought to desire his divine
Majesty to respect the misery of his people, to maintain his own glory, to
turn the hearts of Princes, that they be moved (with Ahasuerosh) to revoke
all ungodly laws and decrees, and with that noble Cyrus) to incline the heart
of Zorobubel, and the people of God, to further the building of the City and
house of God. And if this prevail not, let us then arm our selves with
patience, Christian patience.
that spiritual and divine virtue, which the Lord so much commended and
enjoined to his Apostles and Disciples, by the which the godly do bear with
quiet minds, and those crosses and afflictions which the Lord shall lay on
their shoulders, knowing well, that God is faithful, and will not suffer them
to be tempted above that they be able, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but will give them the issue with the temptation, that they may be able to
bear it. In this ought we to possess our selves, howsoever we be dealt with
for the Lords cause, especially by them that be placed in authority, Exodus 22.
and Not in any wise to rail upon the gods: That is, the Princes and
Magistrates, Eccles. 10.10. 2 Chro. 24.22. Ierem.
nor to wish the King evil in our hearts. In this sort did Zacharias, and
Jeremy behave themselves. Thus Christ Jesus, when his time was come, yielded
himself to the Emperors power, as he was a man, and sharply reproved his
servant Peter, for that he drew his sword, with a purpose to resist: adding to
the same, The judgment of such as resist their Princes.
He that strikes with the sword, especially in such a case, to rebel, or
resist, or oppress the Princes power, Shall perish with the sword. That is,
He shall not escape his deserved judgment in his due time, as a person both
hateful to God, and unworthy to live among men. And thus also that constant
Protomartyr Stephen, patiently endured the rage of his persecutors, Act. 7.60.
and omited not to pray for them, after the example of his Lord and master
Christ. These be patterns for us to follow in all godliness, chiefly in this
point of obedience to Princes and laws.

12 Finally, it becomes us Christians to declare the high honor of our
Princes, Pray for the Prince.
in wishing well unto them, and in hearty and godly prayers to the lord God for
them, without wrath or reasoning. If we know the Prince to be evil and wicked,
we must desire the Lord to convert his heart, and to conform him to the rule
of his holy law in all things, as it is before said: and in this law to grant
him peace and prosperity, to his glory, and the joy of the Church. If the
Prince be good and godly, adorned with the right princely graces and virtues,
as whom we may persuade that the Lord God in mercy has anointed and exalted
for the good of his people, and defense of his cause: let us us not forget nor
omit to bless and praise the Lord for this chief benefit, as the people did
in the reign of David, 1. Chro. 29.
and let us beseech his most high majesty, to increase yet more and more, and
to continue those his divine graces and blessings in this princely person, with
the greatest prosperity and happiness. 1. Tim. 2.1, 2, 3.
To this duty S. Paul was most careful to exhort, and would that Timothy
should be no less careful to move and persuade the people to the same. And
this is indeed a general doctrine, yt men ought to pray for, and wish well
unto those powers which the lord has ordained and placed over the^. Ier. 29.7.
This was Jeremy his counsel to the Israelites now going into Babylon, Ye shall
pray for the peace of Babylon. And he adds a reason. For in the peace thereof
your peace consists. Ier. 20.7. And so wrote Baruch in a book to the Jews:
Pray for the prosperity of Nabuchadonozor King of Babylon, and for the welfare
of Balthazar his son: Bar. 1.11. And he adds the reasons thereof, as Verse.
12. And to persuade the sooner to this duty, Paul also adds to his
exhortation two mighty Arguments, the one he takes from the end of this
ordinance, saying: That we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. The other, he takes from the equity and goodness
thereof, saying: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior. The former Argument contains three necessary fruits of a good
government: namely, It is good: that is, right and lawful. Acceptable and
pleasant unto God. And That God will have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth. The end of a good government.
Which (besides the large mercy and good will of God to all nations, sexes and
degrees of persons therein declared) teaches the end of a good government:
which is, to preserve and save the people, and to draw them to the knowledge of
the truth, by the conservation and defense of the right faith and religion.
Well then, if by the help and ministry of this ordinance, we have the right
peace maintained, godliness conserved, honesty regarded: If it be a thing so
good and acceptable to the Lord, and if it be the will of God by this mean to
preserve his people and nurture them in his fear and religion, let us
acknowledge and remember, that of them also the people should have a chief
care and regard, that they should not only reverence them, love them and obey
them, but also pray for them, and wish them ever al prosperity.

13 The very heathen people thought this also to be just, godly, and
convenient, that the people did yield this point of honor and gratitude unto
them, on whose peace and prosperity they considered the peace and prosperity
of the commonwealth to depend, persuading that the King or prince was no less
stay to the people, The Prince is to the people, as the foundation to an house.
then the foundation of an house to the same house, on whom they lean and rest
themselves, and the which being taken away from them, they soon fall down and
perish. Basileus.
Therefore of the Greeks, a King was called (...) which is a word compounded
of (...), a foundation, or stay: and (...), the people: as, The foundation and
stay of the people. In the like sense, the Princes were by them called (...),
The Pastors or shepherds of the people. For as the pastor is unto his
flock; so is the Prince unto the people: but the Pastor feeds, salueth,
keeps, defends and preserves his flock, and without his ordinary help
and care the flock perishes. And hereof also, the Prince was called sometime
a Captain, sometimes a Bishop, an Ouerseer, or Lawkeeper. Xenophon.
Neither thought these men that it was sufficient for them, to have good laws
provided, except that also they had such noble Princes, as were both willing
and able to see them performed and kept accordingly.

14 Many such arguments might be to this purpose produced, were it not, that
these before alleged enough, on the one side to dissuade men (if they may be
dissuaded) from that irreverent and monstrous opinion which some in there
unquiet spirits have conceived of the Magistrates and laws; and on the other
side, to persuade them (if it may be) to honor the Prince (being the Lords
holy anointed, and chief head of the Church and Commonwealth next under
Christ) with that reverence, that love, that obedience, and those Christian
prayers to the Lord for the same, which are meet and godly to be used: and
that withal, they would esteem of those good laws and godly constitutions,
which are made and provided for the advancement of the glory of God, and for
the benefit of his Church (by the heavenly wisdom of the chief servants of
his grace in the same) most gladly and dutifully, without murmur or vain
disputations.

CHAP. XIII.
Sedition is a vile and noisome thing. Every good man knowing the danger
thereof, does wisely fly and eschew it.
IT is too true, and a thing too often proved, and the grief of the trial
likewise felt in all ages: that as ambitious heads have much disquieted the
peace and tranquillity of the Church with most perilous Schisms: so cease
they not to enhazarde the safety of our established Commonwealth with many
high contentions, discordes, and noisome Seditions. And I fear much (indeed)
that they have already pierced such deep wounds, as they shall be never able
to bind up and recure: neither can their own wisdom, or any their best
devises find out how to stop or prevent the manifold inconveniences ensuing
the same. For, the beginning of strife (as Solomon thereof said) is as one
that opens the waters. Prou. 17.14:
That is to say: A fit comparison.
Even as the waters (which were sometimes bound and enclosed in some vessels,
or within some banks) are now let to run out, and cannot be restrained from
fleeting abroad, nor gathered together again by him or them that so let them
to run forth: so neither can those strifes and contentions be appeased, nor
the inconveniences of the same stopped, or remedyed by those seditious persons
who have broached the same. Therefore Solomon counsels, Before the
contention be meddled withal, leave off. This is good counsel for them which
have not yet warmed their hands at those furious fires, Pro. 28.25. Minsinger
de sedit. C.
which proud stomachs enkindle among men. As this is an universal argument,
that Ambitious persons do sow the seeds of discord among the people. So it is
most certain, that Seditious persons do seek only evil, Pro. 17.18.
as Solomon says. For Sedition brings after it calamity (as Euripedes said)
yea, Sedition brings after it desolation. For she dissipateth and throws
down the strongest Castles, Cities and kingdoms. And this was proved of old
in that memorable example of the builders of the Tower and City of Babel, Genesis
11.8.9, 10.
who soon after the division of their languages, left off to built the City,
which thereon fell to ruin, and themselves were scattered abroad on the face
of the earth, to be for a perpetual document to all the posterities. But let
us yet a little consider the nature of this hurtful vice with her effects and
fruits, and thereby loath and contemn her, as the good citizens are heedful to
prevent those noisome fires, The nature of Sedition.
which rise up of little sparkles, and burn many houses, to the dread and
trouble of their whole City. Maro depainteth her thus: Verg.
-- Ac veluti in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, etc.
2 As, when in mids of mighty troops
of men, does often arise
Sedition fell, the minds of all
the vulgar sort are mad:
The Torches fry, and stones be flung,
and fury forces war, etc.


And this Petronius, Arbiter amplifieth, Bull. in Act. 19.
describing this noisome Sedition, in these words. Intremuere turbae, etc.

The Common people moved, then discord
with rough rented hears
Does lift aloft her Stygian head, The Image of sedition.

and in her face appears
The blood congealed, her staring eyes
as weeping now are seen:
Her gnashing teeth their cankred filth
display with gaping green.
Her driueling tongue is swollen, about
her lips the Dragons been.
Yet more, within her torn attire,
her bloody hand does make
The trembling light of life in breast,
with mortal dash to quake.
Of this matter Luke has set forth to be seen a memorial example, when he
reports how those Seditioners in Asia behaved themselves at the instigation
of Demetrius the siluer-smith. An example o^ sedition. Acts 16.28.29.
They were (says he, Full of wrath, and the whole City was full of confusion:
and they rushed into the Common place, some cried one thing, and some another:
for the assembly was out of order, and the more part knew not wherefore they
were come together. It is a very dangerous thing to thrust in such
unnecessary and troublesome opinions among the people, with whom (all
wisdom and counsel being shut out) their praue affections and fury bear
all the sway: and every one among them is hasty to prefer the decree of his
own mind, howsoever it be, and no marvel, seeing that like as in one water
there appears diverse faces, even so, diverse men have diverse minds, Prou.
27.19.
as says Solomon: of them therefore the Poet thus aduertiseth: (...). That is,
Trust not the vulgar sort: for they be diversely conceited.

Isay. 9.18.
3 The Prophet Isayah likeneth Sedition to a fire among briars and thorns: for
even as fire first takes in dry and light matter, and afterward being
enkindled, The fruits and effects of Sedition.
enters further and further until it burn and consume the tallest trees in
the wood, and the smoke of the burning obscureth the whole country. So,
Sedition rising of light matters, does in the end consume great peace, trouble
many men, and bring endless annoyes. Neither is the same unaptly likened unto
that freating Canker whereof Saint Paul speaks, Hos. 10.14.
2. Tim. 2.17. which had too deeply annoyed Himeneus and Philetus. Moreover,
the Prophet Hoseah shows the effects of this Canker and consuming fire, when
he says: There shall grow a Sedition among the people. All her strong Cities
shall be laid waste, even as Salma destroyed Bethardel in the day of battle,
What is sedition?
where the Mother with the Children were dashed in pieces. Therefore Sedition
is defined not only a tumult, a dissension of Citizens, a moving up of the
people against the Magistrates of a desire to change and overthrow the
government established, Schaah. Schaon.
or the laws, but also (according to the signification of the Hebrew word) A
wasting, a desolation, a calamity, a ruin, a destruction, a casting down
headlong of any thing, especially of families, Cities, states, and kingdoms:
for as concord and agreement is the strength and maintenance of all families,
cities, states and kingdoms, so does strife and sedition, dispatch and
overthrow the same. The Prophet Isayah uses that word, where he says: Isa.
6.11. Read also 2. Chro. 15.5.6
Until the Cities be wasted without an inhabitant, and the houses without
men, and the land be utterly desolate: and the Lord has removed men away, and
there be a great desolation in the midst of the land. (...).
To this consent the Greeks, which call Sedition not only (...), (...).
that is: intestine and civil war: but also (...), which is Englished, a
cutting off, a dividing in sunder, a tearing abroad, a diuorcing, a cha^ging of
a thing into that which degenerateth from kind: a dissipation, Cicero. li. 1.
de fin. and 3. Tusc. August. de abus. saeculi. F. Petra. de bello civilly.
Punishment of such. Com. super decret: Cardin. d. 45. c. Seditionarii.
an undoing and dissolution of a thing. All which are indeed the very fruits
and effects of Sedition, which therefore is accounted a most pestilent thing
amongst men, a contention most miserable, one of the abuses of the world, and
the greatest of all humane evils.

4. In the due regard thereof, those of pristine time have decreed no mean
punishments for Seditionaries. There was an ancient law, that such should be
either hanged on forks or gibbets, or cast to wild beasts to be devoured, or
banished into far countries. Plutarch.
Plutarch tells of a kind of tithing of the soldiers, in an host which were
seditious, that was, Nestor.
where every tenth man was taken out from the rest and put to death. And that
ancient Nestor, which had lived a man's double age, and had had a ripe
experience of these matters, censured such a person in this sort: A wretched
Exile, godless wight, and runnagate be he: Homer. Iliad. 9.

That by sedition, civil broils, and wars procures to be.


So hateful have these thriftlesse persons been after the judgment of mere
Heathen men, who by reason and common experience have noted them to be most
unprofitable to all Commonwealths, and that their practices did much annoy
them at home, when bloody wars abroad were not felt at al, nor scarce
thought on. No less execrable have they been esteemed by them that knew God
by the light of his word. Prou. 6.16.19.
Solomon places him that sows Sedition among brethren or neighbors in the
highest grade of those seaue^ things which the Lord deadly hates: yea, this is
that (says he) which his very soul abhors. Neither is any place more fit
for him that sows sedition between brethren or neighbors, then the Synagogue
of Satan, for why? he is the child of the devil, and not the child of God. For
Christ says, that Peacemakers shall be called the children of God: as they are
indeed, and not the breakers and disturbers of peace. And if they be the
children of God, then must he which seeks evil be of the devil. For he is
against God which is not with God: and who are against God? even the devil and
his children. But let us hear the censure of Solomon, touching the punishment
of such an one, he says: A cruel messenger shall be sent against him. Meaning
indeed, that the Lord uses many means to punish such kind of people. Prou.
24.22.
He says again: The destruction of them that be seditious, shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both: that is, who can tell what
kind of destruction shall be inflicted upon such persons, either by the Lord, or
by the King, or by them both, against whom they have transgressed by their
wicked practices: for is is certain, that whosoever it be, they shall not
escape punishment, and that no mean punishment. As in the fearful
destruction of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, it is before declared. Moreover, Act.
5.36.
the learned Doctor Gamaliel) as we read in the Acts of the Apostles) cites
two notable examples, the one of Theudas, the other of Judas Gallilaeus, two
famous Seditionaries, Act. 5.36.
which were both rewarded according to their deserts, by the just judgment of
God, Theudas and Judas.
and the ministry of his lawful ordinance. This Theudas being a witch,
promised many things: he gat unto him no small rout of Spendthrifts,
banckrupts, murderers, thieves, Joseph: Antiqui. li. 20.4.
and ungodly persons, which opposed themselves against Laws, magistrates, and
all good men. But this fellow the Lord discomfited and destroyed by the hand of
Fadus the governor of Iudaea, Idem. ca. 5. Item. li. 18. ca. 1.
and they al which agreed unto him were scattered abroad. That Judas
Galilaeus, (which was otherwise called Gaulonites) had taken unto him one
Saducus a Pharisee, and raised also great sedition among the Jews: he denied
that tribute was due to the Emperor, which he said was nothing else but a
perpetual slavery of the Jews. For this cause Cyrennius and Copinius coming
from Rome into Syria, slew Judas, punished his confederates, and taxed the
people, Luke 2.1.
as Saint Luke reports it.

5 These be notable examples to teach us, We must not move seditions under
color of reformation.
that neither under the color of Religion, dislike of magistrates, and laws,
nor of any desire of reformation of things amiss, we contriue or move up any
factions, sects, divisions, schisms, seditions, whereby we would revolt from
obedience to that power which God has set over us, and unto the which he would
that we should be subject in fear. For God himself is the revenger of such
practices, and heapeth on such persons worthy destruction, as upon them that
endeavor to ouerthow all good order, and destroy Cities, Kingdoms, people,
and places, which without unity and concord cannot stand nor continue, as
Christ himself witnesses.

Causes to fear invasions.
There is nothing (next to the displeasure of God conceived for sins) causes
me to fear so much the invasion of the foreign enemy upon our land, then
this diversity of minds and mutual dissension. Neither is any thing more to
be dreaded. Such an occasion had the Infidelles gotten against the Roman
Empire, when the Arrians so troubled the Church with sects and schisms in the
time of the Emperors Constans and Constantius, to the grief of that good
father Athanasius. The like opportunity had Julius Caesar to invade this
realm, when ye Troynouants envying the state of Cassibelan the king of London,
as domestical traitors, opened a gap to the ruin of the Realm. And
whatsoever hastened the overthrow of that famous Jerusalem, in to whose gates
the kings of the earth, and all the inhabiters of the world would not have
believed, Vespas. and Titus hos. 10.14. Lam. 4.11
that the adversary and enemy should have entered? Such fruits has sedition,
which permits neither quietness in men's minds, nor peace in their houses,
nor safety within the strongest walls of their Cities, Hos. 10.14.
nor any long prosperity, peace, and continuance of kingdoms.

6. Of this inconvenience feared the high priests and Pharisees, when they
heard that Christ in his doctrine had said, Mat. 10.34.35. Luke. 12.51.
That he was come not to send peace on the earth, but a sword, and to set
variance betwixt the father and the son, the mother and the daughter, and to
cause enmity between them of one house. And thereupon he was falsely accused
to them, that he was a moouer of the people, and a person seditious: they
thereon resolved and concluded against him: If we let him escape thus, all
men will believe in him, the Romans will come, Ioh. 11.48.
and take both our rowme and the people. I produce not this example as though I
allowed of their resolution, touching the doctrine and dealings of Christ, (for
they being carnally minded, and of a corrupt judgment concerning the things
of god, mistook him, wrested his words, and constrained al things peruersly
against him, and therefore they could not avoid the determinate invasion and
their destruction in the time of their visitation, notwithstanding yt they
killed him: but rather, being themselves seditious indeed, and breakers of the
true peace, they drew worthy vengeance on their own heads.) Only by the true
understanding of this place, I would prevent them, that are ready to take from
thence an objection. But in very deed, if Christ had not bin the fall and rising
again of many in Israel, How Christ came to send a sword, yet he was not
seditious.
the sign that should be spoken against, and that only Messiah and savior which
restored man to that true peace and love of god, from the which these
degenerated Jews, were so far estranged through their own malice: but had
bin a troubler of the common tranquillity, and a seditious person (as they
falsely judged of him) the^ their resolution and sentence had sauoured of
wisdom and good policy (seeing that civil controversies, motions, and
seditio^s, drew on so many noisome inco^uenie^ces) but they knew not what was ye
right end of Christ his coming into the world. Neither knew they the time of
their visitation either in grace and mercies, or in wrath and judgments: and
that which pertained to their peace. indeed was hidden from their eyes. And as
for that most excellent prophecy of Isayah touching Christ and his office (ca.
11, Luke 19.42. Isay 11.2.3.4.5.
) they never rightly understood the same, being so cruelly minded.

The end of Christ's coming.
7 Christ came not to provoke the Subjects against their lawful Princes, as
Chorah did: nor to move the Commons against the Magistrates and laws, as
Theudas did: nor to sow discord among the children of God. He was no
seditionarie. The Crier in the wilderness would not so much as contrary his
own voice: the King would not so oppose himself to his Ambassador, who (as
Malachie prophesied, Mal. 4.5. Luke 1.16.
Turned the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just men. Christ came to call sinners to repentance: to save
them that were lost: to bring peace: to preach peace to his people: to recover
that which was taken away: to redeem them whom the devil had captiued: to
gather together in one those which were scattered abroad, and so to preserve
the^: contrary to the nature of sedition, which divides, dissipateth, and
destroys. Isay 11.4.
Now against this the devil (being the prince of the malign world, with high
blustering winds rages the world (being by him moved) with many swelling
waves stirs, and the flesh (which he also suggesteth) with many a lustful
attempt, is disordred. And so every of these enemies make no small ado, to
retain and hold fast those in the bondage of sin, death, and damnation, whom
Christ came to set at liberty, and to reconcile to God.

The Christian warfare is Spiritual.
Against those pestilent enemies of man's soul, Christ encourages them that be
delivered to stand fast, being furnished with all the Armor of God, in regard
of whose service and glory, they must be well contented to forsake father,
mother, wife, children, brethren, sisters, and all that they have, yea, they
must cut off their right hands, put out their right eyes, which are offensive
to them, or that hinder them in this service, and take up their cross and
follow Christ their Captain. Neither could this divine office of our Savior be
otherwise performed but by binding of that strong man which possessed the
house, by treading on the serpents head, There is no concord between good and
evil.
and by casting out the Prince of this world from his usurped hold: and that
the people of god being so recovered by his might and mercy, and gathered
together by his word, might be separated and kept apart from the power of
darkness, between the which and the kingdom of Christ there has bin, there is,
and there shall be continual wars, and enimities, as naturally between the
woman and the serpent: her seed, and his seed: between light and darkness,
Christ and Belial. This is that spiritual warfare, so much spoken of by the
holy Ghost in the Revelations of S. John. This is the sword which Christ
sends on the earth.

8 Howbeit our Savior both commands, The doctrine of Christ teaches love.
and by his own example commends unto his apostles and disciples, patience
peace, concord, love, as the recognizance of his servants, saying: By this shall
al men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love together as I have loved you.
And he yeldeth another reason thereof in this, that he calls them sometimes
his friends, and his brethren. True love and peace apperteineth to true
friendship, and it is both good and comfortable for brethren to dwell together
in unity: but discord, co^tentions, wars among such seem most monstrous,
unnatural and hateful, as not only the word of God, but also the very
heathens teach. By argument, Abraham persuaded his brother or cousin Loath, to
concord and peace. We be brethren (said he) let there be no controversy
between thee and me, thine and mine. The same argument used Moses to the two
Israelites that co^tended, Ye be brethren, why contend ye so? And Joseph having
dimissed his brethren from Pharaos court toward their own country, Genesis 45.24.
charged the^, not to fall at variance on the way.

Romans 15.5.6.
Moreover, Paul writing to the Romans, wills them (as friends and brethren)
to be like minded after the example of Christ Jesus, that they all agreeing
together, might with with one mouth praise God. And he advises them, that If
it be possible, they live quietly with all men. Also he counsels the
Philippians, who^ he calls brethren, Phil. 2.3.
to be all of one mind, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one
judgment, that nothing be done thorugh contention, or vainglory. S. John
has said much of this argument. And the wise man advises wisely: My son
fear the Lord, and the king, and meddle not with them that be seditious. Prou.
24.21.
Such is the doctrine of Christ.

F. Petrar. de bello civilly. dial. 7.4.
9 Let us hearken unto these words of the wise, and beware that we be not
partakers with them, which either by ministering of matter, or by blowing of the
coals, maintain civil dissentions and discords among brethren, neighbors,
christians: for many men unadvisedly do perpetrate and commit that, whereof them
selves do complain, but all too late, and do bewail that wou^d (as pierced by
others) which they them selves have made with their own hands. Many men have
bin burned in the flames of their own fires. Let us therefore cast away this
kind of diversity, and once begin to will one thing: then shall the peace of
the mind be both sound and immovable, and we shall agree and live in peace.
Otherwise as contrary and corrupt humors in gender the fever of body, so
contrary affections breed the fever of the mind, which is so much the more
perilous then yt of the body, Vices strive one with another: but virtues are
knit together in concord.
by how much the mind is in all nobleness preferred to the body, and eternal
death more terrible then the temporal death. We see how vices strive one with
another: but virtues are ever knit in concord together. Let us therefore
through love embrace virtue, and not commit our selves through discord as
thrales to unthrifty vices. Let us not go about to rent in pieces the seamlesse
coat of christ, but endeavor to eschew al disdain, grudge, murmr, envy,
contentions, seditions, and embrace that love which Christ co^ma^deth to his
disciples, and which his holy Apostles, Peter, Paul, James, and John, have with
so many praises commended to the whole church of Christ. The commendation of
love
For this is that right and christian virtue, which properly norisheth concord,
keeps things co^pounded, Greg. hom. 11
conioyneth the^ that be divided, as says Gregory. This is that which (as
says Cassiodore) is ye death of offenses, the strength of the^ that cone^td,
the victory over vices, Cassiod. super Psalm.
the concord of minds, the society of the elect: which faith conceiueth, where
unto hope runs, and the fruit of al good things serves. To be short, this
virtue (says Augu.) is the root of all good. Super John.
Therefore when Christ had preached that in the love of God and our neighbor,
was contained the whole law and the prophets: a certain Scribe replied and
said: Well master, thou have answered right, for there is one God, and there
is none other but he: and to love him with all the heart, Mat. 22.40. Mark. 12.33.
and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love a man's neighbor as himself, is greater then all the
burnt offerings, and sacrifices.

CHAP. XIIII.
Stop not one inconvenience with another, be thankful to God, and prevent
mischiefs timely.
It is no good policy to move up matters, and seek to stop them with vain
words.
AS it is no point of wisdom for men to fling fire into dry Flax, and then
to assay to quench it with greasy Oil: so neither is it any policy to move
up matters unnecessary among the people, and then to assay to allay and
pacify them with ambages and vain verbositie, in the inconstancy of fleshly
conceits, and wandering lusts. For this is even as if we should think to stop
one inconvenience with another. Where offenses be taken and not given, How to
withstand offenses and their effects.
VVo unto them that take them: but if offenses be offered, VVo unto them that
offer them. If the unthrifty effects of offenses must be prevented (as they
should indeed, and the offenses also) yet in all good reason and learned
judgment, must this be done orderly, by such ways and means as the word of
God, and good conscience and reason shall direct.

The condition of our time should move us to thankfulness to God and fear.
And surely if we well weigh the nature and condition of this age and time, we
cannot but grant, how needful it is that fierce fiery flames should be
quenched, by the fountain of Gods spirit, and the ministry of the lawful
ordinance: and that men should yet at ye least be moved to express (with hand
and heart, with mind and mouth) some good tokens of unfeigned love, and right
gratefulness unto God our heavenly father, for so many his bounties and noble
blessings bestowed on them, under the most happy government of our most
Christian sovereign Princess, Queen ELIZABETH. It is must meet, that we
should hear the word of God, and believe in Christ Jesus, that we should fear
God, and honor our Prince: that we should love one another, as brethren, and
help one another as neighbors and friends: that we should abandon all occasions
of wicked co^tentions and discords: and that we should live in godly peace and
Christian co^tentation one with another, within the bounds of our lawful
vocations and callings, especially in this time.

2 To and for this end and purpose, Why God has bestowed on us so many
blessings.
the Lord of all mercies has vouchsaued us his holy word, to lighten and
direct us, wherein he has disclosed unto us the hidden mysteries of his will,
he has granted us the daily use of his instituted Sacraments, whereby our
souls should be satisfied to our good every way. Then the which, what treasure
is there of greater price and estimation? By this we may be well assured of the
love and favor of God to us ward, as to his dear children, to whom he has
provided that bread of life, which he would not should be cast unto dogs, and
has committed those precious pearls, which he vouchsafes not to give to
swine, unto these heavenly and inestimable legasies, he has added many
temporal blessings in this our time, as peace, health, wealth, and prosperity,
with free liberty to sit at home under our vines and fig trees, God has
blessed us above other nations.
when other nations have bin grievously tossed and troubled with wars and
vexations, even to the loathsomnes of their lives: oh how many kings, prophets
and righteous men, God has blessed us above other nations.
have in their times desired to see such ioifull days wherein they might have
embraced these and such like blessings and commodities, and yet could never see
them? Neither has the lord dealt with every other nation in that measure of
his mercies, as he has dealt with us. God grant that through our uncharitable
co^tentions, and unthankfulness, his holy spirit be not moved to complain of
us, as he did sometimes of the ungrateful Israelites, that He had risen up
early, Esaias 65.12.
and in mercy stretched forth his holy hand to an unthankful people, such as
were ever rebelling and running away from him.

This is the desire of the godly.
3 But, would to God, that in this our time we could content our selves in
charity with these his great blessings, and be right thankful for the same in
our hearts: that we would not loath, contemn and disdain such his precious
jewels and inestimable treasures exhibited unto us, but in all obedience run to
the lively waters, Isay. 55.
as such as be thirsty, and come to buy wine and milk of the Lord with them
that in holy love do hunger and thirst after righteousness, the^ shall we eat
of the best, our souls shall have pleasure in plenteousnesse, and be blessed
for evermore.

The way how to defend our selves against our enemies.
This is the way for us to overcome the devil and all his assaults: by this
bulwark and rock of defense, shall we be well able to withstand the popish power,
and invasions of foreign enemies, contrived, intended and threatened against
the Church of Christ in this Realm, against the Lords anointed our sovereign
Princessle, and against the whole land. This is the best course that can be
taken by us against the beastly wild Bore, to force him from our Gardens, and
to drive away those noisome Foxes from our Vineyards. Cant. 2.15.
And this is the banishment of that wicked zeal, schism, Lib. 3. de vit.
contempt.
sedition and unchristian dissension, the which are (as once Prosper said) the
greatest plagues to the mind that can be.

4 But ambition is a devilish sickness, Ambition forces men to break forth
above measure.

Eras. in epist. ad Adrian. pap. super Arnob. Psalm. 58.


and a pernicious spirit (as Erasmus writes) with the which whosoever be
possessed, have both deaf cares and giddy heads: they will neither give heed to
the good counsel of the wise: nor abide within the limits of their own
places, nor will they be pleased that any man should endeavor to dissuade them
from dealing in the affairs of other men. But they must needs bend to pursue
that which they have disliked with stern faces, and to compass and effect
that which they have conceited in mind, and affected with eager desires: yea,
and that far beyond that they are able to reach unto, whiles aspiring in vain,
Some make a show of good when they do evil.
they only commend and glorify themselves, and assay to tread all other men
under their feet. But yet this (notwithstanding) they shame not to blaze their
good purposes, and godly intents. Such a kind of dealing was taken for an high
disgrace in that noble and eloquent Athenian Pericles, Perecles, Pileus.
who in this respect was compared to one Pileus, who had wounded his most deer
friend with his dart, when he thought to have pierced a wild beast. But I know
(as also it will be granted in all Christian resolution) that though Pompey
emulate the renow me of Julius Caesar, Pompey. Anthon.
and Anthony desires that Augustus were deposed, so that himself might rule
alone: yet after the rule of the law of God, and the doctrine of Christ, such
devises and practices should be far off from Christians. Neither may we
be deceived, if we persuade, that by such means, we may pretend to weaken our
foreign enemies, but we shall endamage our own Citizens: we may determine to
hurt foes, but we shall annoy our friends: and we may desire to pearce
others, but we shall wound our selves to the heart. Howbeeit, when such
tragedies be in action, men endeavor to shift off the causes of all hard
happes from themselves on others (so well conceited are they of their own
integrity, The effects cannot cease, until the causes be taken away.
and such is their hard censure of other men) in the mean whiles, they
endeavor not to cease the effects by removing the causes. They are much like
unto the deformed person, which accused the Glass wherein he gazed, and never
acknowledged his own defect, nor deformed himself; but brake the Glass in
pieces: and they also resemble that fool, which standing crooked in the Sun,
would not lift himself up from the earth, nor consider from whence that kind of
shadow came, but accused the Sun as the cause thereof. On that the faults
could once be acknowledged and confessed, that the causes of griefs being
found out, the cure and amendment thereof might soon ensue.

5 But, alas, this also is not the leaft hinderance (if it be not one of the
greatest) to true concord and Christian reconciliation; Hindrances to peace.
Gen 3.16. and 25.22. Luke. 2.35.
that profane Esais is enclosed in the womb together with holy Iaacob,
whereby Heuah finds her conception to be greatly increased, her sorrows
augmented, Rebekah good woman groaneth with a double travail, and the sword
pierces the heart of Mary. Hence distill a thousand drops of bitter wormwood,
and many deep drams of viperous poison, Heb. 13.15.
as from bitter roots, which those, unquiet heads of either sort so unstable
as the water, so inconstant as the clouds, so subtle as the Serpents, and so
wily as the Foxes, have quaffed forth (though in golden cups) to all
faculties and degrees, to the great trouble of the Church, and to the decay of
the Commonwealth: and (howsoever the Daughters of Jerusalem can digest it)
they be no less noisome and perilous indeed, then rotten and corrupt members
to found bodies: and as a little leaven sowreth the whole lump, and as a
little corruption mixed with the soundness of the holy doctrine and true
Religion: so also one root of bitterness, and on such pestilent persons that
spreads and maintains the errors of the same, does very much move and
trouble the Church, and daily disquiet the family of Christians, whereof the
grief is soon felt in the whole, and too late lamented there, where
convenient medicines are not timely prepared and wisely applied to stop
imminent inconveniences. The malady is near desperate, and extreme sickness
require the like salues: but whereas the maladyes be incurable, this counsel
of the Poet (being so like to that sentence of Christ, Mark 9.24. And to the
request of Sarah, touching the casting out of Ismael the mocker, Genesis 21.9. And
to that advise of Salomo^, Cant. 2.5. And to that desire of Paul in such a
case, Gal. 5.12.) may not be rejected.

Morbida facta pecus tolum corrumpit ouile:
Ne maculet reliquos, est seperanda grege.
Thus Englished.

One taignted Sheep among the flock,
infecteth all the rest:
Take hence that sheep from of the flock,
and that is the medicine best.
The magistrate, the minister, the householder. Eccl. 11.1.
6 Of these matters, the magistrate in his place, the Pastor in his charge, and
every man and woman in his and her house, ought to take due regard in the
fear of God. Neither should any Christian doubt to cast forth his bread as on
the face of the fleeting waters, as Solomon said: And that which they cannot
accomplish or perform (when they have done their best to their power) they
must commit unto that high God Jehovah, which with his power made the earth,
and with his wisdom prepared the round world, and with his discretion spread
out the heavens, which only is wise; and esteems all men (as they are in
comparison with him) fools: and then without al doubt, he will not deny to
take upon himself this thing to redressse.

1. Sam. 25.37 38. The judgments of God overtake the rebellious in their time
2. Sam. 16.10 1. King. 2.46.
Then Abigail may entreat for Nabal; and David may be persuaded to spare him:
but yet Nabals heart is dead within him as a stone, the Lord strikes him for
his wickedness, and he dies with shame. So David may restrain Abishai from
the killing of cursing Shimei, for a time: but yet, the Lord which feeth all,
and takes vengeance in a duetime, causes Benaiah (at the commandment of
Solomon) to smite Shimei, that he dies, and the kingdom is established in the
hand of Solomon.

7 This thing when the godly do behold, they are the rather moved thereby to
fear God, and to say of those rebellious people now subdued: Behold the men
that took not God for their strength: but trusted in the multitude of their
Riches, and put their strength in their malice! Psalm. 127.
And these ungodly themselves (seeing how vainly they have risen up early,
how much labor they have lost about their own busy toil, and now into what
misery their own wisdom, their great vanities, their inconstant devices,
their singular conceits, Ier. 23.32.
and carnal cunning has cast them) they shall accuse themselves of folly,
with him that said: Isa. 29.15. and 47.10.
Ingenio perii Naso Poetameo. Ouidius prospero.

Ingenio experior funera digna meo.
Lo, thus (alas) have I now taken,
through mine own wisdom, mine own banel


8 Therefore, let not Cham chop in twixt Shem and Iaphet to divide them, A
caveat for rebellious and unthankful persons.
for God in time will join them again, and wring out Cham from his usurped
hold. Let not Achitophel counsel absalom against his Father David,
contrary to all equity and good conscience: for God will cause Chusai to turn
his Advise into foolishness, and Achitophel shall be forced to hang himself
for his labor. Ios. 7.28.
Neither let Achan trouble Iosuah and his host by his close iugling any
longer: for God will try him out well enough, and trouble him with a just
measure.

In conclusion, as when an hungry man dreameth that he is eating, and when he
awaketh, Isa. 29.9.
his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth that he is drinking,
and when he awaketh he is yet faint, and his soul has appetite: even so
shall the multitude of all nations be, that fights against Mount Sion. Judge.
5.31.
So let all the Enemies of the Lord, of his Church, and of his holy anointed,
perish and be confounded: but let them that love him, that pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, and that live in godly obedience, be as the Sun that rises in
his might: that yet the land may have rest, and the fruition of the right
peace, full forty years.

CHAP. XV.
Happy be they that protest well, and walk accordingly. There be three kinds
of Protestants.
NOw, how commendable a thing is it, and of al men to be desired, that those
only which have taken on them to walk in the kings high way, and to fight
under the banner of their Captain Christ by their Protestations, could both
contain themselves therein, and also to content themselves, as they would not
starte aside, either to the right hand or to the left hand, from that fear of
God and true observation of his laws, which of them in duty is required?
Surely, the light is a most pleasant thing (as says Solomon) and these men,
Eccles. 11.7.
being in their choice, so wise as Mary was (who sat at the feet of Christ
and heard his word) and so diligent in doing the works of their vocation, as
Martha was (who with carfulness provided for Christ and his Apostles) do
with a sweet harmony of hearts, and right concord of minds, comfort the
Church, benefit the Commonwealth, and glorify the Lord in their lives.

And the godly wise, which behold them so walking and pleasing God with them,
seeing that wisdom is justified of her children, do most joyfully apply unto
them, and with them, to themselves, that sweet consolation of the Christian
Philosopher.

O faelix hominum genus: Boeth. de consol. philo. li. 2. Met. 8.

Si vestros animos amor,
Quo caelumregitur, regat!
Oh happy kind of men are ye, whiles Gods good love,
So rules your hearts, as heaven high he rules above!
And thus says our Lord: Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness: Mat. 5.6.7.14.
Blessed is he that hears the word of God, and keeps it: for he is that
wise man which builds upon the Rock. Therefore, when the Psalmist in the
consideration thereof, had ascribed them blessed which are undefiled in the
way, and walked in the law of the Lord, he uttered this desire of his heart
unto the Lord: Oh that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy
Statutes. So shall I not be confounded, Psalm. 11.9.
while I have respect unto thy commandments.

2 But, there be of them that profess and protest with us too, Every talker is
not a walker in the way of the Lord.
which yield unto the Lord and his holy anointed, many sharp and eager
grapes, whiles (having their eyes evil because God is good) they verify that
saying of the same Philosophers Nemo facile cum fortunatae suae condition
concordat: that they can hardly hold themselves pleased with their own estate
of life. Therefore abusing the blessings presently offered them, they do with
the crafty Gebeonites endeavor to dazzle the clear eyes of Iosuah, Ios. 9.4 9.
with a mystical vale, whiles by their Cananitish conueyances, hydious
hypocrisies, and minds insaciate, they climb to please their haughty hearts
and ambitious heads. Howbeit, they cannot choose but bewray their own folly,
for ye light will appear.

This faigning of fealty, and making show of obedience, To make a show of
good, and to do evil, is an old lesson taught by the devil. Genesis 3.1.
when there is nothing less meant then that indeed, is an old lesson that
Satan taught long ago, when in the person of a serpent he beguiled Heuah, and
assayeth the same yet daily among men, resembling in shape, an angel of light.
But good hope assures the godly well-wishers, that the seer of al secrets, and
gide of all governors will from time to time discover both the one and the
other, by pulling off the vizards from dissemblers faces, as in times past he
has done to many of them, that sometimes sat in the highest mountain in the
view of terrene kingdoms, and semblable renown, whom after their most
dastardly yeeldings to Satan's assaults) he has deciphered to their ignomie and
perpetual shame. For his holy will and decree is, that Haggar the bondwoman,
and Ismael her son, shall both be cast out of Abraham's house, that Isaak the
son of Sarah may be and remain the only right heir. But to pass over many
such ambagious circumstances (without shame or offense to the true Christian be
it spoken) among too many of them that pass under the title Protestants in
this time, Vilescunt quotidiana. The word of God which is daily preached is
loathsome unto them. The ministers of the Gospel live in contempt: The truth is
not esteemed: the present peace is unpleasant: The quiet government is
disliked: Righteousness is not entertained: holiness hides her face: faith is
famished: hope is quayled: charity is clean put out: men be ungrateful for
all the good things enjoyed: they be discontented, and groan for that whereof
they know not the experience, in the disdain of yt which they have liberty to
use to their profit. And in a word, they declare themselves to be without ye
true zeal and the fear of god, which at no time will neglect the observance of
his commandments. Unto such says Bernarde: Qui vobis cum virtutibus, qui Dei
virtute^ Christam ignoratis? In Cant. ser. 22.
What right have ye in virtues, which are ignorant in Christ the virtue of
God? yea, unto them says God himself: Psa. 50.16.17
What have thou to do, to declare mine ordinance: that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth: seeing thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee.

3 But of Protestants we may distinguish, for of them there be three sorts:
that is to say: Three sorts of Protestants. 1. A single protestant.
1. A single Protestant. 2. a Christian protestant. 3. a formal protestant. The
single protestant answers to his title in this, that he makes declaration
of his mind in any matter whatsoever, for ye better conservation of the right,
and notwithstanding of the wrong, either generally in any sort, or specially
before witnesses: or in that that he manifestly denou^ceth the thing whereof men
are to take heed, and yt which ought to be done: or that he protests boldly
the truth of a matter doubtful or in question. And this title is diriued from
the latin Verb Protestor, to protest, or witness openly. The name of Christian
protestant, 2. A Christian Protestant.
was first used in Germany (as Sledan notes) then when as the Princes
Electours openly withstood that ungodly decree which Antichrist made against
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in the year of our Lord 1529, unto whose
protestation certain of the chief Cities of Germany did also subscribe. And
he is aright christian Protestant, who in the fear of God and honor of his
Prince, does witness, subscribe, and protest against the ungodly decrees,
damnable doctrines, and filthy abominations of Antichrist. He is a good
protestant, which acknowledges and confesses the doctrine of Christ for his
true wisdom; the mercy of Christ for his true righteousness: the life of
Christ for his true holiness: and the death of Christ for his true fortitude.
He is a true protestant, that takes the truth in hand for his cause, dealing
truly therein, and rendeth zealously to the peace of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. He is a true protestant, which is like that true Israelite, whose
speech agrees with the truth, whose hand consents with his heart, whose
walking concorded with his talking, to the glory of God. This is that sheep
which hears the voice of the true Pastor; that little one which believes in
Christ; that wise virgin which wayteth for the bride, with a burning lamp in
her hand; and that grateful guest which comes to the wedding with his
marriage garment. This is that Christian, which takes up the cross, his
masters recognizance, and follows the Lamb wheresoever he goes. This is
that soldier, which having taken on him (...), 2. Tim. 2.3.4 Ephesians. 6.
All the armor of God, wherewith he is strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might, stands and fights not against peaceable men, true dealing
men, plain and honest persons, and the Christian brethren: but against Rulers,
against powers, against worldly governors of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in the heavenly places: That is, against
Antichrist, and all his ministers: against the devil, and all his Angels. This
is that protestant, which knowing that the end of his Redemption is, To serve
God in holiness and righteousness all the days of his life, Luke. 1.75.
though he has received a kingdom immovable: does endeavor himself
accordingly to serve God with reverence and fear, Heb. 12. 1. Pet. 2.16. Romans 8.
and daily expects the revelation and glorious liberty of the sons of God,
with continual prayer, and this hearty desire: Oh come, good Lord Jesus.

4 Such a Protestant was Nathanael, Nathanael was a good protestant John 1.47.
Apollos. Acts 18.24.
whom Christ himself commended for a true Israelite without guile. Such an one
was Apollos, who aided them much that believed through grace; who mightily and
that openly confuted the Jews with great vehemency, showing by the Scriptures
that Jesus was Christ. Such a Protestant was Paul, Paul. Act. 20.18.
which kept back nothing that was profitable for the Church: but had showed
and taught them openly, witnessing to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, the
Repentance that is toward God, and the faith which is toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. And from this his duty (having set God before him) he was not moved,
neither accounted he his life dear unto himself, so that he might fulfill
his course with joy, and the ministry which he had received of the Lord
Jesus, Nichodemus. John. 3.1. The blind man. John 7.50. and 9.30.
to Testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. Such a Protestant was Nichodemus,
who did not only come to Christ, but also witnessed the truth, and defended
his innocence before the high Priests and Pharisees, without fear: Such a
Protestant was he, which being borne blind, and restored to his sight, both
believed and worshipped Christ, and testified, and mightily reasoned for him
against the malignitie of the spiteful Jews: Stephen the Protomartyr. Act. 6.
and 7. Christ the worthiest Protestant.
and such a Protestant was Stephen, who, for his good protestations was
woorthilie called (...), That is, The first Martyr or witness of Christ, which
sealed his testimony with his blood. But above all other, Christ himself was
the worthiest Protestant, who, as he in all things subscribed to the will of
his heavenly Father, and made the best Confession that ever was made, before
Pontius Pilate, when he testified, that He came into the world to bear
witness unto the truth, and that all they which are of the truth do hear
his voice: So also he sealed and confirmed this Testimony with his most
precious and innocent blood, as necessary it was for him to do, seeing that
the Lord GOD required not Burnt Sacrifices, but a Body, which this Jesus
offered up, according as he had said, I am ready to do thy will, O God, as
in the beginning of the Book it is written of me. And thencefoorth all they
which being enflamed with an holy zeal, and in the fear of GOD have
confirmed their doctrine and testimony of Jesus by bearing of his
recognizaunce (I mean the Cross of Christ) have been woorthilie entitled
Martyrs. That is, VVitnesses, Martyrs are Protestants.
or (as I may say) Christian Protestants, of the Greek Verb (...), To
testify, to witness the truth of the Gospel, without fear or fainting, even
unto the death. These be the true Martyrs, and true Protestants. These have
their praise, I say, not with men, but with GOD, in whose fight their blood is
precious, and they be in their death blessed.

5 The formal Protestants, 3. The formal Protestant.
being of an other mind, are not conformed to this rule: For notwithstanding
they seem to speak in the language used in this time: yet love they to live
after the manners of the corrupt old time: but not according to their manners
whom Fauorinus the Philosopher would that men should follow: howsoever they
speak and would be esteemed. In this, they rightly resemble them, who bowing
their knees before Christ, said, (...), Mat. 27.29.
Hail King of the Jews: but mocked him, and dreanched him with bitter
vinegar. For, notwithstanding their protestations, they be (in very deed)
blasphemers of Jesus, and tormentors of his poor disciples. 2. Pet. 2.16.
The liberty of the sacred Gospel they use for a cloak of maliciousness, and
not as the servants of Christ. They are therefore well like some of those in
Iudaea, but not like the right Jews: for all those in Iudaea were not the true
Jews: for had they been true Jews, Christ would not have reproved them so
sharply for their great hypocrisy, and likened them to painted Sepulchers.
Neither would Saint Stephen have called them stif-necked, and of uncircumcised
hearts, Acts 2. and 7. Reu. 3.
and ears: nor would St. Peter have called them murderers of the just: nor
would the holy ghost by the ministry of John have so vehemently reproved
them, and have censured them of the Synagogue of Satan. Such kind of
Protestants through their unnatural degeneration and Apostacye, are rightly
noted among those Monsterse, which Nature so much abhors, being therefore
not unaptly likened to the cankred Apostate Lueifer, Counterfeit Protestants
likened to Lucifer.
altogether so contrary to that light and beauty, which his name notes.
Think they, it is not true that the Spirit fayeth: I know thy works! I see
thy thoughts! And do they imagine, that the searcher of the hearts and reins,
will not set in order before them all that they have done? Be not deceived:
God will not be mocked: but know for a surety, that every man shall reap
according to that which he sows. Have a care therefore to sow good seeds,
that ye may reap thereof good fruit.

6 To these kind of Protestants is made applicatorie that Song of Bernarde,
which is wholesome enough, how harrish so ever it sounds, and includes them
within the rabble or number of monsters. In lib. de consider. ad Eugen.
Neither feared he to write it to Pope Eugenius. Monstrosa res est, etc. It is
a thing monstrous (says he) to have a chief place, and a mind base: to be
highest in seat, and lowest in life: to have a vaunting tongue, and idle
hands: much talking, and little walking: to have a countenance of gravity,
and works of lenity: to be in great authority, and to be subject to a
nodding inconstancy. As if Bernarde would have said in a word: To make a
great show of holiness, when men be most devilish, is a thing most
abominable before God and good men. It is then certain, that all they which
bear one title or name, are not by and by of one condition, nor children of
the same parents, nor soldiers under one Captain. And it is no maruayle that
also in these days, many of them which pass under the title Protestants.,
have besides that only title, nothing, or very little belonging thereunto.
But shall they therein be holden guiltless? No, no. If the Scribes and
Pharisees, which were said to sit in Moses Seat, and pretended great
holiness, and zeal, for the law and Traditions of their Fathers, and could
not escape the commination of that woe, and terrible vengeance which to
Hypocrites is due: Alas, then, to what heavy doom be such appointed, as
under a fair protestation and show of perfection, will neither fast, nor
pray, nor give almose, nor yield tithes, nor tributes, nor yield any manner of
true obedience to GOD, or their Prince, or any way perform any of the works
of Christian charity? And to what thraldom be those appointed, that rather
dedicate themselves daily and hourelie to heinous perfidies, thefts, piracies,
sacrileges, simonies; to envy, ambition, avarice, backbiting and slaundering
to petiurie, lechery, luxury, pride, and idleness: to gluttony,
drunkenness, strifes, injuries, and wickedness? are not these the things that
pollute a man? do not these matters confound him utterly? and are not many
towns, cities, countries and kingdoms, spoiled and quite wasted through these
inormities? Then what can such persons expect and look for besides such
destructions? Surely nothing at all. And yet, as men that have no fear of God,
and so no religion, they dread not those unhappy events, until they come: but
sitting down in the Chair of Pestilence, wherein they scorn God, and all
godliness, they live without fear, and die without hope.

7 I slander not the title or name of Christian Protestant, no more then Paul
did offend the Angels of GOD, when he said, that Satan transformeth himself
into an Angel of light. The Lord which sees the secrets of all hearts,
knows well that I rather reverence and honor the right Protestant with all
mine heart. And I am sorry, that so noble a name should be imposed on such
persons, as do injuriously usurp thereon, abuse and profane it, to the high
displeasure of God, the discredit of the Gospel, and the offense of good men,
in such their gross palpable abominations: But this is the nature and policy
of the old Serpent, wherein, he is most willing that his children should
immitate and follow him, who being ashamed to show himself as he is, takes
on, him the beautiful face of an Angel of light: who hates the light,
because he does evil, and who knows it to be the easiest way to beguile:
for as treasons are committed under trust, so are great annoyes compassed under
the cloak of honesty. There is no such foolishness, as that which has a
show of wisdom: no such sin, as that which is colored with
righteousness: no such filthiness, as is faced with holiness: no such
thraldom, as that which pretends liberty: neither are there like
abominations perpetrated and and wrought in all the world, as those which
bear a show of the fear of GOD, and Religion. VVoulde to God that these
gross enormities were not found among them that be called Protestants!
VVoulde to God, that rather truth, faith, righteousness, holiness, charity
zeal, knowledge, and the fear GOD indeed, might yet one day, be more
familiar, and of greater estimation amongst men, as those good gifts, which
the more common they be, the better, by so much the more they appear to be in
the eyes of all good men! Then might not our dread be so great, seeing we
should not need to fear such dreadful events, as those heinous sins
engender in all ages, among all Nations.

8 The Lord God of Israel said thus of the Israilites: The more they
increased in multitude, the more they sinned against me. What follows?
Therefore I will change their honor into shame. Again: Hose. 4.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
For as much as thou have forsaken the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children. Here is sorrow: here is woe enough: yet worthily threatened on
such a viperous brood.

This intended the Prophet Isaiah, Isay 3.
when he said: The Lord shall have the heads of the Daughters of Syon, and
shall discover their filthiness: Therefore said our Savior thereof: O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me: but weep for your selves, and your
children. And he added the reason, namely, that great misery and sorrow
should overtake them, which indeed came to pass upon them, about forty
years. And of such a plague the Prophet Amos forewarned them, when he said,
Amos. 5.13.
that except they did seek good and not evil, that they might live, there
should be mourning in all streets, and they should say in all high ways,
Alas, alas: and they should call the husbandmen to Lamentation, and such as
could mourn, to mourning.

God reproved and threatened his own people for their wickedness.
Now let us consider (I beseech you) what these were, whom the Lord so reproved
and threatened with these plagues and woe: were they of the Gentiles? No truly:
they were of Israel, yea, of Syon. They were those whom the Lord had enriched
with blessings far beyond all their neighbors: For he had not dealt with any
Nation, as he dealt with them in his mercy. And what did they? As persons most
ungrateful, they did not any way beautify; but every way pollute Syon gates.
The more that God expressed his love toward them, the more they daily
profaned themselves in the abuse of his blessings. They said, with that son in
the Gospel: Father, we will go forth at thy commandment, and work in thy
Vineyard: But yet they performed their promise nothing at all: but went a
whooring in their own inventions, and forgot him that had exalted them, and
disdained that right godly humility which beautifieth them that enter into
Syon gates. Therefore (as it was meet) he which adorned them, bereeued them
of their garments, We must hereby take heed, not to abuse the gifts of God.
made them naked again, and discovered their shame, to their horrible
confusion. A notable example to terrify them, that nothing regard how they
abuse those excellent blessings of the Lord, in their wicked and ungodly ways,
and ungrateful hearts! Oh that it might pierce and enter into the hearts of
those our carnal Gospellers, who though they cannot deny, but acknowledge
Gods great goodness toward them, do nevertheless, eat with the gluttons,
drink with the drunkards, live with the adulterers, swear with the
blasphemers, rob with the thieves, kill with the murderers, sting with the
backebyters, that so, they might be fearful to bear the devil in their
hearts, whiles they hold Bibles in their hands: and learn, that it were much
better that they were stone cold, then that (like those stinking snuffes whose
lights be lately quenched) they should by their warmenesse continue their
loathsome savor, so hateful to God, and offensive to good men.

9 Surely, when they have every way assayed to join God and Mammon in concord,
and to combine Christ and Beliol together in love (because they love the world,
and would serve to the time) they shall well perceive by the manner of Gods
judgments upon them, that he does see their hearts, does know their devises,
and meets with them therein well enough. For though they once said in their
hearts, We be rich and increased with goods, Reu. 3.15.
and have need of nothing. Yet now they shall know themselves, to be wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. And when all these things shall
be well accounted, and the reckoning truly made, they will change their
opinions, and will not say (with him that has bought a good peni-worth) It is
good, It is good: but with him that has not money enough to pay for that which
is bought: Dear, dear, it is too dear; Pro. 20.14.
and I had it at an unseasonable hand. What good has all our toil brought
us? But whiles this wages is made ready for them, by him which renders to
every man according to his deeds, they cease not to sin yet more and more,
and that because they love and take pleasure in the vain and transitory
things of this world, which they esteem far beyond the treasures and
pleasures of the Kingdom of heaven, and which they worship before the highest
God. And although that it be true, which Augustine said, Laudabilior est animus
cui notaest infirmitas propria, etc. That is, that mind to whom his own
infirmity is known, is more to be praised, then he which neglecting that,
searches out the walls of the world, the ways of the stars, the
foundations of the earth, and the paths of the heavens: yet they (in their
conceit) are wiser then all their instructors, neither will they know their
own infirmity. And therefore, we may pipe to them, but they will not dance:
we may teach them, but they will not learn: yea, as the fool, which though he
be brayed in a mortar like firmentie corn, will not for all that forgo his
foolishnes: they will not be persuaded to know themselves, their own condition,
their sickness, their danger, their misery, their imminent destruction, and
everlasting woe.

Adulators are occasions of men's often slidings into sin.
10 And into this miserable case many the more be pleasantly drawn by the
Adulations and seductions of those immitating Apes, (I mean Flatterers) which
being (indeed) of no Religion, but Epicures, Atheists, mere deriders of all
holy worship, zeal, and discipline, and the very polipragmones of Satan,
to beguile men and to take them in their snares, have learned such a pestilent
Art, and guilefull Sophistry, as overthrows all other laudable Sciences.
They learn of the Camaelion to counterfeit all colors saving White, Camaelion.
and in their dealings show all things save honesty. Echo.
They learn of the resounding Echo, to sooth them cunningly with yea Sir, no
Sir, whose favor they seek to obtain. They be among the Jews, as Jews: with
the Gentiles as Gentiles: with Protestants, they be as Protestants: with the
Papists, as Papists: with Neuters, they be Neuters: with them that speak
well, they be as good speakers: and with them that speak evil, they will
also speak evil, even of those things, and of those persons they know not:
and what things they know naturally, as Beasts that are without reason, Iud.
ver. 10.
in those things they corrupt themselves. They also rightly resemble those in
the Fable, which worshipped the Golden Image that the Assebare on his back
(whereof the Ass waxed proud, The Fable of the Ass.
thinking that all that worship was done, not to the Image, but to himself)
for these persons reuerencing only the Wealth, credit, power, and authority
of them whom they Adulate, do bear them in hand, that all these fair
words, obsequies, and worshippes yielded by them, only unto the persons for
their goodness, qualities, and virtues. And in regard thereof, they give
Titles unto many of them most falsely. They call him wise, which is as foolish
as Nabal was: They call him righteous, which is as wicked as Achab was: They
say, that he is loving, which is as envious as Cayn was. They call the
Prodigal man, liberal: the Covetous man, frugall: they call him a boon
companion and a good fellow, who is a Thief, a Whoremaister, a glutton, a
drunkard.

These do likewise resemble the crafty Fox, which, seeing that the Crow
had in her Mouth a morsel of Meat, commended her for her sweet note in
singing, The fable of the fox and the crow.
and requested her to sing: this when the Crow assayed to do, she opened her
mouth and let fall that morsel; which the fox catching, ran his way with
it. So, faith the Apostle, they reverence men for advantage sake. Neither let
they to further the destruction of them whom they persuade, in such sort, as
the fowler destroys those birds which he allureth to his snares, by his
sweet whisteling. These be they which (as Augustine said) do bind men in
their sins, Aug. super Psalm. 9. Isa. 5. Hier. ad Celant.
and draw sins unto them (as says the prophet) with cords of vanity. These
be those Syrenes (says Hierome) which have deadly songs to drown men in sin,
of who^ men should be very heedy, and careful to eschew them, as the strongest
poison, and the sorest persecutors. For it is true, Aug. super Psalm. 69.
that (as Augustine says again) Plas sequitur lingue adulatoris, quam manus
persequentis. More cruel is the flatterers tongue, then the persecuters hand.
Therefore against them prays David, who had of them sufficient experience:
Lord, keep me from the snare and grens of the workers of iniquity, Psalm.
141.5.9
that their smooth Oil, and precious balmes break not mine head.

Christ was no flatterer.
12 They never learn this art of Christ, for he neither flattered any man, nor
liked of them that used it; but he commended the truth unto his disciples, he
likes them that speak the truth to their neighbors. When Christ would
commend and praise John the Babtist he did it not without good reason, Mat.
11.7.
considering his office and rare virtues: neither did he so commend him either
in ye presence of John or John's disciples: but when they were departed from
him, then he spoke to the people concerning John: By the which, Who invented
the art of flattery.
he freed himself of all suspicion of flattery, and gave none occasion of
vainglory to John. But this art of adulation was invented by the Serpent,
which by the same beguiled both Ada^ and Heuah in Paradise, to their overthrow,
Job. 32.21.22.
and to his own damnation. Elihu in Job considering this, said: that he would
give titles to no men: and he alleges a reason: Least my maker should take me
away suddenly. He saw that such persons as imitated the Serpent, were with him
to be damned by virtue of the curse. And thereto concordeth that saying of the
prophet Isayah. c.a. 5. VVo be unto them that put light for darkness, and
darkness for light. Prou. 17.15.
That justify the ungodly for rewards. For as a flame of fire deuoureth the
stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of the flame, so shall their root be as
rottenness, and their bud shall rise up like dust: that is, Prou. 28.10.
both they and their posterity shall perish: and they that cause other to go
astray shall come to ruin. Hiero. ad Demet.
Therefore happy be they that do neither adulate others, nor be by others
adulated: but that edifying themselves in their most holy faith, and praying in
the holy Ghost, do keep themselves in the favor, love, and fear of God,
which ever has, does, and will, commend and worship them, that serve him in
holiness and righteousness. For these men have neither just cause to be
angry with themselves, and to be overcome with fury, as those others be
occasioned, which have bin led as birds to the snare, and fools to the
torment: nor shall they be moved to execrate and curse others, as those be
constrained to do, which in the midst of their miseries, do call to mind by
whose subtlety and guile they have been drawn into these their endless
calamities and woe.

CHAP. XVI.
The example of some particular parts of title Protestants.
Number. 23.22.
ALthough there was a time when (as Baalam said of the Israelites) God found
none iniquity in Iaacob, nor saw transgression in Israel: yet did the Lord
complain against the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.5.6
not only by Moses, but also by the Prophet Isayah: Frowardly have they done
against him (says Moses) by their vices, not being his own children, but a
wicked and a froward generation. And therefore he thus expostulateth: Do ye so
reward the Lord: O thou foolish Nation and unwise? Isa. 1.2.24.
Is not he thy father that has bought thee? has he not made thee, and
ordained thee? And thus says the Lord by Isayah: I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have done unfaithfully against me. And therefore he says
again. Ah, I must ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of mine adversaries.
Even so in these latter times, we may easily descrie, but not ealy bear, among
such as seem to be of Israel, and make fair protestations of Christianity,
such kind of persons as not only Moses and Isayah had to do withal: 2. Pet.
2.13.14 2. Tim. 3. Mat. 25.
but also such as both Peter and Paul do speak of, when they allude to the
words of Christ in his Sermon of the last days, to the great grief of the
godly, and to the shadowing of the Gospel of Christ among men. And surely, as
Paul once said, and not without sorrow of mind, after the Poet Epimenides,
touching the particular nature and condition of the Cretians: so I am sorry to
see, how near English men verify that old Proverb, Tit. 1.12.
in their unthrifty natures and evil conditions.

Kre^tes aeiplseustai kaka theria gasteres argai.
The Cretes are liars, bad natured beasts, and slow bellies. Epimen.

2 And I presume, There is little faith and trust among men.
when other men have with me examined the particulars, they will confess the
same: for howsoever it be, it is true that Synons perjury, Judas treachery, and
Ananias hypocrisy take such large row me, that this counsel, Epicarmius.
Take heed thou trust no man, is holden for the very strength of wisdom, even
among brethren, families, friends, and acquaintances: yea, between father and
son, He that will be trusted must not lie.
mother and daughter. For what credit can a man repose there, where no truth
is: Trust stands on truth: where there is no truth, there can be no credit at
all: there though men swear, they shall not be believed. And this is that
which liars and breakers of promise get, that men will not believe them, nor
put trust in their words and promises, though they happily report a truth,
and intend to perform the word never so constantly: for as the crased glass
or vessel is ever suspected, though it may perchance contain some kind of
licour for a time: so are they a kind ever doubted of, touching any truth or
assurance of their word, who have once failed the same. The Poets have
remembered Cassandra, the Daughter of Priamus, Cassander verg.
for an example of this thing, who (as they tell) for breaking off her promise
made to Apollo, had this punishment laid upon her, that speak she never so
truly, no man should credit her words. And the most part, considering how
little men esteem of honesty and plain dealing, Valor. max. li. 7.
do willingly admit Demosthenes censure, when being asked what thing he
thought to be of most efficacy in speaking (among the Athenians) answered
(...) Hypocrisy: When men make show of that which is not, nor mind not to
perform.
and being yet further asked again, and again, what thing was of the greatest
force in speaking, he still answered Hypocrisy. Therefore men be most
fearful to trust further then they see (as the proverb is) though they
deeply swear before their faces, and have no less color how to cover their
mischiefs under the beautiful vernish of honesty, religion, and truth. This
practice is in no slender regard, being taken for a way most safe and sure
among men, which also the heretic Priscillianus thought the word of God
confirmed, Priscillianus the heretic.
and that in some cases lying was not forbidden, nor dissimulation to be
eschewed, but was a thing tolerable enough even among Christians. Alas, where
is faith? where is truth? Shall Christ come (indeed) and find neither faith,
nor truth upon the earth: yea, yea, for himself has said it, to the shame
and condemnation of such persons.

Thrasones proud boasters
3 Next, it is noted, that Thraso bears no mean sway: he walks after the
flesh: he stands not a little on his own valor: he speaks swelling words of
vanity, being proud, heady, high minded, covetous, a lover of himself.
Howbeit, he can sometimes resemble Jacob in voice, though with the rough hands
of Esau. Esau.
Alas, who ever thought to see so many of these in this age; and again, so few
of them that in Christian charity are contented to cover the multitude of
sins? Peter.
Peter himself (though a Pastor of the Church) speaks words of vanity, he
is ready to strike with the temporal sword, and therewithal to note his
fellow John, touching his manner of walking, with a curious and disdainful eye,
when as he himself should rather remember how he assaied to hinder his lord
and master from his godly purpose, when he should have furthered him therein:
how himself slumbred then, when he had most need to watch with his
Master: how himself denied his Master three times, when he ought to have
confessed him, and have repented thereof. What is this Peter? Is this Simon
Barionah? Nay, this is rather Satan, as Christ called him, when he bad him go
behind him. Satan an hinderer.
Thus (indeed) is one man most ready to make another man a public example with
open mouth: and one brother displaieth his full desire of revenge on another
brother, resembling not only Thraso, but also that heathen Achilles, who (as
the Poet said) expressed his fury against his foes, Achillis. Homer.
being as sweet to himself as honey melting under his tongue. I say not they
resemble that valiant captain in his famous nature and prowess, but in fury
and revenge, as if in stead of being angry without sin, they might desire a
revenge for sin, and thirst after the blood of them, Psalm. 4.
whom they hate and disdain in their pride: as if they might without offense
to God, and breach of charity, hate one another, face, threate, and beat one
another, yea, and kill one another of them. To this they be willing to pike
occasions against their brethren, The fable of the wolf and the lamb.
as the Woolfe in the fable did against the sielie Lamb, when he drank
beneath him in the River: whose Logic they can choppe better then any good
divinity: He drinks when I drink: Ergo, he troubles the the water
whereof I drink. And yet they retain the title of Christians.

4 If they had any respect to the commandment of Christ, the good lessons
and examples of holy men, and the worthiness of the Gospel, they would be
more wise, and express better fruits to declare their Religion. Pro. 20.22.
Touching the revenge of injuries given and taken, Solomon cou^selleth: Say
not, I will recompense evil for evil (that is not good) but wait upon the
Lord, and he shall save thee. Christ teaches: Mat. 5.39.
Resist not evil: For this word, An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, was
spoken for the Judges, and not that it might be lawful for every man to apply
it to the revenge of his private quarrel. He says again: Love your enemies.
For that saying, Hate your enemies, was added to the words of the law, by the
false expositors of the same. And Paul exhorts thus: Romans 12.18.19
Avenge not your selves: but give place to the backebiter, for it is written,
vengeance is mine: I will repay, says the Lord. For as nothing better
beautifieth a Christian, then humility, love, mercy, courtesy; so is there
not any thing that more disgraceth him, then pride, hautinesse, boasting,
disdain, wrath, vengeance. Therefore when the wise woman Abigail the wife of
Nabal, had pacified David, and turned away his displeasure conceived against
her husband, David was right glad in his heart, praised the Lord, and called
her and her counsel blessed, in that she had stopped him from his purpose of
shedding of blood in his wrath, 1. Sam. 25.32.33.
which might (as he thought) have tended to the disgrace of his profession,
and to the displeasure of God.

5 But let us proceed: Oh good Lord! how few find we of the one sort, More
be given to lust, then to actiuitie and godliness.
that are ready to take up with King Alexander, the Harp of Achillis to play
on? And how few find we of the other sort, that make right good melody on
David's Harp? But on the Harp of Paris the Trojan, how many of either sort
find we to twang most odiouslie? they endeavor not with Hercules, for the
love of Lady Arete to reject the hagge Kakia, (...): virtue. (...), vice and
pleasure.
but with Sardanapalus, in the loath of Arete, to embrace Kakia. Few be given
to actiuitie, less to godliness: Gens inimica Deo.
too many (as enemies to God, and foes to all virtues) are bent to lust, to
love dalliaunces, and luxury.

And this kind of Music is without measure delighted in with them, both in
youth and age, Aug. de doct. Christ.
to the honor of Bacchus, and Venus, most far off from that honest
shamefastness, and abstinence, which to women is beauty, and to men an
ornament; and which being wanting in either, they care not what wickedness
they commit. Quantas Leones domuit vna infirmitas delicata: id est, Idem de
singul. cler.
luxuria? What mighty Lions (says Augustine) has one delicate infirmity,
namely, luxury tamed? Which though vile she be and wretched, yet she makes
her prays of great and valiant men. Val. Max. lib. 9.
This flattering evil, is easier to be accused, then to be eschewed: this is
that which betrayed Hanniball into the hand of the Romans: what vice more
vile? What thing more hurtful? In ventre pingis, non in esse sapientiam.
By this hellish hagge are virtues quayled, victories do languish, glory is
devoured of infamy, and the powers both of body and mind are so weakened,
that a man shall hardly discern whether it be more pernicious to be
captiued either of that, or of his mortal foes. Bed. de temp. Sol.
This is that (says Bid) which effeminateth the mind, weakeneth the body,
defiles the soul, and corrupts the person. Therefore Hierom exclaimed
thereof: O ignis infernalis luxuria: O luxury that fire of hell, the matter
whereof is gluttony, whose flame is pride, whose sparckles are evil words,
whose smoke is infamy, whose ashes are uncleanness, whose end is hell?

6 Surely, these things are not so much to be maruailed at, because they be
so common: howbeeit, they may be lamented, because they cannot be amended,
nor thoroughly corrected among men, with whom this devil dwells to their
destructian: but yet would they be something better, were it not that they
also, who ought to be lights, The good examples of the teachers are auailable
to them that should learn
and good examples of life unto others, be polluted in the same Puddles. Can
those young Scholars learn well to write, which have no good Copies and
examples given them of their Schoolemaister? No truly: so neither can the
people behave themselves like christians, when their teachers have no light in
them, or at the least, The names of certain sherpheards
shine not before men in holy doctrine and Christian behavior! Alas, it is
too manifestly perceived, that Tyterus, Battus, and many like pastoral persons
have quite forgotten Salomons affixe to the conclusion of his last solace:
Eccles. 12.9.10. Pan was said to be the God of the shepherds. Virg. Egl. 1.2
Ovid. li. 2. and 3. Meta^.
and being fat and full, they be willing to commit the regard of their
faint flocks to that rusticke Pan, as forgeth the Poet: Both sheep and
shepeard now let Pan
Regard, and cure them as he can.


In the mean time, Theoer. Idyl. 3.
they be in flamed with the passion of an idle mind: (I mean, with that which
springs up of leisure and idleness, and is allayed through exercises and
want of idleness, as both the Poets and Chrysostom write) for the amourous
conceyte of Narcissus besottes them: Nar. enamored with his own beauty. Hyena
a beast that deceives the shepherds. Names of certain wanton women.
Hyenas voice allures them, and they harp lustilie for Amarillis, and
Galathaea, and Phyllis, which had lately enamoured them: which also in fine,
do prove as Dalila to Samson, to deceive them: as Hyena to the pastor to
devour them: as Syrenes to the Nauigatours to drown them. Of this says
Augustine: Aug. desing clericorum.
Quanti and quales Episcopi, and Clerici, etc. Oh how many, and what notable
Bishops and great Clearkes, (after many tried battles of confessions and
victories, after many great works and maruailous tokens, are knwon to have
made shipwreck of all these things, when they have been willing to sail in
this frail bottom. This Vice distained Nicholas, and utterly defamed Demas.
Nicholas. Demas.


7 Nevertheless, this devise better delights them, then that they should
watch in the cold nights, and labor in the fervent hot days, and that so
much the sooner, Herod.
because that Herod the Tetrarch, so well affects John the Tell-truth
(whatsoever face he show before the people) that he had leauer his head were
taken from his shoulders, and presented before him in a platter, at the request
of a wanton Girl, then that he should live any longer to be a reproouer of
him for his daliaunces with Philips wife: although he bring his authority
with him from God. And for that Pope Boniface the seventh, Boniface the
seventh. Fulgosus.
commanded the eyes of Cardinal John to be pulled out, because he presumed
to tell him of his open abominations, as his duty was to do: And for that
Pope Innocent did so well digest it, Innocent.
to be reproved for his negligent provision against schisms, that he caused
them which undertook to tell him of the same, to be cast down headlong from
the lofty windows. Iere. 8.12. What will they answer. Cant. 3.1. and 7.14.
Fie for shame! what abominable things be these that they do: and yet they
be nothing ashamed: yea, they know of no shame! Alas what will they do in the
day of their visitation, and in the morning when that Christ shall see if the
Vine be sprung forth: if the Grapes be grown: and if the Pomgranates be
shut out? For he will surely call an account of them, and the reckoning must be
made in that day, before his tribunal seat. But learn this: as the holy
spousesse could not find him whom her soul loved, by the night times in her
bed: so neither will Christ be found out of them, either by carnal reason, or
worldly lusts, which obscure in them the light of true knowledge: and if they
find him not with John the Baptist; how can they show him to Andrew? If
Andrew find him not, how can he declare him to Simon? And if Philip follow
not the Lord at his commandment, how is he able to find and persuade
Nathanael? But if any of them be otherwise minded, They that enter into this
charge, must not seek for any worldly peace.
and seek with Demas, Nicholas, and such backesliders, peace, ease, and
contentation in the lusts of their eyes, the lusts of their flesh, and in the
pride of life (when they should rather do their duties, come what love
soever) they may look for peace: Ier. 8.15.
but they shall fare never the better: they may wait for a time of health: but
they shall find nothing but trouble. For they be set in the battle to
strive against powers, Ephesians. 6.
and mighty adversaries in the world. Well then: will ye enter thee field,
and not look for strokes? Will ye follow Christ, and neither hunger nor
thirst? Will ye strive to come into heaven, and live as ye lift? Iere. 45.
In truth your expectation is vain: ye do sorelie deceive your selves, and
your Lord and Master will not allow it so. To follow him he must take up the
cross on your shoulders: to come to heaven, ye must prepare your selves in the
fear of God, and a clean life. Simon Magus.
But it is lamentable to consider what power Simon Magus has to enchaunt men
with his sorceries: how prompt that lying spirit is to enter the minds and
mouths of Achabs Prophets, if God once permit him: how ready Asmodaeus is to
search the bed of Raguels Daughter, 2. Chro. 18.21 Tob. 6.
if he be not restrained by Raphael the Angel? And how hasty Satan is to
try the patience of holy Job, if that once by Gods permission, Job. 1.10*
he can pike out but the very least occasion against him: from this
troublesome spirit, and all other his hideous deceites, the Lord God deliver
us, especially all them, by whose holy doctrine and godly life, the Church is
and ought to be lightened and instructed.

Pythias a contencious person in Athens
8 Now to hinder all the good which is expected, that busy and contentious
Pythias, (which should rather have stood to the deliberation of that wife
Phocian, within the City of Athens, then to have torn out his own tongue
with long lippe-labour in every lire) being provoked makes no small stir,
not only in the Church, but also in the Commonweal, to the great disquiet of
the wise Magistrate, to the grief of the vigilant Pastor, and to the high
displeasure of the Almighty God. And may we call him a Protestant: a
Christian? No, no: for those qualities beseem neither Protestants, nor
Christians: neither would those title Christians (if they were not more then
heathenish) adventure such actions and devises, as the very heathen utterly
abhorred as abhoninable. But Pythias in his contention and stir nothing
blusheth to condemn one liberal science, whiles he would seem to commend one
other of the same sort, notwithstanding, that thereby he incur more
discredit in the one, then gain credit by the other: and withal, he makes no
scruple of this, Mephiboseth Ziba. 2. Sam. 16.4. Naboth. Achab. 1. King. 21.
Math. 4.9.
that Mephiboseth be quite beggred, so as by the same Ziba he be made a
gentleman: that Naboth be murdered, so as Achab be pleasured. Oh good Lord!
what else is this, but the very worship of the devil? Let the show thereof be
never so glorious? The very heathen (according to the rule of natural reason)
have vehemently disliked this, to take from one man to give to another man: as
to rob one, and enrich another with the spoil. Phocian also ratifieth this:
Phocian.
among the Athenians in his time, that was a far better thing for a man to
satisfy and pay his debts, then to give and bestow on other men, that which
he has gotten by rapine and deceit. Does not this redound to the disgrace of
such Christians, as let not to contriue such tragaedies? yes doubtless.

9 Howbeit, that neither the heathen Philosophers may condemn them in open
censure, nor the populer opinions point at their faces with worthy infamy,
there is a pretty preoccupation devise to prevent all. Ziba accuses
Mephiboseth to have his possession.
Ziba must now persuade David the King (who favors Mephiboseth (by one
devise or other) that Mephiboseth is David's enemy: neither must Ziba stick to
blow both hoate and cold in this case, as did the old Heremite in the Fable,
The fable of the Heremite.
who blew on his fingers being a cold, to warm them, and presently with the
same breach blew on his broth being hoate, to cool it. How we should use and
esteem of the fellowship of such kind of persons, the fable tells us. But
so it is, that Mephiboseth is unjustly accused before David, by him who would
seem to commend him to his face. So also was poor Naboth accused and
condemned, and the land of the one is diueded, and the vineyard of the other
possessed, and all is safe and sure enough, so long as the eyes of men be
deluded. In the mean time this is not considered, Vengeance sleeps not.
that vengeance sleeps not: for as Stesichoras said so long sithence (whose
sentence for gravity the famous Philosopher Aristotle remembered) The very
Grasshoppers do sing in the fields of such kind of dealings: that is, Arist. in
Rhetor.
the poor afflicted and oppressed do power forth their complaints in their
fields unto God, crying for just vengeance on their oppressors, whom the Lord
God delayeth not to recompense according to their deserts and the desire of his
oppressed children, Read. chap. 25.7.
when they be forced not only to acknowledge the vprightnes of the judgments
of God upon them; but also to confess how rightly and orderly that sentence is
verified on the^, Mar. 7.12. Luke 6.3.
and there posterities, which (besides the words of Christ in the like case)
experience has hatched in allages.

Melant. in Argum. 4. in Ecclen. Solon.
The man who mischiefs does invent,
To make another man to smarte:
Shall others find, him to prevent,
Therewith to pierce him at the heart.
Tit. 1.15.
10 Howsoever the Cretians have been justly censured, these actions and devises
are so heinous and loathsome in the eyes and judgment of other heathen, that
they have judged them as contrary to nature, to reason, to virtue, and all
honesty, which they) according to their knowledge) both used and reverenced in
far better sort then many Christians in name, whom therefore (after the
example of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, which have produced the birds,
the beasts, and the Gentiles to teach others) we may worthily note and apply
without any offense to the wise. The heathen have observed oaths and promises.
Of the very Paganes, some have bin noted firm and constant to the death, of
their words and promises, especially then, when they did swear by those Gods
which they worshipped, holding that (which Plautus has counseled) for a sure
axiom or ground. Moriri sese misere mauolet, qua^ non perfectumreddat, Terent
in phormione Plaut in Asmar.
quod promiserat. Let a man wish rather to die wretchedly, then to promise a
thing and not to perform it. And that another advises, Prius mori, quam fidem
fallere. Choose rather to die, then to falcifie thy faith. And thereof thus
censureth Ovid.

The way seems sure, and often in ure, with frie^dly face me^ to beguile:
Which yet, how sure, or often in ure, is naught, and eke a practice vile.
Among these, such persons as observed not oaths and promises have bin taken
discredited, unworthy of all trust, and most infamous for ever: yea, Plagues
ensue the breach of leagues and promises.
and they have thought that great plagues ensued the breach of promises,
oaths, and lawful leagues. Therefore when Pyrrhus the king of Epirotes,
contrary to his promise and vow made to the Argiues in Achaia, had entered their
City, and in that conflict was slain and his band discomfitted by Antigonus
the King of Macedon (whose aid the Argiues had desired and obtained for their
rescue and defense) it was thought, that destruction was inflicted on him and
his soldiers by the gods, for his infidelity, and that well worthy for as
the Poet writes.

Why would thou not perform in fine, Ovid.

The just effect of promise thine.
The Sythians, the Medeans, the Arabians, and ye Aegiptia^s, have in ye old
time esteemed so much of fidelity and trust in oaths, words, and promises,
Silius Italicus. li. 3. val. pun. sec.
that they deemed death but a mean punishment for perfidious and faithless
persons: and the Romans judged that scarcely any plague or punishment
whatsoever was severe enough, and hard, for such malefactors, whom after yt
they had offended, they would very seldom pardon, and never trust again,
worthily deserving (as they heide) that Jupiter should cast them out of the
society and company of al men, and bury their carcases in extreme ignomie
and utter diffame. Therefore when Metius Fuffetius the Albane King, Metius Fuffe.
who had promised the Roman King Tullus Hostilius to assist him against his
enemies, did nevertheless break his oath, and trecherously deceived him: he
was at length taken by Tullius Hostilius, and tied to two Carts, his hands to
the one, his feet to the other, and so the Horses being forced contrary
ways, Tit. liu. histor. ab vrb. cond. li. 1.
he was rent asunder. Although Titus Liuius disliked much this punishment, as
too sharp and cruel, wherein he said was small regard of humane laws: yet
Virgil, considering the greatness of the fault, allows thereof with this
censure: At tu dictis, Albane, maneres. Anied. li 8.
But thou (O Prince of Albany)
thy promise should have kept.


The Turk reproves Christ^ans.
11 The Barbarous Turk has hard censures in this case: neither has he let
to reprove the Christians for their slender regard of their promises, and to
complain against them to Jesus Christ, whom he knew the Christians worshipped.
When Amurathes the Turk, once saw how that Ladislaus the Hungarian King,
Amurathes Ladislaus. Julian.
by the counsel of the Cardinal Julian, had (contrary to his oath and
promise) set on the Turks and murdered many of them, he took out of his
bosom a Book containing the conditions of peace, complaining and speaking to
Jesus Christ in this sort. This is the Book; these be the conditions of peace
which thy Christians have broken! therefore, O Christ, if thou be the true
son of God, as these do affirm, now show openly, that the perjury of thy
people do nothing please thee. See what followed within a while after: the
Turk setting fiercely on the King and the Cardinal, slew them both, and with
them no small number of their Soldiers, in the year of Christ 1444. Although
it had been so, that the Turk had falsified his promise, (which he would not
to the death) yet should not the Christian King have failed therein, if he
should have dyed an hundred times, being no more lawful for him to break his
oath, when he had promised to be at peace, then it was lawful for the king of
Jerusalem to break that promise and oath which he had made to the King of
Babylon, Ier. 27.8.
in the name of the lord, Ezech. 17.13 15.
whose perjury the Prophet Ezechiel sharply reproved, and the king himself for
the same, was hardly punished. Should he prosper? shall he escape that does
such things? or shall he break the covenant and escape free. Although Synon
do prostitute his conscience and credit to perjury and deceits, Synon
pariured. Virg.
yet should Christians girde themselves with truth, they should do as they say,
if they have said it according to the law of God: yea, and albeit that the
Papists have taken up that profane rule to observe, Papists regard not their
oaths made unto us. Friar Forest. Grafton. Chro. page 1236.
Linguaiuro, mentem, iniuratamgero, I swear and promise with my tongue only:
but not with mine heart: and in that regard, Friar Forest thought he might
lawfully break his oath which he had sworn to king Henry the eight, saying:
He took the oath with his outward man, but his inward man never consented
thereto: and that those our adversaries regard neither faith nor promises made
by them unto us, whom they call Heretics: yet know we right well, that the
breach of a lawful oath and promise, is most odious to the Lord, Psalm. 15.
August. de ciuit. dei. li. 2. ca* 19. Eccles. 5.3.
and fearful to the consciences of true Christians, who love rather to yield
to the truth, then to seek to conquer her, which will not be conquered. This
is Salomons saying touching lawful vows and promises: If thou vow a vow
unto God, be not negligent to perform it. Again, If thou promise any thing
pay it, Nota.
for it is better that thou make no promise, then that thou should promise
and not pay. Such only (as David says) are meet to dwell in the Lords
tabernacle. Psalm. 15.
And this is the rule of the Gospel prescribed unto Christians, whose yea
should be yea, and whose nay should be nay, and even so, Amen: that being
faithfully minded, they might deal honestly one with another, and fear not to
blaspheme, least for their blasphemy and false dealing, they be given over to
Satanto be tormented.

12. As touching other particular points, I mind not here to rehearse the
particular doctrines, examples, and rules of Hermes, Trismegistus, Socrates,
Pithagoras, Plato, Aesope, Menander, Phocian, Aristides, and others, being
Philosophers, Poets, and wise men of the Gentiles, the which are yet worthy
regard, and may aptly be placed before the faces of Christians, if not to teach
them, yet at the least to condemn them, as the Queen of the South, and the
Ninevites were sometimes called forth against the Jews by Christ himself: but
in steed of them all, we will produce that most ancient Poet Philemon, whom
Justinius Martyr disdained not (though a Christian) to remember with worthy
praises. For (indeed) this Poet, has in few words (among others) gathered
together the chief principles and grounds of that sound doctrine and
institution of life, which not only the Sibylles, but also the better sort of
the Poets and Philosophers held, embraced and assayed to practice in their
lives, howsoever Epicurus, Diagoras, and some other of the wayning and latter
sort of the Philosophers and Poets have digressed from those rules of wisdom
by them prescribed and taught. Philemon, Heming. de leg. Mat.
having first reproved the great abominations and errors of them which
thought to please GOD, with the great multitude of Sacrifices of Bulls,
Goats, and such things, he afterward tells what a man should do indeed
to please God of heaven, and what was required of him in these words.

To God see thou do sacrifice: Phil. touching the worship of God.

Thy self being just, in right justice.
A saying well worthy of all Christians to be embraced, as unto whom that
sentence of Christ belongs, and unto the which, that of Philaemon is near
like. The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth. That
is, as Zachary sings, Ioh. 4.23.
In holiness and righteousness. This thing the very Jews themselves scarce
regarded, Luke 1.
which vaunted of the Temple, and entitled themselves Abraham's children, and
the only worshippers of God, and thought they had pleased God well when they
brought great sacrifices unto the altar, howsoever their lives were distaigned
with abominations. Hebr. 4.12.13
But God who saw their thoghts, and (as Aesope said to his son (...), sees and
knows all things, Isa. 1 and 5. Ier. 7. and 46.
and will not be deceived as men be deceived, loathed their hypocrisy,
reproved them by Isayah and other Prophets, and worthily rejected them and
their sacrifices. Would to God that Philemon and other heathen Philosophers,
might not worthily both reprove and condemn Christians now: yea, those
Christian Protestants that boast so much of their titles and dignities, for
their ungodliness and unchristian behavior.

13 Next, the same Philemon has in effect these words: Philemon touching the
civil life.
To please God, it is meet that a man declare himself an honest man: that he
be not a defiler of Virgins, nor an adulterer, nor a thief, nor a murderer:
that he covet not another man's goods, nor his wife, nor his house, nor his
possessions, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his horses, nor his oxen, nor
so much as one small thread of his: for God which is well pleased with righteous
deeds, and cannot abide the wicked, is ever present before thee, and sees
altogether. A notable doctrine of an heathen Poet, so near the verity of the
legal, Exo 20. Mich. 6. Mat. 6.
prophetical, and euangelical doctrine, to the which, as himself labored to
conform himself, so did also others among them, in the person of all the
which, let Socrates be noted, who touching himself said, that in himself he
had subdued Nature, (that is, those infirmities whereunto he was subject by
nature) through his study of philosophy: in the which, as he learned to know
God and how to live, so he feared not for the profession of the same God, and
his good life, to die most willingly, notwithstanding the great entreatie that
his friends made unto him, to submit himself to the laws and wicked
opinions of the Athenians, as Plato has reported it.

14 Oh, that we Protestants had this conscience of our own profession, and
especially such among us, as are placed and authorized to teach, rule, and
inform others, that yet at the least, those heathen men be not called forth
in the judgment before GOD to condemn us, which have not only their rules,
but also the rules, doctrines and examples of Christ, and his holy Apostles,
Evangelists, and Martyrs to instruct us: Therefore knowing by these laws and
instructions, what the will of GOD is, and considering that we be of the
offspring of God, and as children under their parents) do ever stand in need
of his help (as Aratus writes,) and in fine, Arat. solens.
how much he would that our holiness and pure lives should shine before
those Gentiles, to whom the bright shining Sun of righteousness appeared,
not as unto us: let us yield our selves wholly unto his holiness, and so
order our lives according to our profession, that the Lord may gladly
acknowledge us for his own Children, and daily minister unto us that, whereof
we stand in need, and for the which we are taught to pray in these words.
Our daily bread give us this day.

Otherwise, Seneca, in trag. octan. act, 2.
whiles we would be accounted men, not only of the silver age, but also of
the golden age, we shall be found and so proved indeed (by Astraea or
Justice) to be but of the Copper age, from whom this noble virtue (contemning
the impiety of men) is departed, as the same Poet writes.

Astraea she did fly,
this kind of men,
so wicked then,
And placed herself in sky.
CHAP. XVII.
The former argument is continued. Men being at peace under a peaceable Prince,
wax weary of well doing: contemn Religion, and live wickedlie, neither will
they take heed by other men's plagues.
MOst men, when they hear tell of Laish, Iud. 18.17.
which being waxen fat and wealthy, was secure, and feared no misfortune,
until that misfortune overwhelmed her: they do without mouth condemn the
careless security of Laish, Men can condemn the foolishness of others, and
yet not apply their examples to themselves, being within the same predicament.
and laugh at her destruction. So do they likewise, when they hear of Moab,
which had rested long on her lees, and never thought of any rolling, till time
she so sauoured, that she needed to be changed from out of one vessel into
another. Also they wonder at the famous City of Jerusalem, which had
forgotten the Lord, and all his benefits, and pampered up her self much like
unto Sodom, not knowing the time of her visitation, until the day came, wherein
the daughters of Jerusalem were forced to weep bitterly for themselves and
their children. This and such like fearful examples men can read of, and hear
to be recorded in the holy Scriptures, and daily talk of them: howbeit, the
whiles they have not the grace to apply these and such like things, so as
thereof they may make to themselves a benefit, with this consideration, that
these examples are made perpetual to instruct all men in the posterity, that
the like sins do ever deserve, and have commonly the like plagues, without
timely repentance. And herein they be much like unto those Jews, who^ the lord
reproved for that they said: Surely, if we had bin in the days of our fathers,
Mat. 23.
then would we not have partaked with them in the blood of the Prophets; when
yet themselves ceased not to fulfill the measure of their fathers in their
bloody persecution of the Prophets and of the wise men which God sent unto
them: for these men say, if we had been of Laish, or of Moab, or of Jerusalem,
we would not have bin so careless, secure, and unthankful to God for his
blessings: we would have considered from whence came all our peace and
prosperity; we would have known the day of our visitation, and what belonged
to our ease, and bin provident and wise: but behold, whiles they be excellent
in the observing of other men and their cases, they neglect themselves, and
consider not that those examples of yore are made perpetual for the posterity,
which thereby may be happy, if they can be made wary. Men, for ye most part,
in this case do near counterfeit that covetous Euclio, Plaut. Euclio laugheth
at the case of Tantalus. Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur.
who, hearing the Poet to tell of Tantalus, that was thirsty in the midst of
ye water, was moved to laugh at his folly, when notwithstanding, if he had but
changed his name, he should have perceived that ye fable pointed at himself,
being indeed poor in the midst of his wealth. It is no mean furthera^ce to health
for a man to know himself sick, and with what infirmity he is touched: for he
will thereon repair to such a phisitio^ as (he is persuaded) can do him good, and
not before that: for the whole have no need of the Physician, and they that be
righteous already in their own co^ceits, think themselves to have no need of
Christ.

Long peace is enemy to good manners, not of it own nature, but of the corrupt
nature of man, which as the water not moved will soon smell.
2 It is true, that as prosperity makes men wantons: so long peace (as Iuuenal
said) is an enemy to good manners, and makes bad soldiers: not that the
fault is in that prosperity and peace, but in such foolish people, as abuse
the same: for The fool (as says Salomo^) being full, cannot measure himself.
Not only the heathen which know not god, but also the very Christians in name,
who^ the Lord has enriched and blessed every way, far beyond the heathen,
being grown fat and restie, do kick with the heel, as unbridled colts
against God, and degenerate from their former favor through their abuse of the
creatures, Ephesians. 6. Jude. 7.3. Romans 13.
and their manifold abominations. Insomuch that when the Lord presses them
forth to fight for him, and Gedeon, that is, in the Lords wars, they want
the Armor of Christian soldiers: they be feeble, they be faint hearted,
they lap water as Dogs, they can neither go wisely, nor walk honestly,
nor stand worthily, but by their cowardly cowching, and reuolting from their
profession, they show forth the fruits of their long peace which they have
abused, and decipher themselves (in a kind of rebellion) to be the very
enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose ensigns sometimes they had displayed.
Would to God, that neither my self, nor any other man could justly include
any of our English Protestants within this predicament, that so, they might be
well able to plead for themselves against every one that would either condemn
or accuse them of such a fault! But I am right sorry, because I may say, that
it touches many of them so near, that they cannot be excused, nor cleared,
though that Demosthenes, and Cicero, were their Orators to plead for them:
nor can they escape the deserved judgment, if God awarde them execution,
though Noah, Job, and Daniel, dwelt in the midst of their City, except that
they repe^^.

3 In whatsoever coast they stand now, A degeneration from virtue.
this is most apparent, that too many of them have again admitted him into
their houses, whom it pleased God in his mercy, sometimes to cast out:
whereby their last being worse then the beginning, they shall never be able
to end with the righteous, (as Balaam desired that he might) except they
remember from whence they be fallen, and repent. Though they have made show
of a good commencement and beginning, yet behold, they go slowly forward:
yea, rather as weary of doing well they have fainted and made shipwreck of
faith, and a good conscience, which above all things they should have retained.
The nearer they came to the goal, the swifter should their course have bin,
and from one virtue they should have proceeded unto another, until they had
been perfect men in Christ: but alas they have slugged, they have left the
goal of eternal life, they have declined from the strength of faith, unto the
weakness of man's carnal conceits. They are worse now in their age, then they
have bin in their childhood. In this they are very much like the Indian
Pandora, The Pandora of India.
a kind of people which in their youth have white hoar heads, as old men, and
in their elder age, they have black hair, as young men. For when they were
but young, and tender as babes in knowledge, they expressed some tokens of
christianity and gravity: but now when they should have put from them
childishnes, by reason of riper years, and the longer use of the word of God,
they utter more notes of childish wantonness, then ever they did before.
Neither are they unlike the Tarsen Hermogenes, Hermogenes was in his old age as
a child.
who when he was but fifteen years old, was reported of, to be an approved
Sophist, that Marcus Antonius much affected him, and enriched him with many
noble gifts: howbeit in process of time (whether it were through the great
abundance of his wealth, or worldly pleasures, or sickness, or want of exercise)
he did utterly lose the habit of his faculty: Antiochus Sophista.
of whom therefore the Sophist Antiochus was wont to say: Hermogenes in
pueritia Senex, and in senectute puer: that is, Hermogenes is become in his
old age a child, who in his childhood was an old man. And no marvel (for as
it seems to me) they have quite forgotten the vow and promise made in their
baptism to the Lord, and those principles of religion wherein they seeming
expert under their cathechizers, have bin confirmed: I pray God, that they do
not also with Demas forsake Paul in the open field for the love of this present
world, and that so, with Alexander, Himmeneus, Caine, Esau, and Judas, they
make not ship-wracke of altogether in the end.

Men wane in holiness, and become barren as the she wolf.
4 Thus is it not only apparent how they have forgotten that which before they
had learned in the word of God: but also how they with the Moon wane and slide
backward in godliness and wax barren of the works of Charity and
Christianity, wherein they be neither so full, nor so forward, nor so
fruitful, as they were wont to be. But how near do they follow the property
of the she woolfe, which (besides many evil qualities) has a yearlie defect
in procreation? Surely as near as may be: for as the first time she bears
five, the second time but four, the third time but three, the fourth time but
two, the fifth time but one, and then after that she remains ever barraine:
So, whereas, in the first age of our peace they employed (as it were) five
Talents, and yielded thereof the increase, in the second age or year, they
contented themselves with four, in the third age with three, in the fourth
age with two, in the fifth age with one, in comparison with the former, and so
are become mere barraine, for the most part. For though the word of God be
preached plentifully, and the blessings of God do abound, wherewith men
might be moved to praise him in an holy life: yet there is a complaint
uttered, and a Citation sent forth from him that has a controversy with the
Inhabitants of the land: because, Hose. 4.1, 2.
There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land: but swearing,
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, and blood touches blood,
and yet none may rebuke them, nor reprove them, they cannot abide it, but will
rebuke the Prophets, the Preachers and ministers, whose office is to cry out
against them and their sins. So little care they to fight the good fight with
faith and a good conscience: so deuoid of counsel be they, and without all
understanding in the word of god, Deuteronomy. 32.28. and 44.
through yt which they might prolong their days in ye land wherein the Lord
has planted them, and live if they would.

5 Herehence is also discried, that dangerous sin which hurts man's soul
with a desperate wound: vz. A deep distrust of the divine Providence, A
distrust of Gods providence.
by faith in the which, men have a chief comfort in this life, and without the
which, they run into a labyrinth of errors. Diagoras.
Diagoras the Atheist has within his School many shrewd Scholars, though
Cleanthes the Philosopher, Cleanthes.
by the very operation of nature, confirms the mighty woorking of the high
God in all worldly things: yea, though the Lord testifies in his word
plainly, Abac. 1.5. Act. 13.41.
and we do see it evidently, that the almighty God works a work in our
days: yet say they, Magister dixit: Our master has said, and we will believe
him. When men do distrust God, they fly to their own devises.
Now upon this suggestion, Adam desires a more pleasant place then Paradise to
live in: Lot deuiseth a safer town then Zoar to dwell in: Peter for fear what
will follow, denies his master: Annanias and Zaphira, deal deceitfullie to
eschew beggerie. The Gergesites desire Christ to depart from their coasts for
the safety of their swine: Demas joins hands with the world in hope of
favor: and the Protestant is nothing scrupulous to partake with the Peripatike,
the Stoicke, the Epicure, the thief, the murderer, the periurer, the bragging
Thraso: yea, and (though it be certain, that Dagon cannot stand near the
Ark of God, 1. Sam. 5, 3, 4
and the Israelites be comanded to depart from the tent of Corah, and to
touch nothing of his, Protestants do halt between two as lukewarm.
least they perish with him: yet) a thousand of them which go under this title,
shame not to halt between God and Baal, between Moses and Corah, between
Christ and Belial, for their worldly respects; and so, as it be for their
advantage and filthy lucre, let their trafficks and dealings be either with
the Papist, or the Turk, or the Barbarian, or the devil, they nothing regard;
nor remember they what the holy Scripture says unto the Angel of the Church
of the Laodiceans, and to them of that Church, which were neither heat nor
cold, Apoc. 3.16.
but lukewarm.

6 Further, A contempt of Religion.
they proceed and think (so far is impiety increased) that it is lawful
for them to wreast all Religion to their own commodities and gain: the
rather, because the devil persuades the^, that Religion is nothing else but a
certain humane invention and politic rule of man's wit: and that all the
professors of Religion are but scholars unto Numa Pompilius, and vain
triflers, Valor. max. li. 1. ca. 3.
as Julian the Apostate in that conceit, wickedly censured the Christians, and
scornefully cast in their teeth the Cross of their master. Therefore, Numa
Pompilus a king of the Romans, who to persuade the people, feigned that the
laws he gave them, was by the commandment of the goddess Aegera, with whom
he said he had conferenced Julian the Apostate.
as they nothing blush to resemble hm (scorning them that appear zealous for
their God) so handle they the most sacred law of the Lord and the Gospel, as
Neanthus.
Neanthus handled the harp of Orpheos, when expecting the trees to dance, he
did by his confused iangling thereon, cause the dogs to bark at him. They
argue of Religion, as Pilate. Macchiauile.
Pilate did of the Truth, whereof when he heard Christ to speak, he said
(after a scornful sort) (...). What thing is truth? and so went presently
forth, not vouchsafing to abide the answer to his own question. Such an one
was that Macchiauile, who persuaded men to govern in this world, partly by
fraud, partly by force, and partly by fortune: and not by the divine
providence, whereat he iested: immitating therein, not only Julian and those
profane heathen, Psalm. 115.
which said of the Israelites, Where is now their God (making a mock of their
religion) but also (and that effectually) that cankred Serpent, which hearing
that God had forbidden Adam and Heuah the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
Genesis 3.
scoffed at Gods word, and said: Tush, it is nothing so: ye shall not die,
but ye shall be as Gods.

7 To be short, there be too many of them that here hence reason with the
Saduces, that there is neither Angel, Saduces. Act. 23.8.
nor spirit, nor resurrection, yea, with that senseless fool, that there is
no God, howsoever they protest: The fool has said in his heart there is no
God.
for their lives and conuersations, their words and manner of languages
decipher the same. But if they be induced to grant the being of GOD, yet
imagine they, that God is either of no regard or desire, or ability, to
reward virtues with honors, or to defend the oppressed from their foes in
this life, or to give victory in battle, or to punish horrible sins with
horrible plagues, or else, that his mercy is so great that he will forgive men
all their sins be they never so heinous: that he is a patient rewarder, and
will not be revenged on them that blaspheme him most bitterly: The heresy of
the Origen^sts
yea, and that (as the Origenistes defend) the mercy of God pearceth into
hell, so far, that not only all men both good and badde, but also, the very
Diuelles and damned Spirits shall at length be saved. Moreover, having such an
vnreuerent opinion of God, and of his holy Religion, They that believe not well
cannot live well.
they presume with profane Senacherib against the God of Israel: they cease
not, but with that atheistical Cyclops, (whom Euripides brings in) do
rail against all divine powers, against the Prophets, the Apostles, and
Christ, whom (in an unsavory comparison amiddest their scurrilitie and carnal
companions) they join with Machomet and the Pope, An unsavory comparison.
which three they say do trouble the whole world. Therefore they swear, as
though they had no souls to be damned, they live, as though they were very
diuelles incarnate; neither is there any villainy and wickedness, which they
will blush to perpetrate and commit, without all fear of God or reverence of
man. What ears can but glow to hear this? what eyes can abide to see it?
Howbeit, in despite of Gods judgments, and in contempt of all men that yerne
at their ungodliness, Sap. 2.6.7.
they endeavor to cheer themselves with themselves, and with them that said:
Let us enjoy the pleasures that are present: Let us fill our selves with good
Wine and Ointment: let there no Flower of the time escape us: let us Crown
our selves with Rose buds before they be withered: let there be no fair
meadow, but our lust go through it: let every one of us be partakers of our
voluptuousness: let us lean some token of our pleasure in every place: for
that is our portion, Lucillius.
and this is only our lot. Unto such hayleth that most ancient Satyricall Poet
of the Romans, worthily scorning them thus: Viuite lurcones, comedones, viuite
ventres.

That is,

O Spendthrifts, Tospots, Bellygods,
live ye, be lusty.
So Solomon by an Ironicall speech dirideth the folly of such fools: Be merry
thou lusty ladde, in thy gallant young days: and let thine heart cheer thee
in thy youth: and walk in the ways of thine heart: and according to the lust
of thine eyes. All this is most pleasant for such Brutes: but thereunto is
added that which strikes them dead. Yet know this (says he) that for all
these things God will bring thee into judgment. In the mean time, Reu. 2.22.
Luke 16. Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
there is for them prepared a lodging with the damned devil in the burning
lake of hell, and there be, which wait daily and hourly to bring them to
their bed, they that may go to their own place, where burning with Dives,
Discite Iustitiam, moniti, and non te nuere Dinos.
and boiling with Phlegyas, they may with the one wish for water to cool their
tongues, and with the other give warning to their mates, that they learn
righteousness, and not be so bold thenceforth, as to contemn God and the
Saints. For hither must they come, walking as they do, neither from this place
shall they be freed either by their gold or silver, or by their lands or
revenues, 4. Esd. 9.12.
or by their worldly favor, strength, wisdom, and policy.

8 But this they foresee not, until that (indeed) with Dives they feel their
remediless misery, and with Phlegyas their wretched condition, The ungodly
man foreseeth not his own destruction.
and be made rather examples for others, then instructions for themselves.

In this point, they resemble that foolish Ape, which having once caught an
harp, twanged thereon, daunced and leapt backwarde on the top of an high
house, so far, till at the length he sprang over the same and brake his
neck. So having some high conceit of themselves, they little regard either
their duty to God, or their own miserable condition, and think not of the
danger they fall into through their wicked apostacy. Therefore they compass
many things and build high Towers on sundry foundations: with the Gramarians
they recount the adventures of Ulysses, and the wanderings of Aenaeas: with the
Mathematickes, they stare on the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and make fleshly
reasons for those supernall things: howbeit, they have no reason for their own
loose and filthy lives, and wandering wits. The former days they much commend,
and greedily gape for things future: but the time present, with their present
commodities they wastefully consume. To be brief, in their own opinion they
be the wisest persons in the world, and yet, how little foresight they have for
themselves, it is easily seen: when wanting wisdom, they die the fearful
death. Unto whom therefore may be aptly applied the censure of Euripides (the
which Cicero also used in the like case.)

Miso sophisten, ost is'ouch auto sophos. That Sophist hate I, and esteem
of wit and wisdom small:
Who for himself (in time and place)
has wisdom none at all.
Such persons be they! so live they! and so die they! But (this
notwithstanding) as the fleshly Epicure (which differs nothing from a beast,
cheefely, The Epicure would be taken for a Philosopher.
in that he defines all evil to be in the pain and affliction of this life,
and all good to be in voluptuousness, and worldly, and fleshly pleasures) does
nevertheless take upon him the person of a Philosopher, and would be esteemed
indeed: so those fleshly and Atheistical persons, blush not to call and
entitle themselves Right Christian Protestants, and would be angry with all
them who would not so take and esteem them. And though their kind of wisdom
be that which belongs rather to Sophisters, then well beseems men (as did
that of Euclides, whom therefore Socrates woorthily reproved) yet with most
impudent faces, they challenge to themselves the highest wisdom, they usurp
on the best titles, The Romans esteemed none honorable but the virtuous, and
therefore they builded the Temple of honor, adjoining to the Temple of virtue,
with none other way to enter into the temple of honor, but through the Temple
of virtue.
and would be esteemed honorable (if they might) though they yet never entered
the Temple of Honor through the gate of virtue: by as good reason may the
Ethiopian call himself a right Englishman.

9 How near they approach in these points unto him that (though he be most
foul and ougly) mustereth forth himself as an Angel of Light, any man that
has wisdom may easily discern. With him (therefore) that they be both
reproved, judged, and condemned, it is just and right in equal censure, as
such to whom it is said, O ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the
fire of hell.

When the Jews entitled themselves the children of Abraham (notwithstanding,
that both in life and Religion they were wicked and abominable) Saint John the
Baptist very sharply reproved them, Mat. 3.9.
and said, Be ye not of such minds, that ye would say within your selves,
we have Abraham to our Father. And the Lord himself, seeing how much they
graded on Abraham, when they were so far estranged from him, and from all
holy Religion, to stop their mouths he plainly told them whose Children
they were indeed, saying unto them: Ye are from beneath: Again, Ioh. 8.23.44.
Ye are of this world: Again: Ye are of your Father the Devil. And this he
proves by that they did the deeds of the Devil, and observed his lusts,
contemning the word of GOD, despising Christ Jesus, loving murder and lying,
before love and truth, and wallowing in all ungodliness. For indeed when men
do neither well believe, nor live well, and yet would be taken for right
Christans, and Christan Protestants, what do they else but immitate the
Devil, endeavor to slander the Cross of Christ, to profane Religion, and to
anger the Lord much more, then they do, which being Heathens, Psalm. 50. Ioh.
16. Apoc. 3.
do yet so continue and declare themselves, justly moving him by his Spirit
to reprove them, and threaten them with eternal damnation?

But let us hear what Chrysostom says unto those kind of pesons, In flor.
doctor.
and so conclude this Chapter. O thou Hypocrite (says he) If it be a good
thing to be good, why will thou only show thy self to be that which in truth
thou art not? If it be an evil thing to be evil, why will thou be that,
which thou would not appear to be? If it be a good thing to appear good,
it is better good to be: If it be an evil thing to appear evil, it is worst
evil to be. Therefore either show thy self that which indeed thou art: or
else be thou that, which thou would show thy self to be. Thus should men make
the tree good and the fruit good, show their faith out of their works, and by
a good life declare themselves the Servants of Christ: Neither should the
devil and this Angels either be found in Heaven, or presume to show themselves
as Angels of light, either in the Church, or in the Christian-Commonwealth.

CHAP. XVIII.
An instruction for all Christians. A Caveat for Englishmen.
Ier. 9.1. The godly have cause to mourn.
OH, that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the future miseries of my people! For men
have so little consideration, from whom every good thing comes, that they
have quite forgotten that wonderful deliverance of the little City from the
siege and tyranny of that mighty King, and all other notable benefits that
the Lord has in his mercy done for them and their fathers. Wherein they
resemble the old Israelites, whose unkindness and rebellion Moses justly
reproved: and those Israelites whom David, Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 106. Isa. 1. and 5.
His 6. and 7.
Isayah, Hoseah and other prophets have worthily blamed for their ingratitude
to the Lord, and those Jews whom Christ both vpbraided and threatened: with
whom also, without speedy repentance, they shall be cast out: for like
sinners, have commonly like plagues and punishments. These things if men had
the grace and wisdom to consider, they would not forsake the pure fountain of
the water of life, which has thus long sustained them, and sound the corrupt
puddles of ungodliness which poisoned them, they would not so neglect the
things that appertain to the kingdom of God, and bend their brains to the
wretched things of the world, in the which they find nothing else but
vanities: they would not any longer blaspheme with the thief on the left
hand, and so forgo the chief good: but rather they would, with him on the
right hand, confess the innocence of Christ, and their own guiltiness, and
say, Lord remember us: they would not wander in the broad way to death, but
strive to walk wisely in the right and perfect way to eternal life: but
their talking, their walking, their sins, their transgressions, their
abominations, argue their want of wisdom and grace, and decipher their loose
religion.

2 Such gross inormities of the men of yore, occasioned Lucian to taunt at
them: Democrite to laugh at them: Heraclite to bewail them: and a certain man
thus to exclaim on them: Oh good Lord! Rich. de sanc. victory.
what great pains men endure to seek after virtue, yet not in virtue, but in
vanity: they have found out that which they hunted for: yet not for virtue,
but for vanity: and that which is most miserable, in the words of life, they
procure the pains of death! So do they busy and vex themselves (indeed)
without any profit at all, when they walk on in their vanities, and provoke
the Lord to anger, who (without their hearty repentance) will shortly declare
the same to their great grief and misery, Psalm. 50.
but chiefly to the woe and sorrow of them which had taken the word of God in
their mouths, and entitled themselves Christians, and yet have nothing
regarded to be by the same reformed accordingly: Under these pretenses, me^
spoil and take one from another unjustly.
of them that have said, Lord, Lord, but have not done any thing acceptable to
the Lord: of them that have cried, The Temple of God, the Temple of God, and
we be the Lords, in whose quarrel we fight, whose cause we defend, whose
enemies we throw down: but yet have not washed their hands from cruelty,
and murder: from piracie and theft: from briberie and extortion: from usury
and tyranny: from strife and envying: from gluttony and drunkenness: from lust
and lechery: from swearing and perjury: from sin and iniquity: for these
does the Lord severely reprove and condemn without rescue or delivery in
all ages. Neither does any thing more provoke the Lord of Heaven to high
anger, Apostacy is a most dangerous sin. Esaias. 5.5.7.
then the degeneration and backesliding of them that sometimes resembled the
godly in piety, and virtue. As he is most pleased with them that walk in his
holy ways with faith and good consciences, and is gracious unto them, and glad
of their creation, and of al his benefits on them bestowed: so is he touched
with sorrow and grief of heart, when he sees them which have erst given a
glorious show of holiness, to walk at length in their own ways estranging
themselves from God, and al godliness.

3 Though God when he saw the great wickedness of the generation of Cain, Genesis
6. The degeneration of the sons of Seth.
(in the first age of the world) suffered them to run after their own
imaginations, for a very long time: yet, when he perceived that the sons of
Seth also (which had sometimes resembled the piety of their parents, to whom
the promise of the blessed seed was made, which were men that knew God, of the
true Church, Aben Esra.
and called the sons of God) did fall from God into fleshly pleasures,
tyrannies, idolatries, and other heinous vices, and grew therein like unto the
children of men: yea, and that of the sons of God, they were (by Apostacy)
made the sons of Satan: then (then I say) the Lord was highly moved to
displeasure, so much, that in his anger he determined to destroy those sinners
utterly from off the earth, and the same determination he effected accordingly.

The Scriptures report, that the Lord (upon this occasion) Was touched with
such sorrow, God repented that he had made man.
that he repented that he had made man on the earth: that is to say: his Spirit
in the hearts of the godly, provoked them to mourn and sigh, to behold man's
ungodliness. Noah, being a righteous man, having the Spirit of God, and seeing
the great wickedness of man, Noah.
he was by the same Spirit moved to woefulness, and The holy Ghost was made
sad in all the godly, by means of the great malice of man: Ephesians. 4.30
so far that they desired rather, that man had never been created, then,
that by degeneration, he should be so malicious wicked and sinful against God.

4 But what followed this high displeasure? The effect of-Gods Repentance.
What was the effect of Gods Repentance? My Spirit (says he) shall not
always contend thus in man: I will no longer deliberate, whether I may either
destroy those ungodly men, or else have some pity, and compassion upon them:
and forasmuch as I have by my spirit taught them, and scholed the^ in godliness,
and they be never the better, I will not henceforth grant them this benefit of
my spirit: they shall neither be reproved, nor instructed by the same any more.
I will send them a famine of my word, that they may faint and fall, and not
be able to rise again: for they are contrary to me in all their ways, they
proceed in their carnal desires, they scorn and deride both me and my
word, and contemn all good admonitions: they hate and persecute my spirit, in
them that faithfully teach and preach my word. It is most meet therefore, that
I cease henceforth from doing them any more good, that I give my spirit ease,
and suffer them as most rebellious children to perish from the earth.

Upon this resolution the Lord opened the windows of heaven, and powered down
mighty streams of water upon them: The fountains of the deep brake up also,
and the floods covered the highest hills. Then loud cries and clamours, then
sorrow, weeping, wailing, and utter despair on every side: but no delivery,
no safety, no comfort they find, but are choked in the waters. One man was not
able to help another, neither the parents their children. Every one was forced
to abide his lot. And this lot was common to all them which were not enclosed
with Noah in the Arc. So pleased it the Lord by washing away ye filthiness of
their persons from the earrh, in their destruction, to ease himself being so
grieved in his heart. This was the plague that fell on them, that would not
honor God, Psalm. 50.
when they knew God! O remember this ye that forget God, least he also take you
hence, and there be none to deliver you.

An apostrophe to ^nglish men, warning them to beware.
5 Now, because that above other Nations under the Sun, it has pleased the
goodness of our God to adorn and bless thee (O England) with the like gifts
and blessings wherewith he beautified the sons of Seth, in that first age of
the world* and has not debarred thee from any of those graces wherewith he
adorned Judah and Jerusalem, in the time of their peace: he does therefore
expect the like thankfulness of thee, as he looked for of any of them. Which
if thou yield not to his Grace, but waxing fat, do abuse those blessings, and
spurn with the heel against him, and being called to weeping, mourning and
repentance, Isay. 22.12.13.
for those thy transgressions, thou take up joy and gladness, slaying oxen,
and killing sheep; eating flesh, and drinking wine: what else may be expected
to come unto thee, but a most heavy judgment from the Lord? And of this, the
Lord does forewarne us by blazing stars, earthquakes, fiery Dragons: and
expresses his displeasure by famines, pestilences, threats of wars, and such
like. It is not thy bare profession that shall excuse thee in the day of thy
visitation (O England) neither shall thy often hearing of Sermons, A bare
profession helps not.
nor turning of the leaves of the law, nor bearing of the bible in thine hand,
nor thy talking of scriptures, 1. Cor. 10.
deliver thee in the time of Gods vengeance, no more then those former sinners,
nor then the Corinthians were freed, whom Saint Paul warned to beware by the
examples of the old Israelites which God overthrew in the wilderness, if that
God be not entreated by thy timely repentance: nor shall the often hearing and
ruminating of the strange judgments of God poured upon other the rebellious
people of the old time, and the knowledge of the will of God, profit or
preserve thee from the destruction: if thou will not be thereby thyself
instructed, reformed and made better. To this purpose, this distich which
Iustus Jonas pronounced a little before his death, Mat. Dresserus.
is worthy to be daily ruminated.

Quid iuuat innumeros scire, at que euoluere casus:
Si facienda fugis: si fugienda facis?
The doleful doom of many a wight,
To know, and weigh, what helps it thee:
If thou neglect that should in right
Be done, and do that should not be?
The Lord grant thee grace to look timely to thy self, We should take
instruction by former examples
and to thine estate, and by the consideration of those ancient plagues which
have in their times overtaken the unthankful, to repent and take heed: so
happy shall thou be.

6 O England, if thou did consider thine own unthankfulness, and therewith
would weigh how full of danger thy state stands, and what mighty plagues
awaite to fall on thee, if the Lord God would permit it, and say unto the
spirit of trouble, Go: Many and sundry dangers waiting on England. Eccles.
12.1. Iere. 9. Luke 19.
thou would defer no time to repent, thou would Remember thy maker in
those days of thy youth, before the infirmities of old age overtake thee:
yea, thou would weep for thy self, and for thy children, rather with
Jeremy, and the Lord Jesus, before those times of trouble come, the^ with the
foolish daughters of Jerusalem, when it is all too late. If thou would
apply the examples of yore, unto the times present, and thereof learn wisdom
(as Moses wished the Israelites to do) thou would then be more fearful,
and ashamed to follow the lust of thine own heart any longer: thou would not
trust to thine own strength, nor presume (in thy sins) so far on Gods goodness:
nor would thou put considence in unrighteous Ma^mon, nor consent to be led
away with every wind of doctrine, nor make so long tarying to turn to the
Lord thy God: but thou would rather speedily judge thy self, to escape the
judgment of God: condemn thy self, to be freed from the sentence of Gods
justice: thou would cast thy pride down on the earth, rent thy beautiful
hair, and without delay turn to ye Lord with fasting weeping and prayer. And
thus except thou do in spirit and truth, thy fall, thy dishonor, thy shame, and
thy execration will be horrible, to the dread of all other Nations, for all thy
sins, the which the Lord in mercy forbid.

7 Surely, thou have great cause to fear (O England) least when it shall please
god (for thine unthankfulness) to take to himself from over thee the life and
government of our most gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth (whose life and
government the Lord God in his mercy yet prolong and lengthen (if it may be) to
to the days and years of Methusalah,) that then, thou suddenly feel the pain
of thy sins and deserved miseries. For the Lord has sufficiently warned us
already of such things by so many arguments, as we cannot thereof plead
ignorance: and that he has such a work to be done (without thy repentance) as
ye ears of so many as hear thereof shall surely glow: and this work is deferred
but unto the appointed time. 2. Kin. 20.19. and 22.19 20. Iudit. 16.30.
The God of mercy with held the execution of his judgment from Judah (according
to his promise) during ye life time of Hezekiab: and he spared the same in all
the days of Josiah: neither suffered he any man to trouble Israel so long as
the widow Judith lived: nor would he cast down the fire on Sodom, Genesis 19.22.
Genesis 7.10.
until Lot was departed out of Sodom: nor did he power down the waters on
the wicked world, before that Moah was embarked in his Arc. And who knows
whether that the same Lord has made this merciful promise and covenant with
our right Christian Princess, and with those his faithful ones in the land
(which are by her grace aided, provided for and defended within this realm, in
the name of the disciples of Christ) that he will not alienate the same from
his delight in her, and their days? As his arm is not shortened, but that he
will help his elect that call upon him so is not the same so weak, but most
able to destroy his foes, and cast them down to hell that dishonor him.

Note this.
8 Therefore (I say again) let us not flatter our selves: be sure of this,
that if thou continue careless and ungrateful, and imagine him to be well
pleased with thee, because he suffers thee, and does not charge thee with
folly, but seems to pass it over by long silence, and so thou ad unto thy
former transgressions, a thousand more, without remorse of conscience, and
dread of Gods judgments: he will (in the time of wrath) bring evil upon
thee, and then, he who was before so flow to anger, will appear to be of
great might, and such an one, as will in no wise hold thee excused in thy
sins: he will not wink any longer at thy pride, thy common swearing, thy
perjury, thine erreuere^t talking, thy lying, thy stealing, thy killing, thine
whoring, thine halting, thine hypocrisy, thy profanation of the Lords day,
thine Idolatries, thy dissimulation thy discontented mind, thy murmuring mouth,
thy slaundring tongue, and all other thine abominations and sins, Isay. 21.10.
Ier. 25.31. Psalm. 50.
which thou have wrought and committed, against his majesty, against his
Saints, and against thine own health, peace, and prosperity: Psalm. 2. Prou. 1.
but seeing that then thou do belong to the Lords corn flower to be
threshed, he himself will sommon thee to his Court of Justice, in judgment
he will commence suite against thee, he will contend with thee, he will try
out thy sins, and set them in order before thee: he will condemn thee for the
same, and all to thresh thee, except thou repent. Psalm. 107.34
He that makes the fruitful land barren for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein, will force thee to mourn, Hos. 4.
will cause thee to be troubled, to be endangred of thy plenty and peace,
except thou repent. Thy people shall perish, thy cattle shall be diminished:
the souls of the air, the fishes of the sea, shall be taken away, and every
calamity shall overtake thee except thou repent. Thy life shall ever hang in
suspense before thine enemies, as the lives of thy neighbors, and thine heart
aching for anguish, shall in the morning desire the evening, and in the evening
desire the morning, except thou repent. Genesis 42.21.
Neither shall thy conscience deny, but confess with Jacobs sins in Egypt,
Verily we have sinned against our brother, etc. and therefore is this trouble
come upon us. And others that behold thy trouble shall say (as Baruch did to
Israel) If thou had walked in the way of God truly, Bar. 3.13.4.
thou should have dwelled still safe in thine own land. But lo, they that
lived so delicately, do now perish in the streets: O learn then where is
wisdom, Lam, 4.5.
where virtue is, when understanding is: that thou may know also from whence
comes long continuance, and life, the light of thine eyes and quietness.
Isa. 55.6. Hos. 14.2.
Return ye then unto the Lord your God, for ye are fallen by iniquity. Take
unto your words, and say unto him: Take away all our iniquities and receive us
graciously. Why will ye die? Repent, repent, repent, and ye shall surely live
(says the Lord of hoasts) else will I make lamentation over you, as I
began, and ye shall not be able to comfort me.

CHAP. XIX.
There is no state or condition of man free of his Crosses and troubles in this
life. Of the Prince. Of the magistrate. And the discontentation of those high
states.
Every man is forced to bear his Cross.
NOW, if (besides these general greefes) the condition of every particular man
in his several vocation be duly considered, it will soon appear, what
mighty obstacles and strong cords of vanity there be cast abroad (as the
snares of the enemy) to catch and draw men from of their places and duty of
life. And that, as ye latter age of man is weaker, and so less apt to virtue:
and that in this infirm age do increase vices, slothfulnes, love and pleasure,
easines of the mind, impatie^ce, inconstancy, perfidie, foolishness, The
infirmity of this last age.

Isay. 24.4.


as those that dote, do persuade themselves to be wise men: so such is this
last age of the the world, wherein both in Churches, and in the commonwealth,
are moved up great troubles, to hinder men's particular vocations or callings.
Therefore we must pray, and every man in his place and function, ought to pray
with David, Cast me not away in the time of mine old age: forsake me not when
my strength fails me. Howbeit, Psalm. 71.8.16,
all this the ignorant man knows not: the unwise man considers it not: the
fool does not heedfully prevent these dangers and imminent inconveniences:
Only the wise man, considers these things.
and therefore as blindfold he is heedlesse carried away and cast into manifold
miseries through the subtle seducer, and the guilefull vanities of this world,
to his ignomie and perpetual confusion. But the wise man, ye man of knowledge,
he whose eyes be fixed in his head (as Solomon says) knows well that these
be the common maladies, and ordinary miseries of man's vain life. He sees the
maleuole^t dispositions of man's inventions, and the hard changes and chances of
al age, seaso^s and times. And this man only passes safe through those perilous
aduenturs, with a due regard of his calling and place: yet not without many
unspeakable vexations and cares, verifying that saying: The more wisdom, the
more grief.

2 The most worthy and good Prince, The good Prince is not without his
corasiue.
that does many times watch to provide for the safety of his people, even
then, whiles they soundly sleep (as King Phillip of Macedonia, by the report
of Parmenio did) and those Princes that have made the Cities Marble, which they
found builded but with brick, (as Augustus said that he had made the city of
Rome) and they yt have restored liberty and freedom to them which were thrals
and in bondage, and fought for them, defended and ruled them, as Moses, and
Gedeon, and Samuel, and Samson, and Iiptha, and Othoniel, and David, have in
their times don, performing ye safety and good of their people, before their
own lives, and have deserved thereby to be called (...) herds of the people,
Homer.
fathers, saviors, keepers of the Country: yea, beneficial and earthly gods
unto men. These (I say) do meet with and find out (after all their watchful
regardes) most ungrateful people, and such, who, when they should in all
honesty confess those of whom they have received profit (as Plynye wrote to
Vespasian) do nevertheless scarce acknowledge any benefit at all and yield
them nothing else, but hateful unkindness for recompense of all the good.
The most of all men in the world, regard not to immitate those ancient
grateful and golden men, who (as it is said) invented the three (...) or
Graces: nor have they any care to learn, Sen. de ben. ca. 3. Alceat Emb. 163.
to and for what end or purpose they invented them. This considered Pindare in
his time, when he wrote thus: Thus are the Graces luld a sheep,
and thankfulness is quenched:
For men, unmindful of good turns,
in Lethes lake are drenched.


The virtues of good princes be not considered of the ungrateful people.
3 There be few which have the grace to consider this, that, those noble men
being in place of Government, where (having the reins at liberty) they might
have spoiled the Commonwealth, as Nero did, they have notwithstanding that,
adventured their credit, their wealth, their lives and all, for the safety and
good of other men: that they have taken on them the care and regard not only
of themselves and of a private house, but also of the Empire or Kingdom, and
have ordered the whole nation according to the justice and equity of a Prince.
Wherein Salomons spectacle is rightly verified, Eccles. 9. That no body thought
on that man by whose wisdom the City was delivered from the power of the
mighty King which had besieged it. And surely, this being applied to the case
of the wise Prince and the ungrateful people, thus imports in effect. I have
seen under the Sun a certain King, who in his government never oppressed any
man by the abuse of his authority: yt judged between man and man without
respect of persons: that defended strangers, pupils, and widows: ye duly
punished thieves and adulterers: that advanced not the wicked, nor maintained
impudent and vain persons: that rooted out ungodly men, and spared not
murderers, nor permitted periurers to live in the Commonwealth: that defended
the Church, and relieved the poor people: that placed over the affairs of his
kingdom righteous men, and had a chief regard of most ancient, wise, grave,
and sober men for his Counselors: that never listened to the superstitions of
Witches, Sorcerers, Charmers, Southsaires, and Pithonisses: that banished from
his presence, adulterers, flatterers, back-biters, and slaunderers: that by
wisdom knowing God and himself, had power to bridle his own affections, to
defer his displeasure, and to rule himself and his family: For his good he
has a base reward.
that had most valiantly defended his Country from the foreign mighty
adversaries, and had dedicated himself to the right worship of God. Yet
behold, he has not bin gratefully requited, Judge. 8.35.
nor in any sort honored of his people, according to those his demerites.

4 Yea, I have seen, that a certain Prince was chosen by the Lord of heaven
to reign over his people, Deuteronomy. 17.
and to rule them: he never multipled horses to himself, nor purpose to bring
the people into Egypt, again: neither did he multiply Wives, nor put his
trust in silver and gold: neither did his heart arise above his brethren: nor
turned he from the commandment of the Lord his God, to the right hand or to
the left. But, he did write out a copy of the law book, and did read therein
all the days of his life, that he might thereby learn to fear the Lord his
God, 2. King. 1.6.
and to keep all the words of his law for to do them: according to that desire
of his heart in his prayer to the Lord. And thereby has bin (of the goodness
of God) unto his people, as an hiding place from the wind, Isa. 32.1.
and as a refuge for the tempest: as rivers of waters in a dry place, and as
the shadow of a great Rock in a dry land* and governed them after the rule of
righteousness, and according to the balance of equity. Yet all this
notwithstanding, Senec. in Hercul.
he finds the people ingratum genus, ungrateful toward him, and forgetful
of all: yea, they recompense with evil, for all his great good, to the great
grief of his heart. This is the only reward which such noble Princes and
godly men are to expect of the unthankful world, after so many Princely
virtues and benefits.

5 Abraham, Noah, Moses, Joseph, Samuel, David, and such like, which right well
know how to bear this heavy burden, have yet continued their places, have
done their duty, and walked in ye way of the Lord (maugre the malice of the
malign world) howbeit it is true enough, and a thing too often tried by daily
experience, that a slanderous or ungrateful person destroys a liberal
heart, Eccles. 7.8.
and be sotteth many wise men. Such kind of requitals do often discourage the
good Prince, causing him unwilling to perform his duty in his place. Many have
been unable to bear those burdens. Philip of Macedonia.
Neither have ye most part bin able to digest these and such like morsels: as
namely, that the father of Alexander, (notwithstanding his place, his wisdom,
his dignity, his renown, and all the noble adventures he had taken for the
good of his kingdom) was slain in a public triumph his Princes and
atte^dants looking on the same. That the valiant Julius Caesar (who had
achieved so many famous victories and high benefits for the Romans, and after
the civil wars ended, had showed to his enemies great mercifulness, and to
his friends large bounty, and had left nothing undone of that which might have
purchased to himself benevolence, favor, authority, and rule, among the
Romans) he was for all that, most cowardly murdered among them in the Senate
house, Julius Caesar was cowardly murdered.
through the conspiracy of Brutus and Cassius, his own most familiar friends,
whom above all others, he had most singularly enriched with large benefits.

And that also the Emperors Tiberius, Drusus, Henry 7. of Germany, and King
John of England, The sorrowful ends of many Emperors and Kings.
were poisoned to death: that Valerianus was shut up in prison, where he dyed
miserably: that Scipio was killed by them of his house: that Richard the
second, Edward the 5. Henry the 6, Kings of England, and the Emperor Commodus
were murdered: that Carinus and Numerianus both Kaesares, wretchedly ended
their lives: and that noble Pompey, Pompey.
who had achieved so many goodly enterprises, profitable to his country, for
wordly glory happy, for his virtues a mirror to many princes: and had restored
the young king Ptolomy of Egypt to his kingdom, he was at the length constrained
to fly into Egypt, where he was most butcherly killed of the same king, and
with such beastly ingratitude requited. Finally, it has much yerked many of
them, when they have considered how many noble Princes and Captains of the
Romans, the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, of the Israelites, of the
Englishmen, of the Frenchmen, and other famous Monarchs have found the like
rewards of such ungrateful people, who have ouercharged them in their times
with many partial censures, murmurings, grudgings, rebellions, trecheries,
torments, and death. In the consideration whereof, they have measured their
places both dangerous, and full of difficulty and fear. Dionise shewelth to
Democes the danger of the regal state.
This thing Dionisius of Syracusae, being thereof experienced, would pretily
declare unto his friend Democles, when entertaining him very magnificently and
Princely at his table, he caused a sharp sword to be hanged over his head by a
small hair or thread, with the point threof downward. Whereat Democles,
notwithstanding his princely fare and like cheerings, was stricken with a most
horrible fear, and desired in all the haste to be dimissed from the Table.
The troubles and the dangers of of government have tired out, and made many men
fearful. Charles 5. King Jew, King Cadwallader. Graft. page 127.


6 The consideration of these and such like spectacles, has occasioned some of
them, rather Heliogabalus to dedicate themselves to idleness, sensuality, and
vain worldly pleasures, which in young men is foolishness, and in old men
abomination, then to the right ditties of their vocations. Some with the
Emperor Charles 5. and with King Jew, and King Cadwallader of the Britains,
have wished to resign their royalty, thereby to be quiet from such
dangerous troubles. Some have with Pompey, Pompey.
thought it much better for them to be borne poor men's children, and to lead
their lives quietly in the country, then to be made thrals in and by such
preferments, to so many and so great vexations. Ardentius thought it wisdom,
and much ease for himself, Ardentius.
to deny to succeed Antonius in the Empire. The Marquis of Messena, Marquis
of Messena. Edward the third.
and king Edward the third of England, upon the offer of the Empire unto them,
have both most willingly refused to mount the monster with so many heads,
whereon they might have been opposed to many strong enemies, and been made
subject to many strokes of bitter torment. Dioclesian.
Dioclesian said to one which gave him counsel to return again to the
Empire (after he had chosen to toil in the Garden, as a Gardener) that seeing
he was delivered safely from the plague, he would not drink poison again.

These (as it seems) resolved with Ammian, Ammian.
that this kind of preferment is naught else, but the care of an other man's
safety: with Antiochus, Antiochus.
that it is but a noble thraldom, and with Agamemnon, Agamemnon
that Princes are but the peoples servant, how soever they appear in state,
might, and magnificence. This matter Ioathan intends, Ioathan in Judge.
9.7.8.9.10.
by the riddle of the trees of the wood, that went forth to choose them a King,
when the Fig tree, the Vine, and the Olive tree, refused that, which the
Bramble willingly accepted. Demosthenes said, Demosthenes
that he for his own part, would not stoop to the ground to take up the
crown of a Kingdom: and Antisthenes said, that if two ways were to him
proposed, the one to a private life, the other to the place of government, he
would rather choose the private life. Alluding to that sentence of the wise
man, The mighty shall have mighty torments.

The Magistrates are tormented with many afflictions. Exodus 18.21.
7 Moreover, the worthy Magistrates of the Common wealth, which in their places
represent the royal persons of their Princes, and endeavor to observe their
duties, being (indeed) men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating
covetousness, according to that rule of Iethro, which gave Moses counsel to
ordain Judges under him: when these (I say) consider what Solomon says
touching ye danger of their places, and unkindness of them whom they shall
benefit: Eccles. 10.8, 9.
( He that breaks up an hedge, shall be bitten of a Serpent: he that moves
stones, shall hurt himself thereby: he that cleaves wood, shall thereby annoy
himself:) they have no mean cause of discouragement: and when they have
proved it in this, that nothing besides injurious vexations of one toward
another, and tedious quarrels of persons troublesome, be presented unto them:
and that, when they have done well, and as the place, the persons, and cause
require, they be partially censured, controlled, and many ways endangered and
injured; they have bin moved to yrke with him in Terence, Nostri nosmet
poenitet. But when unto all these things is added the superior displeasure,
without any just desert, and calling to mind, what hard fare that noble Seneca
found under Nero, Seneca. Papinianus. Clytus. Shatilion, the Admiral of France.
and Papinianus under Anthonius, and Clytus under Alexander, and Jasper Caligne
Shatilion, under the French king, to whom although they had bin most faithful
and wise Counsailours, they were nevertheless upon sudden and small
displeasures, disgraced graced and murdered: they are pierced with a sore
terror, and hold not only their places, but also their lives, both
suspensiue and loathsome to themselves. Whereupon many have more labored to be
settled on lower ground, then to climb the pinnacle or turret so full of perils.

8 This thing Seneca Papinianus, and Shatilion did see, and therefore they
would gladly have renounced their power, offices, and places, and have betaken
themselves to a life solitary, and more safe: yea, S. Thom. in Boeth. de
consol. Philo. li. 3. Pros. 5.
Seneca (for his part) offered to employ and bestow all his goods and riches, to
the use and benefit of the Emperor, thereby to have purchased his manumission
and liberty, which yet he could not obtain, until his painful life was
cut off by an injurious death. Thus also Themistocles among the Athenians, and
Lucullus among the Komanes have been very desirous to exchange their public
places for a life private, and more free from emulation. Demosthenes resolved,
that better it is, for him which is deposed of such a government or office, to
die then to be readuaunced. Aeschines is very glad, that he is delivered
from an office, which he terms a mad dog. Timon would rather be
called (...), A contemner of the society and fellowshippe of men, then to
serve other men's turns in such an unthankful and troublesome place.

Socrates esteemed vacant time of leisure, one of the best of all the
possessions of the world, meaning, that to be free and quiet from such cumbrous
business, and the vexations of public affairs, and from such appetites as
trouble the tranquillity of the mind, is no menae treasure. This thing
Themistocles, Phocia^, Demosthenes, Aristides, Cicero, Salpitius, Marius,
Boethius, and many others, some Greeks, some Romans, some Jews, some
christians, some Barbarians, have also too well approved, and have acknowledged
and confessed it, in the sorrowful sense of the same. This consideration (no
doubt) pierced the mind of Barzellai, Barzillai. 2. Sam. 19.37
when he refused to be advanced by King David, which offered him no mean
preferment: Sunemite. 2. King. 4.13.
and this moved the wise Sunemite, to desire rather to inhabit amongst her own
people (with a contented mind) then to be spoken for unto the king, when as
Elisha the Prophet would have done her that pleasure. Graft. page 123. Chron.
And hereof was it, that Benet the master of Beda, who descended of rich
kindred, and was in high favor with Oswye king of Britain, did forsake both the
kings court, and his own house, and all that he had, and became a Monk. The
Chronicles and Histories of the former ages, are not without many such
examples. And a great many noble and wise personages that presently live in the
world, are not freed from the hard experiment of this thing.

CHAP. XX.
The troubles and afflictions of the Minister, of the housholholder, of the
Schoolemaister, of the Scribe, and of other faculties and conditions of men.
The pastor his troubles.
THe faithful Pastor and Minister in the Church, is for his part daily
perplexed and troubled with a mountain of griefs and heavy woes: for
whosoever he be that takes on him the ministry of the word, and preaching
of the Gospel (by the Lords authority) he is set as it were in an open
battle, and has forthwith the Devil, and the world aduersaties unto him,
and professed enemies, which endeavor to hinder and hurt him with all their
power, and policies. The Devil daily watches him, The practice of the devil
against the Ministers.
observes his doctrine, and notes his life, which he couetteth to ensnare.
He assaileth his life and conversation, that so he might move him to deny in
work, that which in word he professes and teaches: that so, though he
build with the one hand, he might with the other hand, pull down and
destroy: for many men, especially the ignorant and common people, immitate and
follow, rather the life and conditions of the Ministers and teachers, then
their words and doctrine. He assaulteth his doctrine also, that such as hear
him, being by errors deceived and seduced, may together with him be damned,
as when the blind leads the blind, they both fall into the pit. And that
he might the better compass that which he has devised against the servant
of God, The world is an enemy to the Ministers of the word.
he moves the world in the which he dwells and rages, which being set
on mischief (as Saint John says) strugleth and strives against him, I mean
the Minister and his doctrine, sometimes by Hypocrisy, sometimes by
Sophistry, sometimes by tyranny, endeavoring to hinder him and enforce him to
deny his profession. To the which, though he bring the glad tidings of peace,
Isay. 53.1.
who calls him happy? though he preach the truth, and publish the mysteries
of God, who believes his report? he talks, who hears him? he walks, who
follows him? he pipeth unto the people, and they dance not: he sorroweth,
and they mourn not. He has given none offense in anything, that the
ministry be not blamed: 1. Tim. 3.2.
but he is blameless, the husband of one wife, watching, sober, comely
apparelled, a lover of hospitality, apt to teach, not given to overmuch wine,
no striker, nor greedy of filthy lucre: but gentle, abhorring fighting,
abhorring covetousness, one that rules well his own house, having children
in subjection, with all gravity, etc. And yet his patience is tried by them of
the world to the uttermost, in afflictions, in necessities, 2. Cor. 2.6.
in anguishes, in stripes, in prisonments, in strifes, in labors, in
watchings, in fastings, in cold and nakedness, in iourneying often, in perils
of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of his own nation, in perils among
the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils
among false brethren, in torments, in death.

2 And in all these hard adventures, whiles he deserves a good report, he
gets an evil report: though he be true, yet is he taken for a deceiuer: he
is scarcely known to his own acquaintance, though he has bin most bountiful
unto them: he is as dying daily, though not killed: he is very poor, though he
enricheth many; and though by ruling well, and laboring both in the word and
doctrine, he has merited that double honor which the Apostle says is unto
such persons due: yet has he no honor at all. He has well deserved of all
men: but of all men he is badlie rewarded. Thus Amos the Prophette was accused
and reproved. Michea was imprisoned: The Prophets and Martyrs have bin hardly
rewarded for their labors.
Zacharias was murdered: Jeremy was cast down into a deep Dungeon, and his
feet made fast in the stocks: Isaiah was cut a sunder with a Saw: Eliah was
threatened and persecuted: Ezechiel had bands for him prepared: and Daniel was
thrown into the Lions Den. Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior himself,
though he came into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved: yet his own received him not, the
darkness comprehended him not, the world knew him not: he bound the strong
man, and delivered them that were captiued: yet no man thought upon him: he was
persecuted, taken, crucified, and rejected. So his Ambassador John Baptist was
beheaded: his Apostles, James, Peter, and Paul, were killed. Also his Martyr
Stephen was stoned to death: John the Evangelist was banished: Ireneus, and
Policarpus, were martyred: so was Laurentius, John Hus, Hierome of Prage,
VVicliffe, Ridley, Cranmer, Latimer, Bradford, Tindall, with a thousand
others, which have been tried by mockinges and scourginges, yea, and moreover,
by bands, and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they
were tempted, they were slain with the sword, burned in the fire, Heb. 11.38.
World is not worthy of good men.
afflicted and tormented most cruelly, of whom indeed The world was nothing
worthy, as the Apostle says. So thanklesse is this office: such is the
reward of the painful preaching of the Gospel, and for laboring hardly in
the Lords harvest, which the world is most ready at all times to bestow.
Many there be that cleave unto the painful minister fainedly: Dan. 11.34.
few there be which join themselves with him in truth and sincerity: Homer.
wherein they find this verified: (...), Benefits bestowed have not so much as
thanks.

A dangerous matter to deal with Princes and great persons.
3 But as it is no mean matter for him to deal in his ministry with the
common people, to persuade them to the fear of God, and honor of the Prince,
and so to live in Christian Contentation, being as those with whom Jeremy had
to do, poor, foolish, Iere. 5.4.5.
ignorant of the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: so is their
no small wisdom to be had in the persuading of the Princes and great
personages, to admit the word of God: for their ears be so tender (as one
said) that they can scarcely suffer any truth to touch them. P. Mart. 1. 1.
King. 20.
Therefore, though Jeremy say, I will get me unto the great men, and will
speak unto them: for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgments
of their God: yet finding them to be breakers of the yoke, it shall be
bootelesse for him to commit himself unto them: Amos 7.10.
and so is it for Amos to go to the Court, and to preach in the Kings Chapel,
except he can handle his matter with rare wisdom, and singular dexterity.
Yea, Nathan being sent from God to David the King, dares not to approach near
the presence of the King, but with such a Parrable in his mouth, as many men
have neither the wit to invent, nor the grace to apply. Christ himself
upon this occasion, proposes to the Scribes and Pharisees, learned Parables,
and in certain riddles, similitudes and proverbs, he reproves them, which
otherwise would not abide the hearing of plain words.

4 In the consideration of these and such like things, Jonas. 1.
the Prophet Jonas being commanded to go and preach against Nineuy the
Metropolitan City of Assyria, wherein were congregated the mightiest and
wisest men of that Monarch, would have eased himself from the danger thereof,
by flying into Tharshish from the Lords presence: that is, from performing of
that which the Lord had to him commanded. And so Jeremy, being first called to
preach and to prophecy in the name of the Lord, Jeremy.
would have excused himself by his tender age, and by that he could not speak
eloquently. And afterward, having felt the tight of the burden, he complained
thus: Oh mother: that ever thou bear me! Ier. 15.10. and 20.18. Isay. 49.4.
The Prophet Isay seeing what ingratefulnesse came from worldly men, after his
long ministry, he thought verily that he had labored all in vain: and that
godly Polycarpus having found the like thanks, Polycarpus.
exclaimeth thus: (...): O good God! for what times have thou reserved me to
feel those torments? Hereuppon was it, that one said to Christ when he was
called, that he would first go home and burn his Father: and that another
said, he would go and bid his friends farewell at home. This caused Peter to
deny his master, and Demas to forsake Paul's society. This caused the stars
to fall from heaven, that the laborers be few, though the harvest be full
great, and that not many do with wisdom instruct the people in the way of
righteousness. An heavy case, the Lord knows, and most intolerable,
without the great mercy of God which strengthens.

5 Also the good Householder matcheth with many afflictions: sometimes through
an unruly wife, The householder has his afflictions.
as Socrates did with his Xantippe: sometimes by disobedient Children, as David
did with his son Absalom, and Eli with his sons Hophnes and Phinez: and
Samuel with his Children, Joel and Abia: and Jacob with his sons, and his
daughter Dina: sometimes by servants, as Philaemon did with Onisimus: sometime
by badde neighbors, as Tobias did with the Ninevites, and Loath with the
Sodomites: besides many disorders in domestical and household affairs, whereby
he is provoked to discontentation, and yet, doing his best, Ovid. li. 4. metam.
Sisyphus. Augustus.
he is tied fast with tired Sisyphus, to the daily turning of his stone.
Augustus himself (though in the highest authority, yet as an householder) as
often as he heard mention made of Iulia his daughter, and Iulia his daughters
daughter, and of Agrippa his daughters son, which he was moved to banish from
his House for their open wicked and dissolute manners, and odious conditions, he
would sigh and complain thereof with this verse of Homer.

Would god my lot had bin to have had neither wife nor child. That old man in
Terence called him happy that was freed from such heavy fetters, to the which
the monastical life is preferred in the judgment of many men: 1. Cor.
7.8.38.40.
yea, Paul himself held it good for the widows, and for the unmarried persons,
at that time, and on that present occasion, so to contain themselves,
resolving that he did better which gave not in marriage, then he did which
gave in marriage: that the single life is the best kind of life, and that Peter
spoke wisely when he said to his Master, If the cause stands so between a
man and his wife, then it is not good to marry: notwithstanding that God said
in the beginning: Genesis 2.
It is not good that the man should be alone.

6 The painful Schoolemaister also finding few or none of his scholars so
industrious and thankful as King Alexander the great was to his master
Aristotle: or as the wise Solomon was to learned Asaph: The schoolemaisters
corasiues. Aristotle.
but rather dull of hearing, slow in learning, Asaph.
indutifull, ungrateful: yea, Seneca*
and upon small occasions so cruel to him, as Nero was to his Master Seneca
when he killed him: Aristomenes*
or as Peholomeus was to his Tutour Aristomenes, Iuuenall Satyr.
when he imprisoned him: and considering how truly Iuuenal sings, Scire
volunt omnes, mercedem soluere nemo: that men scarcely reward well those
persons of whom they would that either themselves, or their children should
learn wisdom. He is quite overthrown with fury and displeasure, and
eases himself of his painful travails with final despair. Oleum and
laborem per do: I do but loose all my labor

7 The learned Scribe also never or very seldom finds the one moitie of
such bountiful rewards, The Scribe his afflictions.
as one Octauius bestowed on a poor Greek Poet, who had exhibited to him
certain learned Epigrams (which reward, as it is said, was an hundred
thousand pieces of Gold) but he rather finds, that his best labors do
purchase emulation, envy, disdain, and many hard constructions, with
dirisions: therefore he accounts with Baruch, Baruch. Ier. 45.3.
that he has gained naught else besides pains for his travails, and waxes
weary of writing. So also many others, both well learned and experienced, from
whom at length the Commonwealth expects the fruits of their studies and
travails, The cunning and wise men have afflictions and enemies.

Boet. de. cons. Phil. li. 1. pros. 3.

Socrates. Valor. max. li. 1.2. and li. 3.3 Zeno.

Anaxagoras.


are wonderfully daunted, when they hear, that Socrates (which was by the
Oracle at Delphos, testified to be the wisest among the Philosophers) was
through envy accused by Anetus, for the Citizens of Athens: by Meletus, for
the Poets: by Lycon, for the Orators: whereupon he was forced to drink
poison, whereof he died: and that Zeno was tormented by Nearchus, in the sight
of his own Citizens: and that Anaxagoras with much adoo escaped the like: that
the men of Delphos threw down Aesope off an high Rock, and brake his neck:
Aesope.
that Octauius Caesar banished Ovid the Poet from his Court, Ovid.
and sent him an exile into Pontus: Iuuenal.
that Domitian the Emperor exiled Iuuenal the Poet: and that Tiberius
commanded that cunning crafts-man, A cunning maker of Glass.
which had made Glass malleable, that is, to abide the hammer as gold, tin,
or other metals, to be beheaded. And weighing and perpending how many others
also, both cunning and well learned in their several facluties, have been
burned in the furious fires of envy and disdain: they do, I say, fold their
hands and cease from altogether with this account: Terra moueatur: Let the
world wag.

8 Finally, it is daily considered and observed, that all such (for the most
part) as have adventured far, and taken hard travails for the good and
safety of other men, yea, of Churches and whole Commonwealths, have found
even them whom they have benefitted, and to whom they have well wished, to be
affected toward them, as were the people of Rome toward Telemalchus the
Monk, in the time of Honorius the Emperor. Telemalchus. Eras. in praefac ad
Paraph. in Marcum.
This Telemalchus hearing of the great delight that the people of Rome had in
their accustomed combats on the common hearer, wherewith no small number of men
had been murdered one of another of them: he of very zeal came to Rome,
with purpose to dissuade them from that barbarous cruelty. And as the saw two
men now ready to fight, he stepped on the stage and spoke unto them thus: Quid
facit is fratres? quur in mutuum exitium ferarum more ruitis? That is, What me
and ye brethren? wherefore do ye thus like brute beasts seek one another
destruction? But thus was he rewarded: the people of Rome rose up with one
accord against him, and stoned him with stones, that he dyed. This kind of
thankfulness toward them which well deserve, Virgil prettily bewrays, and
the same reprooueth in the table of the sleeping Pastor and the watchful
Gnat, thus. The fable of the Pastor and the gnat. Virg.
As a certain Pastor slept in the fields in the heat of the Summer, there
glided toward him a venomous serpent, with full purpose to sting him being a
sleep. This thing the little Gnat perceiving, came hastily, and pight on the
Pastors face, tickling him, with intent to awaken him, to eschew that present
evil. But the peevish Pastor having no consideration either of his own
danger, or of the Gnats good mind, suddenly put up his hand and killed the
Gnat, whose death afterward, but all too late, he thus lamented.

O little Culex, thus thou gain'st Parue culex pecudum custos, etc. Virg.

for guard of life, thy death:
By Pastor, who for thy good deed,
bereaues thy vital breath!
But if that men (after their good deserts) found not such extreme requitals,
yet they scarcely escaped that thankfulness*e which the Physicians that had
cured Triselaus found at his hands. Triselaus and his Physicians.
For this fellow, being sometimes overcome with a melancholic passion,
persuaded himself to be the right owner of all the graet Navy that arrived at
the Port Pireus: but when through the great cunning and care of his Physicians
he was healed, he, in steed of thankfulness began to curse them: saying, that
they had therein robbed him of all his wealth, and utterly spoiled him of his
delights. Lo, such be the rewards which the world commonly bestows on the^
that do good, and benefit others. Wherefore, not only the common sort, but also
many of the better account (as in this conceit made weary of well doing for
others) have bin moved to sing thus with Catullus.

Omnia sunt ingrata nihil feasse benign est. Catul.
Let pass the mind well to deserve of any wight:
Or to persuade, that men will reformed aright.
Ungrateful all things be: that one deserves well,
Is nothing else but yrksome toil, and labor fell.
And others, in the consideration of these things, use to rumynate that notable
song of the Lord touching his ungrateful vineyarde, complaining also to him
of the malign world: What could we have done more unto them, Isa. 5.1.
then that which we have done? after our labors we did only expect this,
that they should be thankful and the near to all virtues: but lo, they be
most ungrateful, and flow with all vices! Therefore they resolve, that it is a
far better thing to be meddling with nothing at all. My talent (says one) is
mine own and in mine own hand: I may bury it in the earth if I will, which
yet had I leauer do, then thus to employ it to any peril and pain. I will
(says another) assay some other thing to live on, for my more credit, quiet,
profit and pleasure: for I perceive that in these my great travails, I am
worthily moved to sing out the hand-maides sorry Song: Mane furgo and fatigo
me, The handmaids song.
ac manduco panem Doloris, that is: Early up, weary toil, and sorry fare.

10 Besides all this, No man lives content.
looking yet more near into the particular estates and conditions of men in
this wretched world, I find not may that are willing to listen to that moral
sentence of Ben-Syrah: Sent.
Burnish that boane which falls in thy lot: because they never learned Paul's
lesson, (...): Phil. 4.11.
I have learned (says he) in what soever estate I am, to be therewith
content. But the Pooreman, 1. Tim. 6.8.9.
although he have food and raiment where with he should be contented (as the
Apostle advises) yet he thinks his estate but miserable, the rather because
he suffers many an injury of them that be rich, which he is not of power
to resist, nor of might to revenge. Therefore he be pittieth himself, he
bewayleth his lot, he emulateth the condition of other men: yea, he labors
to be made rich, and have worldly possessions by all ways and means, though
that thereby he fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and
noisome lusts, which draw men to perdition and destruction. For the love of
Money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted after, they missed the
mark concerning the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
Howbeit, if these worldly riches could by him be obtained, then were he the
happiest man (in his own conceit) and therefore riches is made that Summum
Bonum, and chief scope whereunto the labors of many poor men dotend and are
directed. In the mean whiles, he lives in high murmur, grudge, and
discontentation of mind: and why? he has not yet learned the lesson of
Contentation: 1. Tim. 6.6.
he believes not that godliness is great riches to him that is pleased with
that which God has given him: and he cannot conceive this, that to labor and
to be contented with that a man has, be it little or be it much, Ecclus. 40.18.
is a sweet pleasant life, and a treasure above all treasures. Neither does
he think that Christ spoke truth, when he said, that it is easier for a
Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for the rich men, or for him that
trusts in money to enter into the kingdom of God: or that the poor in
Spirit, though never so poor in wealth, are beloved of God, and blessed.

The rich man and his affliction. Eccles. 4.8.
11 On the other side, the rich man cannot content himself neither, seeing he
feels such torments as much trouble him too. The more he has, the more
mouths must he fill: the greater gain, the greater grief: he watches in
the night: he has no quietness in the day. When the poor man iournyeth
without all fear, and sings before the robbers face, the rich man is most
fearful, and stands in doubt of every bush. Where flock the flies, but to
the Carions? where lurketh the Thief, but there where wealth is? Euclio, apud
Plant. in sua Aulularia.
Therefore the Nigard Euclio, whom Plautus brings in, reasoning with
Megadorus, fears that every one which comes to his house, intends to rob
him of his money and wealth: and that whosoever begins any conference or
talk with him, minds to borrow some of his gold: he thinks that his Chests
are not made and banded strong enough to keep fast his treasure, nor that the
doors of his house be barred and locked fast enough to keep out thieves. So
that in such his perplexity, he often calls him happy, that having nothing
to loose, could say with a mind content, Omnia mea mecum porto: I bear all my
wealth with me, whither so ever I go. Such is his vanity, The rich man is
loath to exchange his condition with the poor man.
and unmeasurable toil: howbeit, he is far off from the poor man's desire,
to exchange his condition with the poor man, albeit the poor man would
willingly exchange with him: but rather most desirous to keep all that he has,
and yet to incroach and get in more: yea, and having enough, and too much, he
never says to them that bring in, ho, ho. Neither is rich Craesus satisfied
with his wealth, Craesus. Alexander.
nor will Alexander be contented with the conquest of one world. His disease
therefore is a dangerous dropsy, whose thirst is not quenched with much water,
but the more have, the more crave, the more drink, the dryer: and his desire
is like the bottomless gulf insatiable. Surely, this man has made that to
himself evil, which of it own nature is good: for riches are not evil, but
only unto them which set their hearts on them and so abuse them. Abraham was
a very rich man, so also was Loath, so was Isaak, so was Jacob, so was Joseph,
and Joseph of Aramathia: yet were they nevertheless the friends of God, and
righteous men. Therefore David in the Psalm did not condemn riches, nor the
true use of them: but he said: Set not thine heart thereupon. For the Lord
says: Give me thine heart. They do set their heart upon riches, which do in
them place their felicity, and make riches their God, and trust in them. And
as the godly Saints do ever hunger and thirst after righteous and the holy
presence of God, until they come home to him into his glory, so the worldly
rich man (though not with the like heart) does ever thirst for that his God
Mammon, and the treasures of Pluto, and cannot be appeased: but he says still,
I will pull down my Barnes, and build them bigger, until it be said to him,
Luke 12.
Thou fool, this very night they shall fetch away thy soul from thee.

Aug. de Charit.
12 Thus are men hardly persuaded, that he is only rich, which in Charity is
contented, and that he is a poor man indeed, which in the midst of his
abundance has not a contented mind. They believe not Christ in this, that
much better it is for a man to be poor Lazarus, then that wealthy Dives in
this life. Neither do they consider, that it little profits a man to labor
in the wind with such eager thirsting after the riches of this world, when in
regard thereof, he misseth King Salomons thousand: that is, his own soul,
and the life everlasting. And they remember not (notwithstanding the common and
daily examples before their eyes) that a man going from hence toward his
long home, leaves all his riches and wealth behind him, departing from this
world as naked as he came into the same. In truth, if they did well weigh
this one thing, they would not be so greedy with the hungry Raven, to pray
on the venomous Serpent to his own destruction, as says the Proverb. Only
the wise man considers well these things, and yields to this, that Content
is rich. And thus that wise Agur, the son of Iake, considered, and knowing
also, on the one side worldly riches and wealth, was a mighty provocation of
pride, covetousness, lust, envy, disdain, rapine, gluttony, and such like:
and that on the other side, worldly poverty was the mother of impatiencie,
discontentation, blasphemy, theft, lying, and such like: and that of all
others the mean estate was the best, he both taught and prayed thus. Two
things (says he to the Lord) have I required of thee, deny them not
before I die. Remove from me vanity and lies. Give me neither poverty nor
riches: feed me with food convenient for me: least I be full, and do deny
thee, and say, who is the Lord? or least I be poor, and steal, and blaspheme
the name of my God.

13 To be short, 1. Tim. 6, 8, 9
howsoever it be that Saint Paul advises men to abide within the compass of
their own vocations and conditions of life, and therein to serve God with pure
consciences, and contentation: yet (that notwithstanding) we see, that the man
which has a wife, commends him that has not yet married a wife: the woman
which is bound to an husband, praises her that remains a virgin. Again, few
married men (as the world goes) listen to Salomons counsel, to drink of the
water of their own wells, and of the rivers that run out of their own
springs. They are scarcely pleased, to reioyne with the wives of their youth,
which should in all equity, be to them as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe.
Their breast cannot content them, nor can they be satisfied with their good
love. Therefore they affect strange women, and assay to please themselves in
other men's houses. And this is also the desire of many married women, who would
if they could, forsake the guide of their youth, and follow strangers.
Furthermore, the souldior will not be content with his wages, but he will
oppress and proll for spoils, neither is he pleased with his condition. The
Merchant man commends the husbandman, Basyl. Mag.
and the husbandman likes well of merchandise. The yeoman would be a
gentleman: the esquire would be a knight: the knight would be a Lord: the Lord
would be a Prince: the Prince would be a king, and Emperor of the whole world.
The child would he were a man, the maid would be a wife, the wife would be her
husbands master. The old man being sorry that so many days of his life be
worn out, wishes that he were a young man again. And thus every vocation and
condition, being loathsome to it self, every man looks with hot emulation
on the calling and condition of some other man without contentation, wherein the
Poets aim, hitterh home on the nails head.

Pers.
Optat Ephipia, Bos piger:
Optat arare Caballus.
Thus englished: The lazy Ox does wish, he were
an Horse, on back to bear:
And so the Horse does wish, he were
an Ox, the soil to tear.


Again, considering many unmeasurable cares and great vanities of men's
affairs, he thus lamenteth the misery of the same.

O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus in ane? Thus englished.

Alas man's cares: how full of pain?
Alas man's ways: how vile and vain?
Indeed right justly (as said Augustine) has the Lord appointed an unquiet
heart and mind, for a punishment to the men of this life, which will not be
contented and pleased with that which they have: and this affliction (says
Solomon) has God given to the children of men, to humble them.

CHAP. XXI.
Many men are distracted in the consideration of the disorders of this world.
Men are even in these our days ungrateful to such as do them any good. The
necessity of instructions and good admonitions.
Moreover, for that all things be so hard, as a man is not of ability to
express them: and he is accounted happy, that knows the causes of things,
the me^ of this world are most wonderfully afflicted in their own
imaginations: so far, that some of them have even consumed away with
spiteful anger, Aristotle died with anger.
as Aristotle the Peripatike was said to do, for that he could not find out the
cause of the ebbing and flowing of the swelling river Euripis: and others have
bin thoroughly distracted as was Aratus the Astronomer: Aratus was destracted.
Saul. Mithridates. Achab. Brutus.
some have bin discomfited, as was king Saul, Mithridate, and Demosthenes,
though some others have promised themselves victory with Achab, and happy
success with Brutus, either by force, or fortune, with a vain expectation.
The confusion of worldly things.


2 But when with all these things, that ugly Ataxie the disorder and manifold
confusions of this life do concur, beyond all the rest, this heavy
consideration, Psalm. 73. Iere. 12.1. Abac. 1.3. Job. 21.7. and 24.12. Eccles.
3.16. and 4.1.
that (not only as Socrates, but also as David said) The wicked and evil
disposed have oftentimes the most abundance of worldly goods and riches, when
the better sort want them: that the godly and wicked be preferred, and live in
long prosperity: that the unrighteous do unrighteously, and God (as Job says)
does not charge them with folly, or plague them: that injustice and oppression
is seen in the place of judgment: that religion often languisheth, and
Atheism and prophanitie does flourish: that the government either
Ecclesiastical or Political, or Oecomicall, little avails to correct,
redress and perfect that which is amiss: that many noble men, and wise men,
have perished together with the ignomious and foolish: that Alexandria,
Corinth, Jerusalem, Sparta, Athens, Thebes, and many other famous cities have
bin made desolate. That Chaldaea, Babylon, Persia, Graecia, and other mighty
Monarchs of the world, have altered their turns, The confusion of things
occasion some an argue want of power in God, etc.
and changed their faces: and that all men be constrained to bear with the
ungrateful world, howsoever it be, because No man can strive with him that is
mightier then himself, and things that are bowed, no man can make straight.
The common sort of men do argue of the want of power and force in God, Not.
deorum lib. 3.
(as Cicero says, reporting the words of Diogenes) and the rather, for that
neither Iupiper Olympius, nor Aesculapius, (as he said) plagued the Tyrant
Dionysius, for dispoyling them of their Treasures: Read Job. cap. 24.12.
and for that many other wicked men are not punished by GOD himself, by and
by with some horrible plagues for their horrible deeds: yea, and many great
and famous personages also have consented to that saying of him in the
Tragedy: Melan. in Epist. praefix. operibus graec. Xenophon.
Vitam regit Fortuna Dea: The Goddess Fortune guides every man's life. And if
it be so, then, to what end (say they) serve all those precepts of wisdom
delivered unto us in the word, and in Hystories? For if man's life be guided,
neither by the counsels of wise men, nor by God himself, why then is
doctrine proposed? And so the greatest part of all people, in the government of
great matters, direct not their counsels to any certain rule and doctrine:
but hoyse up sails to be carried whither soever the wind shall drive, or
blind Fortune permit them.

3 And although the Heathen Orator said: Cicero de Not. decrum lib. 3.
Mala and impia consuetudo contra Deos disputandi, sieve ex animo id fit, sieve
simulate: It is an evil custom to dispute against the gods, The godly
themselves do often murmr.
whether it be done of set purpose, or by simulation: yet many of the godly
themselves also, are by these and such like spectacles, moved to expostulate
against the Lord GOD of Heaven, as Jeremy did: Iere. 12.1. Job. 24.1.
Wherefore prospers the way of the wicked? Why do thou (O God) suffer the
ungodly to live in the World, to hurt and oppress thine own children? what
justice? what reason? what wisdom is there in God that permits it? And
should not the Judge of all the world do justice? And they cannot deny, but
that this deep conceit has also touched them so far, that they have been
moved (with David) to say: Psalm. 73.2.
My feet were almost gone: my steps were well nigh slipped: For I freatted at
the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Eccles. 4.2.
Therefore (with Solomon) they commend the dead before them that live, and,
in the sudden passion of their afflicted spirits they imagine him that is
not yet borne, to be in better case then any of them both. And not a few (as
desperate of GOD, What is god, providence?
and of the divine providence, which is the reason that the Lord God uses in
the ordering and directing of things to their right ends) in this profound
considerations, do consent with Cladianus, thus: Saepe mihi dubium, etc.
This mad conceit unto my doubtful mind, is often brought:
What? have the high caelestiall powers, on worldly matters thought?
And is there any God above, that guides all? or no?
Or do the affairs of wordly men, by chance, uncertain go?


How to expel this imagination of flesh and blood. Sap. 2.22.
4 This vain imagination being deeply rooted in the heart of the natural man,
which is blinded with his own malice, which understands not the mysteries of
the spirit of God, nor hops for the reward of righteousness, nor regards the
worship that the holy Saints shall have at the resurrection of the just: can
very hardly be removed and expelled, and therefore does require the daily and
diligent use of that Armor of light, which Paul would, Romans 13.
we take up against all the deeds of darkness. And yet it cannot be denied,
that not only Moses the servant of God, and the holy Patriarchs, and the
Prophets, and the Apostles have preached and taught, and Christ who came from
the bosom of his father, has witnessed, and God himself from heaven
declares, but also the mere heathen do by the works of the Creation, and the
operation of Nature acknowledge and confess, that the God of heaven by his
providence ordreth and rules all these things, Howsoever they appear confused
and without order to them that understand not the causes and reasons thereof.

5 Such (indeed) be the painful travails wherewith the men of this life have
been so long time burdened, and yet lie yerking under the intolerable tight
of the same. And that because through the malice of the Devil, The cause of
those troubled minds.
the malice of man is great on the earth, and all the thoughts of his heart are
only evil every day, whereof there be procreated a thousand most desperate
imaginations, and eager discouragements to Religion, duty, and right. Yea, and
so much the more lamentable is the cause and condition of man, Some of these
maladies be remediless: and some hard to be cured.
by how much those his maladies be so remediless and incurable: for whosoever
will endeavor and take on him the same to correct, and thoroughly to purge, be he
never so wise, so learned, so just, so strong, so rich, he shall but wash the
Ethiope, cleanse the Leopard of spots, and vex his spirit in vain. Besides
that, as touching those matters which are curable, and to be remedied in time
and place, who sees not how perilous and uneasy it is, for any man to assay
to ease that which may be eased, to adventure to salve that, which may be
salued? for notwithstanding that Sisinnis the Governor of Coelosyria, 1. Esdr.
7.1.
and Phenice, and Sathrabouzanes and their associates, (obeying at length the
Princes commandment) are persuaded to assist the holy work diligently,
laboring with the ancients and Governors of the Sanctuary, and the holy
work prospers by the ministry of Haggaeus and Zacharias the Prophets: yet
behold, the ungrateful and discontented, find flocks furnished for their
purpose, to oppugn the Truth, to resist the Princes proceedings, and to
oppress the defenders thereof, in like sort as the Sodomites forced just Loath,
Genesis 19.9.
when they compassed his house round about of all forces, from all quarters:
by whose sinister devises and Satanicall practices, every good and godly work
is either rejected or hindered by all means: and every good Counsel and godly
advise is construed with great partiality and gross corruption, insomuch that
he (whosoever he be) that aduentureth to admonish either the highest, or the
lowest, the Princes or the people, the Prophets or the Priests, Homer.
the Court or the Country, he is either welcomed as Amos was to Bethel, or
answered as Halitherses Mastorides was at the Gate of Ulysses: and if he
find better cheer, he may account it as so much gained beyond his
expectation, Amos 7.12.
and be thankful for it. But how was Amos welcomed? he was taken for a
plain sotte of the Country, and unmeet for the Court, and therefore Amasiae
the Courtly Priest, expelled him thence with this saying: Go, get thee hence
into the land of Judah, and there eat thy bread, and Prophecy there: but
Prophecy not at Bethel, Halitherses.
for it is the Kings Chapel. And how was that Halitherses answered? the
Poet Homer tells, that when the old man, who was both wise and well
experienced in worldly affairs, Eurimachus the son of Polybus. Odis. 6.
would have persuaded Eurimachus the son of Polibus (who was a long suitor for
Penelope) to depart from the house of Ulysses, and not to trouble himself any
further in those matters, for fear of such an inconvenience as afterward
ensued. Eurymachus thinking himself wiser then the gray head, continued his
suite, and rejected him in these words: Get home (old fool) and to thy
Children, there presage good speed:
That future falls they fly: for we excel thee far in Reed.
Though many birds beneath the Sunne-beames, fly on every side:
Yet do not all pronosticate to men, what shall betyde.


Again.

In that thou multipliest thy words, thou gettest naught therefore:
But in the same thou give us cause to hate thee yet the more.
A miserable kind of people
6 This is a Kind of people of all others to be lamented, as such as without
hope, who knowing nothing, will not for all that vouchsafe to listen to them
which are best able, and most willing to instruct them, then whom, they ever
esteem themselves more learned, more wise, and better furnished every way:
for they put away from themselves the holy graces of God, being proffered them,
and willingly sell themselves to death and extreme misery. Psalm. 58.4.
The Psalmist rightly likeneth the^ to the deaffe Adder that stops his ear
against the voice of the Inchau^ter, though he be most expert in charming. For
they be so corrupted with the venom of the spiritual Serpent, and overthrown
with mad fury, that they either fly from every one that would wisely
admonish them, or so close their ears against their words, The Jews stopped
their ears. Acts 7.
that no power of wholesome admonition and counsel can move them. Thus the
Jews stopped their ears (though not their mouths) against Stephen and his
words: and so at this time (I say) many are deaffe (with the Adder and those
malicious Jews) when rather they should listen to the word of God and holy and
wholesome instructions, whereof the preachers and ministers of the word, have
cause to complain now, as Isayah did in his time: Isa. 53.1.
Lord who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
reueiled? And are worthily occasioned to lament the great vanity and misery
of man, no less then Jeremy and Esdras were moved in their days to be wayle
the sins of the people, and the distress of the holy land, and the ruin of
the City and Temple of God: and many say now as Hezekiah did: The Child is
come to the place of birth, and there wants power of deliverance. Neither
would the Lord himself (if he were now on the earth) refuse to weep over the
people, as he did sometimes over Jerusalem, and to admonish them also to weep
for themselves and for their Children. Surely, the very consideration thereof,
is able to daunte and discourage him that is most willing and forward to tender
aid, (and not a few are thereby discouraged indeed) dispayring of any fruit to
be gathered from those stony places, those high ways, and those pricking
thorns, into the which they had cast the sound and wholesome seed.

7 Nevertheless, as long as it is said, to day, We must not be discouraged
to do good. Romans 8.
and during the time of our course, we give not over, nor utterly despair of
the fruits of our labors: but we urge on, in hope, though not of our own
will, but by the reason of him who has subdued us under hope, and be yet the
more diligent in our duties, to do that good which may be done in our places to
his glory, who has prepared us thereunto. And we continue yet praying and
calling unto God, that it would please him yet further to furnish, to fortify,
to encourage, and to persuade by his loving Spirit, the builders and repayrers
of his own house, to be diligent, able and willing to strengthen that which
remains, to fortify the weak hands and feeble feet, to comfort the faint
heart and weak wits, which in the bitter taste of these extremities are ready
to perish, so far forth, as hope emboldneth, possibility persuades, and the
word of God warranteth: and this shall hold us excused and discharged before
the Lord, howsoever the success of our labors and desires shall appear to
be, the which we must commend to the wisdom, will, and power of God. And, as
this is the best way for us, Eccles. 12.
so it shall be not only good and profitable, but also most needful for all
persons to yield themselves obedient to the words of the wise, as Solomon
admonishes: without the which, it is as impossible for a man to walk in the
way of the Lord toward the chief good and highest happiness, as it is for
a blind man to walk in a tedious way without a guide.

8. Therefore have they been much commended, They have been esteemed for good
men, who have listened to the word of them that instructed the^ in good.
as the men of all others, nearest to wisdom and a godly life, who have
willingly listened to the lessons of wise teachers. The very Heathen have
thought reverently of such persons: and among others of that kind, the Greek
Poet Hesiode thus writes: Right good is he that listneth well,
To him who gives him good Counsel.


Seneca.
And that respecting Seneca, counseled thus: Moneberis libentur, etc. Thou
ought gladly to take admonition, and be patient when thou art provoked. If
a man chide thee deservedly, know this, that it makes for thy good: and
though without deserte, yet think this, that he would profitte thee. Fear
not bitter words, but rather fear obsequies and fair speeches. Pythagoras.
And thus said Pythagoras in his Precepts: He that (being ashamed to be
taught) will not submit himself to discipline and nourtour for a little
time, shall be constrained to continue in the obloquie and shame of
foolishness for ever. This is confirmed by the sentence of Solomon: The Ear
that hearkeneth to the correction of life, Pro. 15.31.32.
shall lodge among the wise: but he that refuses instruction, despises his
own soul: but he that obeys correction, gets understanding.

David, Iehosophat, Aaron, and other good men, have well considered this, and
could be well pleased to be admonished: yea, and that sliding by an occasion,
they have patiently borne a gentle correction, repented their sins, and
amended their lives. And surely, herein the right Christian finds no little
comfort and contentation. For when he sees how the Lord pacifieth the rage
and rigor of the world, with that powerful word which he spoke to the wind
and the seas, saying: Peace and be still: he knows well how he gently
allureth him, as a father does his child: and as he persuaded Iaphet at the
request of Noah, to enter into the Tabernacle of Shem.

In that sort he entreats his Children, by his holy Apostle Paul: I beseech
you Brethren (says he) by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies
a lining sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God. Neither will he neglect, nor
lightly regard this grace (as they that receive it in vain) but hearken
diligently, and embrace willingly the words of the wise, retain that Grace
among them that wayre for redemption in Israel, and so serve God in reverence
and fear, in good contentation. And this also are they made the more able and
ready to perform by godly and faithful invocation of the name of God in
Jesus Christ. For, as the former gives them light, and the right knowledge of
the divine will: so this ministers unto them sufficient abililitie to follow
and perform the same, through the Graces of his spirit, the which he
bestows on them that ask the same of him, and the which has his effectual
operation in the true use thereof. For hereof is that lively and fruitful
faith engendered in the heart of the elected, by the which they be iustfied and
made fruitful in all good works.

CHAP. XXII.
The best medicines for the cure of man's maladies, must be made of the word of
God. An especial comfortatiue for the magistrate.
Eccles. 12.
IN every Book of the holy scriptures are contained most delectable words,
upright writings, eue^ the words of Truth, the sayings of the wise being like
goades to stir up, and like Nails fastened by the masters of the
assemblies to confirm, which are given by one Pastor (as says Solomon)
wherein is contained and published that perfect law of liberty, The word of
God eternal.
and whereof there is made a meet medicine for man's maladies. For albeit the
eternal word of God may not be comprehended and included within the leaves,
lines, and volumes of Books, being the same which was with God in the
beginning, and is everlasting, and that natural and only begotten Son of
God, begotten of the Father before all worlds, whose name is VVonderfull, the
giver of counsel, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace: yet has it pleased his goodness, to speak unto man to his
understanding: and has commanded his Prophets and Apostles to preach, to
write, and to talk accordingly: that is, as Paul said, (...). After the
manner of men, by reason of the infirmity of man, being most unable to
conceive the things that be of the spirit of God. Therefore, howsoever we
imagine the eternal word of God, and his divine will, to be shut up in his
own close counsel, Apoc. 5.3, 4, 5
which neither any in heaven, nor in the earth, nor under the earth is found
worthy to open and declare unto men, and which we may not presume to
inuestigate or search without the help of the Lion of the tribe of Judah: Gods
written word.
he would that we should hearken unto his written will, and that word of God
which he has declared and made known unto us in the holy scriptures. Unto
this therefore the son of God (whom we must hear) sent the Jews, and bad the^
to search the scriptures. The use of this written word, he both taught and
commended unto us, when he said three times to the devil, It is written, It is
written, It is written. Thus he asked of the lawiers: How is it written? Mat. 4.
How read thou? And to the two disciples going toward Emaus, he said: Thus
it is written. He commanded his servant John, Apoc. ^.
to write unto ye seven churches in Asia: and Paul commends the word
written, when he says, The Scriptures are written for our learning.

2 This is that law wherein the blessed man delights, and meditateth day and
night. This is the food whereon the godly man feeds, to nourish his soul.
This is the touchstone which tries the spirits: this is the Index which
shows who are the children of God. This Word gives comfort, direction,
faith, wisdom, knowledge of the will of God, the fear of God, love, hope,
holy zeal, and all heavenly virtues, when the holy Ghost (through the merit of
Christ) has his effectual working in the true use thereof. A solace for
every sore.
Of this sweet honey comb is made a salve for all sores, a medicin for all
maladies, a plaster of peace against al trouble, and comfortatiues to content
the children of God at al times, in all places. Therefore I esteem this, Ruth.
as the best ground for Booz to sow in: as the most plentiful field for Ruth
to gleane in. This is (indeed) the sweetest water to drink of, and the
wholsomest bread for man to feed of. This is that law which the King must copy
out to lay before him, and that right Scripture which all men must search to
find knowledge and life in. Therefore also to the same would I direct them that
want comfort in distresses, counsel in their business, and help in their
miseries. Neither doubt I, but that it shall be embraced and well digested of
them that fear God. But for this our argument and present purpose, Scripture
for contentation of men's minds.
the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, and chiefly his Ecclesiastes,
or last Solace, which otherwise may be called his Commonwealth, are of
singular choice.

3 And this is to be observed in these books, that as David and Solomon have
ministered meet matter therein, for the instruction, solace, and comfort of all
Gods children: so also they being well schooled by holy men, enspired with an
excellent spirit, and themselves both Kings and rulers over the church of god,
and his people: have principally before al others, with their doctrine and
examples, instructed, solaced, and comforted Princes, David and Solomon have
com^orted Princes and Magistrates.
Magistrates and all them in high authority: and so much the sooner, for that
they themselves felt and well perceived, how that the Princes and Magistrates
are often oppressed and troubled, with the manifold treasons, rebellions,
seditions, ingratitude, and offenses of such as are troublers of the
Common-peace, and breakers of tranquillity, and of such, as lay in wait for
the life and livings even of them, on whose care, wisdom, and good
government, the safety and weal of the people (next unto God) does wholly
releigh and depend, in every age. The Prince it the minister of God.
According to whose good counsel and direction yet reserved in the holy
Register, the wise Prince and Magistrate knows himself to be the Minister
of God, and a principal servant of the King of all Kings, and Judge of all
Judges, whose sentence and power no man is able to resist, and whose will must
be fulfilled.

And that this God is not only present in the Congregation of Princes (as the
chief Prince) but also beautifieth those Princes with the high title of Gods,
and sons of the highest, and to comfort and strengthen them in this place and
function, and to take away all fear and fainting from them in authority, he
joins his power and blessings to the same, and assisteth them, and defends
them, and the right of this government against the proud faces, the murmuring
minds, policies, conceits, treasons, rebellions, conspiracies, and wily
practices of their enemies be they never so many or mighty: so that they
shall never be confounded, but stand sure, proceed well, get the victory,
and prove by their own experience, that it lies not in the power of man so
keep the people in obedience, and to conserve the Commonwealth: but in the
will and power of God, who as he has ordained Princes and Magistrates, does
also give them wisdom, power, and obedient subjects, and by their ministry
often saves such from destruction, as naturally hate the Magistrates, because
they desire to live without all government, and so without order, after their
own corrupt lusts.

How the good Prince behaueth himself in his place.
4 But to ratify this consolation, and to remove away all just occasions of
offense, from them that are ready to take offenses before offenses be offered
them. The wise Prince takes on him, and executes this divine function, with
great reverence, wisdom, and in the fear of God. He knows that as God is
present to beautify, strengthen and defend the right of his authority, so he
does also behold all that is done, the which he would should be according to
the method and rule of his holy law, and that he will be an inexorable
Judge, and revenger of the injuries and wrongs of them that pervert the
judgment. And he remembers, that to remove away that pride which exalts
flesh and blood from this place, the Lord has not only said by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 82.7.
that They be Gods, whom he has to this advanced: but also says, that
They shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes: that is, if they
abuse the sacred power: if they rule not their people in Equitye and
righteousness, but oppress them after their lusts, Aug. de abus. saeculi.
Baruc. 3.
which is not the least of the abuses of the world, they shall perish, like as
did those ancient Tyrants, which in their times, rather annoyed, then
benefited the Commonwealth. Therefore the wise and godly Prince, according to
the counsel and examples of those holy men, commended in the holy Scriptures,
governs and rules himself, The praise of a Prince.
his family, and the Commonwealth, and has a chief regard to do that which
best beseems him, In Octauia Tragaedia.
which is (as Seneca says) The praise of a Prince, notwithstanding that Nero
the Tyrant impugned that sentence with this: Calcat iacentem vulgus: The
Commons will tread on, and oppress the gentle and merciful Prince.

5 That godly and perfect man Job speaking in the person of a Prince or chief
Magistrate, tells what was his strength, defense, and comfort in his place,
whether men were pleased, or not pleased: I put upon me (says he)
righteousness, Job. 29.14.
which covered me as a Garment: and Equity was my Crown. To this end was
Solomon made King over Israel, as the Queen of Saba said to him, namely, To
do equity and righteousness: Here is Equity, but not without
Righteousness: here is Righteousness, but not without Equity. Equity and
Justice both necessary in a Magistrate.
And both these virtues combined in the same person, become both him and the
place right woorthilie. For as Justice is that habit and affection of the
mind, whereby men are apt to do and desire that which is just, and by the
which there is yielded to every man his right, and therefore woorthilie
commended in all men, but chiefly in Princes, and Magistrates, as that whereby
the Commonwealth is conserved and defended: so Equity respecting not the
letter, but the will and meaning of the law, and intent of the lawmakers, does
either aptly apply the same to the matters in question, by the wisdom of the
Judge, or thereby the Judge applies himself to the reason and quality of the
cause, qualifying the rigor of the law, bowing the law to the cause, and not
the cause to the law, knowing that Extreme law is extreme injury: And this
virtue is as necessary as Justice, and no less commendable in Princes.
Solomon himself being the King and chief Magistrate in the Commonwealth of
Israel, and thereto beautified with the divine wisdom, gives this good
counsel to all Princes and Magistrates. Be thou not just overmuch: Eccles.
7.18.19, 23. Luth. ibid.
neither ouerwise, that thou perish not. Be thou not wicked overmuch, neither
be thou foolish: least thou die before the time. That is, be thou not too
severe an Exactor of the law, least thou become cruel, and so hateful: nor be
thou too remiss and gentle, least all become naught, and thy self overtaken
by such as contemn thee, and thine authority. For Solomon speaks of the
civil justice.

Arcadius negligent. Melanth.
6 Archadius the Emperor, being too remiss and negligent, punished not those
heinous offenses that justly required the rod of justice, to the great
injury of his subjects, to his own dishonor, and great danger. Julian did
not execute justice on them that oppressed the christians. Herod. Sylla.
So Julian punished not them that most wickedly oppressed the Christians, but
rather derided the Christians upon their complaints, casting their Masters
commandment of patience under the cross in their teeth. But on the other
side: Herod, Sylla, and Aurelianus, transgressed justice through their hard
exactions and cruelty: Aurilianus were cruel.
they killed as well the peaceable, as the rebellious, and were too severe
against the meanest offenders: as of whom Iuuenall might well say: Excessit
medecina modum: The Medicine was too strong, Inuenal.
for that disease. In this respect Aristotle said: Li. 5. Eth.
Justice her self being weaponed is most cruel.

7 Beyond many others, Nero transgressed, Nero his cruelty.
and exceeded in this extremity, whom government rightly deciphered indeed
(for Office tries a many). For albeeit, Arist. 5. Eth.
that during the first five years of his government, he behaved himself
very praise worthy: and, that Seneca had written and dedicated to his
Majesty, a Book entitled, Of Clemency, or gentleness, therein, exhorting
him to that virtue, dehorting him from bloody cruelty: yet, Nero impudentlie
defends the same against Seneca, Sen. tragae. in octa act. 1.
as he did likewise in the case of Octauia the Empress: Ferrum tuetur
princepem, says he, By dint of sword must the Prince be preserved. In
conclusion, he being cruel by nature, and more cruel in his place, killed
both the guilty, and the innocent: the just, and the unjust. He murdered his
most trusty Counsailour Seneca, he slew his own Mother, his own Wife, and
caused his own City Rome to be set on fire.

By these heinous Tragaedies, Nero left his name reproachful.
and his daily cruelty, he committed the honor of his name to a shameful
reproach, as those ancient tyrants had done before him, Tyrannus: sometime a
name of noble Princes.
which degenerated from the right noble virtues of Princes. As the title (...),
or Tyrant, in the old time, was in the good part given to honorable Princes,
governors, and noble conquerours, in regard of strength, fortitude, and
virtue: but at length through the great malice, pride, insolency, and cruelty
of heathen Potentates, that title became a name of disgrace: Nero was a proper
name. Gell. li. 11.
so among the Sabines. Nero was a proper name (which noted Virtue, and
Fortitude, of that Greek word (...), the sinews, being the conjunction and
strength of the members:) and such persons also were of them called Neroes, as
excelled others in the most egregious fortitude, and noble virtues. Afterward,
when this tyrant Nero (who descended of the Claudies, which were Sabines) had
degenerated from all the heroical virtues of his ancestors, and became so
bloody and cruel, he gave occasion to the posterity, to change that proper
name into a name appellatiue, which called them that were cruel, Neroes, and
in comparison, Neroniores, those which were more cruel. Job. 18.17. Prou. 10.7.
Of such speaks Job, That their remembrance shall perish from the earth: yea,
and The name of them (says Solomon) shall stink; as of them which have been the
occasions of the ruin of their own palace, and people, as the Lord said by
Ezechiel touching the Prince of Tire, Cherub the Prince of Tire in Ezech. 28.
who in glory some times shined like the bright Cherub, in the house of god:
but now deformed, and in high contempt.

Moderators of the laws necessary.
8 By this it appears, that the Prince is not only the Lawgiver, but also
the Moderator, and qualifier of the same law: and that also the Magistrates in
their places, are moderators and qualifiers of the general law. Luth. in Eccle.
And the moderation of the law is no less necessary, then the law it self:
concerning the which, the time, the place, the persons, and other circumstances
of the matters and causes duly considered, the virtue (...), that is, Equity,
has a place. Equity.
For Equity being next neighbors, or one of the daughters of Justice, and
placed between those two hard extremities, Negligence and Cruelty,
withstanding those extremities, and relieuing the mean, remitteth some
offenses for the cause of common concord, and again punishes some faults with
lenity and gentleness. And in this shall be seen that moderate liberty, and
that moderate subjection, Chytr. Reg. vit.
which Plato commended to be so excellent good in a commonwealth.

This Princely virtue shined in Julius Caesar, who when he had a just occasion
offered him to kill Cicero, Julius Caesar shows great equity.
M. Marcellus, and some others, did nevertheless remit and pardon them. He well
considered, that extreme law was wrong, and therefore moderated it through
Equity. And nothing more grieved the heart of that noble Augustus, then when
by any point of severity, he was too much feared of his Subjects. Augustus
Caesar.
Therefore to one that offered him a supplication with a trembling hand, he
answered: What? think thou that thou offerest a penny to an Elophant?
Hearing also of the cruelty of his familiar friend Pollio, he reproved him
for it very sharply: but when he was certified of the most barbarous
bloud-thirstinesse of Herod in Jury, Mat. 2.
which had commanded the young innocent children to be murdered, and among
them spared not his own son, he said in high displeasure: Better it is to
be Herod's hog, then his son. He right well considered that such severity
and cruelty to the poor subjects, could purchase unto a Prince neither
honor, nor riches, nor love, nor safety: What is Clemency.
and on the other side, Clemency and Gentleness, which is defined the
tempera^ce of the mind, which has power to revenge: the lenity of the
superior toward the inferior, and the habit whereby he which is provoked
against any man is through goodness restrained, is both commodious and
commendable, especially for Princes. The constraint whereof has deprived many a
potentate of the glory of his place, and cast his Crown down to the ground,
whereof there be extant examples and testimonies in histories both humane and
divine.

9 In the due consideration whereof, although the ancient Romans had
appointed eight several punishments for malefactors, as namely, Damage, Eight
punishments.
imprisonment, whipping, recompense, shame, exile, servitude, death, yet did
they very seldom, and that never unjustly, Romani. Tul. Isidor. li. 2.
Etymolog.
and without great causes, execute them: but so were the lightest applied, as
the fear often spread to many, the pain to few, knowing well, that the
getting of a kingdom is with sword, but the continuance thereof is with
glory, mercy, and benevolence of a Prince to his subjects: and the Subjects
good will and affection toward their king, as said Antigonus the Macedonian
prince. And this thing was well weighed of the Emperor Frederik 3. whom Luther
therefore remembers: his common saying was: Luth. in Eccl. 5.8.
Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit and regnare, whereto Luther adds, nescit and
viuere, A man cannot live which will not winck at some faults. Quintilian.
spoken in the best sense and meaning, as thus: It is impossible for a prince
to reign that cannot wink at some faults, or forbear to punish them in time
and place. In the which sense, that sentence of Quintilian touching a
schoolmaster in Grammar, may be taken, that among the Graces to him belonging,
this is one, Eccles. 7.
that he be ignorant of some things: meaning that he must seem not to see,
nor know many faults in his scholars. And as thouching those private injuries
which touch many men near, Solomon counsaileth again, saying: Give not thine
heart to all the words that men speak, least thou hear thine own Servant
cursing thee. And this has been noted to be observed by Antigonus, to his
praise. Antigonus.
When himself on a time heard certain lewd persons to speak irreverently of
his person, he gently required them to remove further from him, least happily
he should hear them. Octauius Caesar.
And Augustus has been no less commended, for that he did not only set
little by, but also pardon the offense of Cynna, the nephew of Pompeie, and
also Timagines the railing Historiographer, and Pollio that lodged the said
Timagines in his house: and for that he remitted Aemilius Elianus, which was
accused to him for an evil talker of his Majesty. So also King Philip of
Macedonia was highly lauded, Philip of Macedonia.
for that he did so patiently put up those evil and slanderous words of
the Peleponesians touching his own honor, when some of his friends would
that he should be thereon severely revenged on them. Beyond all these, this
right virtue (indeed) was displayed in Moses toward the Israelites: Moses.
David. Elizabeth Queen of England.
in David to Shimei, and is rightly apparent in our most merciful Princess
Queen Elizabeth, toward many of her ungrateful subjects, and others. But
most of all, it has shined in the face of our Savior Christ, which did not
only say: Christ.
Who so speaks a word against the Son of man, if shall be forgiven him:
but also, Prayed unto his father, to pardon and forgive them that nailed him to
the Cross. And this virtue God himself (which is only wise and knows and
sees all, God commends unto Princes mercy, gentleness, by his own example.
whatsoever is done and committed against him, and from whom the privy
murmuring cannot be hid) has by his own example commended unto all Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates in the world, that reign by his authority and grace:
for although that he punish horrible sins with horrible plagues, he does yet
not only seem to wink at, and not to note many small offenses of his
servants against himself, and long suffers men to walk in their own ways
before he punishes them: but also expresses great Equity in the moderation
of offenses, cheefely there, where by nature the maladies be not curable. For
if the Lord should deal with men after their deserts, who were able to abide
it? But unto him belongs mercy and forgiveness, when unto men belongs shame
and confusion: therefore does he not enter hastily into judgment with them,
nor in fury rebuke them, but in gentleness and compassion.

Nota.
10 All this being said, may not justly embolden any person to presume against
the Prince and Ordinance, The mercy of the Prince should not encourage men to
presume against the Prince and laws, nor hinder justice.
upon such Equity and Lenity of gracious Princes and wise Magistrates: nor
may hinder the noble Prince and Magistrate from the execution of justice, as
occasion and reasons may be ministered. For, as he bears the Sword not for
naught, so neither should that man live without all fear of the same, that
offends: for he is the minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do
evil, and to defend and comfort them that do well, and that it is lawful for
the Prince and Magistrate to punish (among other offenses) especially them that
rail upon the Gods (that is, the Princes and Judges) and that male pertly
prattle and talk irreverently of their actions and deeds: a kind of people
worthy of rebuke and punishment. But this has been said only to declare
the great patience, lenity, moderation, graciousnesse, mercifulness, equity,
yea, the highest magnanimity of a Prince, when he can be well pleased upon
good occasions, to neglect and set little by the rash words and foolish
actions of vain and ungrateful persons, touching his own person and
estimation.

11 Finally, although the Counsels of Pompey, The hard haps of some princes,
ought not to discourage others from their duties.
Alcibiades, Mithridates, Ageselaus, have not been so happy and fortunate as
the Counsels of Abraham, David, Moses, Iosuah, and some other Princes in their
times, yet the events of those things (beyond all expectation) do nothing
astonish, nor discourage the wise Princes and learned Magistrates, which are
well schooled in the divine doctrine and fear of God: but they do learn by
these events, to know their own infirmity and the power of God, to be
modest, and not to endeavor to compass things after their own wisdom and
strength, to move up none unnecessary matters, to attempt nothing against the
word and will of God, to remitte no diligence in their duty, to rule well, to
govern, to proceed, and stand fast, as Moses, Iosuah Nehemiah, The good
magistrate does what he can, when he cannot do that he would.
Samuel, Solomon, David, and Hezekiah have done. And moreover, when they see
many faults, as well in the seat of judgment, as in other places of their
gomernment, and know not how to redress them, nor how to amend all things that
are amiss (notwithstanding all their good laws, orders, proceedings, Eccles.
3.16.
and constitutions, a thing which Solomon himself in his own commonwealth
saw and complained of) they do nevertheless exercise mercy, Mat. 23.23.
judgment, fidelity, equity, and other princely virtues: committing the
success of all things to the God of heanen: waiting patiently with prayer for
the goodness of the Lord to appear on them and their people, in the appointed
time.

Thus having expressed the true wisdom of their places, they shine with the
glory of the divine majesty by whom they reign, and do henceforth expect
that bountiful reward, which the almighty God promised and timely performed
unto his righteous servant Abraham, Genesis 15.1.
according as he said: Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thine exceeding
great reward. And that beautiful Crown of eternal glory, wherewith the son
of God shall crown them that have been faithful in his house.

CHAP. XXIII.
Consolations and instructions for the Pastor.
THe wise and vigilent Pastor or Minister of the word, being sent and
authorized by the Lord of heaven, and divinely taught by the wisdom of his
son, should be neither displeased in his mind, nor discouraged in his place,
through the tyranny, the sophistry, the hypocrisy, the contempt, the vain
censures and the ungrateful dealings of worldly men. The minister is authorized
by God.
But knowing the author of his calling to be God, and himself to be the
servant of God, he should rather rejoice and be glad, that it has pleased the
Lord in mercy to separate him from the world, to serve God in his Church. And
truly, if the mean subject have good cause to praise the bounty and
goodness of his Prince, which shall exalt him from the common sort of the
people, and authorize him his honorable Ambassador or Magistrate in the
commonwealth, then have the pastors and ministers good cause to praise the
Lord God, who has in his great love called them by the motion of his spirit
within them, and admitted them by an excellent calling also, to the preaching
of his holy word, and his divine place. This consideration both contenteth
Paul, and makes him glory in the same. Next unto this, the Minister
considering whose servant he is, may be much bolder (though in a godlier sort)
then those serving men are of the Lords and Masters on whom they attend, as
being through the countenance, authority, and power of them much emboldned.
Ier. 1.8. Ezech. 2.6.
Now the faces of Jeremy and Ezechiel being hereby hardened, they fear not
the rebukes and frowning faces of men. Paul may be accused and hardly forced
by Tartullus, but yet, he is able to answer for himself, being in this
place such an one as he should be. And he says boldly before king Agrippa: I
would to God, that not only thou, but also all they that hear me to day, were
not only somewhat, but also altogether such as I am, except these bands. In
this regard Michaeas is bold to call the people of Israel to witness against
Achab their King. 1. King. 22.
And Elisha says without blushing unto Ioram, 1. King. 3.13.
in the presence of Iehosophat King of Judah: What have I to do with thee? get
thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and to the Prophets of thy Mother. And if
it were not that I regard the presence of Iehosophat the King of Judah, I would
not look toward thee, nor yet see thee. So was Eliah emboldned before Achab,
and John the Baptist before Herod, nothing fearing the faces of them that could
only murder the body.

2 Thirdly this must be remembered, that the Pastor must regard his place and
calling, there into walk worthily. For as he is set by his Lord over the
house, so he must be faithful to distribute the portions to them of the house
in season: that is, he must (as Paul teaches) rule well, and labor in the
word and doctrine. And this the wise man remembers, Eccles. 12.10
Eccles 12. when he says, that the Preacher was yet more wise, and taught the
people knowledge: he gave good heed, sought out the ground, and set forth many
Parables: and that he might the better teach the people knowledge, and cause
them to hear, that he might turn them unto rightteousnesse, He was diligent
to find out pleasant words, Dan. 11.33.
and upright scripture, even the words of truth: Nullares discipulo est ita
perniciosa sicut vita magistricontumeliosa. Boet. de discipl. scolar. Mat. 5.14.
and to stop the mouths of ignorant persons (which respect more the life
then the doctrine of the Pastor, and be as children which aim rather to the
behavior then to the instruction of their parents) it is meet that the light
of this person do shine before men correspondent to his teaching (as the right
vrim and thumim combined) to the benefit of the Church, and the praise of God.
God fobidde that he which should be (...), The light of the world, as Christ
called his Apostles, should be Lumen modi, non mundi, The light of the bushel,
and not of the world, as Bernard called some of them in his time. Or that they
which should be (...). The salt of the earth, and instructors of others, as
well in life as doctrine, should resemble in knowledge and wisdom those
Italian Priests, In dicta Alfonsi.
of whom Aeneas Syluius (one of the best learned of the Popes) complained, when
he said, that the very maids at their distaues could answer, both out of
the old and new Testament, and yield a reason of their faith to their
Catechizers: but the Priests themselves were found altogether ignorant in
learning and life: or that they should be both like that profane and
unlearned Friar, who, A very learned Friar.
after he had in his old age happily found a new Testament, and therein read
a few words, said to his fellows, that either those words which he had read
therein, was no part of the holy Scriptures, or that he and they were no good
Christians. So far discented both his life and Religion from the perfect
verity: so blind was he, though of the fraternity, in that which he should
most clearly have seen and declared unto others! Are these persons able to
do and perform the part of an Instructor? Can they deal the true doctrine?
Have they any regard of edification? No truly: Neither (indeed) have they
yet tasted the sweetness of that comfortable Contentation and sacietie of the
Soul, which the holy Ghost bestows in the abundance of his graces, to them
that rule well, and labor in the word and doctrine, as faithful Pastors.

3 But there be, which to the discouragement of the good laborers thus oppose.
Hindrances opposed to the Pastor.
The day is long: the burden is heavy: the work is intolerable: and yet,
when the day is ended, and the burden borne, and the work performed, where is
the reward? who has his wages? where shall the recompense be expected? but
chiefly then, when they say: that not only such as instruct many (as Isaiah,
and Michaeah, and Zachary, and John) do fall by the sword, by fire, by
captivity, and by spoil many days: Dan. 11.33.
but also some of them of understanding, as Julian, Nicholas, Judas, the
Bishops of Rome, and others learned in the Scriptures, do fall, to try them,
and to purge them! Then (I say) they resolve thus with the buier, (...), that
is, Naught, naught: dear, dear. Pro. 20.14.
Howbeeit, as the faithful Pastor does acknowledge the grace and mercies of
God his Lord and master toward him, and is right glad of his calling and place
in the Church, with thankfulness: as he rules well, and labors in the word
and doctrine worthily: and as he believes that the Lord God which has called
him, and sent him to work in his vineyard, is both able and willing to help
and defend him, as he helped and defended his servants, Samuel, Jeremy,
Daniel, and such others: so he does not reckon that the Lord has shut him
out from the true peace: but he remembers the words of his master, Peace.
who said: Peace be unto you: my peace I leave with you: in the world ye
shall have tribulation: but in me ye shall have peace. The word of Christ full
of comfort to the Ministers.
Neither does he forget to pray unto God, that he would vouchsafe to contain
him within the bounds of this peace, that neither by his doctrine, nor by his
life, nor by dealing in matters unnecessary, nor by disputing about
genealogies, and vain questions, nor by the yielding to the enemy of man's
soul, he hinder the happy course of the Gospel of peace, that he no way
disturb this peace, which is, and should for ever be retained among the
Ministers of the Gospel: as of more account and estimation, then all the
favor, friendship, pleasure, and treasure of the world. And then, after
that he has long preached peace, and labored therein, The resolution of the
wise Minister.
and yet perceives that men prepare themselves to wars and contentions: and
has been a workman in the vineyard many days, and sees not any fruit of his
toil to his desire: he does not, for all that, think that he has spoken in
the air, or that he has labored in vain, and lost his travails: but
resolves, Esaias. 55.20
that as the rain and snow which comes down from heaven, returns not
hither again, but waters the earth, makes it fruitful and green, that it
may give corn to the sower, and bread to him that eats, so the word of God
which he has preached unto the people, shall not turn again void unto him,
but accomplish the will of God, and prosper in the rhing whereunto he sends
it: and that His labors in the Lord are not in vain. Moreover, A reward.
he doubts not, but believes, that his reward is with the Lord, who
esteeming his labors in him profitable, will duly make payment thereof in
time convenient: not according to the quantity and quality of the fruit, but
after the measure and quality of his labors. And in this, The labor of him
that washes an Ethiopian is not without wages
he knows himself to be righly likened unto him that is hired to wash an
Ethiopian or Black-moore, and is promised a reward for his days labor,
howsoever the Blac-moore appear after his washing: and unto that schoolmaster,
who in all equity is not to be neglected, but to be rewarded for his diligence
employed on his scholars, how soever they profit. Neither does he think, that
Ezechiel the Prophet was to loose all his pains in his ministry,
notwithstanding that the Lord said of the people to whom he should preach,
They are the children of an hard face, Ezech. 2.4.
and stiff heart: they are a rebellious house: briers and thorns are with
thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions. And thou shall speak my words
unto them, whether they will hear or not hear: that they may know, that
there has been a Prophet among them. So, albeit that the ungrateful people,
which have no feeling, and as little religion, say unto the Minister, we be
never the better for all thy studies, thy pains, thy preaching, thy teaching,
thy laboring: and therefore what reason have we to be loving, and thankful
unto thee? yet he perceives, Gods judgments on the^ that contemn the word.
that their sudden judgments falling on them in their times, do testify
his labors, which they contemned, and the contempt whereof the Lord now
reuengeth to his glory. Again, he sees, that there is a reward laid up
for him by the Lord in his mercy, A reward for laborers.
who forgets not his labors, and that he shall receive this reward in due
time to his best content. For he has heard what he promised. Dan. 11.2. They
that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. Again, Hier.
45.5. Thy life will I give thee for a pray in all places whither so ever thou
go. And (to omit other places) he remembers the words of Paul: 1. Cor.
15.58. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord: for as much as we know, that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord. The labors of all Christians, but chiefly the
labors of the faithful Ministers, whom the Lord has set over his house, to
such he says, that cannot lie: Blessed is that servant, Mat. 24.46. and 25.23.
his Lord will make him ruler over all his goods. He shall be made ruler over
many things: And in a word, He shall be partaker of the joy of his Lord. This
thing when he enjoys, he will not say, It is dear, dear: but with the
Psalmist, he shall sing, Hinne ma tob! Behold how good it is! and with him
which has obtained a great good thing for a little money: It is well worth my
money, Prou. 20.14
I have therein a great pennie-worth. Then will he commend that which before
he was tempted to contemn, and will not be discontented, nor repent him self
of his bargain, though he has sold with that wise merchant all that ever he
had, to purchase the field which contains this treasure: then will he account
indeed (with Paul, Romans 8.18. that All the afflictions of this time, are not
worthy of the glory that shall be to them revealed. Christ has made himself
an ensample for laborers.
To this therefore has our Lord armed his disciples: and to ratify the fame,
he has worthily made his own example perpetual for the immitation and
consolation of the painful laborers. For notwithstanding he was most
irreverently derided, mocked, oppugned, and persecuted of the Scribes,
Pharisees, high priests, and others, in all his doctrines, miracles, and good
works, he did proceed in his most godly purposes (mawgre all their malignitie)
he set the Lord ever before his face: the same Lord stood at his right hand,
he left not his soul in hell, he suffered him not to see corruption: he showed
him the way of life: he made him full of joy with his countenance: he gave him
his hearts desire: he set a crown of pure gold on his head* he exalted him on
high, and gave him a name above al names, and made him a King over all Kings,
for ever and ever. And he has promised, that where he is, there shall also his
minister be: and he that ministers unto him, shall be honored of his father
in the kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Comforts to content the householder, the Scribe, and other persons in their
several places.
AS the holy Scriptures have many meet meditations for every malady, so
also among others, there be many sweet comforts therein, to appeaze and content
the householder, who, as it is before declared, is tormented with no small
troubles and afflictions of mind: whereby there is to him commended the right
use of his calling. The householder is to consider his calling, and use it.
He is counseled to marry a wife in the fear of God: to til and manure his
ground, so seek for wealth and treasures, by all honest and godly means, for
the maintenance of himself, his wife and children, his family and estate: to
educate and instruct his children in the nurture and fear of the Lord: to care
for his household, to be mindful of the poor, to do his duty, and not to be
daunted with the negligent fool, nor to give over all, and care for nothing.
Thus is he schooled to labor, and do his endeavor within the rules of his
calling, with quietness, co^tentation, and christian comfort, having in mind
that wholesome counsel of King Solomon: Pro. 27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thy hands. Then
having considered of his calling and place, He must commit the perfection of
his labors to God, to whom he must pray to this effect. Luther in Psalm.
it shall be the best way for him to commit the perfection of his labors and
affairs to the Lord, on whom it is ever good to depend, and to whom the good
householder daily prays to this effect. O Lord God, thou have ordained me to
be an householder: the things that appertain to mine house, thou have of thy
great goodness given me: but lo, the burden and charge thereof, is heavier
then that I am able to bear. Therefore I beseech thee, to supply my place: be
thou the good householder, and I will with all mine heart submit and yield my
self unto thee. This prayer being made in simplicity and truth, the Lord will
hear, and thus will he answer to the same. The Lords answer.
I will indeed perform this matter: Only I will, that thou so prepare thy
self, as thou may in patience overcome and conquer all things. Though
matters come not to pass after thine own mind, and when thou would that
they should be perfited: yet I will not that thou should despair, nor
forsake this kind of life to the which I have prepared thee, and called thee
to serve me in. For seeing that thou have called upon me, and have acknowledged
al these things which I have bestowed on thee, to be my gracious gifts, I will
gladly preserve thee and thy family. Howbeit, if any adverse or grievous
things betide thee, I will that thou bear the same with patience, in such sort
as thou be not dismayed, or doubtful whether all other things will not
follow, but in the like sort. Remember my servant Job, who in his afflictions
could thus answer: Job. 2.10.
Shall we receive good things from the Lord, and not receive evil or adverse
things also? Remember also what my servant Paul has written to the
Corinthians. There has no temptation taken you, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but such as apperteineth to man, and God is faithful, which will not suffer
you to be tempted above that ye be able: but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that ye may be able to bear it. To pass over the Families of
Adam, of Noah, of Abraham, of Loath, of Isaak, of Jacob, of Moses, of Iosuah, of
Samson, of Gedeon, of Samuel: What household has seemed more miserable, The
family of David.
then that of David in his days? His wives, his sons, his daughters, his
Counsailers, his servants, his kinsfolks, his subjects, his enemies, both
abroad and at home, gave him oftentimes sharp vinegar mingled with gall,
whereby he mixed his drink with weeping tears. And so after him many hard
lots betided his family: yet see, how this family continued without ruin or
decay, through the only stay of my grace, until that my son Christ was born
thereof. Wherefore do thou also thy duty in thy place: Ecclus. 7.15.
account no labourious work tedious to thee in thy vocation, nor the husbandry
that I have created and commit thy self, and the success of all things unto
me, with faithful expectation of the performance of all my promises; and so
thou shall not only have a peaceable heart and right contented mind in this
world, but also that comfortable and blessed life in the world to come, which
I have prepared and promised to give unto them, that never turn their belief
from me. With these most sweet consolations, does the Lord God cheer and
solace the good Householder, whom he would not have to be driven from his
place, though never so yrksome, Romans 12.21.
nor to be overcome of evil, but to stand fast, and to overcome evil with
goodness, being through the grace of God made a right valiant soldier, to
fight under the blessed banner of his Son, against the Devil, the world, and
the flesh.

2 Finally, in all sorrowful events that occur in this estate (among others)
that good counsel of Demipho in Terence is not to be rejected, though a
heathen man, yet speaking divinely, whom therefore Luther writing on the
Ecclesiastes of Solomon, cap. 10. cites, speaking much after this sort:
Quamobrem omnes, etc.

Wherefore, when men their greatest wealth enjoy, Demipho in Phormio.

They cheefely then should ponder well in mind:
How best to bear the burdens of annoy,
The perils, plagues, exiles, to them assign'de.
Returning home from far, how they may find A good resolution for the
householder.

Their sons defaults, their loving wives enterr'd,
Their tender daughters sick, or sore afer'd.
These be the haps, and hurts, that common be:
These be the things, that eke may come to thee.
What ever falls besides the expected lot,
Account it gain, as so much clearly got.
3 Moreover, A good resolution for the Scribe or learned writer.

Ier. 45.5.


Baruch the painful Scribe ought not to be discouraged after his laborious
watchings and long labors, nor to despair of his good wages and sufficient
recompense: for verily, though his expectation of those worldly promotions
which he offers be vain, because the captivity is threatened by the Lord
shortly to ensue, and a miserable plague is brought upon all flesh, according
as himself has written by the direction of Jeremy the Prophet: yet has the
Lord provided for him a far better thing then worldly promotions: for thus
has the Lord promised him, that He will give him his life for a pray in all
places whither soever he goes. And this is no small matter: For as the body
is more worth then meat, and the life then raiment: so a man will not stick
to give all that ever he has for his life. A treasure which no worldly man is
able to purchase with all the plenty of this life. And yet this benefit
extends it self further, to the endless comfort of them that take pain by
their pens to pleasure many others, when that of the goodness of God in his
son Christ, he shall not only live among the famous, in this present world
throughout all generations, in the mouths and memories of men, which reap the
fruits of his labors, to the praise of God, and their instruction: but also
beyond all time, he shall live, and shine with the Lord, among the blessed
Saints for evermore. And what should a man desire more? Ii is certain that the
Lord is ever the same: his warrant and word is of so great credit and
assurance, as ever it was sithence the world was created.

An encouragement to young scholars, to write in a book the words of wise men.
4 When my self being a young scholar in the University, did ordinarily gather
and write into a book, the chief notes of the Sermons and Lectures which I
heard preached and read in the Churches and other public places there, one of
my fellows (which thought somewhat of himself) said unto me, that mine exercise
was nothing but a drudgery, and he maruailed why I took such labor therein? I
answered him, that thereby I was willing (by the grace of God) to profit not
only my self, but many others. Neither at this time do I repent of my pains
taken therein, as if I had naught but toil for my labor (as Baruch did: Iere.
4.5.
) but I am right glad thereof, and do praise God for such an opportunity
offered me: not doubting, but, as I do and shall thereby the better discharge
my duty in my place and calling, and benefit many others: so also the Lords
promise of life in his Son Christ (on whom by faith I depend) will be
performed and established indue and convenient time, to mine endless comfort.
Therefore I do gladly exhort all young men that be desirous of knowledge, and
studious in the the word of God, to do the like, and to make some profit and
use of their long studies and exercises, as those grateful Bees, which flying
hither and thither, do collect and gather from many sweet flowers, and
wholesome herbs, that little pith or juice, whereof (their hiues or
storehouses being replenished) themselves are relieved, and many others
comforted. And howsoever the wisdom of the world derideth and disdaineth the
wisdom of God, which oftentimes appears as in foolishness before men: yet,
let not that maine stroke daunt you, Obsonia quisque palato, digna suo quaerit:
non omnibus vna voluptas.
into whom God has poured the wisdom of his spirit. And although that one
pleasure contenteth not all, but every one hunteth after that which he best
fancieth: it is most certain by the firm warrant of Christ, that Wisdom is
justified of her own Children. The wise and well affected will esteem of your
virtues, then what fools and profane diriders shall do, why should ye
regard? answer them after their folly, but not according to their
expectation: neither sing with them in their discorded tunes. Let not the
ungrateful requitalles of the world trouble you: possess your souls in
patience, and expect the fruits of your travails, and comfortable reward from
him only, that forgets not your love, your faith, your diligence, your
travail and pains that ye have sustained and endured for his cause, and the
good of your brethren.

A comfort for the poor believers.
5 Neither let the poor estate of Christ and his immitators, cause any of us to
dislike our profession: consider that God has chosen the poor of this world,
and has made even them heirs of his kingdom, Art. Solen.
whose children they are, as Aratus said. The poor receive the Gospel without
offense, and those poor in spirit are blessed: for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven, as Christ himself has taught us, who (though he were king of all
kings, and rich beyond all the Lords of the earth, without al comparion)
disdained not at any time to visit the poor, to accompany the poor, A
comfort for the rich.
and to preach the Gospel unto them to their great comfort. On the other part,
if God give us riches, honors, estimation in this world, as he gave unto
Abraham, David, Joseph, Daniel, let us be thankful to God, and rightly use
these things in the fear of God, as those holy men have done, and have taught
us therein, and let us not abuse the gifts of God to the satisfying of our
fleshly appetites, Luke. 16.
as that Dives did, of whom Christ speaks in the Gospel: and as diverse others
use most commonly to do, when with the same, they exalt themselves in pride,
they face their betters, threaten and brow-beat their Christian brethren, wring
and undo many of their neighbors, and provide most delicious for their own
bellies, and gloriously for their own backs, with that, wherewith they should
(in all duty) relieve those poor afflicted, which are constrained with
penury to statue, of whom only this regard they take, Am I the keeper of my
brother? Genesis 4.
that was Cains answer to God, touching his brother Abel. Let us know, that it
has pleased God to make us his trusty Stewards, Rich men be Gods stewards.
and the things that we have are not our own, but his things, and therefore it
is not lawful for us to bury them in the ground with that slothful servant,
nor waste them away with the prodigal son: but to employ them to his glory,
to the bnefit of our brethren, and to the necessity of our states and lives
here. And though it be hard for him that trusts in riches and worldly
promotions, to enter into the kingdom of heaven, yet to them that have them of
the blessing of God; as Abraham had, and use them rightly, as Abraham did, it
shall be said, as unto that good servant in the Gospel, Well done thou good
and trusty servant, thou have been faithful in few things, thou shall
therefore be made ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of the Lord.
But whether ye be poor, An instruction.
or rich, whether in mean place, or place of extremity, whether ye do want
or have enough, let that good counsel of our Lord Jesus be ever remembered
and daily observed. Take no thought saying, Mat. 6 31.
what shall we eat, or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be
clothed? for after al these things do the Gentiles seek: for your heavenly
father knows, that ye have need of all these things: but seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
ministered unto you. Care not the^ for the morrow: for the morrow shall care for
it self: the day has enough with his own travel. For our Lord would not,
that we should vex our selves out of measure in the care of these worldly
things: but that laboring truly in our vocations, we should have an especial
regard of the kingdom of God, and how to walk in a new life in this world: not
doubting any thing, but that the Lord which has created us, will so provide
every day for us, that we shall not want things necessary in this world,
though we augment not the present grief by our excessive carfulness, how to
live in time to come. So that in all worldly things we should stay our selves
contented, only for the things of the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness
thereof, we should hunger and thirst, without all sacietie, as long as we live:
for of this we can never have enough in this life. The sacietie of the Saints
in heaven.
But the sufficiency thereof, shall be happily enjoyed to our endless comfort
and contentation, in that heavenly mansion, wherein we shall find rowme enough:
we shall possess riches and wealth enough: we shall have honor and glory
enough: and of all good things we shall enjoy abundance without measure.

6 In the mean time, let not us which fear God and belong unto his kingdom,
be discouraged, nor distracted, when we do not only consider the general
miseries of all troubles of all mankind: 1. Cor. 15.
but also when we ponder of those heavy crosses which we our selves are
constrained to bear, by the which we were of al men the most miserable, if the
dead did not rise again. With this, let us hear, and well observe to our
consolation, that which Ben-Gorian, or the Author of the 2. book of the
Macchabees has written for the comfort of all them that read his book: 2.
Macc. 6.1.
I beseech those that read this book (says he) that they be not discouraged
for these calamities: but that they judge these afflictions not to be for
destruction, but for a chastening of our nation: for it is a token of his great
goodness, not to suffer sinners long to continue: but straight ways to punish
them. For the Lord does not long wait for us, as for other nations, who he
punishes when they are come to the fullness of their sins: But thus he
deals with us, that our sins should not be heaped up to the full, so that
afterward he should punish us. And therefore he never withdraws his mercy
from us: and though he punish with adversity, yet does he never forsake his
people. But let this be spoken now for a warning unto us. And that saying of
the Lord to Paul, in his greatest distress, cannot but ravish the spirits of
them that trust in God: 2. Cor. 12.2.9. Note.
My grace (says he) is sufficient for thee. This word of comfort made him in
true patience to possess his soul, and to have a contented mind. Unto these,
when the use of the word of God joins, oh God, what comfort, pleasure and
profit shall the believer reap thereof! he shall feel how The power of God is
made perfect through weakness: and therefore he will rejoice even in
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in him: he will patiently bear
infirmities, reproaches, necessities, persecutions and anguishes for Christ's
sake.

CHAP. XXV.
Every man is to take the benefit of time: to keep within the bounds of his
vocation, and to depend on the divine providence: the unlike ends of piety
and impiety.
AS in the word of God there is duly co^me^ded to every person a lawful
vocation or calling in this world, wherein he is to serve God, benefit his
country, and discharge himself, in the fear of God: so is he advised in the
same, to do the works of his vocation, The time of working.
then whiles health and opportune time serves there unto. For our life and
health is given us of God, of whose merciful hand we must acknowledge the
same to come by our timely acceptance and right using thereof. As he only
fostereth and sustaineth our life, and our health in this world, so has he
appointed it to be but short, and transitory, without any return of it, when
it passes away. And when our bodies are diseased and enfeebled, then neither
the cogitation is apt to learn any thing, or to pray, or to sustain the
great cares and painful labors, (...).

Aristotle.


which the vocation requires: for (as the Philosopher says) Good health and
strength is the very foundation and stay of the life. Therefore we must pray
to the Lord, that we may both be taught and learn the true doctrine, and
propagate the same, and follow the works of our vocation in time convenient.

2 For, as we be persuaded, that there is a time for every labor, and every
work under the Sun (as says Solomon) so do we enjoy the benefit of our time,
The use of the benefit of time.
when we embrace and use the blessings of God, in his fear with thankfulness
and contentation. God in this time shows himself in mercy toward us, he
does inuit us to his heavenly banquet, he sends forth his servants to that
end, and they daily cry unto us: Oh come now, and make no longer tarrying,
for all things are prepared and made ready for you. Behold (says he
himself) I stand at the door and knock, if any man open unto me, I will
come in unto him. Now whiles he calls, Apoc. 3.20. Of this Argument I have
written a dialogue, entitled the Tears of Time.
let us give care: whiles he inuiteth, let us come: whiles the things be
ready, let us use them, and not contemn the Lords great bounty and
mercy, least peradventure he say: Ye shall not enter inter into my rest: ye
shall not taste of my meat: ye are come too late, the gate is shut up: I
know you not: depart hence: the tide tarrieth for no man: the time is past.

There is nothing more precious then Time, Time is precious, yet time is wasted
and neglected.
and yet (alas) nothing is found to be so vile in these days. The day of
health passes away, and no man recounteth it: no man considers how his days
be consumed, without retire or return: but as there shall not one hair of the
head perish, so neither any one moment of time shall escape. O therefore, before
that the hour passes away, which the mercy of thy maker has given thee to
repent, to obtain pardon, to apprehende grace, to atchieue glory, before the
time time be gone wherein thou may resemble the divine piety, and hasten to
the Angels society, stir up thy negligent will, and bewail thy
committed sin.

The Apostle admonishes (Gal. 6.) VVhiles we have time, let us do good unto
all men. As if he said: we may be glad, yt we have this benefit of time,
wherein we may through the goodness of God (if we will) do those good works
which belongs to Christians in our several vocations: wherefore let us not
loose this good opportunity, but discharge our duties in the fear of God: and
not to let that pass from us, which being once gone, can never be recovered
again. And that is the meaning of the Prophet also where he says: Isay. 55.
Seek the Lord whiles he may be found: Call upon him, whiles he is near. It
may be, God will not so easily be found at an other time: peradventure, he will
not be so ready at an other season to offer himself unto you, as now:
therefore account this time as precious, and neglect it not, wherein the Lord
is willing to be found, if ye seek him: and to be at hand to help you, if ye
call upon him. Therefore the wise man (which had so deeply considered of the
times and condition of this world, counsaileth most wisely: Eccles. 12.
Remember thy maker in the time of thy youth, before the evil days come.
Again he says: Cap. 7.14. and 9.11.
Use well the time of prosperity, and remember the time of aduersitte: for a
man knows not his time: But like as the fishes be taken with the Angle, and
as the birds are caught with the snare, even so are men taken in the perilous
time, when it comes so dainely upon them. Wherefore he says again: What
soever thou take in hand to do, that do, with all thy power: for in the
grave (whereunto thou tendest) there is neither work, counsel, knowledge nor
wisdom.

Thus let him which has that opportune time so working and doing his duty,
not contemn nor neglect it. He has time now, to morrow he may not have it: if
he be unwilling this day, Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erit.
the next day he may be further off, as he says. To morrow more unfit, who
is unfitte to day. Now this is our time, God grant we neglect it not, but
rightly use it.

3 Next, we are to take heed, To continue within the limits of our vocations.
that we follow not those discontented and curious persons, to break forth
or transgress the right bounds of our vocations. Let us remember what our
Lord said to his Apostle Peter, who had forgotten his own vocation and
place, and curiously noted his fellow John: If I will, that he tarry till I
come, Mat. 21.22.
what is that to thee? follow thou me. And that of Paul, where he says: Let
every man abide within the compass of that vocation wherein he is placed.
Men ought to be content with their own places*
Thus ought men to be contented with their places and condition of life, (the
same being lawful) albeit they be called to labor in the vineyard, but for
their single penny a day, or to gleane the ears of Corn after the reapers
with poor Ruth: and not to emulate others, or to grutch at them that are in in
better state then themselves are. When Socrates had considered the course of
man's life, Socrates his saying touching the choice of let^ in this life.
and had compared the condition of one man with the condition of another, he
said: that if the universal calamities of all men should be gathered
together into one heap, and then to every man it should be severally
distributed like portions out of the same heap, it would be that each man
would rather choose to bear his own calamities (meaning such as befall him
within his lawful vocation and condition) then to take part and part like with
others, Note this.
out of that common heap. And surely we may well think, that every man is
best fit for that vocation, wherein God places him, and that none other can
so easily bear the burdens and greefes of that vocation, as he that is
thereunto so appointed by the Lord, who gives him ability to sustain the
same. 1. Cor: 10.13. Luth. in Eccle.
and that the afflictions do spring of man's ambition, envy, ignorance,
errors, and infirmities, as things by him deserved.

4 Neither let us wax angry with our selves, or with other me^, if things
answer not to our travels and desires, but consider that all lies in the
power and pleasure of God, to who^ our estates, conditions, and the end of our
lives is well known, that he protecteth and guides us. Therefore with the poor
widow Ruth, let us rrust under ye shadow of his wings, and thus resolve: Pro.
20.24.19.
Well, our lots are in the hand of God, he watches over us, he begins,
he continues, he ends over work. We are contented with our state and
condition, and endeavor to please God in the same. He best knows what is to
be done with us and with our labors. He is doubtful of nothing: he works
all for the best to them that fear him, God preserves men in dangers.
and that do reverence before him. Behold! when men in a very little bottom,
sail over the mighty Ocean, God declares himself a mighty preserver and a
most sure guide of life unto the^, wherein (as says David) they cannot but
behold the great works of God. Now it makes no great matter though the common
mariners know not the way nor the end of the voyage, if the same be
sufficiently known to the own or master of the ship. In like manner when we
labor and toil in great extremities and dangers of this life, we ever find
God most merciful unto us, and a loving Savior of our lives: and though we
know not what shall be the end of our course, being uncertain of the event of
things, let this yet please us, that The Lord our king, our governor, our
master, our captain, and right owner, knows it well, and directs us in
the best course, whom we ought to hearken unto, and to follow after the example
of John.

5 But ye say: Things are confused in this world. It is very certain, Though
all things seem confused to us yet God does order all.
that as in a great assembly of many persons diversely disposed (where every
one of them has his several talk, or song, or noise) nothing can be
perceived, besides a most confused sound or rumbling: so (indeed) is the state
of men in this world with themselves, whom even their own affairs do astonish
and confound. Neither do they consider how things proceed, succeed, and be
carried in the world, no more then the idiot or fool does consider of the
order and course of the Sun, the Moon, and other celestial motions with the
ordinary disposition of the Elements, and things inferior with the same. Nor
seem those men in their busy struglings and dealings one with another, much
unlike the Ants or Emmets, that wander hither and thither without all order.
Howbeit it is most true, that the Lord God does not only see all, Ier. 23.23,
24.
and hear all, most perfectly: but also tries, disposes, rules, and
orders all after his wisdom, will, and power most effectually, howsoever the
grossnesse of man's wit cannot conceive it. There is nothing hidden from the
greatness of his power, Isay. 40.26.28, 29.
strength and might (says the Prophet) he is neither weary, nor faint, his
wisdom cannot be comprehended, he works, he rules, he moderateth, he
takes up, he casts down, he gives health, he sends sickness: through
him we live, and move. Of this speaks Sibylla the ancient Prophetess.

Pre. li 7. ca. 27.
(...). Hear me (ye men) and mark well what I say:
The King eternal reigns and rules for aye.
But chiefly the sweet Psalmist of Israel, qualifying those railing taunts,
and godless iestures of the profane heathen, has most finely and divinely
modulated thereof, in these short verses.

Psalm. 115.2.
Lammah iomeru haggoiim?
Aiiehna Elohehem?
Velohenu basschamaiim,
Kol ascher chaphitz Y aschah.
Thus englished:

Why say the Heathen with gestures vnsightie?
Where now forsooth, is their God almighty?
Our God is in heaven, in his holy hill:
There working all things what soever he will.
And further to declare unto us, that all things are done, by the will, power,
wisdom, and providence of God, that the Church might have comfort and
patience in all her troubles, and heavy afflictions, under the unhappy reign
of Antichrist, Apoc. 4.2.
the Lord declares himself to Saint John, like a most mighty and puissant
King, sitting on his throane, determining the things that should be brought to
pass.

6 And with this, we are justly moved to consider, that though the multitude of
fools, and their prosperity in this world, on the one side, and the small
number of the godly, God seteth the difference between the good and evil. Genesis
1.4. Psalm. 58.10.
and their adversity on the other side (with so many shows of confusion and
disorder in this life) do very much beguile the opinions of men: yet, that the
Lord has set a difference between the godly and the ungodly, as he has
divided the light from the darkness. And therefore notwithstanding, that in
this world the tares are mixed with the corn, and Nimrod, and Pharao be
advanced in the pride of their hearts: yet the time comes, when the tares
shall be weeded out from among the corn, and burnt in the fire, and the corn
gathered into the Garner, and barn of safety. This thing the wise man sets
forth in these words: Sap. 3.1.10. and 5.6.2.
The soul of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no torments shall
touch them. But as for the ungodly, they are punished according to their
imaginations. Again, the righteous do stand in great boldness: but the
ungodly are vexed with horrible fear. And this the Lord confirms in his
Sermon of the last judgment. The son of man (says he) shall separate them
one from another, Mat. 25.
as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats: and he shall place the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left hand. Unto this time
Solomon looked (no doubt) when he said: Eccles. 3.16.17.
God shall separate the righteous from the wicked, and then shall be the time
and judgment of all counsels and works. And this remembered David. Psalm.
58.9, 10.

Diagoras the Atheist, and Dionyse the Tyrant, and the Cyclopicall Epicures, do
take their pleasure to jest at the providence of God, contemn the Gospel,
despise the Lords anointed, disdain the Godly, rail on the Ministers of the
word, and nothing fear the threatenings of the holy Prophets, and Apostles, and
that the rather, because their judgments are deferred, and their selves
permitted to wallow in their sins without punishment! Res.
What then? Is there not a God therefore that sees and judges all? And will
not he be revenged on them that sin against him of malicious wickedness? Yes
doubtless. And the time comes, God has his particluar judgments. Psalm.
58.11. Job. 19.29.
when those Atheistical and godless miscreants shall know, even in the world,
there is a God that judges in the earth, as David says: and that the same God
has not only a judgment (as Job said to Bildad) but also particular
judgments, sometimes secret: sometimes open, that not at the day of every
man* death only, wherein there is made a separation between the good and the
evil: but at sundry times within the compass of his life, as the Lord sees
it good: Ior. 25 31.
for (as Jeremy said) The Lord has his judgments to give upon all people,
and will hold his Court of justice with all flesh, and will deliver the
ungodly to the sword. Deuteronomy. 32.
In the which, as the work of the Lord is perfect, as Moses said, and all his
ways are judgment: so also he being Judge of all the world, Genesis 18.28.
deals according to right, as Abraham disputes. For whether his judgments
be secret or open, general or particular, he ever executes them justly,
Psalm. 111.8.
and performs them in truth and equity. And certain it is, that into this
judgment is brought every person, whether man or woman, young or old, and
every work, be it good, or be it evil. In this judgment the godly saints
stand, Psalm. 1.5.6.
and be cleared: they have great boldness and comfort, they have quier
consciences, contented hearts, and great gladness. But the ungodly are not
able to stand: they tremble and fall down: for why, unto them the Lord
speaks in his wrath, Though plagues be deferred, yet they are not removed
from the ungodly in the day time. Psa. 50.21.23
and vexes them in his heavy displeasure. And though their plagues for a time
were not inflicted, but were deferred, when they justly deserved plagues, by
their sinning a thousand times against God and his saints: yet now, their time
being come, they be taken suddenly in the snare as birds, they be accused,
condemned, cast down headlong, rent in pieces without rescue, and constrained
in anguish to weep, wail, howl, wring their hands, and gnash with their
teeth in torments intolerable. The children of God in the sense of the same
(for their sins) have approved these judgments, as it well became them, for
just and righteous, and have condemned themselves of folly, as justly deserving
to be judged: What the godly do in the sense of those judgments. David. 1.
Chro. 21.17.
but so, as they have in faith relied on the promises of God touching the
remission of sins for the sake of Christ upon their repentance. When David
saw that the Lords Angel executed the judgment of God upon his people for
sin, he confessed his own faults, and acknowledged the uprightness of Gods
judgments: therefore he said, It is I, that have sinned and done evil in
deed. Let thine hand (O Lord my God) be on me, and on my fathers house:
Manasses.
but not on the people. And Manasses King of Judah made this confession, when he
was captiued in Babylon: O Lord, I have sinned, Joseph's brethren.
I have sinned, and do know mine iniquity. Thus the brethren of Joseph calling
to mind their own unnatural cruelty toward him, said one to another, being
in Egypt: Genesis 42.21.22.
We have verily sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him. And therefore is this
trouble or judgment come upon us. And Ruben said: See, The Tirants have
been forced to confess the equity of Gods judgments. Adonibezek. Judge. 1.
now is his blood required. The very cruel tyrants also, which neither feared
God, nor cared for man, are at length forced to confess the uprightness of
Gods judgments upon themselves: their own consciences condemning them. When
Adonibezek was taken by the Israelites and had his thumbes and great toes cut
off, he said, confessing the just judgment of God: Seventy Kings having the
thumbes of their hands and feet cut off, did eat under my table; as I have
done, so God has rewarded me. So Pharao the Egyptian tyrant, Pharao.
when he heard the mighty thunders as the voice of God in his land, he was
afraid, confessed his sin, and granted the justice of God: The Lord is
righteous (says he) but I and my people are wicked. Mauritius.
And thus Mauritius the Emperor after his great Pride, disdain, cruelty
against the Christians, and other heinous sins, being taken by wicked Phocas,
and seeing his wife, his two sons, and his three Daughters now murdered
before his face, and himself awayting the like lot, he confessed his sins
unto the Lord, and acknowledges the justice of God, in these words (of the
Psalmist) Iustus es, Psalm. 119.137.
Domine, and rectum Iuditiumtuum. O Lord, thou art righteous, and just is thy
judgment.

8 Therefore, although the men of this world in their gross blindness beyond
the darkness of Egypt, perceive not judgment: Prou. 28.5.
and the ignorant and foolish consider not whether there be any contribution
of piety and impiety in this life, (wherein the Lord God suffers his own
Children to be evil entreated by tyrants, In this life there is a
contribution of piety and impiety.
and to wander out of the way in the wilderness) until they feel the very
judgments of God upon themselves: yet (truly) all they that fear the Lord
and seek him, do understand all things: Prou. 28.5.
they do well perceive and see how that Impiety is plagued either generally or
particularly, secretly or openly, and sometimes both ways, eue^ here in this
life. And that piety and godliness is well rewarded in this life either
generally or particularly, openly or secretly, as says the wise man. Eccles.
8.13.14.
I know that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord and do reverence
before him: but it shall not be well unto the wicked: neither shall he prolong
his days: but he shall be like a shadow because he fears not the Lord. Note
this.
And they do see and understand that the Lord will not so defer to punish the
ungodly when they do sin against him, nor so refer things to the censure
of his last general judgment, as that his particular and secret judgments
shall have no force in this world: but that according to that saying of the
wise: Pro. 11.31.
The Righteous shall be recompensed on the Earth, how much more shall the
wicked and the sinner! Therefore, let us not say with those mockers that
walk after their own lusts, and put far the day of the Lord, 2. Pet. 3.4.9.
Where is the promise of his coming? For the Lord is not slack concerning
his promise, as some men count slacknesse, but is patient toward us, and would
have no man to perish, but would have all men (of what nation or sex so ever
they be) to come to repentance, to be saved. Neither let us be bold upon this,
Not to presume on Gods long suffera^ce
therefore because God suffers a sinner to do evil a thousand times, he
likes well of his dealing, and will also permit us to sin without
controlment: but let us know, by the examples and testimonies of the holy
Scriptures, and the daily experiment of the power and wisdom of God among men
(which we may well observe) that God is able and will indeed) smite the ungodly
in this world, and afterward he will cast them down into hell. El. Schaddai.
For he is that El. Schaddai, the most rich and sufficient God: which
contenteth his Saints with all good things, and gives unto the ungodly the
just reward of their sins. He is that Pantocrator, the Omnipotent and
Almighty God, whose power is according to his will, for the advancement of
his children, and the abasing of them that contemn him. He is Jehovah Elohim,
El Kanna, as himself says: The Lord God, a jealous God, that visits the
sins of the parents upon their children, which walk in their ungodly ways,
unto the third and fourth generation, and shows mercy unto thousands in them
that fear him, even here in this life. Therefore he has justly condemned and
confounded from among the children of men, first secretly and particularly:
then openly and generally, that envious Cain, that shamlesse Cham, that proud
Nimrod, that bloody Herod, that traitorous Judas, that tyrannous Nero, that
devilish Iulia^, that hypocritical Annanias, that witch Simon, and in a word,
that destroying Apolion, with all his pestlent Polypragmones, to whom he gives
this hearty comfort: Now weep and howl for the misery which is come upon
you. Iam. 5.
And on the other side, the same God through his great mercy in Christ the
promised seed, does pardon, preserve, and glorify his faithful and righteous
servants, Abraham, Enoch, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Iosuah, and all other which have
apprehended the promise and believed in his son. These has he made as his
Garden, well locked and close sealed from all the annoyes of wild beasts,
whose fruits are as a Paradise of Pomgranates, with all sweet fruits and
commodities. These has he lovingly invited to his heavenly banquet, these he
entertaineth at his blessed table, and there he does most friendly and
comfortably cheer them with these sweet words: O ye friends, eat, drink,
and be merry, O ye beloved. Cant. 4.12.13.


9. Now let it not seem loathsome to the reader, that the tragical Poet be
heared, touching the contribution of piety and impiety, virtue and vice, both
in this life and afterward. And of the first thus writes Seneca:

Nunquam Scygias fertur ad vmbras, Seneca. in traged. Hero cul. Act. 5.

Inclyta virtus, viuite fortes,
Nec Lethaeos saeua per amnes
Vos fata trahent: sed cum summas
Exigit horas, consumpta dies,
Iter ad Superos gloria pandet.
That is,

Rejoice all ye, that virtuous be,
for virtues never die:
Nor cruel death, that stops men's breath
shall blot you out: for why?
When that last day shall take away
your life from mortal pain:
Then shall ye fly to lofty sky,
with glorious Saints to reign.
Seneca. traiged. Octau. Act. 3. de. Nerone.
In another place he sets forth the reward of Impiety, where he brings
in Agrippina, speaking to Octauia the Empress, touching the Emperor Nero, who
had now compassed to depose and murder the said Octauia his wife ( quamuis
nullo crimine) albeit he found her guiltless (as she also said) in these
words.

The infernal fury in revenge,
does hasten to provide:
For wicked Tyrant, worthy death,
sharp stripes, and flights: beside,
Pains passing thirst of Tantalus as the Poets feign, that for offending the
gods, he stands in water to the very mouth, and yet cannot drink.
Tantalus,
and Sisyphus turns a stone toward the top of the hill, which ever slideth
back again.
Sisyphus hard toil:
The Darts that pearec'd lewd Titius is shot and pierced with an arrow for his
filthy lust.
Tityus,
and Ixion, is tormented on a wheel in hell, for vnreuerent boasting. Tibul.
li. 10.
Ixions wheel, to nouile.
Though he his Palace garnisht gay,
with Marble fair, and gold:
And armed soldiers guard his gate,
his glorious seat to hold, etc.
A time shall come, when he must yield
his life to shameful fall:
His neck to foes, forsaken quite,
and wretched wanting all.
CHAP. XXVI.
We ought to confess and submit our selves to the power, mercy, and will of
God: to eschew contention, to retain contentation, and to pray for strength
and opportunity, to perfoome our duties.
THat we may therefore walk safely through the troublesome Sea of this The
best way to walk in, without danger.
that we acknowledge not only that god is, but also that God is most strong,
sufficient, omnipotent, and everlasting, to whom only, and that justly, is
ascribed all power, all riches, all wisdom, all strength, all honor, all
glory, all praise. Next, it is necessary that we believe and confess,
Israel: that is, to us his faithful and elect children: in the sense whereof,
we are right worthily occasioned to love him with Abraham, David, John, Marie,
and other his Saints, with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
mind, with all our strength, and to sing in good harmony with those heavenly
soldiers (...). Glory be to God on high. Thirdly, Luke 2.14.
it is necessary that we humbly submit and yield our the disposition of his
graces toward us, that all things shall work together for our good, if we
love him, fear him, and depend on his mercy. And surely howsoever the malign
world shall judge or imagine of the ways or works of God we that are thus
taught of God, The best wisdom.
do know most assuredly, that this is the best wisdom in the world, to shrowde
our selves under the wings of his providence and protection, against the frail
and chaungeable things of this vain life, therein to rest contented with that
lot, which it shall please God to appoint for us in the same: and to expect
through faithful hope, a a blessed end of our love and labor, even in the
midst of the horrible confusions of this world, in the which no man living
wants his cross: and through the which, the godly take up their cross and
follow Christ, with patient minds, toward the goal of eternal life.

2 They that have so learned this wisdom that they use to make proof thereof,
live not in loath of their own states and conditions of life, nor do they
intrude on the vocations of others: they do not affect the Seas, whose calling
is, to live on the land: but be well pleased with that lot and life, which the
Lord has called them unto in his fear. The grateful men of the golden age.
4. Esd. 9.19*
They in good sort resemble those ancient grateful men of the golden world,
who being schooled by Justice, and not acquainted with pernicious brawles,
contentions, seditions, and those common maladies of the copper age (as the
Poets call it) did (under the rule of Justice) live contented with that which
they had. Of them thus writes Aratus: Men simply lived content, removed (...)
etc. Aret solen. 63

from hurtes of raging Seas:
They brought not spoils from far in ships,
but best themselves did please.
With Oxen toil, to till the soil,
for worthy Justice then,
Did minister abundantly,
to these right grateful men.


And truly, if we English men were so well learned in this wisdom, as we
ought to be, we would not groan for innouations, Indeed, the faults which be,
are of the negligence and corruption of them that should execute the Laws, and
not in the laws which are provided in our land.
and the alteration of the religion, state, government, and laws constituted,
provided and established within this Realm. The which we cannot but
acknowledge for good, godly and profitable in all equal censure and reason,
howsoever it be, that frail men through their imperfections and infirmities
do fail and offend in the due execution and right performance of the same.
Neither is it meet, that the negligence, defects and offenses of those men
should occasion the things which of themselves are so good, honest, and
profitable, to be condemned and contemned for naught and ungodly: as neither
the transgressions, negligences, sins, defects and offenses of men, against
the divine laws of the Lord, should cause them to be condemned and rejected:
for though there was never any man which yet fulfilled that law (Christ only
exceped) and the executioners thereof have failed beyond all measure in that
which of them was required, yet may we not say that the law of God is therefore
imperfect, or unjust, seeing that the default is not found in the law: but in
them only, that should either observe the same, or punish the transgressors
thereof after their deserts. Solomon could not amend al faults in the common
wealth, a cause of his complaint Eccles. 3.16. and 4.1.
And indeed hereof Solomon complained, but healpe it he could not, albeit he
was the chief Magistrate over the commonwealth of Israel: namely, that
Impiety could not be fully corrected, nor all things which were a miss could
be reformed and amended by the Judges. The Laws were godly, and officers were
appointed to execute the^ accordingly: howbeit, sin increased daily, neither
was there found a sufficient remedy against the same. Therefore, that only
which might be done, he did: yt which was incurable, he was forced to leave,
and commit unto the lord, to be corrected and amended after his divine will, and
not as a man would.

Good counsel to be followed: Be content with the state and seek not an
alteration.
3 Well then, let us learn wisdom of King Solomon in this point, let us not
desire thraldom in the leath of our liberty, nor pull that misery on our
heads again through our own murmr and discontentation, out of the which it
has pleased God (not of our deserts, but of his mercy in Christ) to deliver
us: but rather, let us use our liberty in contentation, and observe those good
things, as the blessing of God with thanksgiving, least that through our
discontentation and unthankfulness we be deprived of them, and brought into
the bondage of Egypt again, where under the heavy hands of cruel
taske-maisters, we shall be constrained to sighe and groan without any
comfort or ease: that thereby, we may at length learn to know and discern the
right difference between the service of the Lord who in mercy saves us, and
the thraldom of worldly Tyrants, which seek to captive and destroy us,
without all mercy or compassion. And this being spoken, I would gladly
entreat the right Christians, and true Subjects to the Lords Anointed
(without all disdain) not only to record, or at the least, once again to
remember what things they have either read or heard in this discource, and such
like books of instruction, admonition and comfort: but also would every day
before they sleep or take rest, call their own ways into remembrance, and
duly examine their own actions, their own words, What men should every day
think on and perform
their own thoughts. In the which, if they have done well, and as it best
became them, they may both rejoice, and continue therein with thankfulness to
ye Lord, that has given them the ability and opportunity such things to
effect: but if they have faulted, transgressed, or neglected duty therein, to
the dishonor of God, to the hurt of their neighbors, to their own discredit and
shame, they may then be sorry, repent, and endeavor without delay, to correct,
amend and recompense that, wherein they have faulted and offended. To this
purpose, Pith. claud. Mino. in Alcuat. Emb. 17.
I gladly remember (as we should not refuse that which is good) and that golden
counsel and wholesome instruction of Pithagoras to his scholars, contained in
these verses.

See, that thine heavy eyes, to sleep,
at night be not afourded:
Until the deeds of all that day,
three times, thou have recorded. Three very profitable questions for every man
to ask of himself.

What have I done, not as I should?
Or what, which should not be?
Or, what neglected I, to day,
which well pertain'd to me?
4 But now, because that (whiles we be in this world) through our own praue
affections, and wicked imaginations, which we have brought with us from the
womb of her that conceived us in sin (whereon the enemy of our Souls
prays greedily, and seeks to drown us in destruction) we cannot do that
which is good, and that which the Lord requires of us: but that all our
sufficiency comes to us from the Lord God, who only makes Saints of them
which were conceived in sin and borne in uncleanness* and makes true
Christians of them which were sometimes as sheep going astray, by the virtue
of his spirit, regenerating them in the blood of his Son our Savior, in
whose name only he wills us to call and come unto him in all our
afflictions: it is both good and necessary that we invoke his holy name,
Invocation and prayer necessary for all men.
and pray unto him (through our Mediator Christ) that he will vouchsafe to
grant and give unto us, all those healps (in the performance of our duties)
which by nature we cannot have. This is an exercise which the Lord himself
commanded, which Christ and his Apostles and Martyrs have used and commended
unto us, and which has many firm promises of consolation and joyful effects
in the word of God.

This is that, which is a sacrifice to God, and to him a pleasure. A plague to
the devil, and to him a pain. An healpe to man, and to him a comfort. This is
that, which is a preservative against all temptations: a comfortatiue to
confirm our hearts: an inkindling of our zeal to godliness: a rauishing of
our minds with the love of celestial things. This is a defense for us against
them that seek to seduce us: a stay for our faith: a way to come by that which
we want: a keye to open the lock that shuts up every good blessing: this is
the up shot of that complete Armor of proof, wherewith the Apostle would,
that the right Christian soldier (and so the prophet protestant) should be
furnished. Ephesians. 6.18. Therefore, al ye that be fathers, train up your
children in this holy exercise: ye that be masters, do the like unto your
servants. All ye that be Christians (of what estate, condition or degree soever
ye be) be ye occupied in this service.

5. There should no place keep you from this service of God: there should be
no societies, The place of prayer. Psalm. 50.15. Baruc. 6.5.
nor companies, that should hinder you (for not only in word, but also in a
godly wel-wishing prays the godly, and their sighs, groans and thoughts
are heard unto the Lord well enough) whether we be in the temple with Hanna, or
in the house with Cornelius, or on the top of the house with Peter, or in the
den with Daniell, or in the dungeon with Jeremy, or in the sea with Jonas,
or in the place of execution with Stephan, or in the garden with Christ, or in
the way with Abraham's servant, either privately alone, or publicly with
others, let us not omit this holy work: for this is good and acceptable to
the Lord: so it be done in faith. And as we must be thus exercised every
where, so also at all time and times, both night and day, with that blessed
man, Psalm. 1.2. not only in adversity, when we have sorrow, need sickness,
affliction, trouble and misery: The time, 1 Timothy 28.
but also in prosperity, when we be in health, wealth, safety, peace,
hearts-ease and felicity. Not only in age when we shall be creeping toward
the grave, In age.
and poasting to our long-home, and so moved to record our wretched
peregrinatio^ through this vale of misery in woefulness: but also in youth and
lusty age, In youth.
when we have yet the flowers of our life green and cheerful in our hands,
and are crowned with rose-buddes and fresh garlandes on our heads, whatsoever
our estate and condition be in this world. This is the meaning of Solomon
where he says: Eccles. 12.1. Ephesians 6.
Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth: and the intent of Paul, when he
bids us to pray always.

What we should ask.
6 When it shall please God to exercise us with trouble and affliction, let us
pray unto him, that in patience we may be able to wade through the tediousness
thereof, without fainting. Again, in prosperity and peace, let us pray, that
we grow not secure, and forget our maker, and that we loose not all that, by
flattering prosperity, which hard adversity is not able to take from us, for
ye adversary of our souls, deals subtly and suggesteth mightily: he
does move them to murmr, The subtlety of Satan.
whom the lord afflicts: and he tempts them with presumption, whom the Lord
enricheth with benifits. Thus did he assault Noah with drunkenness, Noah.
whom the great deluge could not drown, Loath.
and inflamed Loath, with the lust of incest, whom the sier of Sodom could not
burn. And in this time, the number of them is not small. that though when they
sustain trouble by sea or by land, promise many things to be performed upon
their delivery, do notwithstanding that, when they arrive into the haven of
rest and tranquillity, forget al, and make shipwreck of greater treasures then
the wealth of this world. Moreover, when we be young, let us pray, that our
youth deceive us not: and when we be old, that our elder years make us not
to murmour against God, and so be unready to do our duty: for as Satan is
subtle, so lets he not to search the inclination and disposition of every
man. If men be inclined to pleasures, with pleasures will he adulate them: if
men be likely to be daunted with adversity, How Satan deals.
then in adversity will he prove them. If men be disposed to presumption, he
will tempt them to presume. If they be weak and fearful, with fear and
desperation he will endeavor to destroy them. If they be niclined to
covetousness, then with covetous desires will he tempt them: if to malice,
then with malice: if to wrath, then with wrath: if to pride, then with pride,
and so forth, unto all the which motions the flesh is subject, and the enemy is
strong to allure the minds of me^: insomuch, that without faithful prayer, the
good motions of the spirit will be suppressed in them. Therefore let us pray in
the spirit, and pray with understanding at all times, in all places, and so
shall we expel him that is ready to harbor in our hearts to hurt our souls.

7 Leete us pray unto God for the safety, For whom we must pray.
health and prosperity of our most gracious and sovereign Princess, and for
the wealth of all them that be put in authority under her as the Apostle
exhorts) that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty: for that is good and exceptable in the sight of God our Savior.
Let us also pray for the peace and godly proceedings of the Pastors, and all
the true professors of Gods holy word: that vtteraunce may be given unto
them, that they may open their mouths freely to utter the secrets of the
Gospel, that therein they may speak freely as they ought to speak. Let us
pray and make intercession and give thanks for all saints, and for all men.
Let us pray for our selves, that we may not be lead into temptation, but may
be delivered from that evil (I mean the devil) that our faith fail us not:
(...): That is, from the devil. Mat. 6.13. and 13.19.
but that it may be increased, confirmed, fructified and fortified: that we
believing in Christ, may not be overcome, but get the victory, and be
accounted worthy to escape al those things that shall come, and may stand in
great constancy before the son of man.

Then most assuredly the Lord our God (for the love and merit of his Son)
who has both commanded us, and taught us to pray, and promised to grant the
requests of his Saints (being unto him as most sweet Odours powered out of
golden vialles) will grant us for, Apoc. 5.8.
and toward the performaunce of that which he requires, his holy Spirit, the
Spirit of wisdom and understanding: the Spirit of Counsel and strength: the
Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of God: to our exceeding great
Consolation and Contentation in this World: and after this painful
Peregrination, when the happy day of Refreshing comes, at the joyful
resurrection of the Righteous, we shall be contented with that eternal
Society and Sacietie of the Son of God our Savior, and highest Contentation.

The Epiphonema and use of this Preparatiue.
8 Lo! These be the sovereign Simples whereof being thus collected and
compounded, I have confected this Preparatiue to Contentation. I doubt not, but
that (by the good grace of God, the virtue thereof being well applied, This
Preparatiue is to be applied.
will somewhat allaie and abate the insolency and courage of those
discontented persons, who (in their mad moods and strange conceits and
opinions) do yet stay without the door of the house, 1 To the discontented
person Luke 15.25.
with that angry Elder Brother of whom Christ has spoken in the Gospel, and
have not been willing, nor would be persuaded to enter into the house of joy
and contentation, with the younger Brother: but rather prepare themselves in
high displeasure to fight against the Lord, against the Lords anointed, and
against all charitable Christians, as professed enemies to all peace and
Contentation.

Secondly, I trust in the Lord God, 2 To the true christian protestant
that the right Christian Protestant, which contemns the lewd world, and is
strange in the Lord, and in the power of his might, will embrace and apply
this Preparatiue, whereby the sooner he may be comforted, strengthened,
instructed and encouraged to stand fast, to proceed well and prosper in his
holy faith and profession against the devil, and against the bitter taunts and
wicked practices of Satan's ieasting fools: I mean the ungodly deryders of
religion, and contemners of holy discipline.

Thirdly, I persuade, 3 To the true subject.
that all the true hearted subjects will be the readier by the operation of
this confection, to embrace brotherly fellowship, to fear God and honor the
Prince. Finally, 4 To every Christian.
that every true Christian (in his several vocation and place) will hereby
also the sooner be moved to walk on wisely, honestly, and worthily in the way
of the Lord, toward that chief Good, and highest happiness, where the Lord
Jesus lives and reigns for ever with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost,
in perfect Contentation.

To the which three persons and one most mighty God Jehovah, be worthily
ascribed, all blessing, all glory, all wisdom, all thanks, all honor, all
power, and all Contentation for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Genesis 9.27. God persuade, or allure Iapheth, that he may dwell in the Tents of
Shem: and let Canaan be his servant.


A Christian Confession and Prayer, for Contentation.
O Lord God of hoasts, Creator, protector and preserver of mankind, which
love Righteousness, and hate iniquity: we do here acknowledge and
confess before thee, and before the face of al thine holy Angels, that
(notwithstanding thy manifold bounties, benefits and blessings powered forth
on us) we have grievously sinned against heaven and before thy Majesty: wherein
we have both declared our horrible ingratitude toward thee, and right worthily
deserved to be shut out from thy presence, and to receive and feel all those
troubles, vexations, plagues, and miseries, wherewith for sin thou art wont
in thy justice to pain, vex, and torment the children of men: and that were
it not of thine own good love and endless mercies (in the merit of thy Son
Jesus our Savior) in could not the, but that (according to our deserts (we
should suddeinly perish, and be cast away for ever. For (alas) unto us, and unto
every one of us belongs nothing else, but wrath, shame, and destruction.

Howbeit, seeing that it belongs not only to thy Justice to punish sinners:
but also to thy mercy, to pardon them that repent and turn unto thee: and
that thou art the same God which takes no pleasure in the death of a sinner,
but rather would that he should convert and live, and to that end have both
called, excited and provoked us, to believe in thee, to come unto thee, to pray
unto thee, to repent, and to hope for pardon in thee. We be heartely sorry (O
Lord) for all our misdeeds, and in all humility do cast our selves down
under thy footestoole, yet so, as in the name of thine holy Son Jesus (in
whom we believe, and on whom we depend) we hope to find grace. Let it be thy
good pleasure therefore (most gracious God) to accept us clothed in the white
garment of his innocence and righteousness, for we have no clothes of our own
to cover our naked bodies and sinful Souls, and to shrowde us from the
storms of thy fearce wrath, against the which, all the wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, power and policy of man, shall be but as those fig
leaves wherewith Adam covered himself when he had sinned. We beseech thee to
behold us in thy Son our Savior, to consider our miseries, to think upon us
for the best, to convert us, that we may be converted: to forgive us all our
sins, the causes of all our miseries, and to receive us graciously. Then (as
we be most bounden) we will offer up unto thee the Calves of our lips we will
take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon thy name: we will yield thee the
sacrifice of Righteousness, and put our trust in thy mercy: we will glorify
thee in thy Son. O most merciful God, take away from amongst us, all those
unhappy opinions, Sects, Seditions, Scismes, vain questions, idle
disputations, genealogies and strifes about words: and all wicked Contentions
and thriftlesse Discontentations, which springing up of man's pride, ambition
and malice, so much disquiet the tranquillity of the Church, and disturb the
peace of thy people: and in steed thereof, confirm in our hearts the truth of
thy Son, Christian Faith, Humility, Charity, and the peerlesse Peace of his
Gospel: that thereof we may take delight: that therein we may meditate
continually: that thereby we may edify and provoke one another in thy fear,
with good Contentation. O Lord, save and deliver us from that woeful and
deadfull Woe, unto the which the inhabitors of the Earth and of the Sea, are
(by a just decree) subdued, through their wilful ungodliness and presumptuous
sins, provoked by the horrible rage of that devil, which is come down unto
them with so much the greater fury, by how much the nearer he draws in his
dissipation and end. Grant also (O good Father) that though this last attempt
of the enemy be fearcer then the former, by the which, he now assayeth to
touch thine Anointed, to harm thy Prophets, to quench out the light of
Israel, and to deface the glory of thy Son Jesus: yet, that the fall and
destruction of this deadly enemy, and of all his mischievous miscreants, may
soon and sodeinly overtake both him and them to their endless woe and
discontentation. But that (on the other side) thy Grace and Mercy may shine
toward thy faithful hand-mayden Elizabeth, our most excellent Princess, and
to all us her Graces obedient subjects, and thy dear children, that thereby
both her Princely Majesty, which fears thee, and also we which honor thee,
and which to her Highness be obedient, may so possess our souls in the
midst of the troubles of this wretched life, and so wholly dedicated to serve
thee, in trembling and fear, that we may rest under the shadow of thy wings,
to the praise of thy most holy Name, to the sweet comfort of our souls, and to
our highest Contentation, in Jesus Christ thy Son our Savior, Amen.

A Christian Memorandum for all persons, that they order and content
themselves, in their senerall vocations and places.
YE Noble Princes which do reign
as gods, by Gods good grace:
Be wise: with Right and Equity,
Adorn your Princely place.
Ye Magistrates, and Elders all,
be learned, uprightly deal.
Within your chage to benefit
the Church and Commonweal.
Ye Pastors, watch, feed well your flocks,
and faint not for the pain:
In holy life, and doctrine true,
instruct them, to their gain.
Ye Gentlemen, right virtues hold,
let land, and ancient rent
Maintain your port, and families,
live well, and be content.
Ye Lawiers, that men's rights defend,
deal truth in lites of law:
Let neither lucre, favor, fee,
your hearts from Justice draw.
Ye practiced Physicians, whom
the payned patients need:
Regard man's life, before your gainer,
in conscience, take good heed.
Your cunning hand Chierurgians,
advise: and have an eye:
That salues ye frame right to the sores,
and soundly them apply.
Ye valiant Captains with your bands,
direct them to the right:
Distribute them the law full pay,
encourage them to fight.
Ye common Soldiers, see to this,
oppress none in your rage:
Accuse not any wrongfully,
be pleased with your wage.
Ye Husbandmen, on husbandry
your wit and power employ:
Ye Swains, your wayns with Ox direct
a right, without annoy.
Ye Merchants, use your Merchandise
and justly buy and sell:
Ye Sailors, rightly raunge the Seas,
and naught but truth dye tell.
Ye Crafts-men and Artificers,
your conscience so entreat:
That to your Crafts and manual Arts.
ye join not vile deceat.
Ye Subjects all, obey your Prince,
ye brethren, live in love:
Ye Neighbors eke, be brethren like,
in fear of him above.
Ye Husbands love your wives, and them
their honor true afford:
Ye VViues be subject, and obey
your husbands in the Lord.
Ye Fathers, nourtour well your sons,
nor them to wrath constrain:
Ye Children, honor Parents well,
and that shall be your gain.
Ye Masters, to your servants yield
their just and equal right
Ye Servants, serve your masters with
all gladness, to your might.
Ye Protestants, defend the faith,
by prowess of piety:
Protest the Truth, and strive t'attaine
through Christ the heavens hie.
Ye Christians all, learn ye of Christ
to serve the Lord: and frame
To use the creatures rightfully
in the honor of his Name.
For God his Creatures at the first
with wisdom did provide
For man, the not to abuse, but t'vse
in life, with godly guide.
And with the same, to every one,
he justly does commend
A due vocation in this world,
for good and perfect end.
And therein, verily, content
he would, that men should live,
In Christian peace, and thankfully,
all Glory to him give.
In sum, fear God, observe his laws,
(O man) and grateful be:
For lo, this is that total sum,
which God requires of thee.
And this thou may (indeed) perform,
if only thou have faith.
Combined with hope, and Charity,
in Christ: (as Scripture says)
Which done, thou shall account in fine,
thy time not vainly spent:
When thou shall find Eternal Ioies,
with Christ, thee to content.
O Father grant this of thy grace,
O Son, we pray supply
All our defects: O holy Spirit
keep us continually.
Keep well thy Church so dearly bought,
our noble Princess save:
Preserve the Realm, and grant (good Lord)
thy peace that we may have, Amen.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this Preparatiue: the first
number is of the Chahter: the second is of the Section of that Chapter.
A
ABuse of Gods blessings, causes him in his anger to take them away, and to
punish the offenders, cap. 18.3.4 Achillis his displeasure, cap. 16.3. His
Harp, cap. 16.5
Adonibezecke his confession of God judgments, cap 25.7 Adrian 1. a Pope, cap.
5.4 Adrian 2. a Pope, cap. 5.4 Aesop was cast down over a rock, cap. 20.7
Afflictions are sometimes better then prosperity, cap. 2.2 Affliction, without
just cause, cap. 7.2 Age: in every age God has stirred up some men to reprove
sins, cap. 21.5 Alexander the manner of his judgments. ca. 9.4 He used
Achillis harp before Paris harp. cap. 16.5 His host after his death, like
the one eyed Cyclops. cap. 12.2
Ambition. ca. 12.1, her fruits and effects, cap. 13.1 and cap. 14.4. Amurathes
the Saracene, cap. 16.11 Anarchie, or want of government, cap. 12.2.3
Anaxagoras, cap. 20.7 Antiochus the Sophist. cap. 17.3 Antigonus, lenity, cap.
22.9 Antichrist what he is, cap. 4.8 Antichrist rises among the universal
B.B. as a servant and a proud king, cap. 6.5 What the word Antichrist
signifies, cap. 6.4
Antichrist was discovered as soon as he was borne, ca. 6.7 Antichrists number
666, ca. 5.2 His time, his conception, his name, and birth, ca. 5.2.3 His
noursing time, cap. 5.4 His policy and titles, ca. 5.5
Antichrist was fully revealed, ca. 5.7 Antichrist in hell, ca. 7.5 Antichrists
two chief Antichrists in the world, c. 1.3 Antichristian men are the weapons of
the devil, c. 1.3 Antichrist is wounded, ca. 5.6.7 Aratus Eudoxus, ca. 8.6. and
ca. 10.13 Aratus was distracted. ca. 21.1 Archadius was negligent, ca. 22.6
Arguing of God rashly is not good, ca. 10.1. ca. 8.6 Archbishops permitted, ca.
4.5 Aristotle died with anger, cap. 21.1 Aaron submitted himself to Moses, ca.
4.3 Aurelianus was cruel, ca. 22.6 Author of all discontentation is the devil,
ca. 1.1
B
BAalites pleading for Baal, ca. 7.1 Babylon falls, ca. 5.7 Backsliding, ca.
18.2 Barzelli refused to be advanced by David, ca. 19.8 Basilius forced to
recant his opinion against the worship of Images, ca. 5.4 Bernard writes to
the Pope Euagenius, ca. 4.2 Benet, forsook the Court and all, ca. 19.18 Bish.
of Rome, exalted above al other Bishops, c. 4.2 B. of Constantinople, was
rejected, when he would be called the universal Bishop, ca. 4.6 Blessed men:
who? ca. 15.1 Book full of lamentation and woe, ca. 1.1 Brutus and Cassius the
chief conspirators against Julius Caesar, ca. 3.1
C
Caesar ought to have his own. ca. 12.8 Captain of the Papists shall be
confounded, cap. 7.4 Calisthenes disliketh all thing both good and badde ca.
9.3 Catoes in word, but Neroes in deed, cap. 9.5 Catching from one man to give
to another, ca. 16.8.9 Catholic man, is of the earth, ca. 6.3 Caueats, for the
Corinth. ca. 16.7 for the Roman, ib. for England, ca. 18.3.5.6.7
Ceremonies in the reverence of Princes, ca. 12.5 Cherub, the Prince of Tire,
ca. 22.7 Charitable person, how they do reprove others, ca. ^.4 Christ came to
send a sword, and how, ca. 13.6 Christ teaches love, ca. 13.8 Christ came not
to break the law, but to fulfill it, ca. 11.5 Christ has not set forth his
Church in proud titles as the Church of Rome is set forth, ca. 6.6 Christians,
their confession and faith, prayer, ca. 1.4 and 16, 11 Change, how it would be
if men's conceits were yielded unto, shortly, ca. 11.6 Charles the 5. ca. 5.6
Church of England troubled with discontentation, cap. 2.1 Civil discords are
most noisome, cap. 13.7.8.9 Cicero, his wisdom, and lamentation, cap. 10.14
Clement, a Pope, cap. 5.6 Cleo, a busy headed person, cap. 11.6 Cleanthes a
Philosopher, cap. 17.5 Clytus his reward, cap. 19.8 Clemency, cap. 22.8
Comfort to content the Prince and Magistrate in their vexations, cap. 22.3
Comforts for the householder, cap. 24.1 For the Scribe, cap. 24.3 For the
Pastor, cap. 23.1 For poor believers, cap. 24.5 For the rich, ib.
Contentation to be desired as the best thing in this life for a believer,
cap. 11.5. and 20.10. and 24.5 Contentation is from God, cap. 1.4 Contempt of
the magistracy, and ministry, is a wicked thing, cap. 12.1 Constantine his
clemency, cap. 22.9 Constantine and Irene, cap. 5.4 Conster well of Princes
dealings, cap. 12.6 Confusion of worldly things distract many men's wits, cap.
21.2 Men are occasioned the thereby to distrust Gods power and providence, cap.
21.2
Contribution of piety and impiety in this life, ca. 25.8 Consider one thing
with an other, cap. 8.7 Conceited well of themselves, cap. 10.2.5 Cunning men
are not without afflictions, ca. 20.7 Cup, is one of the popes gods and
contains the number of the Beast, cap. 6.5 Cross, for every man, cap. 19.1
Curious persons, cap. 9.5 Curious questions, cap. 10.1.5
D
David and Salomo^, the chief Magistrates over Gods people, cap. 22.3 David's
upright heart toward King Saul, cap, 10.13 David's harp few do play on, cap.
16.5 Danger of government, cap. 19.5 Dangerous to meddle with princes and
great me^, cap. 20.3 Defense against enemies, cap. 14.3 Degeneration from the
Lord is dangerous, ca. 18.3 and 17.3 Demades comparison of Alexanders host
when he was dead, cap. 12.2 Demosthenes his saying of government, cap. 19.8
Demochares the Pareasthes of Athens, cap. 9.5 Devilish Art, cap. 4.1.1
Discontentation of the devil, cap. 1. and 2 Disgrace of Christians, cap. 16.8
Distrust of Gods providence causes men to fly to to their own counsels and
policies, cap. 17.5 Diagoras and Atheist. ib. Diogenes pride, in contemning
Platoes dece^cie, ca. 8.6 Dionyse the tirant a robber of the Temples, ca. 10.9
Diets chosen in religion and persons, cap. 11.7 Dives in hell, cap. 17.3
Dionise shows to Damocles the danger of the Regal state, cap. 19.5
Disputation of the scriptures irreverently, is wicked and ungodly. cap. 10.5.
cap. 8.6 Disputers of divinity: who be fit for that, the time, the place, how
far we may dispute, cap. 10.7 Doctrine of Christ teaches love and charity,
ca. 13.8 The Rock, cap. 11.7
Dolon, the Trojan, cap. 3.1 Duke of Burbone besieged the Pope in the Castle of
Angelie, cap. 5.6
E
Effects cannot cease till the causes be removed, cap. 14.4 Easier to throw
down and destroy an house, then to build it, cap. 8.7 Elizabeth our Queen her
mildness and clemency, cap. 22.9 Elder brother discontented, cap. 2.1
Englands varsities, cap. 2.1 English men be not contented with their blessings,
cap. 2.2 English Saduces, cap. 17.7 England assailed of all obedience to their
lawful King by the Pope, cap 4.2 England abolished the Pope, cap. 5.6 Envy is
used in stead of holy zeal, cap. 8.5 Eudes of good and evil, diverse, cap.
25.6 Envying of others, whose preferments some would have, cap. 12.1 Estimation
of laws and Magistrates, cap. 9.2 Esau's hands, and Jacobs voice, cap. 16.3
Evil is done under good pretenses, cap. 10.12 Evil examples of our
adversaries do much hurt, cap. 3.3 Euclio laughed at Tantalus his lot, and yet
considers not that the case is his own, cap. 17.1 Euclio his fear, ca.
20.11 Erasmus, of the Pope, ca. 5.1 Epicures would be Philosophers, ca. 17.18
Equity, a near neighbor to Justice, ca. 22.8 Examples of old, should be
applied to our times and to our selves, ca. 17.1 Examples of the worlds
ingratitude, cap. 20.8.9 Extreme law, cap. 8.7 Extreme wise, and extreme
just, cap. 8.6 Exaltation of ungodly men, is a shame for men, ca. 4.10
F
Fabian a Bishop of Rome did submit himself to the Emperor, cap. 4.3 Fable of
the Ass and the Ape, being discontent, ca. 2.2 Of the Ass and a golden Image,
whereof he was proud. ca. 15.9 Of the Fox and the Crow, ca. 15.11
Fall of many Emperors and Kings, cap. 19, 5.6 Family of David, cap. 24.2
Faults must be reproved in all estates: but who must reprove them? cap. 9.1
Flatterers occasion men to sin, ca. 15.9 Christ never used nor taught men to
flatter, ca. 15.11
Fly from one City to another, rather then resist power, cap. 12.10 Fortune a
feigned Goddess, ca. 21.3 Frederick the 3. ca. 22.9 Duke of Saxony, cap. 5.6
Fox tied to his obedience, ca. 3.2
G
GAmaliel his saying touching Sedition, ca. 13.4 Glass made malliable, cap.
20.7 God preserves men in dangers, ca. 25.4 He orders all things by his
providence, howsoever they do appear to us, cap. 25.5 He bestows his gifts
on us and why? ca. 14.2
God repented, and the effects of his sorrow, ca. 18.3 He suffers me^ long
before that he punishes, c. 18.7 He threatened his own people and why? cap.
15.8
Godly men are preserved in the judgment, ca. 25.8 They abuse not his
blessings, ca. 15.8. they betried, cap. 1.2
God upon earth: so the Pope is esteemed, and the word contains the number.
666, as cap. 6.2 Good and evil cannot agree, ca. 13.7 Good men hearken to good
admonitions, cap. 21.6 and cap. 10.1 They desire that men would be thankful
and content with Gods blessings, cap 14.2
Good life cannot follow an evil belief. cap. 17.7 Goodly shows when men be
evil, a lesson learned of the devil, cap. 15.2 Good things must be done well,
cap. 8.7. and how, cap. 8.8 Good opinions and constructions of the laws and
dealings of good Ptinces, ca. 12.6 God and Magog, cap. 1.3 Governors are
necessary: and must be obeyed, cap. 12.2 Government wanting, the commonwealth
decaieth cap. 12.3 Gregory a B. of Rome, submitted himself to Mauritius the
Emperor. cap. 4.3 He withstoode that title of universality in the B. of
Constantinople. ca. 4 9 He prophesied of Antichrist, ibid.
Greek characters and words wherein the number of Antichrist is found out,
cap. 6.6
H
Happy kind of men which say well and do well cap. 15.1. Hasty me^ blame yt
which deserves no blame, c. 8.2 Head of the Church, has the very number of
the beast, 666. as, cap. 6.4 Head of the clergy, has ye same number as, ca.
6.5 Hearken to good counsel, ca. 21.8 Hebrew words, letters, and numbers
wherein Antichrist is deciphered and found out, cap. 6.6 Hierome Sauauorola,
cap. 5.6 Henry 8. abolished the Pope out of England, cap. 5.6 His words in the
open Parliament, ca. 9.7 Hermogenes. cap. 17.3 Herod and Pilate are reconciled
into friendship to put Christ to death, cap. 1.3 Herod's cruelty, ca. 22.6
Hinderaunces to peace, ca. 14.15 Hypocrites see moates in other men's eyes, and
not beams in their own, cap. 9.5 Hypocrisy has most efficacy in words, cap.
16.42 Hyena, a cruel beast and subtle, ca. 2.1 Honor the Prince and why,
cap. 12.5.6.7 Householders their afflictions, ca. 20.5 Their comforts, cap. 24.1
Husband-mens desire, cap. 20.11
I
Jealousy, that which is godly is commended, c. 8.2 Jewish clergy compared to
the Elder brother, ca. 1.1. and 26.8 Jews feared the inconvenience of altering
their laws, ca. 11.5 Jews eat not with Samaritanes, nor Egyptians with
Jews, cap. 8.1 Imperfections cannot thoroughly be corrected and amended in this
life, cap. 11.3 Impiety cannot be thoroughly banished from men in this life, by
the force of laws, cap. 26.2.3 Impure are the best things of man by his sin,
ca. 10.14 Infirmities of this last age of the world, like to the infirmity of
old age, cap. 19*1 Infernal Spirits do diride Antichrist in his fall, ca.
7.4 Inconstancy of certain Pharisaical persons. ca. 11.6 Instruction to all
men, cap. 24.5 Jonas fled from God, cap. 20.4 Italia, the dregs of the
priesthood, has the number 666. ca. 6.4 Italia^ priest the head of princes,
has the same, ca. 6.5 Italian Church has the same number, ca. 6.2 Judgments
that one man has of another, rash and without consideration, ca. 9.4
Judgments of God both general and particular, c. 25.7 Gods judgments are
granted to be just, even by the wicked themselves that felt them, cap. 25.7
Judas Galilaeus a seditionarie justly punished, ca. 13.4 Julius Caesar invaded
England then when Englishmen had seditions and civil motions, cap. 13.5 He was
eowardly slain by them whom he had highly benefited, ca. 19.5 His Equity,
ca. 22.8
Julian the Apostate dirided the Christians in their cross, cap. 10.10 He
wrested Christ's doctrine touching private reuenges, to matters of government
and judgment, cap. 12.4
Justice, under color whereof, many do perpetrate wrongs and oppression, ca.
16.9 Justice and Equity both necessary and neighbors, cap. 22.5 Iuuenal was
exiled by Domitian the Emperor, c. 20.7
K
KIngs and Emperors above Popes, ca. 4.3 Kings have had many sorrowful ends,
ca. 19.5 and ingratefully requited, ibid.
Knowledge, to what end men do seek for her, c. 10.3 A ladder to knowledge, ca.
10.4
Knowledge joined with zeal, ca. 8.3
L
LAteinus, has the number of Antichrist, ca. 6.2 Latin thistle, has also the
number 666. ca. 6.4 Lawful it is (as some think) for them to do any thing
they conceit, ca. 10.11 Laws are necessary for the preservation of the people,
cap. 12.13 Laws to be altered is a dangrous thing, without great occasions,
ca. 11.5 Laws that be good, must be obeyed without expectation, cap. 12.6.7.8
Laws against God and good conscience not to be obeyed unto absolutely, ibid.
How men may speak against such laws, ca. 12.10
Laws must not be destroyed, nor altered, whiles we seek to remedy
mischiefs, cap. 11.4 Laws of England are good, if they want not execution,
ca. 26.2 Leuit, his hard lot, being constrained to serve Micha, ca. 10.10 Like:
some men like nothing, but that themselves devise, ca. 9.3.4 Lytta, a worm in
a dogs tongue, to the which some persons be compared, ca. 2.1 Liberty is
good, men ought well to use it, ca. 26.3 Loath was overcome with drink, whom
the fire of Sodom hurted not, ca, 26.6 Love joined with zeal, ca. 8.3 Love to
Prince, and how, ca. 12.6 Love of the world, is the cause of an ungodly life,
ca. 15.9 Love, becomes Christians, ca. 16.4 Lucifer is cast out of heaven,
and lies in the earth, ca. 2.1 Luther saw Antichrist, and pursued him, ca.
5.1.6 Lucillus, against belly gods, ca. 17.7 Lust, described, ca. 16.5 More men
follow after lust, then chiualry, ibi.

M.
MAgistrates are to be reverenced, and how, c. 12.5 Magistrates have many
vexations and troubles, ca. 19.7 Magistrates must have regard to correct them
that troubled the quiet of the Church and Commonwealth, ca. 4.6 Macchiauile,
on a thief of our time, ca. 17.6 Machometa, is that Antichrist whereof S. John
speaks in Apoch. 13. ca. 6.1 Malice of the devil, is cause of all evil, ca.
21.5 Naladies incurable, men are constrained to let pass ca. 21.5. as Solomon
did. Mal-contents, ca. 2.2. and 3.1 Maniches opinion of Mag. ca. 12.1 Man in
this life cannot attain to perfection, ca. 1.1 Man, that would be God: the
number of Antichrist, ca. 6.3 Man is hardly persuaded of the divine providence,
ca. 21.6 Man lives not contented with his lot, ca. 20.10 Man is forgetful of
benefits, ca. 2.2 Mardon and Montanus, two heretics, ca. 10.2 Mass noted in
666. ca. 6.4 Masons of Lesbia, ca. 8.2 Mauritius, his confession, ca. 25.7
Mean is best in many things, ca. 8.1 Men are become brutish, ca. 2.1 In
health, they give counsel to the sick, ca. 22
Men must be faithful in their places, and refer the perfection of things to
God, ca. 10.14 Men are like the she woolfe, as in waning from fruitfulness in
good works, ca. 17.4 Men must permit God to rule them after his will, ca. 26.1
Myd-wiues of Egypt, ca. 12.9 Ministers of the word, must not expect a worldly
commodity, ca. 16.7 Ministers, their cross, ca. 20.1.2.3 Their comfort, ca.
23.1.2.3
Mystery of iniquity, ca. 5.3 Moderators of law are needful, ca. 22.8 Moses
was preferred before the priest Aron, ca. 4.3 Moses mildness, ca. 22.9 Monster
what it is, ca. 4. Who is a monster, ibi. Mourning and weeping, ca. 18.1
N.
NEanthes iangled on Orpheus harp, ca. 17.6 Nero, a tyrant cruel and bloody,
left his name reproachful to the posterity, ca. 22.7 Nestor lived a double
age: his censure on the Seditionaries, ca. 13.4 Nicene Counsel, ca. 4.6. and
5.4 Noah was drunk, and dirided of his own son, c. 26.6 No man is contented
with his lot and calling. c. 20.11 Number of Antichrist, ca. 5.2 His number is
contained in certain Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and English words, ca. 3.4. and 6.4.
Numa Pompilius, aching of the Romans, ca. 17.6
O
OBedience to laws and magistrates, ca. 12.4 Obey the Prince, ca. 12.6
Octauius Caesar, his meekness and gentleness, cap. 22.9 His saying of a good
Citizen, ca. 11.4
Old men as children, ca. 17.3 Origenists, cap. 17.7 Original of man's
discontentation, ca. 1.1 Opinions of Princes, ca. 12.16 See Sects.
Offenses, how to withstand them, ca. 14.1 Oaths and promises, ca. 16.21.10.11
Otho an Emperor that deposed Pope Benedict. cap. 4.5
P
PApinianus, ca. 19.5 Papist, is tied to civil obedience perforce, ca. 3.4
Papists be found out, though never so secret, but hardly expelled, cap. 3.3
They be known by their faces, languages, and dealings, cap. 3.4 Their cause is
wicked and damnable, ca. 4.2 Their suffering and death is deserved and
desperate, ca. 7.1
Patriarchs, 3. ca. 4.6 Pan, God of shepherds, ca. 16.4 Pastors, ca. 2.32.3
Pastor his troubles, 20.1 Paris his harp, ca. 16.5 Patience is commended, ca.
12.10 Parliaments, there God is present, ca. 12.5 Payment of tenths, tolles,
subsedies, to the Prince, ca. 12.7 Pappas: what it signifies, cap. 4.8 Pagans,
may teach Christians in some things, ca. 16.10 Pandora of Iudia, ca. 17.3
Pericles and Pileus did hurt, under good pretenses, ca. 14.4 People without law
miserable, 12.3 Peter's Polypragmosyne and curiosity, c. 10.9. and 25.3
Persecutours of good men, by them that pretend well, and seem to be zealous,
ca. 11.7 Perfidious persons, ca. 16.10.11 Pharisees, their sect renewed in
England, ca. 8.1 Some be worse then the Pharisees, ca. 15-6
Pharao confesses the uprightness of Gods judgments, ca. 25.7 Philip of
Hesse, expelled the Pope, ca. 5.6 Philaemon the Philosopher, a schoolmaster
for Christians, ca. 6.7 Phocas made the Bish. of Rome the supreme head of all
other Bishops, ca. 4.4 His purpose and intent, 4.5
Phocian in Athens, ca. 16.8 Philip of Macedonia was slain, ca. 19.5 Pithias a
busy fellow in Athens, ca. 16.8 Plautus his censure of tale-tellers, ca. 9.5
Plynie his presumption, ca. 10.12 His saying of the difficulty of changing of
things ca. 10.13
Policarpus, ca. 20.10 Polypragmosyne, ca. 10.14 Policy not good, to move up
matters unnecessary, and then to assay to allay them with words, ca. 14.1
Policy of the Pope, ca. 5.5 Policy of the Romans, signified in Apo. 13.1.
c. 6.1 Poor man his cross, ca. 20.10 Poor believers, their comfort and
contentation, ca. 24.5 Poet, that teaches Christians godliness, ca. 16.12
Pompey: his desire, ca. 19.6 Pontifex: the Pope, what it notes: ca. 6.5 Pope:
or Pappas: what it is, being latin, and Englished. ca. 4.8 Pope, he is
contrary to Christ, ergo Antichrist, c. 4.9 He overthrows religion, under
color of religion, ca. 4.9 He is deciphered, ca. 5.1 His authority of
universality, cannot be fathered on Peter, ca. 4.5. and ca. 5.3
Pope and Turk, wherein they agree, ca. 1.1 Pope Johan. ca. 5.8 Pope would be
above Christ: the number of the Beast, ca. 6.3 Pope is Antichrist, in the same
number, ca. 6.8 He is an evil Beast, and ascended from the earth ca. 6.3 He is
an Atheist, ibi. He is a priest above Princes, ibi. 4
Preaching of Jesus is unhappily neglected, whiles men strive in opinions and
questions, ca. 8.6 Some men be the worse for preaching: because they take no
frut thereof, in their abuse of it, c. 10.6
Practice of the devil against the Ministers, ca. 20.1 Prayer is necessary and
profitable: the place, the time, the persons for whom, ca. 26.3.4.5 Pretenses:
under good pretenses, many ungodly things are done, both in the Church, and
also in civil affairs, ca. 10.19.20 Presume not on Gods mercy, ca. 25.8
Priest, an head over Princes: as the Pope in the number, 666. ca. 6.4 Priests
ought to obey Princes, cap. 4.2 Princes must be honored, ca. 12.5 Princes do
watch over the people to preserve the^, cap. 12.5 Their great troubles, cap.
19.2 Their virtues, ibid. 2.3
Princes their praise and comforts to content them, cap. 22.3.4 Princes that be
wise do what they can, when they cannot do all that they would, cap. 22.10 They
may not be discouraged by the hard haps of there is, cap. ibid.
Princes mercy and clemency should not occasion men to presume too much
thereupon, ca. 22.9 Prince is an Archer, and the people as arrows, the law,
as the bow, ca. 12.2 Pricillianists defend lying by scripture, ca, 16.2
Protestants are miscontented, ca. 15.4 There be 3. kinds of protestants. ca.
15.3.4.5 The desire of good Protestants. cap. 3.5
Providence divine, ca. 21.3. and 25.5. and 26.1 Purity cannot be in this
life, and therefore they that defend that men can be perfect and pure, derogate
from Christ, ca. 11.3 Purity that many dream of, ca. 8.6
Q
QValitie, God more respects, then quantity in faith and works, ca. 8.7
R
RAge of the devil, ca. 1.1.2.3 Railing words must be eschued in reprehensions,
ca. 9.2 Rebellion is forbidded and punished by the Lord, cap. 12.4. and ca.
14.7.8 Reformation: under color thereof, we may not move seditions among the
people, ca. 13.5 Religion in contempt, a cause of gods plagues, c. 17.6
Reprehension: how it must be done, and by whom, ca. 9.1.2.3 Remedy against
mal-conted Papists, ca. 3.5 Resist not the Ordinance, ca. 12.9 Reverence the
Prince, ca. 12.5 Reward of Princes, ca. 22.10 Rewards of Ministers, ca. 23.3
Righteous men are preserved in the judge. ca. 25.6 Rich men have their cross,
ca. 20.10 Rich men be Gods stewards, ca. 24.5 Riches be evil unto them that
abuse them, ca. 20.11 but good to such as use them well, ib.
Rome is the spiritual Babylon and seat of Antichrist, ca. 6.6. The beast with
7. heads, ib. 6.7.8 Romanus and Romiit, has the number of Antichrist ca. 6.2
Roman Church: what it signifies, ca. 6.6 Romans had 8. kinds of punishments
for offenders, ca. 22.9
Saduces opinion, ca. 17.7 Sampson took Foxes, ca. 3.2 Samaritanes knew Christ
to be a Jew, ca. 3.4 Satan's subtlety, ca. 26.6 Scriptures, cap. 22.1
Scolemaister, cap. 20. Scribe and his afflictions cap. 20.7 Security and long
peace, an enemy to good manners. cap. 17.2 Sedition, a dangerous thing: the
nature, image, description and fruits thereof cap. 13.1.2.3 Seneca his
counsel. cap. 21.7 His reward of Nero for his service, cap. 19.7
Sects and opinions, cap. 2.1 Servant of Servants, cap. 4.7 Scriphian. cap. 9.3
Shame of men, ca. 4.10 Sidrach, Misach, cap. 12.9 Sibilla, of the Pope, cap.
6.8 Siluester. 2. a wicked Pope, cap. 5.5 Silla a cruel Emperor, ca. 22.6
Sisiphus his toil, cap. 20.5 Simeones his exclamation, cap. 11.6 Simon Magus,
cap. 16.7 Simples of the Preparatiue to Contentation, ca. 22.2 Sins are to be
reproved in all fortes of men, by whom, and how. ca. 9.1.2 Sins are the
occasions of plagues, and that our enemies triumph over us, cap. 3.2.
Slanderers and their reward, ca. 9 5 Socrates, ca. 12. and 25.3 Salomo^ his
complaint how things could not be corrected, ca. 12.13 He was not able to
conform all things to his laws cap. 11.1. and his conclusion. ca. 1.1 Why he
could not conform things to the law, ca. 26.2
Solon his sentence of Innouators, ca. 11.4 Soldiers their desire cap. 20.11
Strive to run to heaven, ca. 11.3 Suffering as malefactors for offenses: is
not the cross of Christ. cap. 7.2. but for righteousness, cap. 7.3.4
Supremacy of Popes, not warranted by the Scriptures. cap. 4.4 Sword of the
minister is the word of God, ca. 4.2 Shunemite would not be preferred, cap.
19.8 Suffetius the Albane Prince was punished for breaking of his promise, ca.
16.10
Tale-tellers, their punishments, cap. 9.5 Talkers, and no walkers, cap. 15.2
Terasius Patriark of Constantinople, cap. 5.4 Telemalchus, his reward for well
doing. cap. 20.8 (...). This word has the number of Antichrist, ca. 16.15.
and 10.4 Thersites, ca. 9.3 Themistocles. ca. 19.3 Theodosius his clemency,
cap. 22.9 Theudas a Sedicionary, cap. 13.4 Theodorus B. of Miron, cap. 5.4
Theodotius, B. of Amorie, ibi. Time for every thing, ca. 10.13 Benifit of time
must not be abused, cap. 25.1.2
The condition of our time should make us thankful to God. cap. 14.1 Timon
contemned men, cap. 19.8 Titles given, cap. 15.10 Tyrannus, what he is, ca.
22.6 Triselaus, cap. 20.8 Troubles of government have tired many, cap. 19.5.6
Trust no further then you see, cap. 16 Truth is great and prevails, cap.
16.12 Truth being wanting, all others are not esteeemed, cap. 16.2 Turks have
reproved Christ and for their breach of Promises, ca. 16.11
V.
VAriable affections and chaunges, cap. 8.1 Virgils pastor, ca. 20.8 His verse
of the monster, cap. 4.7
Virtue is sought for in vanity, ca. 18.2 Vicar of Christ, is the gall of the
Church: wherein is the number of Antichrist, ca. 6.5 Vicar exalted, Eodem.
Vicar of the world, ibid. Vladislaus King of Hungary brake his oath, ca. 16.11
Ulysses, cap. 3.1 Universal Pope, a proud title and a note of Antichrist,
cap. 4.6.7 Uncharitable tongues. cap. 9.4 Vocation: every man is to walk within
the bounds of his vocation, cap. 25.8
W
WArre-fare of Christians, cap. 13.7 Walking according to our vocation and
profession. cap. 15.1 Wickliffe martyred cap. 5.6 Wicked men are the powers of
the devil, cap. 1.3 Wise in their own conceits be many fools, c. 10.9 Wise
men be content and consider of the daily dangers, ca. 19.1 Wolf is become a
scholar. cap. 3.2 Wolves degenerat and become barrain after 5 years, ca. 17.3
Woman absolved by Christ of her sin: but not of her lawful punishment, cap.
12.4 Word of God and prayer the means to health. ca. 21.7 We must dispute and
talk of the word reuere^tly c. 10.7 World is feeble and decaieth daily, cap.
10.14 The world is an enemy to Christ and his ministers ca. 20.1 The world is
not worthy of good men, ca. 20.2 The worlds unkindness to good men, cap.
20.8.9
Worldly men do not see their own dangers and destruction, cap. 17.8
Worshipping of Images renewed vnde Antichrist. ca. 5.4 Writers and Scribes
their affliction, ca. 20.7 Their comforts, cap. 24.3

Young scholars are encouraged, cap. 24.4 Years of 1000. and the time 666.
ca. 5.5.7
Z
Zarababella his saying of the Pope, cap. 6.2 Zeno his reward, ca. 20.7 Zeal
both good end evil, ca. 8.2.3.4:5 Ziba, against Mephiboseth. cap: 16:8:9
Zophirus the Persian. cap. 3.1
FINIS.

