A SHORT AND brief narration of the two Nauigations and Discoueries to the
Northweast parts called NEW FRANCE:

First translated out of French into Italian, by that famous learned man Gio:
Bapt: Ramutius, and now turned into English by John Florio: Worthy the reading
of all Venturers, Travelers, and Discouerers.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by H. Bynneman, dwelling in Thames streate, near unto
Baynardes Castle.

Anno Domini. 1580.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Edmond Bray Esquire, High Sheriff within her
Majesty's County of Oxenford: I. Florio wishes much increase of worship in
this life, and in the World to come, eternal happiness.
THe old saying is: None so bold as blind Bayard: nor any so ready to
undertake, as the least able to perform: Even so (right Worshipful) it now
fares with me, who (at the requests and earneste solicitations of diverse my
very good friends here in Oxforde) have undertaken this translation, wherein I
hold my self far inferior to many. Howbeeit, forasmuch as that servant
was of his Lord and Master most highly discommended, which hiding his Talent
in the ground, had thereby profited nothing: my self being very loath to
incur the same fault, and so to become worthy the like reprehension, have
the rather adventured to translate this part of Navigations, which (I assure
my self with other men's travel and diligence) may be an occasion of no small
commodity and benefit to this our Country of England. And herein the more
to animate and encourage the English Merchants, I do only (for brevity
sake) propose unto them the infinite treasures (not hidden to themselves)
which both the Spaniardes, the Portugales, and the Venetians have severally
gained by their such nauigations and travails. Now (right Worshipful) when I
had well considered with my self, that her Majesty has deemed your Worship
a very meet man for that authority wherein you now presently remain, I my
self could not but account your Worship (for the present) the fittest man
within the shire, to patronize and defend this my simple labor, whereby any
benefit may either happen to her Majesty's person, or commodity, to her
highness common weal: and if the wealth of a Prince be any cause of the
safety of his person, (which, who doubts? it may be (and not untruly) said
to be both. But to the end your Worship have not altogether so much cause
to condemn me for this my bold attempt upon no manner of acquaintance, I
thought it not unfit unto you, that I have the rather hereunto presumed, upon
the request and warrant of my dear and well-beloved friend Master H. Leigh, who
(no doubt) is a man very mindful of al your Worships courtesies from time to
time showed toward him.

Thus not willingly desirous to be herein more tedious than is requisite, I
cease from troubling your good Worship, heartily praying the Almighty, to
increase the same, with abundaunce of all other virtues, to his good will and
pleasure: and withal, wholly commit my self unto your Worships good
disposition. From Oxenford the 25. of June. 1580.

Your Worships most humble at commandment. I. Florio.

To all Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots.
WHen I had taken in hand to translate this Treatise, which I did for the
benefit and behoof of those that shall attempt any new discovery in the
Northweast parts of America, I thought good brieflye to touch the use of my
translation, that the Reader may see and consider the drift of my travel. For,
although this Discourse may seem very barraine, and not to contain such
matter as is pretended, as being a particular Relation of certain Provinces
which have been hitherto of all men rather contemned than thoroughly known:
yet if the Merchant Venturer, or skillful Pilot, or whosoever desirous of new
Discoueries, have the readyng and perusing thereof, for whom especially I have
done it into English, they will find matter worthy the looking, and
consequently, gratefully accept my pains herein. For here is the Description
of a Country no less fruitful and pleasant in all respects than is England,
France, or Germany, the people, though simple and rude in manners, and
destitute of the knowledge of God or any good laws, yet of nature gentle and
tractable, and most apt to receive the Christian Religion, and to subject
themselves to some good government: the commodities of the Country not
inferior to the Merchandise of Moscouy, Danske, or many other frequented
trades: the voyage very short, being but three weeks sailing from Bristowe,
Plymmouth, or any commodious Port of the Weast Country, with a direct course
to the coast of the New found land. Al which oportunities besides many
others, might suffice to induce our Englishemen, not only to fall to some
traffic with the Inhabitants, but also to plant a Colonie in some convenient
place, and so to possess the Country without the gainsaying of any man,
which was the judgment and counsel of John Baptista Ramusius, a learned and
excellent Cosmographer, and Secretary to the famous state of Venice, whose
words, because they are not impertine^t to this purpose, I have here set down.
Why do not the Princes (says he) which are to deal in these affairs,
send forth two or three Colonies to inhabit the Country, and to reduce this
savage nation to some civility? considering what a battle and fruitful soil
it is, how replenished with all kind of grain, how it is stored with al
sorts of Birds and Beasts, with such fair and mighty Rivers, that Captain
Carthier and his company, in one of them sailed up a hundredth and four score
leagues, findyng the country peopled on both sides in great abundaunce. And
moreover, to cause the Governors of those Colonies to send forth men to search
and discover the North lands about Terra del Lauorader, and toward Weast
northweast to the Seas which are to sail to the Country of Cataya, and from
thence to the Islands of Molucke. These were enterprises to purchase immortal
praise, which the Lord Anthony di Mendoza Viceroy of Mexico, willing to put in
execution, sent forth his Captains both by Sea and by Land upon the Northweast
of Nuoua Spagona, and discovered the Kingdom of the seven Cities about
Ciuola* And Franciscus Vasques de Coronada, passed from Mexico by land toward
the Northweast 2850. miles, in so much, that he came to the Sea, which lies
between Cataya and America, where he met with the Catayan ships. And no
doubt, if the French men in this their new France, would have discovered up
further into the land toward the Weast northweast parts, they should have
found the Sea, and might have sailed to Cataya. Thus much out of Ramusius,
where you may see this learned man's judgment concerning the planting of
Colonies, and inhabiting these countries, which might be a mean, not only to
discover the Sea on the backe-side, as he desires, but also to come unto the
knowledge of the Countries adjacent: and namely of Saguenay, which abounds
with Gold and other Mettalles, as in the second Relation is to be seen. All
which things, except they build and inhabit, can never be achieved, for as
Fraunciscus Lopez di Gomara, and diverse other Spanishe Authors affirm, the
Spaniards never prospered or prevailed, but where they planted: which of the
Portingales may also be verifyed, as in the Histories of all their Conquests
and Discoueries does manifestly appear. And as there is none, that of right
may be more bold in this enterprice than the Englishmen, the land being first
found out by John Gabot the Father, and Sebastian Gabot, one of his three
sons, in the year 1494. in the name and be half of King Henry the seventh,
as both by the foresaid Ramusius in his first Volumes, and our own
Chronicles, and Sebastian Gabots letters patents yet extant, and in his Map
may be seen: so there is no nation that has so good right, or is more fit
for this purpose, than they are, who trauayling yearly into those parts with
50. or 60. sail of ships, might very commodiouslye transporte a sufficient
number of men to plant a Colonie in some convenient Haven, and also might yield
them yearly succor, and supply of al things necessary, receiving again such
commodities as the country does produce. And this the Frenchmen had done long
since, if first their wars with the Spanyardes, and since their cruel
dissentions at home, had not hindered them. And Johannes Varrozzana a
Florentine, if he had not been prevented by death, purposed (as the foresaid
Ramusius writes) to persuade Francis the French King to send forth good store
of people to inhabit certain places of these coasts, where the air is most
temperate, and the soil most fruitful, with goodly Rivers and Havens
sufficient to harborough any navy, the inhabitants of which places might be
occasion to bring many good purposes to effect, and amongst many others, to
reduce those poor rude and ignorant people to the true worship and service of
God, and to teach them how to manure and till the ground, transporting over
Beasts and Cattle of Europe into those large and champion countries, and
finally, in time they might discover up into the land, and search, whether
among so many Islands as are there, there be any passage to the Sea of Cataya.
And thus much out of the third Volume of Voyages and Nauigations, gathered
into the Italian tongue by Ramusius: which Books, if they were translated
into English by the liberality of some noble Personage, ou^ Seamen of
England, and others, studious of Geographie, should know many worthy secrets,
which hitherto have been concealed. For, the best Cosmographers of this age
(as I am by the skillful in those Sciences informed, and as to him that does
diligently consider their Mappes, it shall plainly appear) have described
Asia, Africa, and America, chiefly by the help of those books. But to return
to that from whence I did digress, although some attemptes of our
Contrymen have not had as yet such success as was wished, they ought not
therefore to be the slower in this enterprice, for if they were of late
contented in their voyage, to have stayed all the Winter in those colder
Countries, if their store of victualles had been sufficient, how much rather
ought we now in a far more temperate clime, where James Carthier,
accompanied with 120. men remained a whole Winter contrary to his determination
when he set out of France? Thus beseeching God, that this my travel may take
that effect for the which it is meant, I commend the diligent consideration to
al such Gentlemen, Merchants, and Pilots, as seek Gods glory, the advancement
of their Country, and the happy success, to the providence of the Almighty,
who in my opinion has not in vain stirred up the minds of so many
Honorable and Worshipful persons to the furtheraunce of these commendable and
worthy Discoueries.

In Oxford* I. F.

The first relation of James Carthier of the new land called New France,
newly discovered in the year of our Lord, 1534.
How Master James Carthier departed from the Port of S. Malo, with two Ships,
and came to the new land, and how he entered into the Port of Buona Vista.
AFter that Sir Charles of Mouy, Knight, Lord of Meyleray, and Vice Admiral of
France, had caused all the Captains, Masters, and Mariners of the Ships to
be sworn to behave themselves truly and faithfully in the service of the most
Christian King of France, under the charge of the said Carthier, upon the 20.
day of April. 1534. we departed from the Port of S. Malo with two Ships of
three score tun apeece burden, and by well appointed men in each one, and with
such prosperous weather, we sailed onwardes, that upon the 10. of May we came
to the new found land, where we entered into the cape of Buona Vista, which is
in Latitude 48. degrees and a half, and in Longitude. *. But because of the
great store of Ice that was alongest the said land, we were constrained to
enter into a Haven called, Saint Katherins Haven, distaunt from the other Port
about five leagues toward South southeast: there did we stay ten days,
looking for fair weather, and in the mean while we mended and dressed our
boats.

How we came to the Island of Birds, and of the great quantity of Birds
that there be.
Upon the 21. of May the wind being in the Weast, we hoised sail, and sailed
toward North and by east from ye Cape of Buona Vista until we came to the Island
of Birds, which was environed about with a bank of Ice, but broken and
crackte. Notwithstanding the said bank, our two boats went thither to take
in some Birds, whereof there is such plenty, that unless a man did see
them, he would think it an incredible thing; for albeit the Island (which
contains about a league in circuit) be so full of them, that they seem to
have been brought thither, and sowed for the nonce, yet are there a hundredth
fold as many houering about it as within, some of the which are as big as
Iayes, black and white, with beakes like unto Crows: they houer always about
the sea, they cannot fly very high, because their wings are so little, and no
bigger than half ones hand, yet do they fly as swiftly as any birds of the
air level to the water, they are also exceeding fat: we named them Aporath.
In less than half an hour we filled two boats full of them, as if they had
been with stones: so that besides them which we did eat fresh, every ship did
powder and salt five or six barrels full of them.

Of two sorts of Birds, the one called Godetz, the other Margaulz: and how we
came to Carpunt.
BEsides these, there is an other kind of Birds, which houer in the air
over the sea, lesser than the others: and these do al gather themselves
together in the Island, and put themselves under the wings of other byrds that
are greater: these we named Godetz. There are also of another sort, but
bigger, and white, who bite even as Dogs: those we named Margaulz. And
albeit the said Iland^ be 14. leagues from the maine land, notwithstanding
Bears come swimming thither to eat of the said Birds: and our men found
one there as great as any Cow, and as white as any Swanne, who in their
presence leapt into the sea, and upon Whitsonmonday (following our voyage
toward the land) we met her by the way, swimming toward land as swiftly
as we could sail: so soon as we saw her we pursued her with our boats,
and by maine strength took her, whose flesh was as good to be eaten, as the
flesh of a Calfe of two years old. The Wednesday following being the 27. of
the month, we came to the entrance of the Bay of the Castles, but because the
weather was ill, and the great store of Ice we found, we were constrained to
enter into an harborough about the said entrance called Carpunt, where,
because we could not come out of it, we stayed till the 9. of June, that
thence we departed, on hope with the aid of God to sail further than the
said Carpunt, which is in latitude 51. degrees.

The description of the new found land, from Cape Razo, to the Cape of
Degrade.
THe land from Cape Razo, to the Cape of Degrade, which is the point of the
entrance to the Bay that trendeth from head to head toward North northest, and
South southweast, all this part of land is parted into Islands, one so near the
other, that there are but small rivers between them, through the which you
may pass with little boats, and therefore there are certain good harbourghs,
among which is that of Carpunt, and that of Degrade. In one of these Islands,
that is the highest of them all, being on the top of it, you may plainly
see the two low Islands, that are near to Cape Razo, from whence to the Port
of Carpunt, they count it twenty and five leagues, and there are two
entraunces thereat, one on the East, the other on the South side of the Island.
But it is to be noted, that from the side, and point of the East, because
that every where there is nothing else but shelues, and the water is very
shallowe: you must go about the Island toward the West the length of half
a Cable or thereaboute, and then to go toward the South, to the said Carpont.
Also you are to take heed of three Shelues that are in the Chanel under the
water: and toward the Island on the East side in the Channel, the water is
about two faddome deep, and clear ground. The other trendeth toward East
northeast, and on the West you may go on shore.

Of the Island which now is called Saint Katherins Island.
GOing from the Point of Degrade, and entering into the said Baye toward the
Weast, and by North: there is some doubt of two Islands that are on the right
side, one of the which is distant from the said point 3. leagues, and the
other 7. either more or less than the first, being a low and plain land, and
it seems to be part of the maine land. I named it Saint Katherines Island:
in which, toward Northeast there is very dry soil: but about a quarter of a
league from it, very ill ground, so that you must go a little about. The
said Island, and the Port of Castelles trend toward North northeast, and
South southweast, and they are about 15. leagues asunder. From the said Port
of Castles to the Port of Gutte, which is in the northern part of the said
Bay, that trendeth toward East northeast, and Weast southweast, there are
twelve leagues and an half: and about two leagues from the Port of Balances,
that is to say, the third part, athwarteth the said Bay: the deapth being
sounded it is about 18. faddo^ and from the said Port of Balances to the White
Sands (...) Weast southweast there is 15. leagues, but you must ^ike heed of a
shelfe that lies about 3. leagues outward from the said White Sands on the
Southweast side above water like a Boat.

Of the place called White Sands: of the Island of Breast, and of the Island of
Birds: the sorts and quantity of Birds that there are found: and of the
Port called the Islettes.
WHite Sands is a Road in the which there is no place guarded from the South,
nor Southeast. But toward South southweast the said road there are two
Islands, one of the which is called Breast Island, and the other the Island of
Birds, in which there is great store of Godetz, and Crows with red beakes
and read feet: they make their neestes in holes under the ground even as
Connies. A point of land being passed about a league from White Sands, there is
a Port and passage found, called the Islettes, a better place than White
Sands: and there is great fishing. From the said Port of the Islettes, unto
another called Breast: the circuit is about ten leagues. This Port is in
latitude 51. degrees and 55. minutes, and in longitude. *. From the Islettes,
to that place there are many other Islands: and the said Port of Breast is
also amongst those Islands. Moreover the Islands do compass more than 3.
leagues from the said Breast, being low, and over them are the other lands
(above mentioned) seen.

How we with our Ships entered into the Port of Breast, and sailing onwarde
toward the Weast, we past amidst the Islettes, which were so many in number,
that it was not possible to tell them: and how we named the^ the Islettes.
Upon the 10. of June we with our Ships entered into the Port of Breast, to
furnish our selves with water and wood, and to make us ready to pass the
said Bay. Upon Saint Barnabas day, service being heard, we with our boats
went beyond the said Port toward the Weast, to see what harboroughes were
there: we passed through the midddest of the Islettes, which were so many in
number, that it was not possible they might be told, for they continued about
10. leagues beyond the said Port. We to rest our selves stayed in one of
them a night, and there we found great store of Duck^ eggs, and other birds
that there do make their neastes, we named them all, the Islettes.

Of the Port called S. Antonies Port, S. Seruans Port, James Carthiers
Port: of the river called S. James: of the customs and apparel of the
inhabitors in the Island of White Sands.
THe next day we passed the said Islands, and beyond them all we found a good
Haven, which we named S. Antonies Haven, and how one or two leagues beyond,
we found a little river toward the Southwest coast, that is between two other
Islands, and is a good harborough. There we set up a Cross, and named it
S. Seruans Port* and on the Southwest side of the said Port and river, about
one league, there is a small Island as round as any Oven, environed about with
many other little Islands, that give notice to the said Ports. Further about
two leagues, there is an other greater river, in which they took good store
of Salmon, that we named S. James his River. Being in the said river, we saw
a Ship of Rochell that the night before had passed the Port of Breast, where
they thought to have gone a fishing: but the mariners not knowing where they
were, we with our boats approached near unto it, and did direct it to another
Port one league more toward the Weast than the said river of S. James, which
I take to be one of the best in all the World, and therefore we named it
James Carthiers Sound. If the foil were as good as the harboroughes are, it
were a great commodity: but it is not to be called the new Land but rather
Stones, and wild Furs, and a place fit for wild beasts, for in all the
North* Island I did not see a Cart^oade of ^ood earth: yet went I on shore
in many places, and in the Island of White Sands, there is nothing else but
Moss, and small Thorns scattered here and there, withered and dry. To be
short, I believe that this was the land that God allotted to Caine. There are
men of an indifferent good stature and bigness, but wild and unruly: they
wear their hair tied on the top like a wreath of Hay, and put a wooden pin
within it, or any other such thing, in stead of a nail, and with them they
bind certain birds feathers. They are clothed with beasts skins, as well
the men as women, but that the women go somewhat straightlier and closer in
their garments than men do, with their wastes gyrded: they paint themselves
with certain Roan colors: their Boats are made of the bark of a tree
called Boul, with the which they fish, and take great store of Seals, and
as far as we could understand since our coming thither, that is not their
habitation, but they come from the maine land out of hotter Countries, to take
of the said Seals and other necessaries for their living.

Of certain Capes, that is to say, the double Cape, the pointed Cape, Cape
Royal, and the Cape of Milk: of the Mountains of Barnes: of the Islands of
Do^e* houses; and of the great fishing of Cods.
Upon the 13. of that month we came to our Ships again with our boats, on
purpose to sail forwards, because the weather was fair, and upon Sundaye we
caused service to be said: then on Monday being the 25. of the month, we
departed from Breast and sailed toward the South to take a view of the lands
that there we had seen, that seemed unto us to be two Islands: but when we
were amiddest the Bay, we knew it to be firm land, where was a great double
Cape, one above the other, and therefore we named it the Double Cape. In the
entrance of the Bay we sounded, and found it to be an hundred faddome round
about us. From Breast, to the double Cape, there is about 20 leagues, and
about five, or six leagues beyond we sounded again, and found 20 faddome
water. The said land lies Northeast, and Southweast. The next day being the
16. of the month, we sailed along the said coaste toward Southweast, and by
South, about 35 leagues from the double Cape, where we found very steep and
wild hills, among the which were seen certain small Cabbans, which we in
the Country call Barnes, and therefore we named them the Hills of the Barnes.
The other Lands and Mountains are all craggie, cleft, and ^utte, and betwixt
them and the sea, there are other Islands, but low. The day before, through
the dark mists and ^ogges of the weather, we could not have sight of any
land, but in the evening we spyed an entrance into the land, by a river,
among the said Hills of Barnes, and a Cape lying toward the Southwest about
3. leagues from us. The said Cape is on the top of it blunt pointed, and also
toward the Sea, it ends in a point, wherefore we named it the pointed Cape,
on the north side of which, there is a plain Island. And because we would have
notice of the said entrance, to see if there were any good Havens, we stroke
sail for that night. The next day being the 17. of the Month, we had stormy
weather from Northeast, wherefore we took our way toward the Southwest until
Thurseday morning, and we went about 37. leagues, til we came athwart a Bay
full of round Islands like Dove houses, and therefore we named them the Dove
houses. And from the Bay of Saint Julian, from the which to a Cape that lies
South and by weast, which we called Cape Riall, there are 7. leagues, and
toward the Weast Southweast side of the said Cape there is another that
beneath is all craggie, and above round. On the North side of which about
half a league there lies a low Island, Cape Latte.
that Cape we named the Cape of Milk. Between these two Capes there are
certain low Islands, above which, there are also certain others, that show
that there (...) some rivers. About two leagues from Cape Royal, we sounded,
and found ten faddome water, and there is the greatest fishing of Coddes that
is possible: for staying for our company, in less than an hour we took
above an hundred of them.

Of certain Islands that lie between Cape Royal, and the Cape of Milk.
THe next day, being the eyghtenth of the Month, the wind with such rage
turned against us, that we were constrained to go back toward Cape Royal,
thinking there to find some harborough, and with our Boats went to discover
between the Cape Royal, and the Cape of Milk, and found, that above the low
Islands there is a great, and very deep Gulf, within which are certain
Islands. The said Gulf on the South side is shut up. The foresaid low grounds
are on one of the sides of the entrance, and Cape Royal is on the other. The
said low grounds do stretche themselves more than half a league within the
Sea. It is a plain Country, but an ill soil: and in the midst of the
entrance thereof, there is an Island. The said Gulf in latitude is forty
eight degrees and an half, and in Longitude. *. That night we found no
harborough, and therefore we launched out into the Sea, leaving the Cape toward
the Weast.

Of the Island called S. John.
FRom the said day until the 24. of the month, being S. John's day, we had
both stormy weather and wind against us, with such darkness and mistes, that
until Saint John's day, we could have no sight of any land, and then had we
sight of a Cape of land, ye from Cape Royal lies Southweast, about 35.
leagues, but that day was so foggie and mistie, that we could not come near
land, and because it was S. John's day, we named it Cape S. John.

Of certain Islands called the Islands of Margaulz, and of the kinds of beasts
and birds that there are found. Of the Island of Brion, and Cape Dolphin.
THe next day being the 25. of the month, the weather was also stormy,
dark, and windy, but yet we sailed a part of the day toward Weast
North-weast, and in the evening we put our selves athwart unto the second
quarter that thence we departed, then did we by our compass know that we were
North-weast, and by Weast about seven leagues and an half from the Cape of S.
John, and as we were about to hoyse sail, the wind turned into the
North-weast, wherefore we went toward North-east, about fifteen leagues, and
came to three Islands, two of which are as steep and upright as any wall, that
it was not possible to climb them: and between them there is a little clift.
These Islands were as full of Birds, as any field or meddow is of grass, that
there do make their nestes: and in the greatest of them, there was a great and
infinite number of those that we call Margaulz, that are white, and bigger than
any Geese, which were feuered in one part. In the other were only Godetz Isoli,
but toward the shore there were of those Godetz, and great Apponatz, like to
those of that Island that we above have mentioned: we went down to the lowest
part of the least Island, where we killed above a thousand of those Godetz, and
Apponatz. We put into our Boats so many of them as we pleased, for in less
than one hour, we might have filled thirty such boats of them: we named them
the Islands of Margaultz. About five leagues from the said Islands, on the
Weast, there is another Island that is about two leagues in length, and so much
in breadth: there did we stay all night to take in water and wood. That Island
is environed round about with sand, and has a very good road about it three
or four faddome deep. Those Islands have the best soil that ever we saw, for
that one of their feelds is more worth, than all the new land. We found i^ all
full of goodly trees, meadows, champaines full of wild peason blomed, as
thick, as rank, and as fair, as any can be seen in Brittayne, that they
seemed to have bin plowed and sowed. There was also great store of gooseberies,
strawberies, damask roses, parseley, with other very sweet and pleasant
herbs. About the said Island are very great beasts, as great as Oxen, which
have two great teeth in their mouths like unto the Elephant, and live also in
the Sea. We saw one of them sleeping upon the bank of the water: we thinking
to take it, went to it with our Boats, but so soon as he heard us, he cast
himself into the Sea. We also saw Bears, and Woolues: we named it Brions
Island. About it toward South-east, and North-weast, there are great meadows.
As far as I could gather and comprehend, I think that there be some passage
between the new land, and Brions land, if so it were, it would be a great
shortning, as well of the time, as of the way, if any perfection could be
found in it. About four leagues from that Island toward West South-weast,
there is firm land, that seems to be as an Island, compassed about with
little Islands of sands. There is a goodly Cape, which we named Cape Doulphin,
for there is the beginning of good grounds. On the seven and twentieth of June
we compassed the said lands about that lie Weast South-weast: a far off they
seem to be little hills of sand, for they are but low lands: we could
neither go to them, nor land on them, because the wind was against us. That
day we went fifteen leagues.

Of the Island called Alezai, and of S. Peeters Cape.
THe next day we went along the said land about ten leagues, till we came to
a Cape of read lands, that is all craggie, within the which, there is a bracke
looking toward the North. It is a very low Country. There is also between ye
sea and a certain poole a plain field and from that Cape of land^ and ye
poole, until to another Cape, there is about 14. leagues*

The land is fashioned as it were half a circle, all compassed about with sand
like a ditch, over which, as far as ones eye can stretch, there is nothing
but marrish grounds, and standing pooles. And before you come to the first
Cape, very near the main land, there are two little Islands. About five
leagues from the second Cape toward South weast, there is another Island very
high and poynted, which we named Alezai. The first Cape we named S. Peeters
Cape, because upon that day we came thither.

Of the Cape called Orleans Cape: of the River of Boats: of wild men's Cape:
and of the quality and temperature of the Country.
FRom Brions Island to this place, there is a good sandy ground, and having
sounded toward South-weast even to the Shore, about five leagues, we found 12.
faddome water, and within one league 6. and very near the shore rather more
than less. But because we would be better acquaynted with this stony and
rockie ground, we stroke our Sails low and athwart. The next day being the
last of the month save one, the wind blewe South and by East. We sailed
Westwarde until Tuesday morning at Sun rising, being the last of the
month, without any sight or knowledge of any land, except in the evening
toward Sun set, that we discovered a Land, which seemed to be two
Islands, that were beyond us West south-weast, about nine or ten leagues. All
the next day till the next morning at Sun rising we sailed Westward about
fortye leagues, and by the way we perceived that the land we had seen like
two Islands, was firm land, lying South south-east, and North north-weast,
till to a very good Cape of land called Orleans Cape. All the said land is
low and plain, and the fairest that may possibly be seen, full of goodly
meddowes and Trees. True it is that we could find no harborough there, because
it is all full of shelues and sands. We with our boats went on shore in many
places, and among the rest we entered into a goodly river, but very shallow,
which we named the river of boats, because that there we saw boats full of wild
men, that were crossing the river. We had no other notice of the said wild
men: for the wind came from the Sea, and beat us against the shore, that we
were constrained to retire our selves with our boats toward our ships, till
the next day morning at Sun rising, being the first of July, we sailed
Northeast, in which time there rose great mystes and storms, and therefore we
struck our sails till two of the clock in the after noone, that the weather
became clear, and there we had sight of Orleance Cape, and of another about
seven leagues from us, lying North and by East, and that we called Wild men's
Cape. On the Northside of this Cape about half a league, there is a very
dangerous shelf, and bank of stones. Whilst we were at this Cape, we saw a man
running after our boats that were going along the coast, who made signs unto
us that we should return toward the said Cape again We seeing such signs,
began to turn toward him, but he seeing us come, began to flee: so soon as
we were come on shore, we set a knife before him, and a woollen girdle on a
little staff, and then came to our ships again. That day we trended the said
land about nine or ten leagues, hoping to find some good harborough, but it
was not possible, for as I have said already, it is a very low land, and
environed round about with great shelues. Nevertheless we went that day on
shore in four places to see the goodly and sweet smelling trees that there
were: we found them to be Cidrons, Ewe-trees, Pines, white Elmes, Ashes,
Willowes, with many other sorts of trees to us unknown, but without any
fruit. The grounds where no wood is, are very fair, and al full of peason,
white and red gooseberies, strawberies, blackeberies, and wild corn, even
like unto Rye, that it seems to have been sown and plowed. This Country is
of better temperature than any other that can be seen, and very hot. There
are many Thrushes, Stockdoues, and other birds: to be short, there wants
nothing but good harborough.

Of the Baie called Saint Lunario, and other notable Baies, and Capes of land,
and of the quality, and goodness of those grounds.
THe next day being the second of July we discovered and had sight of land on
the Northern side toward us, that did join unto the land abouesayd, all
compassed about, and we knew that it had about * in deepth, and as much
athwart, we named it Saint Lunarios Baie, and with our boats we went to the
Cape toward the North, and found the land and ground so low, that for the
space of a league from land there was but half a faddome water. On the
Northeast side from the said Cape about seven or eight leagues there is
another Cape of land, in the midst whereof there is a Baie fashioned
triangle wise, very deep, and as far as we could ken from it lies Northeast.
The said Baie is compassed about with sands and shelues about ten leagues from
land, and there is but one faddome water: from the said Cape to the bank of
the other, there is about fifteen leagues. We being a cross the said Capes,
discovered another land and Cape, and as far as we could ken, it lay North
and by East. All that night the weather was very ill, and great winds, so that
we were constrained to hear a small sail until the next morning, being the
third of July, that the wind came from the West: and we sailed Northwarde, to
have a sight of the land that we had left on the Northeast side, above the
low lands, among which high and low lands there is a Gulf, or Breach, in
some places about six and twenty faddome deep, and fifteen leagues in
breadth, with variety of lands, hoping to find some passage thither, we went
even as the passage of the Castles. The said gulf lies East Northeast, and
West Southwest. The ground that lies on the South side of the said gulf, is
as good and easy to be wrought, and full of as goodly fields and meadows, as
any that ever we have, as plain and smoothe as any die: and that which lies
on the North, is a Country altogether hilly, full of woods, and very high and
great trees of sundry sorts: among the rest there are as goodly Ceders, and
Fur trees, as possibly can be seen, able to make mastes for ships of three
hundred Tun: Neither did we see any place that was not full of the said
trees, excepted two only, that were full of goodly meadows, with two very
fair Lakes. The midst of the said Baie is seven and forty degrees and
half in latitude.

Of the Cape of Hope, and of Saint Martins Creek, and how seven boats full of
wild men, came to our boat, would not retire themselves, but being terrified
with our Colubrins and lanches we shot at them, they fled with great have.
THe Cape of ye said South land, was called The Cape of Hope, through the hope
that there we had to find some passage. The fourth of July we went along ye
coast of ye said land on the Northerly side to find some harborough, where we
entered into a Creek altogether open on ye South, where there is no succor
against ye wind: we thought good to name it S. Martines Creek. There we stayed
from the fourth of July, until the twelfth: while we were there, on Monday
being the sixth of ye month, service being done, we with one of our boats went
to discover a Cape and point of land yt on the Northern side was about seven
or eight leagues from us, to see which way it did bend, and being within half
a league of it, we saw two companies of boats of wild men going from one land
to the other: their boats were in number about five and forty or fifty. One
part of the which came to the said point, and a great number of the me^
went on shore, making a great noise, beckning unto us that we should come on
land, showing us certain skins upon pieces of Woodde, but because we had
but one only boat, we would not go to them; but went to the other side,
lying in the sea: they seeing us flee, prepared two of their boats to follow
us, with which came also five more of them that were coming from the sea
side, al which approached near unto our boat, dancing, and making many signs
of joy and mirth, as it were desiring our friendship, saying in their tongue
NAPEV TONDAMEN ASSVRTAH, with many other that we understood not. But because
(as we have said) we had but one boat, we would not stand to their courtesy,
but made signs unto them, that they should turn back, which they would not
do, but with great furye came toward us: and suddenly with their boats
compassed us about: and because they would not away from us by any signs
that we could make, we shot of two pieces among them, which did so terrify
them, that they put themselves to flight toward the said point, making a
great noise: and having stayde a while, they began a new, even as at the first,
to come to us again, and being come near our boat, we struck at them with
two lances, which thing was so great a terror unto them, that with great
have they began to flee, and would no more follow us.

How the said men commming to our ships, and our men going toward them, both
parties went on land, and how the said wild men with great joy began to
traficke with our men.
THe next day, part of the said wild men with nine of their boats came to
the point and entrance of the creek, where we with our ships were at road. We
being advertised of their coming, went to the point where they were with our
boats: but so soon as they saw us, they began to flee, making signs that
they came to traficke with us, showing us such skins as they cloth
themselves withal, which are of small value. We likewise made signs unto
them, that we wished them no evil: and in sign thereof two of our men ve^tured
to go on land to them, and carry them knives with other Iron wares, and a red
hat to give unto their Captain. Which when they saw, they also came on land,
and brought some of their skins, and so began to deal with us, seeming to
be very glad to have our iron wares, and other things, still dancing with many
other ceremonies, as with their hands to cast sea water on their heads. They
gave us whatsoever they had, not keeping any thing, that they were constrained
to go back again naked, and made us signs that the next day they would come
again, and bring more skins with them.

How that we having sent two of our men on land with wares, there came
about.300. wild me^ with great gladness. Of the quality of the Country, what it
brings forth, and of the Baie called The Baie of heat.
Upon Thursday being the eight of the month, because the wind was not good to
go out with our ships, we set our boats in a readiness to go to discover the
said Baie, and ye day we went fifteen leagues within it. The next day, the
wind and wether being fair, we sailed until noone, in which time we had
notice of a great part of the said Baie, and how that upon the low lands,
there were other lands, with high mountains: but seeing that there was no
passage at al, we began to turn back again, taking our way along the coast,
and sailing, we saw certain wild men, that stood upon the shore of a Lake,
that is among the low grounds, who were making fires and smokes: we went
thither, and found that there was a Chanel of the sea, that did enter into the
Lake, and setting our boats at one of the banckes of the Channel, the wild
men with one of their boats came unto us, and brought us pieces of Seals
ready sodde, putting them upon pieces of wood: then retyring themselves, they
would make signs unto us, that they did give them us. We sent two men unto
them with Hatchets, knives, beads, and other such like ware, whereat they were
very glad, and by and by in clusters they came to the shore where we were with
their boats, bringing with them skins, and other such things as they had, to
have of our wares. They were more than three hundred men, women, and children:
some of the women which came not over, we might see them stand up to the knees
in water, singing and dancing, the other that had passed the river where we
were, came very friendlye to us, rubbing our arms with their own hands,
then would they lift them up toward heaven, showing many signs of
gladness: and in such wise were we assured one of another, that we very
familiarly began to traffic of whatsoever they had, till they had nothing
but their naked bodies, for they gave us al whatsoever they had, and that was
but of small value. We perceived that this people might very easily be
converted to our religion. They go from place to place. They live only with
fishing. They have an ordinary time to fish for their provision. The Country
is hotter, than the Country of Spain, and the fairest that can possibly be
found, altogether smooth, and leauel. There is no place, be it never so little,
but it has some trees (yea albeit it be sandy) or else is full of wild corn,
that has an ear like unto Rye: the corn is like Oats, small Peason as thick
as if they had bin sown and plowed, white and red gooseberies, strawberies,
blackberies, white and red Roses, with many other flowers, of very sweet and
pleasant smell. There be also many goodly meadows full of grass, and Lakes where
great plenty of Salmons be. They call a Hatchet in their to^g Cochi, and a knife
Bacon: we named it The Bay of Heat.

Of another nation of wild men: of their manners, living and clothing.
WE being certified that there was no passage through the said Bay, we hoised
sail, and went from S. Martines Creek upon Sunday being the twelfth of July,
to go and discover further in the said Baie. and went along the sea coast
Estward about eighteen leagues, till we came to the Cape of Prato, where we
found the tide very great, but shallow, and the sea stormy, so that we were
constrained to draw toward shore, between the said Cape and an Island lying
Eastwarde, about half a league from the Cape, where we cast Ancker for that
night. The next morning we hoised sail to trend ye said coaste about, which
lies North Northeast. But there rose such a stormy and raging wind against
us, that we were constrained to come to the place again, from whence we were
come: There did we stay all that day till the next, that we hoised up sail,
and came to the midst of a river five or six leagues from the Cape of Prato
Northward, and being overthwart the said river, there arose again a contrary
wind, with great fogges and storms. So that we were constrained upon Tuisday,
being the fourteenth of the month, to enter into the river, and there did we
stay til the sixteenth of the month, loking for fair weather to come out of
it, on which day being Thursdaye, the wind became so raging, that one of our
ships lost an Ancker, and we were constrained to go up higher into the river
seven or eighte leagues, into a good harborough and ground, yt we with our
boats found out, and through the evil weather, tempest, and darkness that
was, we stayed in the said harborough till the five and twentieth of the month,
that we could not come out: in the mean time we saw a great multitude of
wild men that were fishing for Mackrels, whereof there is great store. Their
boats were about forty, and the persons, what with men, women, and children,
two hundred, which after they had haunted our company a while, they came very
familiarly with their boats to ye sides of our ships. We gave the^ knives,
combs, beads of glass, and other tri^^es of small value, for which they made
many signs of gladness, lifting their hands up to Heaven, dancing and
singing in their boats. These men may very well and truly be called Wild,
because there is no poorer people in the world. For I think all that they had
together, besides their boats and nets, was not worth five souce. They go
altogether naked, saving their priuities, which covered with a little skin,
and certain old skins that they cast upon them. Neither in nature nor in
language, do they any whit agree with them we found first: Their heads be
altogether shaven, except one bush of hair, they suffer to grow upon the top
of their crown, as long as a horse tail, and then with certain leather
strings bind it in a knot upon their heads. They have no other dwelling but
their boats, which they turn vpside down, and under them they lay themselves
al along upon the bare ground. They eat their flesh almost raw, only that
they heat it a little upon imbers of coals, so do they their fish. Upon
Magdalens day we with our boats went to the bancke of the river, and freelye
went on shore among them, whereat they made many signs of gladness, and al
their me^ in two or three companies began to sing and dance, seeming to be
very glad of our coming. They had caused all the yo^g women to flee into the
wood, two or three excepted, that stayed with them, to each of which we gave a
comb, and a little bell made of Tin, for which they were very glad, thanking
our Captain, rubbing his arms and breasts with their hands. When the men
saw us give something unto those that had stayde, it caused all the rest to
come out of the wood, to the end they should have as much as the others:
These women were about twenty, who altogether in a knot fell upon our
Captain, touching and rubbing him with their hands, according to their manner
of cherishing and making much of one, who gave to each of them a little Tin
bell: then suddenly they began to dance, and sing many songs. There we found
great store of Mackrels, that they had taken upon the shore, with certain
nets that they make to fish, of a kind of hemp that grows in that place
where ordinarilye they abide, for they never come to the sea, but only in
fishing time. As far as I understand, there grows likewise a kind of Millet
as big as small Peason, like unto that which grows in Bresil, which they
eat in stead of bread. They had great store of it. They call it in their ^ong
RAPAIGE. They have also Primes, (that is ^o say Damsins) which they dry for
winter as we do, they call the^ HONESTA. They have also Figs, Nuttes, Apples,
and other fruits* and Beans, that they call SAHV, their Nuttes CAHEHYA. If we
showed them any thing that they have not, nor know not what it is, shaking
their heads, they will say NOHDA, which is as much to say, they have it not,
nor they know it not. Of those things they have, they would with signs show us
the way how to dress them, and how they grow. They eat nothing that has any
taste of salt. They are very great Thieves, for they will fil^h and steal
whatsoever they can lay hold of, and all is fish that comes to net.

How our men set up a great Cross upon the point of the said Port, and the
Captain of those wild men, after a long Oration, was by our Captain appeased,
and contented that two of his Children should go with him.
Upon the 24. of ye Month, we caused a fair high Cross to be made of the
height of thirty foot, which was made in the presence of many of them, upon
the point of the entrance of the Gulf, in the midst whereof, we hanged up a
Sheeld with three Flower de Luces in it, and in the top was carved in the
wood with Anticke letters this posse, VIVE LE ROY DE FRANCE. Then before them
all we set it up upon the said point. They with great heed beheld both the
making and setting of it up. So soon as it was up, we altogether kneeled down
before them, with our hands toward Heaven, yielding God thanks: and we made
signs unto them, showing them the Heavens, and that all our salvation
depends only on him which in them dwells: whereat they showed a great
admiration, looking first one at another, and then upon the Cross. And after
we were returned to our Ships, their Captain clad with an old Bears
Skin, with three of his Sons, and a Brother of his with him, came unto us
in one of their Boats, but they came not so near us as they were wont to do:
there he made a long Oration unto us, showing us the cross we had set up, and
making a Cross with two of his fingers, then did he show us all the Country
about us, as if he would say that all was his, and that we should not set up
any Cross without his leave. His talk being ended, we showed him an Axe,
fayning that we would give it him for his skin, to which he listened, for by
little and little he came near our Ships. One of our fellows that was in our
boat, took hold on theirs, and suddaynely lept into it, with two or three
more, who enforced him to enter into our Ships, whereat they were greatly
astonished. But our Captain did straightwayes assure the^, that they should
have no harm, nor any injury offered them at all, and entertained them very
friendly, making them eat and drink. Then did we show them with signs, that
the Cross was but only set up to be as a light and leader which ways to enter
into the port, and that we would shortly come again, and bring good store of
iron wares and other things, but that we would take two of his children with
us, and afterward bring them to the said port again: and so we clothed two of
them in shirtes, and colored coats, with red cappes, and put about every ones
neck a copper chain, whereat they were greatly contented: then gave they
their old clothes to their fellows that went back again, and we gave to
each one of those three that went back, a hatchet, and some knives, which made
the^ very glad. After these were gone, and had told the news unto their
fellows, in the after noone there came to our ships six boats of them, with
five or six men in every one, to take their farewels of those two we had
retained to take with us, and brought them some fish, uttering many words which
we did not understand, making signs that they would not remove the Cross we
had set up.

How after we were departed from the said port, following our voyage along
the said coast, we went to discover the land lying South-east, and North-weast.
THe next day, being the 25. of the month, we had fair weather, and went
from the said port: and being out of the River, we sailed East North-east,
for, after the entrance into the said River, the land is environed about, and
makes a bay in manner of half a circle, where being in our Ships, we might see
all the coast sailing behind, which we came to seek, the land lying South-east
and North-weast, the course of which was distant from the river about twenty
leagues.

Of the Cape S. Aluise, and Momorancies Cape, and certain other lands, and how
one of our Boats touched a Rock and suddenly went over it.
ON monday being the 27. of the month, about sun set we went along the said
land, as we have said, lying South-east and North-weast, til Wensday that we
saw another Cape, where the land begins to bend toward ye East: we went
along it about 15. leagues, then does the land begin to turn Northward.
About three leagues from the said Cape we sounded, and found 12. faddome water.
The said lands are plain, and the fairest and most without woods that we have
seen, with goodly green feelds and meadows, we named the said Cape S. Aluise
Cape, because that was his day: it is 49. Degrees and a half in Latitude, and
in Longitude. *. On Wensday morning we were on the East side of the Cape, and
being almost night, we went North-eastward for to approach near to the said
land, which tre^deth North and South. From S. Aluise Cape, to another called
Momerancies Cape* about fifteen leagues, the land begins to bend
Northweast. About three leagues from the said Cape, we would needs sound,
but we could find no ground at 75. faddome, yet went we along the said land,
about ten leagues, to the Latitude of 50. degrees. The Saturday following,
being the first of August, by Sun rising, we had sight of certain other
lands, lying North, and North-east, that were very high and craggie, and
seemed to be mountains: between which were other low lands with Wooddes and
Rivers: we went about the said lands, as well on the one side as on the
other, still bending North-weast, to see if it were either a Gulf, or a
passage, until the fifth of the month. The distance from one land to the
other, is about fifteen leagues. The middle between them both, is 50. degrees
and a third part of one in Latitude. We had much ado to go five miles farther,
the winds were so great, and the tide against us. And at five miles end, we
might plainly see and perceive land on both sides, which there begins to
spread it self, but because we rather-fell, than got way against the wind^,
we went toward land, purposing to go to another Cape of land, lying
Southwarde, which was the farthermost out into the Sea that we could see, about
five leagues from us, but so soon as we came thither, we found it to be
naught else but Rocks, stones, and craggie cliftes, such as we had not found
any where that we had sailed Southwarde from S. John's Cape: and then was the
tide with us, which carried us against the wind Westwarde, so that as we were
sailing along the said coast, one of our Boats touched a Rock, and suddenly
went over, but we were constrained to leap out, for to direct it on according
to the tide.

How after we had agreed and consulted what was best to be done, we purposed
to return from S. Peeters straight, and from Tiennots Cape.
AFter we had sailed along the said coast, for the space of two hours, behold,
the tide began to turn against us, with so swift and raging a course, that it
was not possible for us with thirteen oars to row or get one stones cast
farther, that we were constrained to leave our Boats with some of our men to
guard them, and ten or twelve men went on shore to the said Cape, where we
found that the land begins to bend South-weast, which having seen, we came
to our Boats again, and so to our Ships, which were still ready rigged,
hoping to go forward: but for all that, they were fallen more than four
leagues where we had left them, where so soon as we came, we assembled
together all our Captains, Masters, and Mariners, to have their advice and
opinion what was best to be done: and after that every one had said,
considering that the Easterly winds began to bear sway, and blow, and that
the flood was so great, that we did but fall, and that there was nothing to be
gotten, and that storms and tempests began to puff in those new Countries,
and that we were so far from home, not knowing the perils and dangers were
behind, for either we must agree to turn and come back again, or else to
stay there all the year. Moreover, we did consider, that if an exchange of the
Northern winds did take us, it were not possible for us to depart thence. All
which opinions being heard and considered, we altogether determined to address
our selves homeward. Now because upon Saint Peeters day we entered into the
said straighte, we named it Saint Peeters Straight. We sounded it in many
places, in some we found 70. faddome water, in some 50. and near the shore
but 30. and clear ground. From that day till Wensday following, we had a good
and prosperous gale of wind, that we trended the said land about on the North
East South-east, Weast and North-weast sides: for such is the situation of it,
excepted one Cape of low lands that bends toward South-east, about 25.
leagues from the straight. In this place we saw certain smokes, that the
people of the Country made upon the said Cape: but because the wind blew us
toward the coast, we went not to them, which when they saw, they came with
two Boats and twelve men unto us, and as freely came unto our Ships, as if
they had bin French men, and gave us to understand, that they came from the
great Gulf, and that Tiennot was their Captain, who then was upon that Cape,
making signs unto us, that they were going home to their Countries where we
were come from with our Ships, and that they were laden with Fish. We named
the said Cape, Tiennots Cape. From the said Cape all the land trendeth East
South-east, and West Northwest. All the land lies low, very pleasant,
environed with sand, where the sea is entermingled with marshes and shallowes,
the space of twenty leagues: then does the land begin to trend from Weast to
East, North-east altogether environed with Islands two or three leagues from
land, in which as far as we could see, are many dangerous shealues more than
four or five leagues from land.

How that upon the ninth of August we entered within White Sands, and upon the
fifth of September we came to the port of S. Malo.
FRom the said Wensday, until Saturday following, we had a great wind from the
South-weast, which caused us to draw East North-east, on which day we came to
the Easterly parts of the new land, between the Barnes and the Doble Cape.
There began great stormy winds coming from the East with great rage:
wherefore we coasted the Cape North North-weast, to search the Northern
part, which is (as we have said) all environed with Islands, and being near
the said Islands and land, the wind turned into the South, which brought us
within the said gulf, so that the next day being the ninth of August, we by
the grace of God entered within White Sands. And this is so much as we have
discovered. After that, upon the fifteenth of August, being the feast of the
Assumption of our Lady, after that we had heard service, we altogether departed
from the port of White Sands, and with a happy and prosperous weather, we
came into the middle of the Sea, that is between the new^ land (...)
Bri^tanie, in which place we were tossed and turmoyled three days long with
great storms and windy tempests coming from the east, which with the aid
and assistance of God we suffered: then had we fair weather, and upon the
fifth of September, in the said year, we came to the port of S. Malo whence we
were come.

The language that is spoken in the Land newly discovered, called new France.
God -- the Sun Isnetz the Heaven camet the Day -- the Night aiagla Water ame
Sand estogatz a Sail aganie the Head agonaze the Throat conguedo the Nose
hehonguesto the Teeth hesangne the Nails agetascu the Feet ochedasco the
Legs anoudasco a dead man amocdaza a Skin aionas^a that Man yea a Hatchet
asogne green Fish gadag^ursere good to be eaten guesand^ Almonds anougaza
Figs ascond^ Gold henyosco the privy members assegnega an Arow cacta a
green Tree haued^ an earthen dish auda^o a Bow -- Brass aignetaze the Brow
ansce a Feather yco the Moon casmogan the Earth conda the Wind canut the
Rain ^nnoscon Bread cacacomy the Sea a met a Ship casaomy a Man undo the
Hears hoc hosco the Eyes ygata the Mouth hach^ the Ears h^ntasco the Arms
agesc^ a Woman enrasesco a sick Man alouedeche Shoes att^ a Skin to cover a
ma^s privy members ^nscoz^n vondico Flesh -- red cloth cah^neta a Knife agobod^
a Macrell (...) Nuttes (...) Apples ^onesta Beans sabe a Sword achesco


Here ends the first relation of James Carthiers discovery of the new land
called New France, translated into English out of Italian by I. F.
Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suma.
A short and brief narration of the Navigations caused to be made by the King
of France, to the Islands of Canada, Hochelaga, Saguenay, and diverse others,
which now are called New France, with a discourse of the particulars,
customs, and manners of the inhabitoures therein.
Chap. 1.
IN the year of our Lord 1535. upon Whitsonday, being the 16. of May, by the
commandment of our own Captain James Carthier, and with a common accord, in
the Cathedral Church of S. Malo, we deuoutely each one confessed our selves,
and received the Sacrament: and all entering into the Quier of the said Church,
we presented our selves before the Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord Bishop
of S. Malo, who blessed us all, being in his Bishops Roabes. The Wensday
following, being the 19. of May, there rose a good gale of wind, and
therefore we hoysed Sail with three Ships, that is to say, the great
Hermina, being in burden about a hundredth, or a hundredth and twenty Tun,
wherein the foresaid Captain James Carthier was General, and Master Thomas
Frosmont chief Master, accompanied with Master Claudius of Pont Briand,
Son to the Lord of Monteceuell, and Cupbearer to the Dolphin of France*
Charles of Pomera^^^, John Powlet, and other Gentlemen. In the second Ship
called the little Hermina, being of threescore Tun burden, were Captains
under the said Carthier, Mace Salobert, and Master William Marie. In the third
Ship called the Hemerillon, being of forti^ Tun in burden, were Captains
M. William Brittan, and M. James Maingare. So we sailed with a good and
prosperous wind, until the 20. of the said month, at which time the weather
turned into storms and te^pests, ye which with contrary winds, and
darkness, endured so long yt our ships being without any rest, suffered as
much as any ships that ever went on seas: so that the 25. of June, by reason of
that foul and foggie weather, all our ships lost sight one of another,
neither saw we one another again till we came to the new land where we had
appointed to meet. After we had lost one another, we in the Generals ship were
with contrary winds tossed too and fro on the sea, until the seventh of July,
upon which day we arrived and came to the Island called the Island of Birds,
which lies from the main land.44. leagues. This Island is so full of birds,
that all our ships might easily have bin fraighted with them, and yet for the
great number that there is, it would not seem that any were taken away. We to
victual our selves filled two boats of them. This Island has the Pole
elevated.49. degrees, and 40. minutes. Upon the eight of the said month we
sailed further, and with a prosperous weather came to the Port called The Port
of white Sands, that is in the Baie called The Baie of Castles, where we had
purposed to meet and stay together the fifteenth of the said month. In this
place therefore we looked for our felows, that is to say, the other two ships,
til the.26. of the month, on which day both came together. So soon as our
fellows were come, we set our ships in a readiness, taking in both water,
wood, and other necessaries. And then on the 29. of the said month, early in
the morning we hoised sail to pass on further, and sailing along the
Northern coast that runs Northeast and Southwest, til two hours after
Sun set or there aboutes, and then we crossed along two Islands, which do
stretch further forth than the others, which we called S. Williams Islands,
b^ing distant about 20. leagues or more from the Port of Breast. All the coast
from the Castles to that place lies East and Weast, Northeast and Southweast,
having between it sundry little Islands, altogether barren and full of
stones, without either earth or trees, excepted certain Valleys only. The
next day being the last of Iulye saving one, we sailed on (Westward to find
out other Islands) which as yet we had not found, xij. leagues and a half,
among which there is a great Baye toward the North all full of Islands and
great creekes, where many good harboroughes seem to be: them we named Saint
Marthas Islands, from which about a league and a half further into the sea,
there is a dangerous shallow, wherein are four or five rocks, which lie from
Saint Marthas Islands about vij. leagues as you pass into the said Islands, on
the East and on ye West side, to which we came the said day an hour after
noone, and from that hour until midnight we sailed about fifteen leagues
athwart a cape of ye lower Islands, which we named S. Germans Ila^ds
South-eastward from which place about three leagues, there is a very dangerous
shallow* Likewise between S. Germans Cape and S. Marthas, about two leagues
from the said Ila^ds, there lies a ba^ck of sand, upon which hanck ye water is
but two fadome deep, and therefore seeing ye danger of ye coast, we struck
sail and went no further ye night: The next day being ye last of July, we
went al along the coast yt runs East and west, West and by North, which is
al environed about with Islands and dry sands, and in truth are very
dangerous. The length from S. Germans Cape to the said Islands is about xviij.
leagues and a half, at the end of which there is a goodly plot of ground full
of huge and high trees, albeit the rest of the coast be compassed about with
sands without any sign or show of harboroughs, til we came to Thiennots Cape,
which tends Northwest about vij. leagues from ye forsaid Ila^ds, which
Thiennots Cape we noted in our former voyage, and therefore we failed on all
that night Weast Northwest, til it was day, and then the wind turned again
from us, wherefore we went to seek a Haven wherein we might harbor our ships,
and by good hap, found one fit for our purpose, about vij. leagues and a half
beyond Thiennots Cape, and that we named S. Nicholas Haven, it lies amidst
four Islands that stretches into the sea. Upon the next we for a token set up
a wooden cross. But note by the way that cross must be turned Northeast, and
then bending toward it, leave it on the left hand, and you shall find three
fadome water, and within the Haven but two. Also you are to take heed of two
shelues that lean outward half a league. All this coaste is full of quick
sands and very dangerous, albeit in sight many good Havens seem to be
there, yet is there naught else but shelues and sands. We staide and rested
our selves in the said Haven, until the seventh of August being Sundaye: on
which day we hoysed sail, and came toward land one the nether side
toward Rabasts Cape, distant from the said Haven about twenty leagues North
Northeast, and South Southweast: but the next day there rose a stormy and a
contrary wind, and therefore we could find no Haven there toward the
South. Thence we went coasting along toward the North, beyond the aboue-sayde
Haven about ten leagues, where we found a goodly great gulf, full of
Islands, passages, and entraunces toward what wind soever you please to bend:
for the knowledge of this gulf there is a great Island that is a Cape of the
maine land, stretching somewhat further forth than the others, and about two
leagues within the land, there is an Hill fashioned as it were an heap of
corn. We named the said Gulf Saint Laurence his Baie. The twelfth of the
said month we went from the said S. Laurence his Bay, or Gulf, sailing
Westwarde, and came to find a Cape of maine land on the Northside of the
Baye, that runs from the said Saint Laurence his Baie about five and
twenty leagues West and by South. And of the two wild men which we took in
our former voyage, it was told us that this was of the Band^ toward the
South, and that there was an Island, on the Southerlye part of which is the
way to go to Honguedo where the year before we had taken them in Canada,
and that two days journey from the said Cape, an Island began the Kingdom of
Siguenay, in the land^ Northwarde extending toward Canada, and about three
leagues athwart the said Cape, there is above fifty faddome deep. Moreover I
believe that there was never so many Whale^ seen as we saw that day about the
Cape. The next day after our Lady day in August, being the fifteenth of the
month, having past those straightes, where we had notice of certain lands
that we left toward the South, which lands are full of very high hills, and
therefore we named them The Islands of the Assumption, and one Cape of the said
high countries lies East north-easte, and Weste south-west, the distaunce
between which, is about five and twenty leagues. The Countries lying North,
may plainly be perceived to be higher tha^ the Southerly more than thirty
leagues. We trended ye said lands about toward the South, from the said day
until Twesday noone following, the wind being in the West, and therefore we
bended toward the North, purposing to go and see the land that we before had
spyed. Being arrived there, we found the said Islands, as it were joined
together, and low toward the Sea. And the Northerly mountains that are upon
the said low Islands stretching East, Weste, and by Southe. Our men told us
that there was the beginning of Saguenay, and that it was land inhabited, and
that thence comes the red Copper, of them named CAIGNETDAZE. There is
between the Southerly Islands, and the Northerly about 30. leagues distance, and
more tha^ 100. faddome depth. The said men did moreover certifye unto us, that
there was the way and beginning of the great river of Hochelaga, a ready way to
Canada, which river the further it went the narower it came, even until to
Canada, and that then there was fresh water, which went so far upwards, that
they had never heard of any man had gone to the head of it, and that there
is no other passage but with small boats. Our Captain hearing their talk,
and how they did affirm no other passage to be there, would not at that time
proceed any further, till he had seen and noted the other Islands, and coast
toward the North, which he had ommitted to see, after Saint Larance his gulf,
because he would exquisitly know, if in the Islands toward the South any
passage had bin discovered.

How our Captain caused the ships to return back again, only to know if in
Saint Laurence gulf there were any passage toward the North. CHAP. 2.
Upon the 18. of August being Wednesday, our Captain^ caused his ships to
wind back, and bend toward the other shore, so that we trended the said
Northerly cost, which runs South-east, and North-west, being fashioned like
unto half a bow, and is a very high land, but yet not so high as that on the
Southerly parts. The Thursday following we came to seven very high Islands,
which we named The round Islands. These Islands are distant from the others
about forty leagues, and stretche out into the Sea about three or four
leagues. About these there are goodly low grounds to be seen full of
goodlye trees, which we the Friday following, with our boats compassed
about. Overthwart these Islands there are diverse sandy shelues more than two
leagues into the sea, very dangerous, which at a a low water remain almost
dry. At the furthest bounds of these low Islands, that contain about ten
leagues, there is a river of fresh water, that with such swiftness runs into
the sea, that for the space of one league within it the water is as fresh as
any fountain water. We with our boats entered into the said river, at the
entrance of which we found about one fadome water. There are in this river
many fishes shaped like horses, which as our wild men told us, all the day
long lie in the water, and the night on land: of which we saw therein a great
number. The next day being the one and twentieth of the month, by break of day
we hoysed sail, and sailed so long about the said coaste, that we had sight
of the Northerly parts of it, which as yet we had not seen, and of the Island
of the Assumption which we had found, departing from the said land: which
thing so soon as we had done, and that we were certifyed no other passage to be
there, we came to our ship again, which we had left at the said Islands,
where is a good harborough, the water being about nine or ten faddome. In the
same place by occasion of contrary winds and foggie mystes, we were
constrained to stay, not being either able to come out of it, or hoyse sail
til the four and twentieth of the month. On which day we departed and came to a
haven on the Southerly coast, about 80. leagues from the said Islands. This
haven is over against three flat Ila^ds yt lie amidst a river, because on the
half way of ye said Islands, and the said Haven toward the North, there is a
very great river that runs between the high and low Islands, and more than
three leagues into the sea: it has many shelues, and there is not altogether
one fadome water, so that the place is very dangerous: and from bank to bancke
of the said shelues, there is either xv. or xx. yardes. All the Northerly cost
runs East Northeast and South Southwest. The said haven wherein we stayed,
is as it were but a sluice of the waters that rise by the flood, and but of small
account, we named them S. John's Isleetes, because we found them, and entered
into the^ the day of the beheading of that Saint. About five leagues before you
come to the said haven Westward, there is no passage at al but only with little
boats. The haven of S. John's Islettes, dries up all the waters that rise by
flowing, yea if it flow a faddome. The best place to harborough ships therein
is on the South part of a certain little Islande that is over against the
said haven, whereby the bancke or shore of of the Island rises. Upon the first
of September we departed out of the said haven, purposing to go toward Canada,
and about 15. leagues from it toward West Southwest, amidst ye river there are
three Islands, over against the which the river runs swift, and is of a
great depth, and it is that which leads, and runs into the Country and
kingdom of Saguenay, as by the two wild men of Canada it was told us. This
river, passes and runs along very high and steep hills of bare stone,
where very little earth is, and notwithstanding there is great quantity of
sundry sorts of trees that grow in the said bare stones, even as upon good
and fertile ground, in such sort that we have seen some so great as well
would suffice to make a maste for a ship of forty Tun burden, and as
green as possible can be growing, in a stony rock without any earth at all.
At the entrance of the said river we met with four boats full of wild men,
which as far as we could perceive, very fearefullye came toward us, so
that some of them went back again, and the other came as near us as easilye
they might hear and understand one of our wild men, who told them his name,
and then took acquaintance of them, upon whose word they came to us. The next
day, being the second of September, we came out of the river to go to Canada,
and by reason of the Seas flowing, the tide was very swifte and dangerous for
that on the South part of it there lie two Islands, about which more than
three leagues compass, lie many great stones, and but two faddome water: and
the flowing amidst those Islands, is very inconstant and doubtefull, that if
it had not been for our boats, we had been in great danger to loose our
lives: and coasting along the said dry sands, there is more than fifteen
fadome water. About five leagues beyond the river of Saguenay Southweast,
there is another Island more Northerly acrosse, which are certain high
pieces of land, and thereaboutes we thought to have cast Ancker on purpose to
stay the next tide, but we could sound no ground by three score fadome within
a flighte shoot from shore, so that we were constrained to wind back to the
said Island, where we sounded again, and found eighteen faddome. The next
morning we hoysed sail and went thence, sailing further on, where we had
notice of a certain kind of fish never to-fore of any manne seen or
known. They are about the bigness of a Purpois, yet nothing like them, of
body very well proportioned, headed like Graye-houndes, altogether as white
as Snow, without any spotte, within which River there is great quantity of
them: they do live altogyther between the Sea and the fresh Water. These of
the Country call them ADHOTHVYS, they fold us that they be very sauorye and
good to be eaten. Moreover they affirm none to be found else-wher but in that
river. The sixth of the month, the weather being calm and fair, we went about
fifteen leagues more upward into the river, and there lighted on an Island that
looks Northward, and it makes a little haven or creek wherein are many and
innumerable great Tortoyzes, continuallye lying about that Island. There are
likewise great quantity of the said Aphothuys taken by the inhabitours of the
Country, so that there is as great concourse and meeting in that place as is at
Bordeous in France at every tide. This Island is in length about three leagues,
and in breadth two, and is a goodly and fertile plot of ground, replenished with
many goodly and great trees of many sorts. Among the rest there are many
Filburde trees, which we found hanging full of them, somewhat bigger and better
in savor than ours, but somewhat harder, and therefore we called it The Island
of Filburdes. The seventh of the month, being our Ladies even, after service we
went from that Island, to go up higher into the river, and came to the
Fourteen Islands, seven or eight leagues from the Island of Filburdes, where
the Country of Canada begins, one of which Islands is ten leagues in
length, and five in breadth, greatly inhabited of such men as only live by
fishing of such sorts of fishes as the river affourdeth, according to the
season of them. After we had cast Ancker between the said Island, and the
Northerly coast, we went on land and took our two wild men with us, meeting
with many of those Country people, who would not at all approach unto us, but
rather fled from us until our two men began to speak unto them, telling
the^ that they were Taignoagny and Domagaia, who so soon as they had taken
aquaintance of the^, began greatly to rejoice, dancing and showing many sorts
of ceremonies: and many of the chiefest of the^ came to our boats and brought
many Eles, and other sorts of fishes, with two or three burdens of great Millet
wherewith they make their bread, and many great mus^ milions. The same day came
also many other boats full of those Countrymen and Women, to see and take
aquaintance of our two me^, al which were as courteously received, and friendly
entertained of our Captain, as possible could be. And to have them the better
acquaynted with him, and make them his friends, he gave them many small gifts,
but of small value: nevertheless, they were greatly contented with them. The
next day following, the Lord of Canada (whose proper name was Donnacona) but
by the name of Lord, they call him Agouhanna, with twelve boats came to our
Ships, accompanied of many people, who causing ten of his Boats to go back
with the other two, approached unto us with sixteen men more. Then began the
said Agouhanna being nearest unto our Ship, according to their manner and
fashion, to frame a long Oration, moving all his body and members after a
strange fashion, which thing is a Ceremony and sign of gladness and
security among them, and then coming to the Generals Ship, where
Taignoagny, and Domagaia spoke with them, and they with him, where they began
to tell and show unto him what they had seen in France, and what good
entertainment they had had, hearing which things, the Lord seemed to be very
glad of, and prayed our Captain to reach him his arm, that he might kiss it,
which thing he did: their Lord taking it, laid it about his neck, for so they
use to do when they will make much of one. Then our Captain entered into
Agouhannas boat, causing bread and wine to be brought, to make the said Lord
and his company to eat and drink, which thing they did, and were greatly
thereby contented and satisfied. Our Captain for that time gave them nothing,
because he looked for a fitter opportunity. These things being done, each one
took leave of others, and the Lord went with his boats again where he was
come from. Our Captain then caused our boats to be set in order, that with
the next tide he might go up higher into the River, to find some harborough
wherein to set our Ships: and the next tide we went coasting along the said
Island, about ten leagues, at the end whereof, we found a goodly and pleasant
sluice of water, where is another little river and haven, where by reason of the
flo^d there, is two faddome water. This place seemed to us very fit and
commodious to put our ships therein, and so we did very safely, we named it the
holy Cross, for on that day we came thither. Near unto it, there is a
village, whereof Donnacona is Lord, and there he keeps his abode: it is
called Stad^gona, as goodly a plot of ground as possibly may be seen, and
therewithal very fruitful, full of goodly trees even as in France, as Oaks,
Elmes, Ashes, Walnut^ trees, Maple trees, Cidrons, Vines, and white Thorns,
that bring forth fruit as big as any Damsons, and many other sorts of trees,
under which grows as fair tall hemp, as any in France, without any seed, or
any man's work or labor at all. Having considered the place, and finding it
fit for our purpose, our Captain withdrew himself on purpose to return to
our Ships, but behold, as we were coming out of the River, we met coming
against us one of the Lords of that village Stadagona, accompanied with many
others, as men, women, and children, who after the fashion of their Country,
in sign of mirth and joy, began to make a long Oration, the Women still
singing and dancing up to the knees in water. Our Captain knowing their good
will and kindness toward us, caused the Boat wherein they were, to come unto
him, and gave them certain trifles, as knives, and beads of glass, whereat
they were marvelous glad, for we being gone about 3. leagues from them, for
the pleasure they conceyue^ of our coming, we might hear the^ sing, and see
the^ dance for all they were so far.

How our Captain went to see and note the bigness of the Island, and the
nature of it, and then returned to the Ships, causing them to be brought to
the River of the holy Cross. CHAP. 3.
AFter we were come with our Boats unto our Ships again, our Captain
caused our Barks to be made ready to go on land in the said Island, to note
the trees that in show seemed so fair, and to consider the nature and quality
of it, which thing we did, and found it full of goodlye trees like to ours.
Also we saw many goodly Vines, a thing not tofore of us seen in those
Countries, and therefore we named it Bacchus Island. It is in length about
twelve leagues, in sight very pleasant, but full of woods, no part of it
wrought, unless it be in certain places, where a few houses be for Fishers
dwellings, as before we have said. The next day we departed with our Ships to
bring them to the place of the holy Cross, and on the 14. of that month we
came thither, and the Lord Dormacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, with 25.
Boats full of those people, came to meet us, coming from the place whence we
were come, and going toward Stadagona, where their abiding is, and all came to
our Ships, showing sundry and diverse gestures of gladness and mirth, except
those two that we had brought, to wit, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, who seemed
to have altered and changed their mind and purpose, for by no means they would
come unto our Ships, albeit sundry times they were earnestly desired to do it,
whereupon we began to mistrust somewhat. Our Captain asked the^ if according to
promise they would not go with him to Hochelaga, they answered yea, for so they
had purposed, and then each one withdrew himself. The next day being the
fiftenth of the month, our Captain went on shore, to cause certain poles
and piles to be driven into the water, and set up, that the better and safe^yer
we might set our Ship there: and to behold that, many of those Country
people came to meet us there, among whom was Donnacona, and our two men, with
the rest of their company, who kept themselves aside under a point or nooke
of land that is upon the shore of a certain River, and no one of them came
unto us as the other did that were not on their side. Our Captain
understanding that they were there, commanded part of our men to follow
him, and he went to the said point, where he found the said Donnacona,
Taignoagny, Domagaia, and diverse other: and after salutations given on each
side, Taignoagny settled himself foremost to speak to our Captain, saying that
ye Lord Donnacona did greatly grieve and sorrow that our Captain and his me^
did wear warlike weapons, and they not. Our Captain answered, that albeit it
did grieve them, yet would not he leave the^ of, and that (as he knew) it was
ye manner of France. But for all these words, our Captain and Donnacona left
not off to speak one to another, and freendly to entertain one another. Then
did we perceive, that whatsoever Taignoagny spoke, was only long of himself,
and of his fellow, for that our Captain departed thence. He and Donnacona
entered into a marvelous steadfast league of friendship, whereby all his people
at once with a loud voice, cast out three great cries, (a horrible thing to
hear) and each one having taken license of the other for that day, we went a
board again. The day following, we put our two great Ships within the River
and harborough, where the waters being at the highest, are but one fadome and
half deep, and at the lowest, but half a fadome. We left our Galion without
the sluice, to the end we might bring it to Hochelaga. So soon as we had
safely placed our Ships, behold, we saw Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia,
with more than five hundred persons, men, women, and children, and the Lord
with ten or twelve of the chiefest of the Country came a board of our
ships, who were all courteously received, and friendly entertained, both of
our Captain, and of all us: and diverse gifts of small value were given them.
Then did Taignoagny tell our Captain, that his Lord did greatly sorrow that he
would go to Hochelaga, and that he would not by any means permit that any of
them should go with him, and that the River was of no importance. Our Captain
answered him, that for all his saying, he would not leave off his going
thither, if by any means it were possible, for that he was commanded by his
King to go as far as possibly he could: and that if he (that is to say
Taignoagny) would go with him, as he had promised he should be very well
entertained, beside that, he should have such a gift given him, as he should
well content himself: for he should do nothing else but go with him to
Hochelaga, and come again. To whom Taignoagny answered, that he would not
by any means go, and thereupon suddenly returned to their houses. The next
day being the 17. of September, Donnacona returned even as at the first, and
brought with him many Eeles, with sundry sorts of other fishes, whereof they
take great store in the said River, as more largely hereafter shall be
showed. And as soon as they were come to our Ships, according to their
wonted use began to sing and dance. This done, Donnacona caused all his
people to be set of one side, then making a round circle upon the Sand,
caused our Captain with all his people to enter therein, then he began to
make a long Oration: holding in one of his hands a Maiden child 10. or 12.
years old, which he presented unto our Captain: then suddenly began his
people to send out three shreekes or howles, in sign of joy and league of
friendship, presently upon that he did present unto him two other young Male
children one after another, but younger than the other, at the gyuing of which,
even as before, they gave out shreekes and howles very loud, with other
ceremonies: for which presents, our Captain gave the said Lord great and
hearty thanks. The Lord told our Captain then, that one of the children was
his own brother, and that the Maiden child was daughter unto his own sister,
and these presents were only given him, to the end he should not go to
Hochelaga at all, to whom our Captain answered, that if they were only given
him to that intent, if so he would he should take them again, for that by no
means he would leave his going off, for as much as he was commanded of his
King. But concerning this, Domagaia told our Captain, that their Lord had
given him those children as a sign and token of goodwill and friendship, and
that he was contented to go with him to Hochelaga, upon which talk great
words arose between Taignoagny and Domagaia, by which we plainly perceived
that Taignoagny was but a crafty knave, and that he pretended but mischief
and treason, as well by this deed as others that we by him had seen. After
that our Captain caused the said children to be put in our ships, and
caused two Swords, and two copper Basens, the one wrought, the other plain,
to be brought unto him, and them he gave to Donnacona, who was therewyth
greatly contented, yelding most hartye thanks unto our Captain for them, and
presently upon that he commanded all his people to sing and dance, and
desired our Captain to cause a piece of artillery to be shot off, because
Taignoagny and Domagaia made great brags of it, and had told them marvelous
things, and also, because they had never heard nor seen any before: to whom
our Captain answered, most willingly: and by and by commanded his men to
shoot off 12. cannons charged with bullettes, acrosse the wood that was hard
by those people and ships, at whose noise they were greatly astonished and
amazed, for they thought that Heaven had fallen upon them, and put themselves
to flight, howling, crying, and shrieking, that it seemed hell were broken
loose. But before we went thence, Taignoagny caused other men to tell us, that
those men which we had left in our Gallion at road, had stain two men of
their company, with a piece that they had shot off, whereupon the rest had
put themselves all to flight, as though they should all have been slain,
which afterward we found untrue, because our men had not shot off any piece
at all that day.

How Donnacona, Taignoagny, with others, devised a pretty slight or policy:
for they caused three of their men to be attyred like Devils, fayning to be
sent from their God Cudruaigny, only to hinder our voyage to Hochelaga. CHAP.
4.
THe next day being the eighteenth of September, these men still endeavored
themselves to seek all means possible to hinder and let our going to
Hochelaga, and devised a pretty guile, as hereafter shall he showed. They went
and dressed three men like Devils, being wrapped in dogs skins white and
black, their faces besmeered as black as any coals, with horns on their
heads more than a yar^ long, and caused them secreatly to be put in one of
their boats, but came not near our ships as they were wont to do, for they
lay hidden within the wood for the space of two hours, looking for the tide,
to the end, the boat wherein the Devils were, might approach and come near us,
which, when time was, came, and all the rest issued out of the wood coming to
us, but yet not so near as they were wonted to do. There began Taignoagny to
salute our Captain, who asked him if he would have the boat to come for
him, he answered, not for that time, but after a while he would come unto our
ships: then presently came that boat rushing out* wherein the three devils
were with such long horns on their heads, and the middlemost came making a
long Oration, and passed a long our ships without turning or looking toward
us, but with the boat went to strike on land^. Then did Donnacona with all
his people pursue them, and lay hold on the boat and Devils, who so soon as
the men were come to them, fell prostrate in the boat even as if they had
been dead: then were they taken up and carried into the Wood, being but a
stones cast off, then every one wythdr^we himself into the wood, not only
staying behind with us, where being, they began to make a long discourse, so
loud, that we might hear them in our ships, which lasted above half an
hour, and being ended, we began to epsy Taignoagny and Domagaia coming toward
us, holding their hands joined together, carrying their hattes under their
upper garment, showing a great admiration, and Taignoagny lookyng up to
Heaven, cried three times Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, and Domagaia dooyng as his
fellow had done before, cried, Jesus Maria. James Carthier our Captain
hearing them, and seeing their gestures and ceremonies, asked of them what they
ayled, and what was happened or chanced anew, they answered, that there were
very ill tydyngs befallen, saying in French, Nenns est il bon, that is to say,
it was not good: our Captain asked them again, what it was, then answered
they, that their Lord Cudruaigny had spoken in Hochelaga, and that he had sent
those three men to show unto them that there was so much Ice and Snow by the
way, that whosoever went thither should dye, which words when we heard, we
laughed, and mocked them, saying, that their God Cudruaigny was but a fool and
a noddy, for he knew not what he did or said: then bade we them show his
messengers from us, that Christ would defend them al from cold, if they
would go with him. Then did they ask of our Captain, if he had spoken with
him, he aunsweared, no, but that his ministers had, and that he had told them
they should have fair weather: which words when they had heard, they thanked
our Captain, and departed toward the woodde to tell those news unto their
fellows, who suddenly came all rushing out of the woodde, seeming to be very
glad for those words that our Captain had spoken, and to show, that thereby
they had had, and felt great joy. So soon as they were before our Ships,
they altogether gave out three great shreekes, and thereupon began to sing and
dance, as they were won^ to do. But for a resolution of the matter Taignoagny
and Domagaia told our Captain, that their Lord Donnacona would by no means
permit that any of them should go with him to Hochelaga, unless he would
leave him some hostage to stay with him, our Captain answered them, that if
they would not go with him with a good will, they should stay, for he would not
by any means leave his going off, but would by all means possible endeavor
himself to go thither if he could.

How our Captain* with all his Gentlemenne, and fifty Mariners, departed
with our Gallion, and the two boats of Canada to go to Hochelaga, and also
there is described, what by the way and upon the river was seen. CHAP. 5.
THe next day being the 19. of September we hoised sail, and with our Gallion
and two boats departed to go up the river with the floude, where on both
shoares of it we began to see as goodly a country as possibly can with eye
be seen, all replenished with very goodly trees, and Vines laden as full of
Grapes as could be all along the river; which rather seemed to have been
planted and wrought by handy work than otherwise. True it is, that because
they are not dressed and wrought as they should be, their bunches of Grapes
are not so great as ours, also we saw all along the river many horses
inhabited of Fishers, which take all kinds of fishes, and they with great
familiarity and kindness came unto us, even as if we had been their
Countrymen, and brought us great store of fish, such as they had with
other things, which we exchaunged with them for other wares, who lifting up
their hands toward heaven, gave many signs of joy: we stayed at a place called
Hochela^, about 25. leagues from Canada, where the river waxes very narrow,
and runs very swift, wherefore it is very dangerous, not only for that, but
also for certain great stones that are therein: Many boats and barks came unto
us, in one of which came one of the chief Lords of the Country, making a
long discourse, who being come near us, did by evident signs and gestures
show us, that the higher the River went, the more dangerous it was, and bade
us take heed of our selves. The said Lord presented and gave unto our
Captain two of his own children, of which our Captain took one being a
wench seven or eight years old, the man child he gave him again, because it
was too young, for it was but three years old. Our Captain as friendly and as
courteously did entertain and receive the said Lord and his company, giving
the^ certain small trifles, and so they departed toward shore again.
Afterward the said Lord, his wife, and his daughter, came to visit our
Captain at Canada, bringing him certain small presents. From the 19. until
the 28. of September, we sailed up along the said river, never losing one
hour of time, all which time we saw as goodly and pleasant a Country as
possibly can be wished for, full (as we have said before) of all sorts of
goodlye trees, that is to say, Oaks, Elmes, Walnut-trees, Cedrons, Firres,
Ashes, Box, Willowes, and great store of Vines, all as full of Grapes as
could be, that if any of our fellows went on shore, they came home laden
with them: there are likewise many Cranes, Swannes, Geese, Duckes, Feasants,
Partridges, Thrushes, Blacke-birdes, Turtles, Finches, Re^breastes,
Nightingales, Sparrowes, with many other sorts of Birds, even as in France, and
great plenty and store. Upon the 28. of September, we came to a great wide
lake in the middle of ye river five or six leagues broad, and twelve long,
all that day we went against the tide, having but one faddome water, still
keeping the said scantling: being come to one of the heads of the Lake, we
could espy no passage or going out; nay, rather it seemed to have been closed
and shut up round about, and there was but half a faddome water, little
more or less. And therefore we were constrained to cast Ancker, and stay
with our Gallion, and went with our two boats to seek some going out, and
^e place we found four or five branches, which out of the river come into the
Lake, and they come from Hoche^aga. But in the said branches, because of the
great fierceness and swiftness wherewith they break out, and the course of
the water, they make certain Creekes* and goings acrosse, yet at that time
there was but half a faddome water. Those Creekes being passed, we found three
fadome, and as far as we could perceive by the flood it was that time of the
year that the waters are lowest, for at other times they ^l^we higher by two
faddomes. All these four or five branches do compass about five or six
Islands very pleasant, and thereby rises the end of the Lake, about 15.
leagues beyond, they all do come into one. That day we landed in one of the
said Islands, and met with five men that were hunting of wild beasts, who
freely and familiarly came to our boats without any fear, as if we had
ever been brought up together. Our boats being somewhat near the shore, one
of them took our Captain in his arms, and carried him on shore, as lightly
and as easily, as if he had been a child of five old: so strong and sturdy
are those people. We found, that they had a great heap of wild Mice that
live in the water, as big as a Conny, and very good to eat, which they gave
unto our Captain, who for a recompense gave them knives and glazen Beads. We
asked the^ with signs if that was the way to Hochelaga, they answered yea,
and that we had yet three days sailing thither.

How our Captain caused our Boats to be mended and dressed to go to
Hochelaga: and because the way was somewhat difficult and hard, we left our
Gallion behind: and how we came thither, and what entertainment we had of
the people. CHAP. 6.
THe next day our Captain seeing, that for that time it was not possible for
our Gallion to go on any further, he caused our Boats to be made ready,
and as much munition and victualles to be put in them, as they could well
bear ^ he departed with them, accompanied with many Gentlemen, that is to
say, Claudius of Ponte Briand, Cup Bearer to the Lord Dolphin of France:
Charles of Poueray: John Gouion: John Powlet: with twenty and eight mariners;
and Mace Iallobert, and William the Britton, who had the charge under the
Captain of the other two ships; to go up as far as they could into that
river: we^ sailed with good and prosperous weather until the nineteenth of
October, on which day we came to the town of Hochelaga, distant from the
place where we had left our Gallion 45. leagues. In which place of Hochelaga,
and all the way we went, we met with many of those countrymen, who brought us
fish, and such other victualles as they had, still dancing, and greatly
rejoicing at our coming. Our Captain, to lure them in, and to keep them our
friends, to recompense them, gave them knives, beads, and such small trifles,
wherewith they were greatly satisfied. So soon as we were come near
Hochelaga, there came to meet us above a thousand persons, men, women and
children, who afterward did friendly and merely entertain and receive us as
any father would do his child, which he had not of long time seen, the men
dancing on one side, the women on an other, and likewise the children on an
other: after that they brought us great store of fish, and of their bread made
of Millet, casting them into our Ships so thick, that you would have
thought it to fall from heaven. Which when our Captain saw, he, with many
of his company went on shore: so soon as ever we were alande, they came
clustring about us, making very much of us, brynging their young children in
their arms, only to have our Captain and his company to touch them, making
signs and shelves of great mirth and gladness, that lasted more than half an
hour. Our Captain seeing their loving kindness and entertainment of us,
caused all the women orderly to be set in array, and gave them Beads made of
Tin, and other such small trifles, and to some of the men he gave knives: then
he returned to the boats to supper* and so passed that night, all which while
all those people stood on the shore as near our boats as they might,
making great fires, and dancing very merrily, still crying, Aguiaze, which in
their tongue signifies Mirth and Safety.

How our Captain with five Gentlemen, and twenty armed men, all well in
order, went to see the Town of Hochelaga, and the situation of it. CHAP. 7.
Our Captain the next day very early in the morning, having very gorgeously
attired himself, caused all his company to be set in order to go to see the
Town and habitation of those people, and a certain Mountain that is somewhat
near the City: with whom went also five Gentlemen, and twenty Mariners,
leaving the rest to keep and look to our Boats: we took with us three men
of Hochelaga to bring us to the place. All along as we went, we found the way
as well beaten and frequented as can be, the fairest and best Country that
possibly can be seen, full of as goodly great Oaks as are in any wood in
France, under which the ground was all covered over with fair Akornes. After
we had gone about four or five leagues, we met by the way one of the chiefest
Lords of the City, accompanied with many mo, who so soon as he saw us,
beckned and made signs unto us, that we must rest us in that place, where they
had made a great fire, and so we did. After that we had rested our selves
there a while, the said Lord began to make a long discourse, even as we have
said above they are accustomed to do in sign of mirth and friendship, showing
our Captain and all his company a joyful countenance, and good will, who gave
him two hatchets, a pair of knives, and a Cross, which he made him to kiss,
and then put it about his neck, for which he gave our Captain hearty
thanks. This done, we went along, and about a league and a half farther, we
began to find goodly and large feeldes, full of such Corn as the Country
yields. It is even as the Millet of Bresill, as great, and somewhat bigger
than small Peason, wherewith they live even as we do with ours. In the midst of
those feelde is the City of Hochelaga, placed near, and as it were joined to
a great Mountain that is tilled round about, very fertile, on the top of
which, you may see very far, we named it Mount Royal. The City of
Hochelaga is round, compassed about with timber, with three course of
Rampires, one within another, framed like a sharp Spire, but laid acrosse
above. The middlemost of them is made and builte as a direct line, but
perpendicular. The Rampires are framed and fashioned with pieces of Timber,
laid along on the ground, very well and cunningly joined together after their
fashion. This enclosure is in height about two rods. It has but one Gate
or entry thereat, which is shut with piles, stakes, and bars. Over it,
and also in many places of the wall, there be places to run along, and
Ladders to get up, all full of stones, for the defense of it. There are in
the Town about fifty houses, about fifty paces long, and twelve, or
fifteen broad, builte all of woodde, covered over with the bark of the
woodde, as broad as any boorde, very finely and cunningly joined together.
Within the said Houses, there are many roomthes, Lodgings, and Chambers. In
the midst of every one there is a great Court, in the middle whereof they
make their fire. They live in commons together: then do the Husbands, Wives,
and Children, each one retire themselves to their Chambers* They have also on
the top of their Houses certain Garets, wherein they keep their Corn to
make their bread withal: they call it CARRACONNY, which they make as
hereafter shall follow. They have certain pieces of woodde, made hollow,
like those whereon we beat our Hemp, and with certain Beetles of woodde
they beat their Corn to powder: then they make paste of it, and of the paste,
Cakes, or else Tartes, then lay them on a broad and hot stone, and then cover
it with hot Tiles, and so they bake their Bread, in stead of Ouens. They make
also sundry sorts of Pottage with the said Corn of Pease, and of Beans,
whereof they have great store: also with other fruits, as Musk Millions,
very great Cowcombers. They have also in their Houses certain Vessels, as
big as any Boat, or Tun, wherein they preserve and keep, their fish,
causing the same in Summer to be dried in the Sun, and live therewith in
Winter, whereof they make great provision, as we by experience have seen. All
their viandes and meats are without any taste or sauoure of salt at all. They
sleep upon barks of Trees laid all along upon the ground, with the Skins
of certain wild Beasts, wherewith they also cloth and cover themselves. The
thing most precious that they have in all the World, they call it ESVRONY: it
is as white as any Snow: they take it in the River of Cornibotz, in the manner
as here follows. When any one has deserved death, or that they take any of
their enemies in Wars, first they kill him, then with certain great knives
they give great ^lashes and strokes upon the buttockes, flanckes, thighs, and
shoulders: then they cast the same body so mangled, down to the bottom of the
River, in a place where it is, called Esurgny, and there leave it ten or
twelve hours, then they take it up again, and in the cuttes find those. Of
them they make beads, and wear them about their necks, even as we do them
of gold, accompting it the preciousest thing in the World. They have this
virtue and property in them, they will stop or stench any bleeding at the
nose, for we have proved it. These people are given to no other exercise, but
only to husbandry, and fishing wherewith to live, they have no care of any
other wealth or commodity in this world, for they have no knowledge of it, and
that is, because they never travel and go out of their Country, as those of
Canada, and Saguenay do, albeit the Canadians with eyghte or nine Villages more
along that River be subjects unto them.

How we came to the Town of Hochelaga, and the entertaynemente there we had,
and of certain gifts our Captain gave them, with diverse other things. CHAP.
8.
SO soon as we were come near the Town, a great number of the inhabitoures
thereof came to present themselves before us after their fashion, making very
much of us: we were by our guides brought into the midst of the Town. They
have in the middlemost part of their houses a large square place, being from
side to side a good stones cast, where we were brought, and there with signs
were commanded to stay: then suddaynely all the Women and Maidens of the Town
gathered themselves together, part of which had their arms full of young
Children, and as many as could, came to rub our faces, our arms, and what
part of the body soever they could touch, weeping for very joy that they saw
us, showing us the best countenance that possible was, desiring us with their
signs, that it would please us to touch their Children. That done, the men
caused the Women to withdraw themselves back, then they every one late down
on the ground round about us, as if they would have shown and rehearsed some
Comedy, or other show: then presently came the Women again, every one
bringing a fouresquare Matte in manner of Carpettes, and spreading them abroad
on the ground in that place: then they caused us to sit upon them. That done,
the Lord and King of ye country was brought upon nine or ten men's shoulders,
(whom in their tongue they call AGOVHANNA) sitting upon a great Stagges Skin,
and they laid him down upon the forsayde mattes near to our Captain, every
one beckning unto us that he was their Lord and King. This Agouhanna was a man about fifty years old: he was no whitte better apparelled than any of
the rest, only excepted, that he had a certain thing made of beasts Skins
(called Ricc^) like a red towell, and that was in stead of his Crown. He
was full of the palsy, and his members shronke together. After he had with
certain signs and beckes saluted our Captain and all his company, and by
manifest tokens bid us all welcome, he showed his legs and arms to our
Captain, and with signs desired him to touch them, and so he did, rubbing
them with his own hands: then did Agouhanna take the wreath or crown he had
about his head, and gave it unto our Captain, that done, they brought before
him diverse diseased men, some blind, some criple, some lame and impotent, and
some so old that the hear of their eyeleeds came down and covered their
Cheeks, and laid them al along before our Captain, to the end they might
of him be touched: for it seemed unto them that God had been descended and
come down from Heaven to heal them. Our Captain seeing the misery and
devotion of this poor people, recited the Gospel of Saint John, that is to
say, In the beginning was the word: touching every one that were diseased,
praying to God that it would please him to open the hearts of this poor people,
and to make them know his holy word, and that they might receive baptism and
Christendom: that done, he took a book in his hand, and with a loud voice
read all the passion of Christ, word by word, that all the bystanders might
hear him, al which while this poor people kept silence, and were maruellously
attentive, loking up to heaven, and imitating us in gesturs. The^ h^ caused he
men al orderly to be set on one side, ye women on another, and likewise the
children on another, and to the chiefest of them he gave Hatchets, to the other
knives, and to the women beads, and such other small trifles. Then where the
children were, he cast rings, counters, and branches made of Tin, whereat they
seemed to be very glad. That done, our Captain commanded Shaw^es, and
other musical instruments to be sounded, which when they heard, they were very
merry. Then we took our leave and went to our boat* the women seeing that,
put themselves before to stay us, and brought us out of their meats that they
had made ready for us, as fish, pottage, beans, and such other things,
thinking to make us eat, and dine in that place: but because the meats had
no sauoure at all of salt, we liked them not, but thanked them, and with
signs gave them to understand that we had no need to eat. When we were out
of the Town, diverse of the men and women followed us, and brought us to the
top of the forsayde mountain, which we named Mount Royal, it is about a
league from the Town. When as we were on the top of it, we might discern, and
plainly see thirty leagues off. On the North side of it there are many
hills to be seen, running Weaste and East, and as many more on the South,
amongst and between the which the Country is as fair and as pleasant as
possiblye can be seen, being leauell, smoothe, and very plain, fit to be
husbanded and tilled: and in the midst of those fields we might see
further a great way^ than where we had left our boats, where was the
greatest and the swiftest fall of water that any where has been seen, as
great, wide, and large, as our fight might discern, going Southweast along
three fair and round Mountains that we saw, as we judged about fifteen
leagues from us. Those which brought us thither, told and showed us, that in
the said River there were three such falls of water more, as that was where
we had left our boats: but because we could not understand their
language, we could not know how far they were one from another. Moreover,
they showed us with signs, that the said three falls being paste, a man
might sail the space of three months more along that River, and that along
the Hills that are on the North side, there is a great River, which even as
the other comes from the East, we thought it to be the River that runs
through the Country of Saguenay: and without any sign or question moved or
asked of them, they took the chain of our Captains whistell, which was of
silver, and the dagger hafte of one of our fellow Mariners, hangyng on his
side, being of yellowe Copper, guilte, and showed us that such stuff came
from the said River, and that there be Agouionda, that is as much to say,
as evil people, who go all armed even to their fingers ends. Also they
showed us the manner and making of their armoure: they are made of coardes and
woodde, finelye and cunninglye wroughte together. They gave us also to
understand that those Agouionda, do continuallye war against them: but
because we did not understand them well, we could not perceive how far it
was to that Country. Our Captain showed them read Copper, which in their
language they call Caignetadze, and lookyng toward that Country with signs,
asked them if any came from thence, they shaking their heads aunsweared no:
but they showed us that it came from Saguenay, and that lies clean contrary
to the other. After we had heard and seen these things of them, we drew to
our boats accompanied with great multitude of those people: some of them
when as they saw any of our fellows wearye, they would take them up on
their shoulders, and carrye them as on horssebacke. So soon as we came to our
boats, we hoysed sail to go toward ^uer Gallion, doubting of some
mischaunce. Our departure grieved and displeased them very much, for they
followed us along the River as far as they could: we went so fast that on
Mondaye being the fourth of October we came where our Gallion was. The
Twesdaye followyng, being the fifthe of the month, we hoysed sail, and with
our Gallion and boats, departed from thence toward the province of Canada, to
the port of the Holy Cross, where we had left our ships. The seventh day we
came against a river that comes from the North, and entered into that river,
at the entrance whereof are four little Islands, full of fair and goodly
trees: we named that river The river of Fouetz: But because one of those
Islands stretches himself a great way into the river, our Captain at the
point of it caused a goodlye great Cross to be set up, and commanded the
boats to be made ready, that with the next tide he might go up to the said
river, and consider the quality of it, which we did, and that day went up
as far as we could: but because we found it to be of no importance, and
that we could sound no bottom, we returned down and back again.

How we came to the Port of the Holy Cross, and in what state we found our
ships: and how the Lord of the Country came to visit our Captain, and
our Captain him: and of certain particular customs of the people. CHAP. 9.
Upon Monday being the eleventh of October we came to the Port of the Holy
Cross, where our ships were, and found that the masters and Mariners we
had left there, had made and reared a Trench before the ships, altogether
closed with great pieces of Timber set vprighte and very well fastened
together: then had they beset the said trenche about with pieces of
Artillery and other necessary things to shield and defend themselves from
the power of all the Country. So soon as the Lord of the Country heard of
our coming, the next day being the twelfth of October, he came to visit us,
accompanied with Taignoagny, Domagaia* and many others, fayning to be very
glad of our coming, making much of our Captain, who as friendly as he could,
entertained them, albeit they had not deserved it. Donnacona their Lord desired
our Captain the next day to come and see Canada, which he promised to do: for
the next day being the thirteenth of the month, he with all his gentlemen, and
fifty Mariners very well appointed, went to visit Donnacona and his people,
about a league from our ships. The place where they make their abode, is called
Stadagona. When we were about a stones cast from their houses, many of the
inhabitours came to meet us, being all set in a rank, and (as their custom
is,) the men al on one side, and the women on the other, still dancing and
singing without any ceasing: and after we had saluted and received one another,
our Captain gave them knives and such other slight things: then he caused all
the women and children to pass along before him, giving each one a ring of Tin,
for which they gave him hearty thanks: that done, our Captain was by Donnacona
and Taignoagny, brought to their houses (the quality considered) were very
well provided, and stored with such victualles as the Country yields, to
pass away the Winter withal. Then they showed us the skins of five men's
heads spread upon bourds as we do use parchme^t, Donnacona told us that they
were skins of Toudamani, a people dwelling toward the South, who continually
do war against them. Moreover they told us, that it was two years paste
that those Toudamans came to assault them, yea even into the said river, in an
Island that lies over against Saguenay, where they had been the night before,
as they were going a warfaring in Honguedo, with two hundereth persons, men,
women, and children, who being all asleep in a ^ort that they had made, they
were assaulted by the said Toudamans, who put fire round about the ^ort, and
as they would have come out of it to save themselves, they were al slain,
only five excepted, who escaped. For which loss they yet sorrowed, showing
with signs, that one day they would be revenged: that done, we came to our
ships again.

The manner how the people of that Country live: and of certain conditions: of
their Faith, manners, and customs. CHAP. 10.
THis people believe no whit in God, but in one who^ they ca^ Cudrua^gni: the^
say that often he speaks with the^ and tells them what weather shall
follow, whether good or badde. Moreover they say, that when he is angrye with
them he casts duste into their eyes: they believe that when they die they go
into the Stars, and thence by little and little descend down into the Horizon,
even as the Stars do, and ye then they go into certain green fields full of
goodly fair and precious trees, flowers, and fruits. After that they had
given us these things to understand, we showed them their error, and told
that their Cudruaigni did but deceive them, for he is but a Devil and an
evil spirit: affirming unto them, that there is but one only God, who is in
Heaven, and who gives us all necessaries, being the creator of all himself,
and that only we must believe in him: moreover, that it is necessary for us
to be baptized, otherwise we are dampened into Hell. This and many other things
concerning our faith and religion we showed them, all which they did eas^ly
believe, A noughtie liver.
calling their Cudruaigni, Agouiada: so that very ernestly they desired and
prayed our Captain that he would cause them to be baptized, and their Lord,
Taignoagny, Domagaia, and all the people of the town came unto us, hoping to
be baptized: but because we did not throughely know their mind, and that
there was no body could give them our belief and religion to understand, we
excused our selves, desiring Taignoagny and Domagaia to tell the rest of their
Countreymenne, that we would come again another time, and bring Ministers and
Priests with us, for without them they could not be baptized: which they did
easilye believe: for Domagaia and Taignoagny had seen many children baptized
in Brytain while^ they were there. Which promise when they heard, they seemed
to be very glad. They live in common together, and of such commodities as
their Country yields they are indifferentlye well stoared, the inhabitours
of the Town of (...) cloth themselves with the skins of certain wild
beasts, but very miserably. In Winter they wear hosen and shoes made of wild
beasts skins, and in Summer they go barefooted. They keep and observe the
rytes of matrimony, saving that every one weddeth two or three wives, which
(their husbands being dead) do never marrye again, but for the death of
their husbands wear a certain black weed all the days of their life,
besmearing all their faces with cole duste and grease mingled together almost
half a quarter of an inche thick, and by that they are known to be Widows.
They have a filthye and detestable use in marrying of their maidens, and that
is this, they put them all (after they are of l^wfull age to marry) in a
common place, as harlots free for every manne that will have to do with them,
until such time as they find a match. This I say, because I I* have seen
by experience many housen full of those Damsels, even as our schools are full
of children in Fraunc^ to learn to read. Moreover, the misrule and riot that
they keep in those houses is very great, for very want only^ they sport
and dallye together, showing what soever God has sent them. They are no men
of great labor. They ploughe their grounds with certain pieces of wood, as
big as half a sword, on which ground grows their corn, The call it
Offici: it is as big as our small Peason there is great quantity of it
growing in Brasil. They have also great store of musk Milions, Pompons,
Gourdes, Cowcombers, Peason, and Beans of every color, yet differing from
ours. There grows also a certain kind of Herb, whereof in Summer they make
great provision for all the year, making great account of it, and only men
use of it, and first, they cause it to be dried in the Sun, then wear it
about their neck^ wrapped in a little beasts skin made like a little bag,
with a hollow piece of stone or wood like a pipe: then when they please they
make powder of it, and then put it in one of the ends of the said Cornet or
pipe, and laying a cole of ^re upon it, at the other end suck so long, that
they ^ll their bodies full of smoke, till that it comes out of their mouth
and nostrils, even as out of the Tonnel of a Chimny. They say that this does
keep them warm and in health: they never go without some of it about the^. We
our selves have tried the same smoke, and having put it in our mouths, it ^ed
that they had filled it with Pepper dust, it is so hot. The ^omen of that
Country do labor much more than the men, as well in fishing, (whereto they
are greatly given,) as in ^illing and husbanding their grounds, and other
things: as well the me^ as women, and children, are very much more able to
resist cold, than savage beasts, for we with our own eyes have seen some of
the^, when it was coldest, (which cold was extr^eme raw, and bitter) come to
our ships stark naked going upon Snow and Ise, which thing seems incredible
to them that have not seen it. When as the Snow and Ise lies on the ground,
they take great store of wild beasts, as F^unes, Stagges, Bears, Martons,
Hares, and Foxes* (...) diverse other sorts, whose flesh they eat raw,
having (...) dried it in the Sun or smoke, and so they do their fish. As
far forth as we could perceive and understand by these people, it were a
very easy thing to bring the^ to some familiarity and civility, and make
them learn what one would. The Lord GOD for his mercies sake less there unto
his helping hand when he sees cause. Amen.

Of the greatness and deapth of the said River, and of the sorts of Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, and other things that we have seen, with the situation of the
place. CHA. 11.
THe said River begins beyond the Island of Thassumpcion, over against the
high Mountains of Honguedo, and of the seven Islands. The distance over from
one side to the other, is about 35. or 40. leagues. In the midst it is above
100. faddome deep. The surest way to sail upon it, is on the South side, and
toward the North, that is to say, from the said seven Islands, where from
side to side, there is seven leagues, where are also two great Rivers that
come down from the hills of Saguenay, and make diverse very dangerous shealues
in the Sea. At the entrance of those two Rivers, we saw many and great store of
Whales, and sea Horses. Overthwart the said Islands, there is another little
River that runs along those marrish grounds about three or four leagues,
wherein there is great store of water fowls. From the head of that River to
Hochelaga, there is about three hundred leagues: the original beginning of it
is in the river that comes from Saguenay, which rises and springs among
high and steep hills: it enters into that River before it comes to the
province of Canada on the North side. That river is very deep, high, and
straight, wherefore it is very dangerous for any vessel to go upon it. After
that river, follows the province of Canada, wherein are many people dwelling
in open boroughes and villages. There are also in the circuit and territory
of Canada, along, and within the said river, many other Islands, some great, and
some small, among which, there is one that conteyneth above ten leagues in
length, full of goodly and high tr^e^, and also many Vines. You may go into it
from both sides, but yet the surest passage is on the South side. On the shore
or bancke of that River Westward, there is a goodly, fair, and delectable
s^ce, or Creek, convenient and fit for to harborough Ships. Hard by, there
is in that River one place very narrow, deep, and swift running, but it is not
passing the third part of a league, ouer-against the which, there is a goodly
high piece of land, with a Town therein: and the Country about it is very
well tilled and wroughte, and as good as possibly can be seen. That is the
place and abode of Donnacona, and of our two men we took in our first voyage,
it is called Stadagona. But before we come to it, there are four other peopled
Towns, that is to say, Ayraste, Starnatan, Tailla, which stands upon a
hill, and Scitadin, and then Stadagona, under which Town toward the North,
the River and Port of the holy Cross is, where we stayed from the fiftenth of
September, until the sixteenth of May 1536. and there our Ships remained
dry* as we have said before. That place being past, we found the habitation
of the people called Teguenondahi, standing upon an high Mountain, and the
valley of Hochelay, which stands in a Champaigne Country. All that Country
is full of sundry sorts of woodde, and many Vynes, unless it be about the
places that are inhabited, where they have pulled up the Trees to till and
labor the ground, and to build their Houses and Lodgings. There is great
store of Stagges, Deeres, Bears, and other such like sorts of Beasts, as
Connies, Hares, Martons, Foxes, Otters, Weasels, Badgers, and Mice exceeding
great, and diverse other sorts of Venison. They cloth themselves with the
Skins of those Beasts, because they have nothing else to make them apparel
withal. There are also many sorts of Birds, as Cranes, Swannes, Cigne^s, wild
Geese white and gray, Duckes, Thrushes, black Birds, Turtles, wild Pigeons,
Levites, Finches, read breasts, Stares, Nightingales, Sparrowes, and other
Birds, even as in France. Also as we have said before, the said River is the
plentifullest of Fish that ever has of any man bin seen or heard of, because
that from the head to the end of it, according to their seasons, you shall find
all sorts of fresh water fish, and salt. There are also many Whales, Porpo^ses,
Seahorses, and Adhothuis, which is a kind of Fish that we had never seen nor
heard of before. They are as great as Porpoises, as white as any Snow, their
body^ and head fashioned as a gray hound, they are wont always to abide
between the fresh and salt water, which begins between the River of
Saguenay and Canada.

Of certain aduertisements and notes given unto us by those Countrymen, after
our return from Hochelaga. CHAP. 12.
AFter our return from Hochelaga, we have dealte, traffickt, and with great
familiarity and love have bin conversant with those that dwelt nearest unto
our Ships, except that sometimes we had strife and contention with certain
naughty people, full sore against the will of the others. We understood of
Donnacona, and of others, that the said River is called Saguenays River, and
goes to Saguenay, being somewhat more than a league farther Weast
North-weast, and that eight or nine days iourneys beyond, it will bear but
small Boats. But the right and ready way to Saguenay, is from that River to
Hochelaga, and then into another that comes from Saguenay, and then enters
into the foresaid River, and that there is yet one months sailing thither.
Moreover, they told us, and gave us to understand, that there are people clad
with cloth as we are, very honest, and many inhabited Towns, and that they
have great store of Gold, and read Copper, and that about the land the said
first River to Hochelaga and Saguenay, is an Island environed round about with
that and other Rivers, which beyond Saguenay enter into two or three great
Lakes, and that there is a Sea of fresh water found, and as they have heard say
of those of Saguenay, there was never manne heard of that ^ounde out the way
and end thereof: for as they told us, they themselves were never there.
Moreover, they told us, that where we had left our Galion when we ^ente to
Hochelaga, there is a River that goes Southweast, from whence there is a whole
months sailing to go to a certain land, where there is neither Yse nor Snow
seen, where the inhabitours do continually war one against another, where is
great store of Oranges, Almonds, Nuttes, and Apples, with many other sorts of
fruits, and that the men and women are cladde with Beasts Skins even as
they: we asked them if there were any Gold or red Copper, they answered no. I
take this place to be toward Florida, as far as I could perceive and
understand by their signs and tokens.

Of a strange and cruel disease that came to the people of Stadagona, wherewith
because we did haunt their company, we were so infected, that there died 25. of
our company. CHAP. 13.
IN the month of December, we understood that the Plague or Pestilence was
come to the people of Stadagona, in such sort, that before we knew of it,
according to their confession, there were dead above 50. whereupon we forbad
them neither to come near our Forte, nor about our Ships, or us. And albeit we
had driven them from us, the said unknown sickness began to spread it self
amongst us, after the strangest sort that ever was either heard of or seen, in
so much, as some did lose all their strength, and could not stand on their
feet, then did their legs swell, their sinnowes shrink as black as any
cole. To others, all their Skins was spotted with spots of blood of a
purple couloure: then did it ascend up alofte to their anckles, knees,
thighs, shoulders, arms, and neck: their mouth became stinking, their
gummes so rotten, that all the flesh did fall off, even to the roots of the
Teeth, which did also almost all fall out. With such infection did this
Sickness spread it self in our three Ships* that about the middle of
February, of a hundredth and ten persons that we were, there were not ten
whole, so that one could not help the other, a most horrible and pitiful
case, considering the place we were in, for so much as the people of the Country
would daily come before our forte, and saw but few of us. There were already
eight dead, and more than fifty sick, and as we thought, past al hope of
recovery. Our Captain seeing this our misery, and that the sickness was gone
so far, ordained and commanded, that every one should devoutly prepare
himself to prayer, and in remembrance of Christ, caused his Image to be set
up upon a tree, about a Flight shot from the Forte, amidst the Ice and
Snow, giving all men to understand, that on the Sunday following, service
should be said there, and, that whosoever could go, sick, or whole, should
go thither in Procession, singing the seven Psalms of David, with other
Letanies, praying most heartily, that it would please the said our Christ to
have compassion upon us. Service being done, and as well celebrated as we
could, our Captain there made a vow, that if it would please God to give him
leave to return into France, he would go on pilgrimage to our Lady of
Rocquemado. That day Philip Rougemont, borne in Amboisa, died, being two and
twenty years old, and because the sickness was to us unknown, our Captain
caused him to be ripped, to (...) if by any means possible we might know what
it was, and so seek means to save and preserve the rest of the company: he
was found to have his heart white, but rotten, and more than a pottle of red
w^er about it: his liver was indifferent fair, but his lungs black and
mortified, his blood was altogether shru^ke about the heart, so that when he
was opened, great quantity of rotten blood issued out from about his heart:
his milt toward the back was somewhat perished, rough as if it had bin rubbed
against a stone. Moreover, because one of his thighs was very black without, it
was opened, but within it was whole and sound: that done, as well as we could
he was buried. In such sort did the sickness continue and increase, that there
were not above three found men in the ships, and none was able to go under
hatches to draw drink for himself, nor for his fellows. Sometimes we were
constrained to bury some of the dead under the Snow, because we were not able
to dig any graves for them, the ground was so hard frosen, and we so weak.
Besides this, we did greatly fear, that the people of the Country would
perceive our weakness and misery, which to hide, our Captain, whom it
pleased God always to keep in health, would go out with two or three of the
company, some sick, and some whole, whom when he saw out of the Fort, he
would throw stones at them and chide them, faigning, that so soon as he came
again, he would beat them, and then with signs show the people of the
Country, that he caused all his men to work and labor in the Ships, some
in mending them, some in beating of chalk, some in one thing, and some in
another, and that he would not have them come forth, till their work was
done. And to make his tale seem true and likely, he would make all his men
whole and sound to make a great noise, with knocking sticks, stones, hammers,
and other things together, at which time, we were so oppressed, and grieved
with that sickness, that we had lost all hope ever to see France again, if
God of his infinite goodness and mercy had not with his pitiful ^ye looked
upon us, and revealed a singular and excellent remedy against all diseases
unto us, the best that ever was found upon earth, as hereafter shall follow.

How long we stayed in the Port of the holy Cross amidst the Snow and Yse,
and how many dyed of the said disease, from the beginning of it, to the midst
of March. CHAP. 14.
FRom the midst of November, until the midst of April, we were kept in
amidst the Yse above one faddome thick, and Snow above four foot high, and
more higher than the sides of our Ships, which lasted till that time, in such
sort, that all our drinckes were frosen in the Vessels, and the Yse through
all the Ships, was above a handebreadth thick, as well above hatches as
beneath, and so much of the River as was fresh, until to Hochelaga, was
frosen, in which space there dyed five and twenty of our best and chiefest
men, and all the rest so sick, that we thought they should never recover
again, only three or four excepted. Then it pleased God to cast his pitiful
eye upon us, and sent us the knowledge and remedy of our healthes and
recovery, in such manner as in the next Chapter shall be showed.

How by the grace of God we had notice of a certain tree, whereby we all
recovered our health: and the manner how to use it. CHAP. 15.
Our Captain considering our estate (and how that sickness was increased and
hot amongst us) one day went forth of the Forte, and walking along upon
the Yse, he saw a troop of those Countrymen coming from Stadacona, among
which was Domagaia, who not passing ten or twelve days before, had been very
sick with that disease, and had his knees swollen as big as a Child of two
years old, all his sinowes shruncke together, his teeth spoiled, his gummes
rotten, and stinking. Our Captain seeing him whole and sound, was thereat
marvelous glad, hoping to understand and know of him how he had healed
himself, to the end he might ease and help his men. So soon as they were
come near him, he asked Domagaia how he had done to heal himself, he
answered, that he had taken the juice and sap of the leaves of a certain
Tree, and therewith had healed himself: For it was a singular remedy against
that disease. Then our Captain asked of him if any were to be had thereabout,
desiring him to show it him, for to heal a servant of his, who whilst he was
in Canada with Donnacona, and was stricken with that disease: That he did,
because he would not show the number of his sick men. Domagaia straight sent
two women to fetch some of it, which brought ten or twelve branches of
it, and therewithal showed us the way how to use it, and that is thus, to
take the bark and leaves of the said tree, and boil it together, then to
drink of the said decoction one day, and the other not, and the dregs of
it to be put upon his legs that is sick: moreover, they told us, yt the virtue
of that tree was, to heal any other disease: the tree is in their language
called AMEDA. Our Captain presently caused some of that drink to be made for
his men to drink of it, but there was none durst taste of it, except one or
two, who ventured the drinking of it, only to taste and prove it: the other
seeing that, did the like, and presently recovered their health, and were
delivered of that sickness, and what other disease soever, in such sort,
that there were some had been diseased and troubled with the French Pockes
four or five years, and with this drink were clean healed. After this
medicine was found and proved to be true, there was such strife about it,
who should be first to take of it, that they were ready to kill one another,
that a tree as big as any Oak in France, was spoiled and lapped bare, and
occupied all in five or six days, and wroughte so well, that if all the
Physicians of Mountpelier, and of Louaine, had been there with all the
drugges of Alexandria, they would not have done so much in one year, as that
tree did in six days, and did so prevail, that as many as used of it,
by the grace of GOD recovered their health.

How the Lord Donnacona accompanied with Taignoagny and diverse others,
fayning that they would go to hunt Stags, and other wild Dear, tarried out
two months, and at their return brought a great multitude of people with
them, that we were not wont to see before. CHAP. 16.
Whilst that disease lasted in our ships, the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, with
many others, fayning, that they would go catch Stags and Dear, which is in
their tongue called Aiounesta, and Asquenoudo, because the Ice and Snow was not
so broken along the river that they could sail, it was told us of Domagaia,
and others, that they would stay out but fortnight, and we believed it, but
they stayed above two months, which made us mistrust that they had bin gone to
raise the Country to come against us, and do us some displeasure, we seeing
our selves so weak and faint. Albeit we had used such diligence and policy
in our^ Forte, that if all the power of the country had bin about it, they
could have done nothing but look upon us: and whylest they were forth, many
of the people came daily to our ships, and brought us fresh meat, as Stags,
Deeres, Fishes, with diverse other things, but held them at such an excessive
price, that rather than they would sell them any thing cheap, many times they
would carry them back again, because that year the Winter was very long and
they had some scarcity and need of them.

How Donnacona came to Stadagona again with a great number of people, and
because he would not come to visit our Captain, feigned himself to be sore
sick, which he did only to have the Captain come and see him. CHAP. 17.
ON the one and twentieth of April Domagaia came to the shore side,
accompanied with diverse lusty and strong men, such as we were not wont to see,
and told us that their Lord Donnacona would the next day come and see us,
and bring great store of Deers flesh, and other things with him. The next day
he came and brought a great number of men in Stadagona, to what end, and for
what cause we knew not, but (as the proverb says) he that takes heed and
shields him self from all men, may hap to escape from some, for we had need
to look about us, considering how in number we were diminished, and in
strength greatly weakened, long of our sickness we had been troubled withal,
that we were constrained to leave one of our ships in the said Port of the
Holy Cross. Our Captain was warned of their coming, and how they had brought
a great number of me^ with them, for Domagaia came to tell it us, and durst not
pass the river that was betwixt Stadagona and us, as he was wont to do,
whereupon we mistrusted of some treason. Our Captain seeing this, sent one of
his servants to them, accompanied with John Poulet being best beloved of
those people, to see who were there, and what they did. The said Poulet and
the other faygned only to be come to visit Donnacona, and bring him certain
presents, because they had been together a good while in the said
Donnaconas Town. So soon as he heard of their coming, he got himself to
bed, fayning to be very sick. That done, they went to Taignoagny his house
to see him, and wheresoever they went, they saw so many people, that in a
manner one could not stir for an other, and such men as they were never
wont to see. Taignoagny would not permit our men to enter in any other
housen, but still kept them company, and brought them half way to our
ships, and told that if it would please our Captain to sh^we him so much
favor as to take a Lord of the Country people, whose name Agonna, of whom he
had received some displeasure, and carrye him with him into France, he
should therefore for ever be bound unto him, and would do for him
whatsoever he could possible, and would do for him whatsoever he would
command him, and bade the servant to come again the next day, and bring an
aunsweare. Our Captain being advertised of so many people that were there,
not knowing to what end, purposed to play a pretty prancke, that is to say,
to take their Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and some more of the
chiefest of them, prisoners, in so much as before he had purposed, to bring
them into France, to show unto our King what he had seen in those Western
parts, and maruailes of the world, for that Donnacona had told us, that he
he had been in the Country of Saguenay, in which are infinite Rubies,
Gold, and other riches, and that there are white men, who clothe themselves
with woollen cloth even as we do in France. The said Lord was an old
manne, and even from his chyldehoode had never left off nor ceased from
trauayling into strange Countries, as well by Seas and Ryuers, as by Land.
The said Powlet, and the other having told our Captain their Embassage,
and showed him what Taignoagny his will was, the next day he sent his
servant again, to bid Taignoagny come and see him, and show what ^ee
would, for he should be very well entertained, and also part of his will
should be accomplyshed. Taignoagny sent him word, that the next day he
would come and bring the Lord Donnacona with him, and him that had so
offended him, which he did not, but stayed two days, in which time none
came from Stadagona to our Ships, as they were wont to do, but rather
fled from us, as if we would have slain them, so that then we plainly
perceived their knavery.

But when they understood, that those of Sidatin did frequent our company, and
that we had forsaken the bottom of a ship which we would leave, to have the
old nails out of it, the third day followyng they came from Stadagona, and
most of them without difficulty did pass from one side of the river to the
other with small Skiffes: but Donnacona he would not come over, Taignoagny
and Domagaia stood talking together above an hour before they would come
over, at last they came to speak with our Captain. There Taignoagny prayed
him that he would cause the foresaid man to be taken and carried into
France. Our Captain refused to do it, saying, that his King had forbidden
him to bring any man or woman into France, only that he might bring two or
three young boys to learn the language, but that he would willingly carry him
to another land, and there put him. Our Captain spoke this, only to assure
them, that they should bring Donnacona with them, whom they had left on the
other side, which words, when Taignoagny heard, he was very glad, thinking he
should never return into France again, and therefore promised to come the
next day, which was the day of the holy Cross, and would bring Donnacona
and all the people with him.

How that upon Holyroode day our Captain caused a Cross to be set up in our
Forte: and how the Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, Domagaia, and others of their
company came: and of the taking of the said Lord. CHAP. 18.
THe third of May being Holy roode day, our Captain for the solemnity of the
day, caused a goodly fair cross of thirty foot in height to be set up,
under the crosset of which he caused a shield to be hanged, wherein was the
Arms of France, and over them was written in antique letters: FRANCISCVS
PRIMVS DEI GRATIA FRANCORVM REX REGNAT, and upon that day, about noone, there
came a great number of the people of Stadagona, Men, Women, and Children, who
told us, that their Lord Donnacona, Taignoagny, and Domagaia, were coming,
whereof we were very glad, hoping to retain them. About two of the Clock in
the after noone they came, and being come near our Ships, our Captain went
to salute Donnacona, who also showed him a merry countenance, albeit very
fearfully his eye were still bent toward the woodde. Shortly after came
Taignoagny, who bade Donnacona, that he should not enter in our Forte, and
therefore fire was brought forth by one of our men, and kind^ed where their
Lord was Our Captain prayed him to come into our Ships to eat and drink as
he was wont to do, and also Taignoagny, who promised, that after a while he
would come, and so they did, and entered in our Ships: but first it was told
our Captain by Domagaia, that Taignoagny had spoken ill of him, and that he
had bid Donnacona he should not come aboard our Ships, Our Captain
perceiving that, came out of the Forte, and saw that only by Taignoagny his
warning, the Women ran away, and none but men stayed in great number,
wherefore he straight commanded his men to lay hold on Donnacona, Taignoagny,
and Domagaia, and two more of the chiefest, whom he poynted unto: then he
commanded them to make the other to retire. Presently after, the Lord entered
into the Forte with the Captain, but by and by Taignoagny came to make him
come out again. Our Captain seeing that there was no other remedy, began
to call unto them to take them, to whose cry and voice all his men came
forth, and took the said Lord with the others, whom they had appointed to
take. The Canadians seeing their Lord taken, began to run away, even as
Sheep before the Woolfe, some crossing over the River, some through the
Wooddes, ^^th one seeking for his own advantage. That ^one, we retired our
selves, and laid up the prisoners under good guard and safety.

How the said Canadians the night following came before our Ships to seek
their men, crying and howling al night like Wolves: of the talk and conclusion
they agreed upon the next day: and of the gifts which they gave our Captain.
CHAP. 19.
THe night following, they came before our Ships, (the River being betwixt
us) striking their breasts, crying and howling like Woolues, still calling
Agouhanna, thinking to speak with him, which our Captain for that time would
not permit, neither all the next day till noone, whereupon they made signs
unto us, that we had hanged or killed him. About noone, there came as great a
number in a cluster, as ever we saw, who went to hide themselves in the
Forest, excepted some, who with a loud voice would call and cry to Donnacona
to speak unto them. Our Captain then commanded Donnacona to be brought upon
high to speak unto them, and bade him be mercy, for after he had spoken, and
showed unto the King of France what he had seen in Saguenay and other
Countries, after ten or twelve months, he should return again, and that
the King of France would give him great rewards, whereat Donnacona was very
glad, and speaking to the others, told it them, who in token of joy, gave out
three great cries, and then Donnacona and his people had great talk together,
which for want of interpretours, can not be described. Our Captain hade
Donnacona, that he should cause them to come to the other side of the River,
to the end they might better talk together without any fear, and that he
should assure them, which Donnacona did, and there came a Boat full of the
chiefest of them to the Ships, and there anew began to talk together,
giving great praise unto our Captain, and gave him a present of four and
twenty chains of Esurgny, for that is the greatest, and preciousest riches
they have in this world, for that they esteem more of that, than of any Gold
or Silver. After they had long talked together, and that their Lord saw
that there was no remedy to avoid his going into France, he commanded his
people the next day, to bring him some victualles to serve him by the way.
Our Captain gave Donnacona as a great present, two frying pannes of Copper,
eight Hatchets, and other small trifles, as knives, and Beads, whereof he
seemed to be very glad, who sent them to his Wives and Children. Likewise, he
gave certain small gifts to them that came to speak with Donnacona, they
thanked him greatly for them, and then went to their Lodgings.

How that the next day, being the fifth of May, the said people came again
to speak unto their Lord, and how that four Women came to the Shore to
bring him Victualles. CHAP. 20.
Upon the fifth of May, very earelye in the Morning, a great number of the
said people came again to speak unto their Lord, and sent a Boat, which
in their tongue they call Casnoui, wherein were only four Women, without any
manne, for fear their men should be retained.

These Women brought great store of victualles, as Millet, which is their
Corn that they live withal, Flesh, Fish, and other things after their
fashion.

These Women being come to our Ships, our Captain did very friendly
entertayne them. Then Donnacona prayde our Captain to tell those women that he
should come again after ten or twelve months, and bring Donnacona to Canada
again with him, that he did only to appeal them, which our Captain did
wherefore the Women, as well by words as signs, seem to be very glad, giving
our Captain thanks, and told him, if he came again, and brought Donnacona
with him, they would give him many things: in sign whereof, each one gave our
Captain a chain of Esurgny, and then passed to the other side of the River
again, where stood all the people of Stadagona, who taking all leave of their
Lord, went home again. On Saturday following, being the sixth of the month,
we departed out of the said Port, and came to harborough a little beneath the
Island of Orleans, about twelve leagues from the Port of the Holy Cross, and
upon Sunday we came to the Island of Filberdes, where we stayde until the
sixteenth of that Month, till the fierceness of the waters were past, which
at that time ran too swifte a course, and were too dangerous to come down
along the River, and therefore we stayde till fair weather came. In the
mean while, many of Donnaconas Subjects came from the River of Saguenay to
him, but being by Domagaia advertised, that their Lord was taken to be carried
into France, they were all amazed, yet for all that, they would not leave to
come to our Ships, to speak to Donnacona, who told them, that after twelve
months, he should come again, and that he should be very well used, with
the Captain, Gentlemen, and Mariners. Which when they heard, they greatly
thanked our Captain, and gave their Lord three bundles of Beauers, and Sea
Woolues Skins, with a great knife of read Copper that comes from
Saguenay, and many other things. They gave also to our Captain a Chain of
Esurgny, for which our Captain gave them ten or twelve Hatchettes, and
they gave him hearty thanks, and were very well contented. The next day,
being the sixteenth of May, we hoysed Sail, and came from the said Island of
Filburdes, to another, about fifteen leagues from it, which is about five
leagues in length, and there, to the end we might take some rest the night
following, we staide that day, in hope the next day we might pass and avoid
the dangers of the river of Saguenay, which are great. That evening we went a
land and found great store of Hares, of which we took a great many, and
therefore we called it The Island of Hares: in the night there arose a
contrary wind, with such storms and tempest, that we were constrained to
bend to the Island of Filburdes again, from whence we were come, because there
was none other passage among the said Ila^ds, and there we stayde till the one
and twenty of that month, that fair weather and good wind came again: and
then we sailed again, and that so prosperously, that we passed to Honguedo,
which passage until that time had not been discovered: we caused our ships to
course athwart Pratos Cape, which is the beginning of the Port of Cator: and
because the wind was good and convenient, we sailed all day and all night
without staying, and the next day we came to the middle of Brions Island, which
we were not minded to do, to the end we might shorten our way. These two Islands
lie Northwest, and Southeast, and are about fifty leagues one from another.
The said Island is in latitude 47. degrees and a half. Upon Thursday being the
26. of the month, and the feast of the Ascension of our Lord, we coasted over
to go to a land and shallow of low sands, which are about eight leagues
Sowthwest from Brions Island, on which are large Champaines, full of trees and
towns, and also an enclosed sea, of which neither could we see or perceive any
gap, or any way to enter therein. On Friday following, being the 27. of the
month, because the wind did change on the cost, we came to Brions Island
again, where we stayed till the beginning of June, and toward the Southeast of
this Island, we saw a land, seeming unto us as an Island, we coasted it about
two leagues and a half, and by ye way we had notice of three other high
Islands, lying toward the Sands, after we had known these things we returned
to the Cape of the said land, which does divide it self into two or three
very high Capes: the waters there are very deep, and the flood of the Sea
runs so swift, that it cannot possibly be swifter. That day we came to S.
Laurence his Cape, which is 45. degrees and half toward the South, we named
it S. Paul's Cape, it is at 47. degrees, and a quarter. The Sunday followyng,
being the fourth of June and Whitsonday, we had notice of the coaste lying
East Southeast, distant from the new found land about 22. leagues: and because
the wind was against us, we went to a Haven, which we named S. Spiritus Port,
where we stayed till Tuisdaye that we departed thence, sailing along that
coaste until we came to S. Peter's Islands. We found along the said coaste
many very dangerous Islands and Shelues, which lie all in the way East
southeast, and Weast Northweast about 23. leagues into the Sea. Whilst we were
in the said S. Peter's Islands we met with many ships of France and of Britain,
we stayed there from S. Barnabas day, being the 11. of the month, until the
16. that we departed thence and came to cape of Ras, and entered into a Port
called Rogaoso, where we took in freshwater, and wood to pass the sea: there
we left one of our boats. Then upon Monday, being the 19. of June, we went
from that Port, and with such good and prosperous weather we sailed along the
Sea, in such sort, that upon the 6. of June. 1536. we came to the Port of S.
Malo, by the grace of God, to whom we pray, here ending our Navigations, that
of his infinite mercy he will grant us his grace and favor, and in the
end, bring us to the place of everlasting felicity. AMEN.

Here follows the language of the Country, and Kingdoms of Hochelaga and
Canada, of us called New France: But first the names of their Numbers.
Secada. 1 Indahir. 6 Tigneni. 2 Aiaga. 7 Hasche. 3 Addigue. 8 Hannaion. 4
Madellon, 9 Ouiscon. 5 Assem. 10
Here follow the names of the chiefest parts of man, and other words
necessary to be known.
the Head aggonzi the Browe hergueniascon the Eyes higata the Ears abontascon
the mouth esahe the Teeth esgongai the Tongue osnache the Throat agonhon the
Bearde hebelim the Face hegouascon the hears aganiscon the Arms atayascon the
Flanckes aissonne the Stomach aggruascon the Belly eschehendo the Thighs
hetnegradascon the Knees agochinegodascon the Legs agouguenehonde the Feet
onchidascon the Hands aignoascon the Fingers agenoga the Nails agedascon a
Man's member amoascon a Woman's member castaigne an Ele esgueny a Snaile
vndeguezi a Tortois heuleu^ime Wooddes conda leaves of Trees hoga God cudragny
give me some drink quazahoa quea give me to breakfast quasa hoa quascaboa
give me my supper quaza hoa quatfria^ let us go to bed casigno agnyda hoa good
morrow aignag let us go to play casigno candy come and speak with me
assigniquaddadia look upon me quagathoma Hold your peace aista let us go with
the boat casigno casnouy give me a knife buazahca agoheda a Hatchet adogne a
bow ahenca a darte quahetan let us go a hunting quasign^ donnascat a Stagge
aionnesta a Sheep asquenondo a Hare Sourhanda a Dog agayo a Town canada a
Man agu^huni a Woman agruaste a Boy addegesta a Wench agniaquesta a Child
exiasta a Gown cabata a doublet caioza Hosen hemondoha Shoes atha a Shirte
amgoua a Cappe castrua Corn osizi Bread carraconny Water ame Flesh
quahouasco^ Paces. queion Damsons honnesta Figs absconda Grapes ozoba Nuttes
quahoya a Hen sahomgahea a Lamprey zisto a Salmon ondacon a Whale ainne honne a
Goose sadeguenha a Street add Cucumber seed casconda to Morrow achide the
Heaven quenhia the Earth damga the Sun ysmay the Moon assomaha the Stars
stgnehoha^ the Wind cohoa the Sea agogasy the waves of the Sea co^a an Island
cahena an Hill agacha the Ise honnesca Snow cama Cold athau Hot odazani
Fire azista Smoke quea a House canoca Beans sah^ Cinamond adhotathny my Father
addathy my Mother adanahe my Brother addagrim my Sister adhoasseue


They of Canada say, that it is a months sailing to go to a land where
Cinamonds and Cloves are gathered.

Here ends the second Relation of James Carthiers discovery and navigations
to the new found Land, by him named New France, translated out of Italian
into English by I. F.
Patisco il male sperando il been.
FINIS.

