A COMMENTARY UPON THE EPISTLE of Saint Paul written to the COLOSSIANS.

PREACHED By Thomas Cartwright, and now Published for the further use of the
Church of God.

COLOSSIANS. 3. 16. Let the Word of CHRIST dwell in you richly in all wisdom.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by George Norton, dwelling
near Temple-barre. 1612.

A DILVCIDATION, OR EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLE of S. Paul the Apostle to the
Colossians, delivered in sundry Sermons.
The first Sermon.
COLOS. CHAP. 1. VER. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God,
and Timotheus our brother.
IT will make much for the understanding of the place in hand and of this
Epistle, to know the occasion of the Apostles writing; for thereby we shall
more easily come to the understanding of the things delivered by the Apostle.

The occasion is drawn from the text it self: for whosoever will know the
drift of the Scripture, must take it from the place of Scripture it self,
being sometimes set in the beginning, as in the book of the Proverbs:
sometimes in the later end, as in the general Epistle of Peter: Sometimes in
the midst, as 1. Tim. in one verse the drift is delivered. Sometimes of the
whole body of the Scripture, that is handled, whether Psalm, Prophecy,
Epistle, etc.

The point in hand is set forth in the 6. 7. 8. verses. In the 8. verse the
occasion, which was this, that whereas the Colossians had received the Gospel
well and soundly preached unto them, first they suffered themselves to go a
side and to follow vain conceits, or reasons drawn from Philosophy; in the
sixth and seventh the second cause is showed: which is, that they suffered
themselves to be lead away to follow the ceremonies of the Law: which before
had been the ordinances of God, but being ceased are become the traditions of
men, as the Apostle calls them.

For the better understanding of this Epistle, we are to know the conueyance of
the matter of it. And as in all Paul's Epistles he uses to set down first the
principal grounds of religion: Secondly, the exhortations. And as he uses in
other, so does he in this Epistle. It therefore contayneth-two points: first,
the delivery of the body and of the substantial points in religion of our
Savior.

The second part (beginning at the 3. chapter) is a declaration of the godly
conversation, wherein all true professors of the Gospel, which profess
CHRIST, must live.

The first and second Chapters are of doctrine, the other of manners. In the
first is delivered the truth, and sincere and plain doctrine (in brief) of
the Gospel set forth. In the second are rooted up and thrown down all those
wretched opinions, which were by the false Apostles sown in the hearts of the
Colossians.

That, which he speaks of manners, begins at the third Chapter, where
first the Apostle exhorts generally to all good, holy and righteous works:
Secondly from the general, he falls to the particular declaration of those
duties, he would have them practice. As of masters to servants, parents to
children, and children to parents, of husbands to wives, and wives to husbands
etc. And then returns again to general exhortations; and this is, as it
were, the general conueyance of the matter of the Epistle.

In this text to the 14. verse he does labor to draw the Colossians to the
knowledge of his love to them: which he does first by his preface, which is
usual in all his Epistle, is n his salutations, wherein he wishes good things
unto them from God. The 2. thing to persuade them of his love is a
testification that he did pray for them in both kinds; both by praising and
thanking God for things they had received, and by petition, where he prayed to
God, and desired the increase of the graces of God in them. And hereby he
insinuates himself and stampeth, as it were, in their minds his love and
affection to them, to the end his doctrine might be the better received by them.

1 As if he should say, I Paul understanding that there are some, that go
about to spoil you, and to make a prey of you, partly by show of wisdom and
Philosophy, and partly by the beggarly elements or ceremonies of the Jews,
thought it needful to write unto you, that according as you have received
JESUS CHRIST at the first, even so that you would both abide and proceed
further in him, that you may be rooted and further built in the faith.

And that I write unto you, know, that I do it with warrant for I am an
Apostle of JESUS CHRIST no^ tied ^^ one particular congregation, or to one
province, yea or to one kingdom, but am an Ambassador, and have commission
unto all the world. Neither do I come to this charge of mine one will, (...)
the will of any other man: but by the will of God, and the same his revealed
will. And albeit my authority her in be sufficient to convince all men of the
truth I write of: yet for further and stronger persuasion thereof I have joined
Timothy, my beloved brother, to bear record with me, that in the mouth of two
witnesses the truth may be more surely established? And considering that the
blessing of all labors depends upon the Lord, our beginning is with hearty
prayer unto God, for the grace and favor of God to be freely given, together
with all the blessings both of this life, and of the life to come, from God the
father, and from our Lord JESUS CHRIST to you Colossians: yet not all that
dwell in that City, but unto those alone, which by faith are Saints, and
brethren, not in the flesh, but in JESUS CHRIST.





word of any man, but by the word of truth, that is to say the Gospel.

Epaphras, whom if you love me, you must love him, as being my beloved
fellow-seruant in Christ; yea if you love your selves, you must respect him, as
being a faithful minister of CHRIST for you.



over praying for you, making this suit that ye may be filled with the
acknowledgement of his will, and all wisdom and understanding, whereof the
holy Spirit is the Author.





The sum is, a declaration that the Apostle makes of the singular affection
and love that he has to the Colossians, which is first considered in the
salvation, as it were the indorsement of the letter.

Secondly in the profession which he makes of his, and Timotheis,
thanksgiving, and prayer for them to the Lord.

from the 9: verse until the 12. is contained. Cause of the prayer for the
Colossians Prayer it self wherein is contained A request for perfect
Knowledge. Obedience.


First the Apostle sets sorth himself by his name Paul, He had two names given
him, one at his Circumcision viz. Saul, his father being a Gentile, he had
another name vid. Paul, in regard that they would keep a note of his
privilege in Rome.

The reason why he would rather keep the profane, then the old name Saul,
taken from Gods people* signifying one begged of God, is this, that because
that holy name was not so pleasant to the Gentiles, of whom especially he was
Minister, he is content to take the worse name, which he took not so much
pleasure in.

Heathenish names may be used of Christians, so there be no hinderance of the
Churches edification.
Whereby we learn that in matter of name we do not always please our selves so
much, as others, viz: the Church, it being a matter of indifferency.

Secondly, for the Apostles calling. If one had asked him, what calling have
you to deal with us? he answers, that he was an Apostle, which had a
general charge over the whole world. Indeed there is great difference between
the Ministers now, which may not roue about, but have their charge, and place
limited them, as if they had but one plough-land to till: Whereas the Apostles
Ministry was general, they had the field of the whole world to Till by their
message, and by their miracles, for the publication and confirmation of the
word. As in time of wars, it is necessary that there should be a General and
Lord Marshall, but when that wars are ceased and there is peace there needs
only to be a Garrison and Captain made for them. So when as the great
conquest of the Gospel was to be made over the world, it was necessary there
should be Apostles as Generals, afterward it was sufficient to have the
Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, as a Garrison in the Church of God to keep and
govern it. Therefore we see after James was killed none was elected into his
room, as at the first in steed of Iud^s. So likewise we see in the building of
the house, the chief Master (...)lder is only for the plat-forme, the other
bui(...) afterward are sufficient. Indeed the fruit of the Apostles Ministry
remains still unto the Church.



It follows how the Apostle proves himself to be a true Apostle, and not a
false, as there were many then, which under the name of Apostles did sow the
tares of error and sedition.

By the will of God) viz. not by the secret will, by the which are wicked and
unlawful Apostles, Magistrates, and Ministers; but he was by the revealed will
of God, it being manifested unto him, in the way; as he was going to Damascus,
and also revealed to the Act. 9.
Disciples afterward.

Learning, piety, and a lawful ordination make a co^pleat Minister, one
pleasing unto Cod. 2. Tim. 3. 2. 3.
the Minsters of God indeed, and that we are to do by the reueiled will of
God, wherein the Lord does note forth who are those that are called to the
Ministry by him, viz. such as are endued with fit gifts, and enter as he
requires. Saint Paul to Timothy describes a Minister, first, by his learning,
able to teach, and confute: Secondly, by his good manners, as a necessary thing
in all Christians, yet more especially in a Minister; and therefore he makes
mention of those special things, which are necessary for all Christians, so
principally are required in the Ministers, which Math. 5. 14. Tit. 2. 7.
are to be lights, and good examples to their flocks.

In that the Apostle joins Timothy with him, we Paul's humility.
observe. First, his humility, that would join his scholar with himself in
the honor, which had no part of the labor, which he had taken in admonishing
and instructing the Collosians. This he does to the end the truth might be
further credited.

Timothy was to Paul: yet for the furtherance of the truth, we are not to
think much to join them as equal with us.

Secondly, we observe his wisdom herein, that Paul's discretion.
howsoever his testimony had been sufficient against all the world, yet because
two witnesses were of more force and assurance, he takes unto him Timothy. And
therefore it was that CHRIST sent the Disciples two by two, one to speak and
another to bear record. So when Paul and Luke 10. 2. Acts 14. 12.
Barnabas went together, Paul spoke, and therefore they called him Mercury.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
COLOSS. CHAP. 1. VER. 2. ad 6. 2 To them which are at Colosse, Saints and
faithful brethren in CHRIST: Grace be with you, and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

3 We give thanks to God even the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, always
praying for you:

4 Since we heard of your faith in CHRIST JESUS, and of your love toward all
Saints.

5 For the hope sake which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye have have
heard before by the word of truth, which is the Gospel.


BEFORE the Apostle comes to the substance and point of the Epistle, he does
wisely (according to his manner) draw attention to that he speaks of. And
therefore thereis, as it were, a Preface of the Epistle unto the 14. verse: For
as in a house, which is stately built there is a Porch to enter in by, so the
Apostle, in this stately building of his has first a Preface set before to
draw attention: which he does first from the authority of the Epistle, which we
have heard drawn from his own person: Secondly, in the person of Timothy.

Next from the testification of the love, he did bear unto them, from this
verse to the end of the Preface, which he labors in, as a Minister ought, to
testify his affection toward them, whereby the word might be more lovingly
received and accepted, willingly and carefully practiced: Proverb. it is said,
that the wounds of a friend are better Proverb. 27.
the^ the kisses of an enemy: And he were barbarous, or rather A fit similitude.
a madman, that for some grievous disease, being pricked by the skillful
Surgeon, if he will flee upon him and be revenged of him: so when the
Ministers lanch the soars of their souls, in the Ministry of the word, what
a barbarous rudeness is it to fall out with the Minister for it? etc.

His love he testifies, 1. by a loving salutation, and then by testifying that
he daily prayed for them, both thanking God, and desiring all good things for
them, and he proves his prayer in a form of thanksgiving and petition for
them which he sets down.

Of the persons saluting we have heard; the parties saluted are the Colossians,
described by two titles, first title Saints, secondly, Faithful brethren.

For the first, they are called Saints for two causes, one without themselves
in CHRIST, the other wrought within them by the spirit of CHRIST, by the spirit
of sanctification. Romans 6. 7. 8.
affection, and an endeavor to do the will of God.

Romes blasphemy, which will have none to be Saints but those that he
canonizeth. they are no Saints, and so they may say indeed, their lives
testify it. He that has not Romans 6.
the spirit of CHRIST is none of CHRIST'S.



Example we have in Nehemiah that having authority from the King to build the
Temple, when a false Prophet named Shemagah, whom he took to have been a true
Prophet, had bid him hide himself in the Nehem. 6. 10.
house of God because that night he should be laid in wait for and slain. He
considering that he was the Prince of the people, says: shall I do thus? Is it
not a shame for me? etc. Where the consideration of his authority did withdraw
him from this shameful and cowardly thing. And ought not much more the
consideration of our high estate in CHRITT, that are Christians, withdraw us
from sin? Ought not we much more to be ashamed of it, which is so shameful
and abominable a thing? Are not we Kings (as it is said) and Priests in
Christ, and shall not we hereby be Reu. 1. 6.
with-drawne from sin, then which nothing is more base? If a Noble-mans son
give himself to base things unfit for his estate, we will rebuke him for it,
as from a thing unfit him, and will say to him, does this become a Gentleman?
etc. And seeing we can rebuke him, why can we not much more rebuke our selves
of our sins, which are far more detestable and unseemly for the children
of God?

Faithful, 1 religious, which have received the Title 2.
truth of God, and submit their souls unto it: and this the Apostle exhorts
Timothy unto. So that in that he 1. Tim. 6. 11. 2. Tim. 1. 19.
says some had made shipwreck of faith, it is not meant of justifying faith,
but of religion in a good conscience: for religion cannot abide to ly in a
filthy conscience.

man be truly religious, he will bring forth good works: True religion has
the true fruits of it, to Iam. 1. 26. and 3. 17. 27.
keep himself from the lusts of the world, and to visit the sick, the
fatherless, and widows. So that if he be a Saint, he is holy, if holy, he
is religious: if he love not holiness, he is not religious, make what
profession he can, though it be never so good. From the Titles we come to the
benefits desired.

He wishes 1 Grace. 2 Peace.

Grace, the fountain of all goodness, is God, and the graces of his children
are as springes and fruits, that proceed from the mere grace, love, and
favor of God: which favor and grace of God the Apostle wishes to them.

Romans 5.
not grace.

Secondly, he wishes Peace, viz. all things necessary for this life,
prosperity, health, etc. as is the manner of the Hebrews in wishing peace, to
understand all outward prosperity.

He that has all things has nothing, unless he have Gods favor.
but hatred of God; our gold, no gold, our peace no peace, our love of parents
and of men, hatred of God. And better were it that we had none of all these,
then to have them without the love of God ^ CHRIST. The Prophet, when as two
Kings came against Ahaz, telling him he should be defended Isa. 7. 2.
from those Kings (howsoever Ahaz was a wicked King and would not believe it)
yet he tells him a sign 2. King. 16. 2. 3. Isa. 7. 14.
and token of it, that a Virgin should conceive and bear a son, etc. Noting
thereby that all benefits whatsoever are from God in CHRIST alone. And therefore
if we seek for any thing out of CHRIST, we seek amiss, and if we desire
any thing before the Note.
love of God, we do as harlots, which love the gifts better then the persons
that give them. In that he says, Grace and peace from God our Father, and
from the Lord JESUS CHRIST, He there shuts not out the Holy Ghost, as
though it came not as well Note.
from him, as from the Father and from the Son. For in the word grace, the
Holy Ghost is included, seeing that grace is the gift of the Holy Ghost alone.

We praise God, viz. He and Timothy. Here consider that they give thanks to
God alone, because all grace and mercy, both of eternal life, and the comforts
of this life come from him, and therefore our petitions are to be made to him
for them, and praise to be rendered unto him for enjoying them.

Quest. How can this be? did he not preach, eat, and drink, and apply his
occupation?

Ans: Here the Apostle means, that he kept a constant course of prayer for
them: And to the These* he says, Pray without ceasing, where as a man is bound
to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
do his business in his calling also, but the meaning is to keep a constant
course daily of this duty. Therefore the sacrifice in the Law, which was done
morning and evening, is called a continual sacrifice, because of the
continual course of it: so here he means that daily, so often as they pray,
they make mention of them in their prayers.

Reasons of private prayer.
first there is no man or woman of what state soever, but they have particular
sins, which every one has not. For when they pray in the house, they desire
pardon of sins, which are common to the house: but I may have committed a
sin the which they have not, and I may have received particular blessings,
which others have not, and I have need of some particular blessing in my place,
that others have not need of. And therefore it is necessary that we should
make a choice of some particular time, wherein by our selves we may have
recourse to God.

We give thanks) whenever he prayed he gave thanks, and for that he prayed
he gave thanks. For howsoever there were great faults in the Church, Note.
yet he is thankful for some good thing left them. But such is the corruption
of our days, that howsoever we are most especially bound to this duty of
thanksgiving, as being the duty of the Angels, and that which after this life
we shall only perform in heaven, yet though both privately and publikly we will
peradventure pray and ask still of God, we are negligent in rendering thanks.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ) whereby God is discerned from all
other Gods. In the Law he was deserned by the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Note.
Jacob, but this is a more excellent difference, which here the Apostle gives,
that our God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, not the God of the Turks,
and Infidels etc.

Then is set forth the cause of his thanks Viz. for their love and faith Quest.
Why does the Apostle give thanks and prays for them, which were called
already? Why does he not rather pray for heathen and wicked men that ly
groueling in their sins? Answer: we are bound indeed to pray for all. But we
1. Tim. 2. 1.
are more specially bound to love and pray for those, Gal. 6. 10.
that are called already: for as God shows more tokens of his love to a man,
so must I show, more and more tokens of it. For howsoever Gods love cannot
increase, yet the tokens of it increase, but ours must increase, as we see the
tokens of Gods love to increase toward any.

The degrees then of our love and of our prayers toward others are that we are
bound to pray for all, but especially for those, that are of ^he household of
faith, and amongst them for Joseph viz. for those that are afflicted, and
amongst them that are in affliction we are especially to pray for those, that
suffer for the Gospel sake.

The end of the second Sermon.
The third Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. 4. 4 Since we heard of your faith in CHRIST JESUS, and of your
love toward all Saints.
WE have heard the last day of the prayer and of the thanksgiving given by the
Apostle unto God for the Colossians. Now follows to speak of the causes of
the thanksgiving, the matter was for their faith toward CHRIST, and love
toward all Saints: these are the causes of the thanksgiving and prayers, the
Apostle made daily and ordinarily for the Saints at Colosse.

Quest. How comes it to pass that there being diverse guiftes bestowed on the
Colossians, yet the Apostle prayseth God and prays to him for these only?
Seeing there is nothing, but which is received from God all, he is to be praised
and prayed unto for them: especially seeing he before wished them peace, Viz.
All temporal benefits, and having prayed to God for these, why did he not
thank God for them, as health, peace etc?

Answer. The reason that the Apostle made choice of faith and love, not of
other (though he Faith and charity are graces chiefly to be desired, and God
is chiefly to be praised for them, as being the Cardinal virtues of Christians.
was not unmindful of them) is to teach us what gifts we are especially to
pray for, and desire of God, and to give thanks for, being received. Where he
meets with the corruption of men, that will pray, and desire worldly things,
and will labor mightily in the comforts of this present life, and never make
mention of these, which are principal, whereas the other are but sweepinges,
and those things which are to be cast to dogs, in comparison, and as dung and
dross, nay less then nothing in comparison of CHRIST, and the things
belonging to him, which are of most singular price. As if a man Note.
should be careful for the hangings of a house, and have no care for a house
to put them in, or to lie in: and for the bosses of the bridle, and not the
bridle: for the traps of the horse, and have never a horse to ride upon. And
therefore the Apostle sets down these two, notwithstanding he gave God thanks
for every blessing, they had received.

Perticularly he first binds and lim^teth faith to Christ is the object of
faith.
the object, which is CHRIST, by whom, by our faith we lay hold on God and his
promises: therefore CHRIST says: Believe in God, but believe Ioh. 14. 1.
in me also, as if he should say, ye cannot believe in God unless ye believe in
me first, for none can see the father but by the son. And as the Apostle
says God dwells in light, that none can come unto, but by 2. Tim. 6. 16.
CHRIST, without whom we are unto God as stubble to the fire.

And as a man cannot look on the sun without Note.
hurt of his eyes, unless there be a cloud between, so God the father, son,
and holy Ghost, is as a sun, that unless the cloud of CHRIST, the mediator,
come between us, we cannot behold the sunshine of Gods glory. And without
the screene of CHRIST'S mediation we cannot come near to God, which is Heb. 12.
29.
a consuming fire. Now by CHRIST we come near to God boldly and lay hold on
him.

Mary, as the Church of Rome and the Papists wretchedly expound the Articles of
our faith. For faith only lays hold on God and cannot be communicated to
any. Indeed love spreads it self to men; but faith is only in Gods
promises. For as it is said, Thou shall ^oue the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Et.
10. 20.
and him only shall thou serve, and since faith is the chiefest worship and
service of all, and the instrument of Math. 4. 10.
all true worship, it ought only to laid hold on God in CHRIST; Love to the
Saints) here we see to whom love properly belonges, namely to the Saints who
are (as we have heard) justified by CHRIST and have his righteousness imputed
unto them, and have the beginning of holiness in them, which is the true fear
of God.

The Apostle does not here shut out all men, even those that are aliens from
the house of God, for the Jews, Turks etc. are our neighbors and of our
flesh, as the Apostle says, and therefore to be prayed for. Here we are to
examine our selves whether we have true love or no, Viz. if we love the Saints
Viz. those that are joined to us in the bond of Christianity: for our love is
usually so strait laced, that it cannot go from our selves, and if it go to
our wives and those in our house: yet so poor it is, that it cannot go out of
our doors over our threshold, where as we are to love others, even those that
hate us, to speak well of those that speak ill of us. Math. 5.


And our love must be to all the Saints, to the poor as well as to the rich,
whom Saint James meets with and says: If a poor man, though of the true
religion, come in, he is bid to go behind the door and to sit at our
footstool; if one rich he is James. 2. 3. 4.
exalted: whereas true love does embrace even all, that do profess the truth.
Here Saint James discovers the hipocrisy of men in their excuses: why (will
they say) are not we to love our neighbors? and the rich men are our
neighbors. True, he is your neighbor, but if you love him, why do you not
love him also, that is poor, which is more near peradventure, if he be a
professor: and again if your love be to the rich, because of the commandment
of God, then ye will love the poor as well as the rich. As if for the love of
God ye abstain from adultery, theft, murder etc. Then ye will abstain from
all other sins, which are of the same nature, all the commandments being of
the same nature, coming from God, who is one and the same; and therefore if I
abstain from one sin for the love of Note.
Gods sake, I will as well abstain from another for that cause. And therefore
this condemns the common practice of men, that being blamed for some one
sin; as drunkenesse etc. will say I am no thief, no murderer etc, and so
will justify himself. But if he have no conscience of that sin he is guilty
of all James. 2. 10.
other. Indeed a man by infirmity may fail, and be inclining to one sin more
then to another, but if he have no strife against it nor hatred of it, it is a
sure token that he is guilty of all other sins, and has no true hatred of
any. He confirms their faith and love, by the true end, that there being a
true end of Verse. 5.
them, then their faith and love are true. The end is ye look for reward in
heaven, without which it were impossible your faith should stand, and your love
should be supported: for there are so many assaults befalling unto us, in this
present life, which would overthrow our faith and quench our love, unless it
were supported by the hope of everlasting life. Therefore in the Epistle to the
Hebrewos it is compared Heb. 6. 19.
to an Anchor: yet there is difference: for as men cast their Anchor into the
sea, to be fastened in the earth, so this is fastened in heaven, that no storm
of tentation, or trouble shall be able to break it of.

Quest. Whether is it lawful for a man in looking to the reward to use it as a
spur to do good things, where the Papists charge us wrongfully, that we hold
that it is not lawful to do good works, in regard of everlasting life, nor
to avoid sin, in regard of the judgment of hell.

Answer. We profess and hold, that if there be nothing else but everlasting
life that we do good for, there is no faith, nor love: If only I avoid sin
Note.
for the terror and fear of hell, no pity and godliness. But the principal
regard of our doing good, is to glorify God: and therefore our Savior says,
Let your light so shine before men, that seeing your good Math. 5. 16.
works, they may glorify God, your heavenly father. And we are principally
also to have regard to avoid evil for the glory of God, but yet that does not
exclude the regard of our salvation. Our reward, which our hope looks unto,
is laid up, as a treasure very safe, and this is laid up in heaven with God.
doubting, contrary to the papists, who will have doubting, therefore the
Apostle says; blessed be our Lord JESUS CHRIST, by whom we have given unto us
an inheritance, which is reserved for us;

Comparing the spiritual Canaan to the Land of promise. And this is (says he)
an inheritance, which cannot be polluted by wicked men, and which cannot be
taken away, as that was, nor made barren, as that is now, by the sins of the
Jews, which was once flowing with milk and honey, contrary to the wretched
cauils of certain Atheists, who because it is now barren, will go about to
falsify Moses. And says he, it is laid up for you in safety, and ye are kept
and laid up for it, and preserved, that nether it shall be taken from you, nor
you can be lost, or kept from it.

The end of the third Sermon.
The fourth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. 5. 5 For the hope sake which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof
ye have heard before by the word of truth, which is the Gospel.
THE Apostle* as we have heard does give God thanks for two things: First,
faith toward God, and love toward all Saints. In the first place ye have
heard confirmed unto us, the truth, both of their faith and of their love. One
mark of the truth thereof, we have heard to be their hope, which did uphold
them in their faith and in their love. Now it is further described to be true
faith and true love, here it being set forth by another argument. Namely that
they have heard it in the word of truth: so that it is true faith and love, if
it come by the hearing of the word of truth, which is the Gospel.

words are as wind, which indeed is true in men's words, but this word, which
the Apostle ^ere speaks of, is another thing more effectual, viz: that
whereby God gives faith, love, and hope unto his children. According as it is
in the Prophet, the Lord says, I will not always be angry, I will not always
chide; for then the souls and bodies of men would be consumed, but says the
Lord, though I have chastised them, yet I will heal them I will comfort them,
and the medicine I will use shall be the fruit and reverence of the lips, And
this shall bring peace, that is, such peace, that none can take from them. This
is the word of God, and this indeed we may trust unto, and lean upon. Men may
speak that which they will not or cannot perform: but says Solomon to the
Lord, that 1. King. 5. 8.
which thy mouth has spoken, thine arm will perform. The arm and mouth of
God are of one measure, Note.
whereas men have wide mouths to speak much, but short arms to bring to
pass that they speak: but God he is as good as his word, nay oftentimes he is
better then his word, for he often performs and brings to pass, that he
never promised. As to the children of Israel, he promised them only the land
of Canaan, but he gave them, besides the whole land of Canaan, two other
kingdoms which he never promised; and to Zachary for his unbelief he was
Luke 1.
stricken dumb, he promised to give him his speech at the birth of the child,
but besides he gave him also the gift of Prophecy.

The word of God has another title here annexed, the word of truth, for all
the promises of God are in CHRIST, Yea, and Amen, (as Paul says) it is
undoubtedly true, and therefore in that regard it is a word of truth. And
again it is the word of truth (as it is in Psalm.) because it is tried and
purged seven Psalm. 12.
times, that is very often, for as silver and gold, when it is often tried in
the fire, at length will be so pure that there will be no dross found in it,
even so is the word of God, and therefore we may well believe it Because for
all the often trial of it, yet still it stands sure: Metals with often trials
will diminish: Gods word is not so. And therefore our Savior CHRIST Ioh. 17.
in his prayer that he made for his Apostles, and consequently for the Church
of God, says, sanctify the^ by the truth, and in the next verse, says he, thy
word is truth. Again, by the word of God we are bound to believe other
truths, we are not bound unto this to believe there was an Aristotle, and
Plato, etc. Further, it is called the word of truth, because it is the
touchstone of all truth, acording to which all is to be tried in the Church
of God, and the Church it self to be governed by it: which confutes the
Papists, which makes the word of God to be controuled by the word of the
Church. And if the Church should say that the Epistles of James, or of any of
the Apostles Note.
were not the word, then it were no word, which is a vilde blasphemy, for what
disorder were it that the word of the wife should prevail against the word of
her Spouse and Husband, in his own house especially?

Again, the word is called the Gospel, the Gospel is an accomplishment of all
the promises of God in CHRIST at his coming, which began at Saint John
Baptist, for howsoever the Prophets and David, etc. have notably and plainly
spoken of CHRIST, yet that was not the Gospel, they speaking of things to
come, the Gospel of that which is present. To teach us to consider what
thankfulness we are bound to render to God, for that mercy and light, that
he has vouchsafed us by the Gospel, viz. that which Abraham and the Fathers
and Kings have desired to see and could not.

The Gospel is a good news, and therefore this commends it unto us, as to
be so much the more desired of us: And who is it, that naturally is not
desirous to hear good news, and will very much inquire of it: if not too
much; as that it may be well said of us, which the Apostle says of the
Athenians, Speak again? But (alas) how backward are we to Act. 17.
enquire of this news of the Gospel? we enquire of news out of England,
France, Spain, and other places, but how much more ought we to be desirous and
inquisitiue of the news of our own country, indeed, which the Gospel
brings? for we are but strangers here in this life, and our own country is
in heaven.

Again, we will be very desirous to hear other news which yet may be
uncertain, but this news of the Gospel is most true and certain. Further,
if good news come to us, which is confirmed to us from all quarters, we
rejoice in it, and are the more desirous of it, and if they should say that
this news is not confirmed unto us, even by God himself, and by CHRIST, they
should lie, and therefore this news is to be preferred before all news. The
Apostle proceeds further to prove it to be the truth, because the Gospel is
come to them, and is preached through all the world.

Luther and John Husse time? but the Gospel (say they) must be through all
the world.

Ans. We must not always measure the Church Solution.
by the universality of it, as they affirm, for let us consider in the days
before CHRIST, and especially in Abraham's time, when the Church was shut up in
his household and family, and all the world was Heathenish: after it proceeded
and the Church was contained in a Kingdom, one Kingdom only had the
knowledge of the truth, and none might preach the Law in any place of the world
besides. And howsoever Jonah preached, yet he preached judgment, not the
Gospel, they could not be saved by it. But after the ten Tribes sell away, and
the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin remained; And the Jews themselves failed* as
in the time of Eliah, and though there were seven thousand, yet in the view of
men, even of Elias himself, they could not be seen.



Ans. But nevertheless it is not to be understood Solution.
that all times of the Gospel and continually it should be over the world, but
our Savior CHRIST says that the end should not be yet, viz. of Jerusalem
before the Gospel was to be Preached over all the world, which began at
Jerusalem as the Prophet Esaias 2.
testifies. And therefore it was necessary that the word should go throughout
the world indeed, but not generally at all times. But if they will have that to
be the Truth and the Gospel which was Preached in the whole world, then theirs
is not the Gospel, which was never in India, nor in Turkey, nor in any of the
Greek Churches, for the Patriarch of Constantinople never embraced their
religion, and therefore their Gospel is not the true Gospel. Our Gospel is
that which was spoken by the Prophets, and has been through the world, it is
that, which was taught and Preached by the Apostles, etc. and therefore ours is
the true Gospel.

Another argument of the truth of the Gospel he proves by the fruits, for the
Gospel will show it self by the fruits.



Answer. Would to God they could not too rightly object that to us But yet they
cannot hereby prove our Gospel to be none, or not the true Gospel. For in the
time of Popery, they lived in ignorance in palpable and Egiptiacall darkness,
wherein small sins could not be seen to be sins. Great sins as
blasphemy, infidelity etc. were no sins. For there was no liberty in reading
of the word. Now the light of the Gospel discovers sins that are committed
under it, which in time of ignorance were not thought nor known to be sins.
Again we wish it might be found more truly; That if the sin in time of
the Gospel be puninished under the Gospel, then the Gospel is quit and free
from that accusation. Now by the Gospel, the Gospel appoints the sins
committed under it to be punished, and so much the more sharply, as because in
the light they have been committed. And therefore those, that have the charge
in the common wealth, and the Ministers are more earnesty to perform that duty
more carefully for the credit of the Gospel. The Ministers ought to inueigh
the more vehemently against sin and to reprove it out of the word of God, and
the Magistrates to see it more severely punished. Thirdly our Gospel is proved
indeed to be the Gospel, because that in the Gospel sins more brake out
then without the Gospel, which is strange. But the Apostle proves it, for the
Romans 2.
preaching of the Law, which goes before the preaching of the Gospel,
presses (says he) the wicked. And in the wicked it has this effect, that it
makes them worse: for those that are truly called are but a few, and a little
flock, and therefore the word must have an effect of condemnation in the
greater sort. Fourthly, but the truth and fruit of the Gospel does appear in
those, that are truly called, for in them it brings forth holiness of life
and good works. And therefore we be to them, that seeing any sins under the
Gospel lay it upon the Gospel, whereas it is the corruption of men, which is
the cause of offenses and transgression and not the Gospel. And therefore it
shows their corruption, which pass by those good men, and instruments of
Gods glory, the most religious and holy men, and will not behold the good
things, that are in the Church. But the Apostle proceeds further to confirm
them more perticularly, that whereas they might have doubted whether it was the
same, that was preached to Macedonia, and other Churches, he answers, it is the
very same with theirs, which was preached by Epaphras their Minister. And so we
may say of our faithful Ministers, which have truly instructed us before, that
our doctrine now is the same, which was preached by them to us heretofore.

And Epaphras he describes to be their Dear fellow servant and a faithful
minister of CHRIST, etc. By that he gives commendation unto him, thereby to
maintain the honor and reputation of the Minister to his people, that so they
might be the better persuaded of his love.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
The fifth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. 9. 10. 11. 9 For this cause we also, since the day we heard of it,
cease nor to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding,

10 That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God,

11 Strengthened with all might through his glorious power, unto all patience
and long suffering with ioyfulnesse.


THE Apostle having given thanks to God for the graces the Colossians had
received, as namely for the grace of faith, love, and for the sincerity of both
that they were not vain and in show only, but true faith and sincere love,
does now also make his prayers unto God, that, as they had begun, they might
go forwards, till they came to the perfection God had appointed them.

The sum of these three verses is a prayer, that the Apostle does make for
the Colossians, for all manner of Christian conversation, and for all Christian
duty whatsoever, so that in these 3. verses are shut up whatsoever may be
required of a Christian man, so that the like prayer in so few words is scarce
to be found in the Scripture again. Wherein these two things are to be
considered, first, the cause why the Apostle prays, secondly the prayer it
self laid down in the rest of the text. For the first, for this cause Viz.
because of that for which we have given thanks before, Viz. your faith and
love, because that it is wrought abundantly in you. Luke 8. 18.
says, those that have shall have more abundantly. And the same we see
verified, that he that has 5. tallants has gained. 5. more, he that has
gained 2. has two more, he that has one, having hid it, and being judged to
have it taken away, the King commands it to be given to him that had 5. and
Luke 4. 19. 24. 26. Iam. 1. 5.
they object that he has 5. he answers, he that has, shall have in
abundance. And Saint James says, God gives without vpbrayding, he gives
without grudging or repining, or casting it in their teeth; which receive of
him: for he does not as men, who having bestowed much on a man, if he come
again, he will lay it in his dish, that he has bestowed on him already, this
and this, and shall he give him more? but the Lord does not so, but to whom he
has given much, he will yet give more. And therefore the Lord in some sort
does after the manner of men, from whence the proverb of our Savior is taken,
that when men are rich, others will give great guiftes unto them: but the Lord
does after a far other manner: for the Lord fears none, neither is
behoulden to any, as men are to those, that are greater then they, Reasons
showing that those. that have grace, ought especially to be commended to God.
and therefore for that cause bestows not his guiftes.

The reasons why they, that have received graces from God, are more specially
to be prayed for, and that those, that are entered into the lists of
Christianity, are principally to be recommended unto God, are diverse, and
worthy to be considered.

we may be kept from not being lift up against others, and in regard of their
infirmities to contemn them. And therefore the Apostle says, if any man be
fallen Gal. 6. 1.
by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one with
the spirit of meekness, considering thy self least thou also be tempted. And
therefore it is necessary, to see our sins, that we maybe the more able to
bear with the weakness of others.

Math. 13.


The Church being with child, that is, desirous and taking pains to bring
forth Christians, and Apocal. 12.
children unto God (for it asks great pains to beget a Christian) we see the
devil is waiting and leering to devour them, when they come out, as the kite
houereth over the chickens, to devour them, when they are young. So the devil
is ready to devour the children of God at the first when they are young and
tender, and newborn: for when they are strong, he does not so much assault
them.

it is a shame that the fault should be laid on the Parent or Master: for we
usually say, if one thus brought up, do fall in his life, their parents or
Masters have done their part, but he is an ungracious child, or servant. But
men do not so to God; for if any of his children fall, they lay it straight
and impute it unto God himself. And therefore we ought the more to pray for
them, that are exalted by the Lord, that by their falls the Gospel of God may
not be dishonored. And as they are placed in higher place, and are indewed
with greater gifts, so the more earnestly we ought to pray for them. And
therefore let us examine whether, when we have a Minister to enter, and come
unto us, to instruct us, we have commended him to the Lord, or whether we have
been thankful for any blessing, that we have received by our Minister.



not for virtues, because (said they) men have virtues of nature, and therefore
they prayed to their gods only, for things of this life. But their opinion is false, that any virtue is of nature: for we have no 1. Cor. 4. 7. ^^m. 1. 17.
good thing in us by nature, but by the gift of God. But we learn that
whatsoever good thing we have is of God, especially, which concern the
kingdom of God, and therefore to be often asked of him alone. This serves to
confute the error of Popery, who will make our selves to have free will to
good, or any good things of our selves. And not only to confute the opinion of
Popery but the practice of Popery in us still: for though in our judgment, we
nourish not that opinion of Popery, but confess, and approve and acknowledge
these graces proceed from God Vote.
yet in our hearts and practice we nourish it: when as we do not use the
means of increase: in the graces of God in us, in praying, in diligent hearing
the word, and using and frequenting the exercises of religion, which is the
most dangerous thing of all. He desires first that they may be filled with all
knowledge: this is the first thing in Christianity, that a man have knowledge
and understanding; for though a thing be good, yet being not of knowledge, it
is evil to him that does it. This knowledge, is set out by two words, the one
signifies to judge between things, what is good, what evil, what is holy,
what profane. And not only he requiers to judge of the things themselves, but
of the means which are to be used for the doings of men. For men often
discern and judge well the things, but fail in the means: Sarah she believed
well and judged well, that there should be a blessed seed, but she judged
evil, and Gen* 18
failed in the means, for she dispaired in her self being old, and therefore
gave to Abraham her ma^d. So Rebecka she judged well of the blessing, which
should be to Jacob, better then Isaac did, yet of the means she judged not
rightly, and therefore abuses her husband and makes her son abuse him by a
lie. Another word is here used, which signifies not only to judge of the
things and the means but also to judge rightly of the persons, times, and
places with other circumstances, which is a necessary thing in Christianity.
For it is not enough to know of the things and means to do them, but of the
circumstances, when, where, and before whom to do them. As to know to what
person he is to speak and when etc. As for example. Abigale when she saw her
husband was drunken, she would not reprove 1. Sam. 25. 37.
him in his drunkenness, but does it afterward: where we see the time is to be
rightly judged of.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
The sixth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 9. 10. 9 For this cause we also, since the day we heard of it,
cease not to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

10 That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, being
fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.


IT has been said that of this place are two parts: one the cause of the
prayer, and supplication, that Paul and his company did make, the other the
prayer it self.

Of the cause we have heard, and somewhat of the petition it self, and thus
far we have spoken of this notable prayer, the like whereof in so few words
is scarce to be found in the Scripture.

Having understood what is the first point of Christianity to have knowledge,
and to be fill^d with knowledge, which is a Metaphor taken from vessels, which
are filled ready to run over: So the Apostle requires of all men to be full
of knowledge. And therefore the Prophet speaking of the time of the Gospel,
says: men shall be as the waters, which shall ever regorge Esaias 19.
of their waters to the fields. And therefore we may condemn the Church of
Antichrist, which were so far from nourishing knowledge, as that the chief
point of their religion, was to mainetaine ignorance.

But let us come to our selves, let us examine whether we be able to discern
between sweet and sower, nay, between that which has a show of good, and
ill, evil from good, and not only of the foulest and grosest, but of the
least sins, that we be able to discern them to be sins: this discerning
spirit must be in us: And we must discern between good and good also, which
is more good, which less. And in evil to see the least evil, that can be,
which every Christian ought to do. Indeed the world usually does not discern
of evil things, etc. but Gods children do: for they look into the sin, as a
man into a Crystal glass, wherein a man may see the least moate: Even as
well, as a man can by his taste discern meats and drinks. Indeed in matter of
meat and drink we can soon feel whether it be sweet or sower, salt, or
ill-sauory, and yet in sins though as great as Mountains we cannot discern
them.

This of the first point, the next is, that they walk worthy of God: this is
another point of Christianity and a far greater, for knowledge indeed is
necessary, but with it must be joined practice, without which knowledge is
unprofitable, nay rather hurtful. And it may be said that a man knows so much
in Christianity, Ephe. 4.
as he practices, if ye be learned any whit in the school of CHRIST, ye
have learned this, to lay down the old man, the flesh and rags of the old
corruption, and put on the new roabes of holiness, showing that nothing is
learned without practice: for when men see you practice nothing, they say you
have learned nothing of the Minister. The Prophet, speaking of Sion, set on a
Mountain, in the Esaias 2.
time of the Gospel, says: they shall exhort one another to go up, why? To
hear: and to what end? to walk in the way, we are taught. So that we are in
Christianity to know how we may practice. Indeed in some knowledge, as of the
Arts, etc. knowledge may be profitable without practice, but in matters of
God and godliness, it is nothing, without practice. The practice of a
Christian is set out

In General, and Particular

In general to walk worthy of God, what means the Apostle by this, we shall
consider better of it by comparing it with other places. The Apostle to the
Ephesians says, Every man is to walk worthy of the calling, Ephe. 4. 1. 2.
whereunto he is called: and he exhorts the Phillipians to walk worthy of the
Gospel. So that this is set down in three sorts: to walk worthy of our
calling, to Phil. 1. 27.
walk worthy of the Gospel, and to walk worthy of God.

to walk according to the Gospel, signifies, to be spiritual and holy, as
the Gospel is holy and spiritual.

walk according to our calling, is spoken by a similitude, taken from men;
because in that calling a man is, he will carry himself according to his
place. A Gentleman will not walk basely, as others do: And a Magistrate will
do according to his estate, and a Prince likewise. And shall not the children
of God, being called to be children of God, and the sons of the most Highest,
walk as the children of God. And therefore we see it marked on David as a
reproach, that he did carry himself like 2. Sam. 21. 13.
a madman, in Achish his Court. And is it not a shame for a Christian to carry
himself so basely in sin? For sin is the vilest thing that can be, it is a
most base thing to be a slave to sin, there is no drudgery so loathsome,
which can be compared to it.

to walk worthy of God, here the Apostle declares that he that makes light
of the Gospel, makes light of God himself, and walks unworthy of God. It
may be asked what that worthiness is? It is set forth to be a walking in all
manner of pleasing of God, if we study to please God in every thing, which is a
very notable thing: 1 To please God, then to please him in all things which we
know: to do that which we know may please God, and to set our selves against
any thing that we know may displease God, for men usually do naturally take
delight to please themselves, and to seek for those things, which may be most
according to their own hearts, pleasant to their own eyes. And therefore
Solomon in Ecclesiastes says, to the young man, mocking him, Go to, Rejoice o
young man in thy youth, and Eccle. 11. 9.
walk in the ways of thine heart.

Another sort of men walk to please the world, and care not what they may do,
so they may please those, whose favor they desire; but if I should please Gal.
1. 10.
men, I should not be the servant of God, says the Apostle, And as we are to
please God, so, in all things we ought to do it, at the least to wrestle and
strive with our selves to the obedience of Gods will in all things. And if in
doing the will of God, the world be displeased, we need not to care, but to
go forward: For al-be-it the Apostle says, as much as we can with pleasing
God we are to please all men, yet Romans 15.
if we cannot please men, but displease God, we are not to care for men's
displeasure in regard of Gods: for Saint Paul says, I care not for man's 1.
Cor. 4.
judgment.

Examine our selves, therefore we ought, whether we please our selves, or the
world, more then God, or no.

It follows, Being fruitful in all good works, that Verse 10.
is, bringing forth every good fruit; this is the same with the former, but it
explaineth the other by a Metaphor, if we bring forth good fruit in every good
work, where he compares men to fruitful creatures, as sheep, especially
bringing forth two lambs, or to trees bringing forth good fruit. The children
of God are in Esaias, called Oaks of righteousness, Esaias 61. 3.
in that they are strong and stand against all temptations and tempests: And
like Oaks in steadiness of profession: So also in regard of the excellent
fruit, they are compared to the Vin^, which is accounted in the Scripture of
all trees a most excellent tree, and most profitable, sweet, and pleasant, as
also plentiful, and therefore in regard of the goodness and abundance, we
are to like of it. And therefore our Savior says: I am the Vine, and my Ioh.
15. 2.
Father the Husbandman to dress the Vine. And the Vine is singular and most
excellent in regard of the Ezekiel. 15.
fruit, for else it is good for nothing, not for to make a pin, but for the
fire: so Christians, which profess God and the Gospel, if they bring forth no
fruit and please not God, they are the worst of all men, worse then the Jews,
Turks, and heathen, let them brag what they will of the word, and Sacraments,
etc. And they must bring forth much fruit, viz. in every good work, and
therefore it is said the Father does trim that Vine, to make it bring forth
more fruit, It was required always that the children John 15. 2. Zach. 12. 8.
of God, should bring forth fruit, but much more in the time of the Gospel.
And therefore the Prophet says, the least, basest, and weakest of the people
of God, at that time shall be as David, and he that is as David shall be as an
Angel of God. We know how valiant and courageous David was, so shall the
weakest in the Gospel.

To increase in knowledge, is another point of Verse 10.
walking worthy of God, as to be endowed with the graces of God, so to
increase (both the Ministers and others) in the knowledge of God, that is, in
the knowledge of the will of God, and to be quicke-sighted in the same. In the
beginning of the book of Proverbs there is a saying, which may Prou. 1. 4.
be referred to all the Scripture. That the Proverbs of Solomon are such as
the least child, that has wit, and the hardest man of capacity, the simplest,
may profit by it to knowledge, and there is not the wisest man in the world,
but may learn wisdom thereby, and may wax more wise, and so it is to be
said of all the books of the Scripture.



1. Cor. 13.
years, so we are not always to be children in Christianity.

There is (as we have heard) required of us knowledge and practice. Lastly,
there is besides these, Constancy, to continue in the good thing, we know and
practice: and yet noe strength is of our selves; the Apostle tells us where we
must have strenght, in the power of God, in his glorious power, for we have
sore enemies, for first we have a corruption within us, which is compared to
an excessive lump of flesh, and fat hanging on us, which we cannot cast of
Heb. 12. 1.
at our pleasure, which we might do, if it were tied only at our back, or
girdle, and therefore we must have strenght to carry it and to weld it.

The world also is ready by tentation, by illusions, examples, and
discouragements, to hinder us: And the devil being a strong enemy labors
to circumuent us, and therefore we had need to have this glorious strenght from
God, which we cannot have of our selves.

And having entered a good course, it becomes us to go forward. For better not
to begin, then having entered not to proceed.

Lastly, we must have long Patience to bear the Verse. 11.
things which come hard unto us, whether they be greiuous or of long
continuance, as the word signifies. And that with joy and comfortablenes, as
the Apostles, when they had been whipped, and scourged, Act. 5. 41.
rejoiced greatly that they were accounted worthy to suffer for CHRIST'S sake.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
The seventh Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 12. 13. 14. 12 Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light,

13 Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the kingdom of his dear Son,

14 In whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, the forgiveness of
sins,


UNTO the prayer that the Apostle made for the Colossians he does now add the
Thanksgiving, which ought not to be separated: whereby he sets forth the
salvation, which is offered us in CHRIST. As if the Apostle should thus speak.

And as we give not over praying for you, so do Verse. 12.
we not cease to give thanks to God the father, because it is he, which by his
holy spirit has made us fit, to have a part in the inheritance of Saints,
whom whether we consider, as they are in the world by reason of their perfect
blessedness, may well be said, that they are in light. pulled us out both of
the present darkness of ignorance, and disobedience, and from that which is
to come, even the fearful punishment of them both. And secondly it stands in
that the same God has translated us into the kingdom of his most dear son,
which being here begun in This life, shall be accomplished in the life to come.
In which his dear son we have a full redemption, whereof one part is our
justification, which we have already received, waiting for that which
remains, even the redemption of our bodies. All which redemtion is purchased
unto us in the obedience of the Son: which obedience was most specially and
most signally declared in the sheadding of his blood.

Here are two things to be considered, the Actors of salvation coming from.

God simply considered in the three persons verse. 12. 13. Christ, God, and
man, verse. 14.
So that the scope and drift of the Apostle is to set forth unto us the
salvation prepared for us, set forth in 2. sorts, one is proceeding from God
the father by his spirit, the principal working cause,

And by CHRIST JESUS the material or meritorious cause of our salutatio^. For
the 1. what God the father by his spirit has done for us, it appears in that
he, viz. That God the father has fitted us for a portion among the Saints in
light.

So that salvation is a portion among Gods Saints, which portion is in light,
where we see that the state of Gods children is compared to a part or portion,
and that by lot. viz. an inheritance, as it was by lot, it is so said, because
that in the old law the people of God used to divide their inheritances by lot,
as in the dividing of the Land of Canaan. Which Iosuah, and the Priests, and
the chief Elders did castlots for the inheritance of the Tribes.



Psalm. 16.
fayer and beautiful inheritance, and has fallen unto him in an excellent
ground. And seeing our inheritance is the same with David's, and as excellent as
his was; and yet it is more notably set forth 1. Peter 2. 1. Peter. 2.
That whereas the Jews were scattered from their inheritance into Pontus etc.
This is now trodden down under foot by wicked men, this cannot be so. Again
that is faded and decayed, this can never decay 1. Peter 5.
and perish, and therefore seeing our inheritance is so excellent, and so
precious; whatc are ought we to have to keep it and maintain it? for as we
use in proverb, It is my freehold, and therefore I must look to it: so
seeing this our freehold, we are to have special care, and regard above all
things to keep it sure.

He has fitted us for this, wherein he does plainly teach us, that there is
no readiness, aptness, and fitness in our own nature, and therefore we must
have our fitness from God: A man is fit for his fathers inheritance: but for
Gods inheritance we are not so, for we are (even all the world, in regard of
Gods matters) naturally but blind borne. Again though Esaias 42. 7.
we had our sight, yet we are lame and cannot reach so much as a hand to it,
nor go one foot to it, and have both these naturally, and therefore cannot by
us be cured, as the blind man said. Again, which John. 9. Ephesians. 2. 1.
is more, we are dead in sin, and therefore must be new creatures, which we
cannot make our selves. And therefore the Apostle says, that we are not able
2. Cor. 3.
to do good, because we are not apt, nor fit to do good, and therefore what
fitness soever we have it comes from God: And this ought to cause and stir
us to thankfulness unto God, as the Apostle here does. For seeing we are both
made fit by God for his inheritance, and seeing he has bestowed it freely
upon us, therefore we are the more carefully to be thankful, which we
should not be bound to do, if it were of our selves, What this inheritance is
he shows in making it consist of two parts.



Pulled us) Thereby shows that he uses great strength to deliver us, which
confirms to us the doctrine before, of being unable our selves to do. And
therefore he delivers us, and pulls us out as of a prison, which are usually
dark. And more notably he says, that he pulls us out of the pit without water,
setting down Esaias 42. Zach. 9. 11.
and comparing this prison to a pit or dungeon, wherein is only dirt, wherein
we stick, where is no water, where he describes our damnable estate, for
seeing we are cast into such a prison, but especially being cast by God
himself, in his just judgment, how is it possible that we should deliver our
selves, and therefore our Savior faith: No man can come to me, but he must be
drawn by my Father. A man may Ioh. 6.
be in prison and have no will nor affection to come out, and therefore it
makes to the glory and praise of God, in doing the whole work of our
Redemption. And if, after the Church is called to CHRIST, she finds such
dullness and heaviness in her self, that she must be drawn, though they
Cant. 2.
have received grace and are drawn out of the pit. How shall they have any
strength to get out, which are not yet drawn out of the pit and dirt? So that
the first part is to be delivered from blindness, from ignorance, hardness of
heart, the wrath and judgments of God, and condemnation.

The second part is the making us pertakers of his Kingdom, And as the
darkness we are delivered from, is partly in this life, and was after to be
accomplished, in hell, if we had not been delivered: so the Kingdom of God is
begun in this life, and is within us, and shall be perfected in heaven after
this life: So that we see those, that are the children of God indeed, will in
this life endeavor, to give obedience to the commandments of God. And
therefore though men profess themselves the servants of God, yet their lives
being not according to God, they are no subjects of God: For as he that will
profess himself to be subject to the King, and yet in his deed will yield
obedience to the King of Spain, and serve him, he is doubtless a Traitor. So
it is with those, that profess themselves to be Christians, yet if in their
lives and behavior they do not show forth the fruits of it, they are nothing
but Rebels to God, and servants to the devil, come they never so diligently to
the Word, and Sacraments, etc.

Hitherto we have heard what these two persons, God the Father, and God the
Son, have wrought in our salvation. Now follows the matter of our
Redemption, viz. in him, viz. in his beloved Son we have Redemption, because
we have forgiveness of sins.

Here is set forth in whom, by whom, and in what price we have our redemption.
For many men will confess that they are saved by CHRIST, but when it comes to
the means there they fail: For the enemies of the truth will say that they
are saved by CHRIST, but yet that they are also saved by their merit and
free will: and they will say that the good works they have, they have of God,
and yet they have no good works at all, because they have it not by the means
which God here has laid down. Our Savior CHRIST is he that has redeemed
us, and paid the price for us, and that wholly.



God and therefore it reaches to all the times before, it is not only
belonging to them, that come after, but to Adam and the Fathers, and therefore
it is said that the death of our Savior CHRIST reaches to the Romans 3.
former sins.



Adam being but one man, seeing his own sin, was able to condemn all men, he
being but a man and not a God, and Romans 5.
therefore shall not CHRIST being the Son of God by his so many sufferings be
able to save those that are to be saved?



Heb. 5.
which men and women should have suffered for ever in themselves.

But our Adversaries of the Church of Rome, object Object. of the Adversaries.
we are not saved by CHRIST from all our sins, and therefore they abused that
place to the 3 of the Romans expounding the former sins to be original and the
rest to be satisfied and wrought out by us. Again they say the punishment we
are to work out, he having taken away the sin original.

But we have proves for this against them, for says Solution. 1. Ioh. 2. John.
3.
the Apostle he is the propitiation for sins, viz. even all. And in John he
is the lamb of God that takes away our sins, not that did, but that does
take away, as those that were, so also those, that are.

Again for that they say CHRIST takes away the sins only and not the
punishment: they do greatly abuse God himself, for in Esaias 53. CHRIST Esaias.
53.
has suffered the punishment, and therefore this were to accuse God himself of
false-hood, and cruelty, that would promise the taking away of our sins, and
forgiveness of our dets by CHRIST, and yet would exact the utmost farthing at
our hands: what an unjust thing were this?

David, that for his sins he was punished, by persecution at the hands of
his Son, and driven from his kingdom, and after it is told him his sins
were forgiven.

not punished (for that were infinite, and could not be suffered) but only
chastened. For Reu. 3.
says God, those I love, I chasten, so that if it come from Heb. 12.
love, it is no punishment.

Again, from the effect it appears it is no punishment, because it is for
their good, on whom it is laid, and therefore no punishment. For punishments are
to destruction.

And the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews compares Heb. 12.
all the afflictions that God lays on his servants to the corrections, which
a father lays on his child. For a father corrects his child for two causes:
first that he might be better, for though he do him never so much injury, even
to burn his house, yet if he love his son, he will only correct him,
seeking, to bring him to good order.

Another cause is that by his example and correction the rest of his children
may be kept the better in awe. Even so the Lord deals with his children as a
loving Father, chastising them for their good.

The end of the seventh Sermon.
The eighth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 15. to the 21. 15 Who is the image of the invisible God the
first borne of every creature.

16. For by him were all things created which are in heaven, and which are in
earth, things visible and invisible: whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him, and for him.

17 And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.

18 And he is the head of the body of the Church: he is the beginning, and the
first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence.

19 For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.

20 And by him to reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at peace
through the blood of his cross, both the things in earth, and the things in
heaven.


THE holy Apostle having entered into the declaration of the redemption brought
unto us, sets forth the Causes.

First, what God the father has done for us: Secondly, what God the Son has
done for us. And now he comes to a notable description of God the Son, to
show unto us that in him we have a full and plentiful redemption. As if the
Apostle should say.

This CHRIST (that you may know what a A Metaph. 15.
plentiful and rich redemption you have in him, to the end you may rest in him
alone) is thus set forth unto you as follows. As touching his person standing
of both natures, he is the most lively and express image and caracter of God,
not only of his qualities (if yet there were any quality in the Godhead) but
of his very nature and essence. In whom we may behold God, which is invisible,
and touch him, that is insensible, which is the principal heir of all the
creatures in the world, in whom we, that believe, have right unto them.









That by him he might reconcile unto himself all things, making peace by the
death of his cross between God and all men, whether it be they which having
believed in him before his coming, are now in heaven, or others, which being on
earth, do believe in him.

Here there is a description of Christ, God, and man, touching his.

Person, whereby he governs all things. Office, whereby he governs his
Church.
Sum; a description of the excellency of our Savior CHRIST which consists
of two parts.

One touching the government of our Savior CHRIST, which he has over all
things in heaven, earth, and hell; the other touching the particular rule over
his Church.

First he is called the image of the invisible God, that cannot be seen by
the eye of man. And not only is meant here but none can so much as come to the
understanding of God, by the eye of the mind: But by our Savior CHRIST we see
the Godhead, those that were alive when he was on earth did see the Godhead
in him: and we shall see God in him in heaven. This is proved by diverse places.
1. Tim. 3. 16. A wonderful Mystery, that God which is a light that Ioh. 1. 18.
1. Tim. 6. 16.
no man can see, which is incomprehensible, is yet seen and comprehended of a
mortal man, so far forth as man is able. 1. John 3. None has seen God at
any time, nor can come to the knowledge of him, but the only begotten Son of
the Father has reueiled him. Ioh. 14. When as one of the Apostles says to
him, show us thy Father: our Savior answers, O Phillip have thou been with
me so long, and have not seen the Father. otherwise invisible. And this is a
wonderful mystery, and an exceeding mercy, that God, which cannot be
conceived in the capacity of men, should yet be seen of us.

Quest. Whether in the body and Manhood, or Godhead of CHRIST is it seen?

Not in the Manhood, for it is too weak to express Solution.
the Godhead of his Father, and touching the Godhead he cannot be
comprehended in himself being equal with his Father, and as inco^prehensible
as the Father being one with him. And therefore he is understood of us, and is
the image of the Father, as his Godhead, and Manhood are both joined together.

Quest. What great thing is this that CHRIST is the image of God, seeing Adam,
a bare man, was the image of God? And the woman is Image of 1. Cor. 11.
man, and man is the image of God* even in this wretched estate, and therefore
no such wonderful a thing to be the image of God.

Ans. Adam is called the image of God in regard of Solution.
some sparkles of the image, which God had ingrafted in him, by creation he was
not the image of the Essence of God, nor had any of his Essence. Again, man is
said to be the image of God, in regard of the rule which God has given him
over his wife, whereas our Savior CHRIST has in him the Essence of his Father,
being perfect God, having the Godhead joined to his Manhood, in one and the
same person.



Ans. We do not understand an image here to bethat, which does represent the
accidents or lineame^ts of things (as images of earthly things do) for the
images, that are made of a man, cannot represent the Essence, but the accidents
and lineaments of the body of a man: but CHRIST is such an Image of his Father,
which is the thing it self, as the word is 1. Cor. 1^.
used in other places. As we are after the Image of Adam, being the thing it
self. Again, Hebr. 9. 23. These things, viz. ceremonies, being the shadows
of those things which were the truth, being not the image it self: And
therefore their argument is a false reason, for the understanding of this; To
know how CHRIST is the image of the Father, and of the Holy Ghost, and of
himself as God, viz. that he in the Godhead, and Manhood did represent the
infinite power of God, It may appear by that in Ioh. 1. Ioh. 2.
1. We have seen him as God himself, for in all his words, and works, and
whatsoever he showed such virtue and power, viz. even of God himself; He
commanded the devils and they came out, commanded the seas and winds, and they
obeyed, which none, Angel, or men could ever do, and therefore there
appears the image of God.

Again, there is an infinite mercy set forth unto us in JESUS CHRIST in saving
his children, in that by him we are saved. Again, an infinite justice reueiled
to us in our Savior CHRIST, who has borne in his own person for us the
infinite wrath of God, and has made satisfaction for us in his own blood. And
in that one action of his suffering appeared both the infinite justice, and
mercies of God, and therefore the image of God.

This may be considered after this sort, for seeing the Angels themselves
stoop to look into this mystery, We may by this mean example of the
profane History see some small resemblance of this thing, serving somewhat to
open it: and yet take heed that with reverence we consider this, so deep a
mystery of our Savior CHRIST.

There is in the Histories recorded, A King, which This similitude is warily to
be used.
his son by Adultery having transgressed the Law, and should have lost his
eyes, by the importunity of the people was entreated not to do it: yet because
the King would not have the Law broken, he found out a way to keep the Law,
and because he would not have them to have a blind King, he put out one of his
sons, and one of his own eyes. Where was justice in that the King would
execute the Law, and mercy in sparing his son, but this was imperfect
justice, and mercy.

But in CHRIST both are perfect.



Inheritour, and heir of all creatures, for howsoever Verse. 15.
it be otherwise interpreted, yet it seems rather to be this, because as in
the Law, the eldest son was heir of all, or of the most part of the Fathers
possessions. So CHRIST he is the heir of all, and those that have any thing,
have it by him, and have right by him. His father has put all things under his
Psalm. 8. Heb. 1. 1. Cor. 15. Doctrine.
feet.

He that has any possession, or power, never so great, if he have it not by
CHRIST, it is none of his, he is an usurper, whatsoever he be. And therefore
it condemns them, that get not their goods with good consciences; Nay though
they may come to it by their parents, yet having not the testimony of the
Spirit of God, that he is the child of God, it is not his. Therefore Pro. 15.
Better is a little with the fear of Pro. 15. 16 Psalm. 37. 16.
God, then great treasure with trouble. And this is the reason that better a
little, with Gods fear, because if he be the child of God, that has it, it is
his own, and he may use it: but if he be not, be he never so wealthy, he shall
answer the Lord for it, and his judgment shall be the greater for it. For if
he, that eats brown bread shall answer for it, if he be wicked, much more
shall he that feeds and fares of the best, as he abuses more of Gods
blessings, and therefore let them look unto it, that have received any from
God.

As CHRIST is the Image of God, and heir of all things, so also it is said.
That he made all things. Which he proves by a division, whether in heaven or
earth, meaning underneath, or above also: and if any make a dout of that, he
takes it away, and says, whether visible o^ invisible, whatsoever things were
made, were made by him.

Visible and invisible He uses this upon occasion of an error in the
Colossians, that they worshipped Angels, departing from the truth, and therefore
the Apostle stands upon this point, handling Angels, of what order or degree
soever.

Thrones, viz. such, as sit in Thrones, or Lordship, viz. which have Lordship,
or whatsoever they were, were made by him, and therefore not to be worshipped,
but of that afterward, when we come to the error; they do use order, how much
more are we to seek for order, which are so corrupt and confused? And if
inferior Angels, in regard of order, obey those over them; much more should we
be obedient to those over us. And if wicked spirits, to the accomplishing of
their wicked purposes, have their orders, some to command, some to obey,
Therefore much more ought we. And yet here arises comfort for us, that Note.
if the wicked Angels observe order for to hurt us, yet the good Angels, much
more for over defense. And the devils though they are very strong and exceeding
subtle, yet it is not to be doubted but by their fall they have lost much of
that strenght, which they had by their Creation.

The end of the eighth Sermon.
The ninth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 16. to the 21. 16. For by him were all things created which are
in heaven, and which are in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they
be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created
by him, and for him.

17 And he is before all things, and in him all things consist.

18 And he is the head of the body of the Church: he is the beginning, and the
first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence.

19 For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.

20 And by him to reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at peace
through the blood of his cross, both the things in earth, and the things in
heaven.


HERE is set forth as we have heard in these and them that went before the
description of our Savior CHRIST, of his excellent and glorious estate
consisting in the description of

his Person, Office.

The Person of CHRIST stands of both natures, both of the Godhead, and
manhood; for those things here spoken can neither belong to the Godhead a
part, not to the manhood a part.

The last point spoken of out of the beginning of this part we are to consider
further of, viz., touching the Angels, called here powers, dominions,
principalities etc. Where we observed, that seeing there is such an order among
the Angels, such excellent creatures, have some superiors, others inferiors.
And for so much as Angels are subject to higher Angels, much more ought men to
be subject to their Governors and Princes, having far more need. This was for
instruction. An other point for consolation was delivered upon this question;
whether the blessed Angels have more strenght then the devils.

Answer. Notwithstanding the devils have great Note.
power and strenght and do great things: yet they have not such wisdom, such
power, nor strenght to do mischief, as the good Angels have to defend the
children of God. The reason is, that as men falling from their estate lost much
of their wisdom, wit, strenght etc. Even so the wicked Angels are by their
fall dishabled of that power, and wisdom, and strenght in comparison of the
blessed spirits, for further proof of this read Apocalips 20. 2. One Angel
(not said to be an Archangell, or principal Angel, but a meaner Angel) is
said to take the dragon, the principal devil (by the neck as it were) and
bind him. For when as the devil, at the increase of the Church, about 30.
years after the ascension of our Savior CHRIST began to rage mightily against
the Church of God, and would have clean devoured it, had not the Lord laid him
on his back. It is said that an Angel took him, and bound him up for a 1000.
years.

He proceeds to set forth the excellency of our Savior CHRIST, in that he
says, by him were made Verse 16.
all things, where is noted the excellency of his personage, that he must
needs be indeed a meet and sufficient one, for the great work of the
redemption, because he was the Creator of all, and if that was such an
excellent work, then the Spiritual recreation and regeneration is a far
more excellent thing, and can be performed by none, but by such a one, which
was God. And therefore condemns the Papist, which is so wretched to take upon
him power to redeem himself, and to help himself to heaven. Nay to help
others by his good works, as they call them of super-errogation, or rather to
be called of superarrogation.

But is there any man that by his good works can create himself, or help in
any part to the creation of himself? Much less then is a man able to do any
thing in the matter of his redemption: As being not able to do any good thing:
thus the Lord has called and regenerated him. And as all the work of our
Creation depends on God, as here it is proved, so every part and lot of our
redemption is in God, and by God alone. For howsoever, before we be called we
have life of body, and motion, yet toward the Kingdom of our Savior CHRIST,
we cannot move a foore, till the Lord bring us

He has the praeheminence, and all things are made Verse 17.
for him.

Alpha 1 the beginning that made all, and the Omega, the end of all, for whom
all things are ordained. And therefore how dare any challenge him, or reason
and dispute against him? Shall the pot speak against the Potter? For did not
he make all, and did not he Romans 9. 20. Pro. 16. 4.
make them to his glory, as it pleased him, whether to glorify himself in
their salvation or destruction? and therefore what is it, that wretches dare
reason with God, why he made man to destruction?

But faith the Prophet, let the sheard reason with Isa. 45. 9.
the sheard, not with the Potter, and yet the Potter gives only the form, not
the matter, but God makes Note.
both the matter and form.

All things are for him, viz. our selves, our souls Verse 16. Doctrine.
our bodies, our honor, credit, children, goods, wit, strength, etc, are not
to serve for our selves, for our own pleasure and delight, to use as we list,
much less for others, but only for the Lord, and for his service.

the faithful servant the Master will cause to sit down, etc. Luke 19. Verse
17.


By him all things stand, As he created all things, so he keeps and
preserves all things, The heavens are kept, the earth stayed in the midst of
all, without Heb. 1.
any prop, only by the hand of God, and of the Son of God, for living
creatures, Acts 17. In him all things live, move, and have their being.



ready to glorify God: Then much more ought our hands to be strengthened to
glorify God, we being also re-created and borne again: And therefore to
employ our knowledge, wisdom, strength, and all in Gods service, and that by
so much the more, as we have received more graces at the hand of God.

Thus much of the first part of this Text, The second point of the office of
our Savior CHRIST, is set forth, in that he is called the Head of his Church.
Which we will come unto, when we have understood the reason, why our Savior
CHRIST which is the first begotten of the creatures, etc. is here set down.

This is to prove unto us that our Savior CHRIST is the fit and sufficient
Messiah: for first, because he is the image of God, hereby it is proved that
by him only, being in the bosom of his Father, Gods will is reueiled unto us.

Again, he is called the heir of al things: for else how could he make us the
inheritours of the things of this life, much less of heaven.

Again, he is called the ruler of al things) for were not he controuler of the
Angels, of the heavens, of the earth and of all things, that so he might
subdue whatsoever should rise against the salvation of his children, they
should be discouraged. John 17. He has the power of all flesh, to master
whatsoever should set it self against the salvation of his Church: and these
are the causes, why the Apostle labors to set down the excellency of our
Savior by all these points.

Head of the Church, Here is set forth the office of our Savior CHRIST, the
Church being his body, id est, the Mystical body of CHRIST.

One office of our Savior CHRIST, as he is the Head of his Church, is to be
the Prophet: because as from the head comes wit and light, to all the
members, so all instruction of the Kingdom of God comes from CHRIST.

Secondly, he is the Priest, as he is the Head of his Church, because as from
the head comes all the life, and sense by the Arteries: even so by CHRIST, as
the Head, all spiritual life flows.

Thirdly, as the head rules all the other parts, so CHRIST is King over his
Church, to rule and govern them after his will, signifying that whatsoever
good the Church has, comes from CHRIST.

For this cause he is called the root, not the sprigge of David, because,
whatsoever good thing David had, he received from CHRIST. And hence it is that
he is called in John, a Vine, in whom all the branches Ioh. 15. 1.
meet, and of whom they receive life, so that if they be cut of, they must
needs die.

He is called the Head of the Church, after, in this Epistle, and in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, where it Ephe. 1. 23.
is said to be his body, even the fullness of him, that fills all, in all
things, where is set forth the love of our Savior CHRIST, that howsoever he
perfecteth all things, yet he himself is not willing to be perfected without
the Church.

before all things: must be he, that has created all things.

And therefore this must needs be a blasphemous thing to attribute this to
Peter. That howsoever he was an excellent man, yet he never arrogated this to
himself. And we see that the wisdom of the holy Ghost, making Peter such an
excellent instrument of his glory, and foreseeing the wretched abuse of Peter
to follow afterward, that he should by reason, that he was such a worthy man be
more esteemed, then he ought, does never set forth any excellent thing in
Peter, but sets forth also with all very notable Note.
and great, special faults, and blots, and blemishes in him. As when he had
made that worthy confession of his faith, concerning our Savior CHRIST, which
our Savior commended, he presently is brought in to diswade our Savior from
suffering, which was as much as from the work of redemption (...) which cause
our Savior rebukes him sharply, Math. 16. 23. Mark. 8. 33. Math. 14. 28. 31.
(...)als him Satan, get thee behind me Satan. And again, when that he would
by reason of the strength of his faith walk on the seas, he shows, as he
showed his great faith, so his great infidelity. And also, when he bragged that
he would suffer with our Savior, he Math. 26.
most shamefully denied and forsware him. And after all this was taxed by Paul
for a point of hipocrisy. Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13.


And if this cannot without blasphemy, be given to Peter, who for all his great
infirmities was an excellent Apostle of our Savior CHRIST, much more
blasphemous is it to impute it to the Pope, a most wretched man.

And if they say the Pope is a Ministerial head and deputy, what needs
CHRIST to have a deputy Math. 28 20.
being present himself. Therefore John 14. and 16. I leave my spirit, and
therefore if he have any deputy, it is his own spirit.

The beginning and first begotten. Beginning 1. the Verse. 18.
fruits ( first begotten) 1. both himself rose, and is the 1. Cor. 15. 20.
cause of the resurrection of all the children of God. John 11. I am the
resurrection 1. the cause of the resurrection John 11. 25.
of his children. For as he is God, he is the cause of the resurrection of all
men. But as he is the mediator and head of the Church, he is the cause Note.
of the resurrection of his Church. For if the head rise, the body must needs
follow. And therefore, as by one man all men fell, so by one, all ( viz. that
are saved) 1. Cor. 15. 22.
rise again.

A part of this resurrection is in this life, by mortification and quickening
wrought in them, which shall be perfected at the last resurrection, when they
Note.
shall rise in glory. Indeed then the wicked shall rise, but by the general
power of his God head not by the particular power of virtue or his medi(...)
All fulness dwells: this has been spoken of i^ (...)14. verse, we will
only speak of that, not then handled.

It pleased: it is only so to be set down, for the father is not in the
Greek: howsoever it be of Divines thought to be meant of the father: yet it
seems rather to be understood, that it pleased God the father God the Son
himself, and the holy Ghost.

Again, by reconciling is meant to reconcile, not Verse. 20.
to his father only, but to himself, and to the holy Ghost also.

An other point, not observed before, in that he says, by himself, which may
seem to be a surplusage of words, but in regard of the corruption that should
arise, he says that this sacrifice is to be offered by himself alone, where
we are to be referred to the further proof of it in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, where the Apostle says that CHRIST has, Heb. 1. 3.
By himself purged our sins.

All things Quest. Why not all men? for men only are saved and reconciled unto
God, having been his enemies.

Answer. True, for it is not meant of the Angels, Solution.
nor of the other creatures. And yet all these dumb and unreasonable creatures
have restoration by the death of CHRIST. For the Heavens and earth and all
things shall be renewed, and the sun shall have 2. Pet. 3. 13.
double the light it has, and therefore the virtue of CHRIST'S sufferings
reaches even to them. But yet these can not be said to be reconciled unto God,
because they were never his enemies, how be it, by reason of the sin of man,
they were pertakers with him of the curse of God. But by reconciling, all
things, is here meant all the children of God, that are already in heaven, or
in earth, or shall be to the end of the world.

The end of the ninth Sermon.
The tenth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 21. 22. 21 And you which were in times past strangers and
enemies, because your minds were set in evil works, has he now also
reconciled,

22 In the body of his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable,
and without fault in his sight,


THE Apostle Saint Paul having set forth unto us the rich redemption of the
world by the blood of CHRIST, does now show how the same does agree unto the
Colossians The Metaphrase.
themselves.

you: which benefit that it may the better be esteemed, consider what you were,
when he reconciled you, strangers from God, yea enemies in your very
understanding, which is the chiefest, and therefore much more in other parts;
which enmity was made manifest by your evil works. himself. Note.
wrought) but for the confirmation of your faith, and example of your patience.
And seeing thereby are fulfilled the passions, which are yet wanting unto the
body of CHRIST, which is the Church, which must be like unto CHRIST her Head
in suffering, that it may be like unto him in glory. And finally seeing it is
not for your good alone, but for the good of the whole body of CHRIST which is
his Church. which yet would be unfruitfully, were it not that God works by
his Spirit mightily, with my Ministry.

The sum of all is, that the Colossians, in the general redemption of
mankind by CHRIST, through the working of the Spirit have their part, upon
condition, if they abide in the truth to the end.

The parts are 1 A particular application of the common benefits of CHRIST'S
redemption unto the Colossians. 2 An exhortation to perseverance, that they may
be truly pertakers of that redemption.

The sum whereof is to set forth unto us, the benefit of God bestowed upon
the Colossians, to the end that they should be holy.

Wherein we consider: First, the application of the benefits of CHRIST to the
Colossians: Secondly, the end of this redemption, that they should be holy,
without spot, and unblameable.

For the application; it appears herein: for when he says, you has he
reconciled; he declares the wonderful kindness of God toward the^, viz. the
Colossians, for though that there be a redemption wrought, yet if the
Colossians could not apply it to themselves, nor have any hope that it belonged
to them, they were not the better for it; Nay, it is the worse, when as a
blessing being abroad, is yet neglected, and not obtained of some, when as
others get it. And therefore our Savior CHRIST, speaking to the obstinate
Jews, says: ye shall see the Prophets in heaven, and. your Luke 13. 28.
selves shut out; ye shall see it, arguing the greatness of the iudgemnt.

Here then we are to learn, to try whether we our Instruction.
selves have any part or portion in the same, and whether we be not those,
which only shall see the same, and not feel it in our selves, and that we are
of those that enjoy it, and not such as only hear tell of it.

For even as if there should be a thousand Rebels, and a pardon granted to some
ten, or an hundred, if a man know not that he is one of the men, which should
be pardoned, what should it profit him to know there is a pardon? Note.


And as if any should hear of a treasure found, and yet be not sure that he
has part in it, what avails it him? so it is in the case of our Redemption,
when as we know not that this favor belongs to us. And when as we only
can say that there are some that shall be redeemed, and can talk of the
salvation of others, and not of our own: how can we be truly thankful?

Colossians, for he assures the Colossians of their redemption. Note.


And it is far otherwise with the possession of our salvation, then with
worldly possessions, which possession may be lost, but this cannot be taken
away.

Now against the wretched opinion of the Papists we out of Genesis 15. and 17.
are to consider, that seeing the Lord says, (making his covenant to Abraham) I
am thy God, thou art my servant, why should not the covenant of God make
Abraham say again, Thou art my God, I am thy servant? Hos. 2. 23. I will say
to them, which were not my people, Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou
art my God.

Quest. How could Saint Paul know this, seeing there are so many deceits, and
turnings of Hypocrisy in a man's heart, that a man can hardly know any thing of
certain in himself.

Ans. The Apostle might know, and we may well Solution.
know, that wheresoever God does spread the banner of the Gospel, there are
some, that are certainly called and elected.

Indeed there are many that are Reprobates and Hypocrites, but yet so long as
the Gospel was there, the Apostle might know, that there were some Elect.



Contrarily, this confuteth those, that for corruptions Note against the
Brownists.
in the Church, will utterly deface the Chuch of God, and make it to be no
Church, and forsake it. For where the Gospel is Preached by authority from
God, there is CHRIST'S throne erected.



To the further setting forth of their excellent estate he seteth down their
cursed estate before. Verse. 21.


Solomon, loathes honey, the sweetest thing. And a man though sick, yet if he
feell not his disease, will never seek to the Physician.

So it is in our estate of salvation, that because we Note.
see not how loathsome we were naturally, we can not discern the wonderful
glory offered. Hence it was that the Papists being filled, with their Merits,
Dirges, Masses, etc. could not see the pretiousnesse of CHRIST, and therefore
sought not to him.

And, we, though we are by Gods mercy delivered from the sincke of Idolatry,
yet we do not wey sufficiently our redemption, because we do not see narrowly
into our sins, nor behold the vileness of them; indeed we confess in
general we are sinners etc. but the cause of our Frosennesse is for that we
do not see the horriblenesse of our sins.

And therefore we are to study, and to look diligently into the glass of Gods
word, wherein we may see our sins in their proper coulors. Indeed if men be
once touched with the sense of sin by the hand of God, then will they cry, oh
the goodness of God! etc. then they will acknowledge it to be the most
precious thing that is, to be assured of the favor of God. It follows.

Strangers: viz. in regard of the inheritance of God, Verse. 21.
we have no lot nor portion with CHRIST, before our redemption. Again without
CHRIST we are strangers from the City of God, from the heavenly Ephesians. 2. 12.
Jerusalem, and we are vagabonds and rogues from the common wealth of God.
Whereas if we be pertakers of CHRIST, we are of the City of God, of the
heavenly City, which came down from above.

And if to be a Burgess and free Citizen, be such Note.
an excellent thing, as in the world it is accounted highly: for we see when
as Paul said he was a Citizen of Rome, Lisias said, I bought it with a great
price. And Act. 22. 28.
says he, dare you beat a Citizen. But how much more excellent and precious a
thing is it to be a freeman in the heavenly City of God?

Now if we be Citizens of Gods City, then follows an other point, that we
must be strangers from Note.
the world. And therefore if we be not strangers from the world, from
drunkenesse, from our pleasures, from our riches, etc. we are strangers from
God. It follows.

Enemies, not only strangers, but enemies. For howsoever with men they may be
strangers one to Note.
an other, but yet may be in league together, but with God it is not so. For if
we be strangers, we are enemies to God, which is a fearful thing, for if God
be our enemy, what can all friends do us good? And Pro. 16. 14.
if the anger of a King be death, then what is the anger of the King of Kings?

The anger of God we may see in Job, who howsoever Job. 7. 20. Et. 16. 9.
he was the child of God, yet in his own feeling he thought God to be his
enemy. And therefore feeling the anger of God he could not rest: when it was
morning he desired it were evening etc. And David, says the Lord had shot his
arrows at him, and Ps. 38. 2. 3.
that nothing was sound in him by reason of Gods anger

Quest. How can we be said to have been Gods enemies, seeing he always loved
us from the beginning of the world? And therefore whether is this enmity to be
considered, actiuely, or passiuely in regard of God or of our selves?

Answer. True it is God loved us from the beginning Ephesians. 1. 4.
of the world, but that was in regard of CHRIST, in regard of our selves he
hated us, we were his enemies: And had it not been for the love in CHRIST, Ephesians.
2. 1. 3. 12.
we should not have abidden in his presence, but had been consumed and
therefore we have to praise God, that in love he spared us so long, till he
called us, and sent means of calling us. It follows.

Mind: We were enemies therein, which is the principal part of the soul, and
therefore we were much more enemies in the inseriour faculties, in our gross
affections, of fear, anger, and in regard of love, and also of our body.

Doctrine. We learn that seeing we are thus enemies, there is nothing in us but
corruption and enm^ties in our thoughts, words, and deeds. Which is contrary to
the Papists, which will make us that we can merit at the hand of God by our
good works. But if the tree be corrupt, what shall the fruit be? For the
reconciliation by CHRIST we have heard Verse. 22.
of it before. The end of our reconciliation is in the Luke 1. 74. 75.
next words expressed: which is sanctification, which is the end we why are
redeemed. This the Apostle sets out by the three words.

The first word signifies, that which is not earthly, Hagios, holy, not
earthly, of (...), and (...).
viz. that our minds should be carried from earthly things to heavenly. The
second is without spot. viz. not a man that is not charged with blame, but
which being blamed, is not truly nor justly blamed.

The third word, signifies a man, that cannot be justly brought into judgment
before the magistrate, or before the Church. Signifying, that a man, not only
may befree from great crimes, but even from all, that may be reprehended by
other inferior men. And here is meant not only to walk unblameable before men,
but even before God, to walk uprightly and sincerely. So that sanctification
is the end of our redemption. That the Gospel should not be evil spoken of.

Tree, that bears Phil. VII.
them.

The end of the tenth Sermon.
The eleventh Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 24. to the end. 23 If ye continue grounded and established in
the faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have
heard, and which has been Preached to every creature, which is under heaven,
whereof I Paul am a Minister.

24 Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of CHRIST in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.

25 Whereof I am a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is
given me unto you-ward, to fulfill the word of God.

26 Which is the mystery hid since the world began, and from all ages, but
now is made manifest to his Saints.

27 To whom God would make known what is the riches of his glorious mystery
among the Gentiles, which riches is CHRIST in you, the hope of glory.

28 Whom we preach, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS.

29 Whereunto I also labor and strive according to his working, which works
in me mightily.


THe Apostle having set forth the redemption brought unto us by our Savior and
having showed that the Colossians had a part in that redemption, he comes to
set forth unto us a condition, Whereupon his grace and mercy of God is bestowed
upon them, viz. no other but this: If ye continue grounded and settled in the
faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, ye have heard of,
etc.

The sense has been before metaphrastically set down.

The sum contains an earnest exhortation and effectual unto constancy, and
abiding in the truth they have received.

First, consider the exhortation, which Saint Paul gives to the Colossians,
and in them to all the children of God, to abide in the true faith.

Secondly, the reason and grounds, whereon this exhortation is laid, many,
sundry, and strong.

First, for the exhortation to continue in the truth, Reasons of constancy.
to which men are persuaded by many reasons, for otherwise they have no part in
CHRIST, no part in the reconciliation or sanctification by CHRIST, for this is
necessary to all the children of God to continue unto the end: Therefore (
Math. 24.) our Savior speaking of the great troubles, which should come,
says: he that continues to the end shall be saved. We see Math. 23. 13.
example of those that having professed, go back, leese their hope and the
comforts of Gods children, L^ts wife though she went not back, but desired to
Genesis 19. 26.
go to Sodom, in regard of wealth, and riches, and therefore our Savior says,
Remember Lot wife. Luke 17. 32.


Thus we see the children of Israel in Exodus that though they went out of
Egypt with joy and gladness, yet feeling after want of meat in the
wilderness, Exodus 16. 3. Heb. 3. 17. 18.
wished to return into Egypt: and therefore it is said, they should not enter
into the Lords rest: viz: the spiritual Cannan. Let us beware therefore of
Apostasy, and that we run not in vain. For it were better we had never
professed at all, then having once professed the truth, afterward to fall away,
2. Pet. 2. 21. 22.
and to return like a dog to his vomit:

It is a great matter to enter into the profession of CHRIST, and if we do
not continue, but depart from it, it had been better we had never known, nor
professed it. Therefore we read in the Acts that Barnabas admonished the
brethren of Antioch, to continue in the grace of God. Acts 13. 43.


One notable degree of contiuance is to have a Note.
purpose to continue: and therefore those that have not this purpose to abide
in the truth, come life, come death; but rather purpose, if an other time
should come, they are as ready for that, as for this, they are nothing but
hypocrites, and have a witness in their own heart of their condemnation. And
we must not only have a purpose, but we must labor to be strong, and use
all means for the confirming of us, calling on the name of God for it. For
Peter had a purpose indeed not to deny CHRIST, but to stand for him: but yet he
denied him grossly, because he did not call earnestly unto the Lord for
strenght, neither did use the means of absteyning himself from danger before
he was called, but would needs run into danger to the high Priests house,
and lean too much upon himself. they are reconciled, if they continue and
abide; and therefore if they abide not they are not truly reconciled and
sanctified: So that this is a true doctrine, a Saint once, a Saint ever, and
that if God once love us, he will never forsake us. As Romans 8. Neither Romans 8.
39.
life, nor death, etc. shall separate us, from the love of God in CHRIST. And
here it is that our Savior prays for all: John 17. not only for Peter, but
for all that Ioh. 17. 20.
shall believe by the doctrine of his Apostles unto the worlds end, even for
all the faithful; and he was heard in his prayer, and therefore it is
impossible that they which believe should perish. Mat. 24. They shall seduce if
it were possible, the Elect: so that it is impossible for the Elect to perish.
And those only are elected which believe: Therefore it is said, that those
Acts 13. 48.
believed that were chosen to life. And therefore we see that the inheritance
which God has given unto us, by his son, we cannot be disherited of, CHRIST'S
Sheep shall not perish: none shall pull them, out of Ioh. 10. 28.
his hands, nor deprive them of that life, which in him is laid up for them.

Object. If those that believe, cannot fall away, but must necessarily be
saved, what then needs these manifold exhortations and reasons? it is in vain
for the Preachers to enforce them so much, and for us to come to hear, This is
objected of the Papists, who would have us stand in doubt of our Election, and
their reason is this, because the Apostle stands upon this so much, because men
may fall away.

Ans. But these have a good agreement, for God Solution.
which has ordained we should not perish, has ordained us these means of
his Ministers, whereby we should not perish. We know out of the Scripture that
every man's time is set of God, which he Job. 7. 1.
shall not pass, as the Prophet in the Psalm; my days are in thine hand o
Lord: And because God has appointed me my days, is it a reasonable speech
that therefore I should not use means to prolong my life to that time, by
food, apparel etc. is this reason?

Again, Genesis 9 God has promised after drowning of the world, that the world
should never be drowned, and that there should be harvest to the worlds end:
should not men therefore sow and reap their corn? it is a foolish thing to
deny it.

Acts. 27. When Paul was in danger, the Lord told him that not a man should be
lost: it was most true: and the Lord having promised, would perform: yet after
when the mariners would have gone away, says the Apostle, unless these stay we
shall not be safe.

So that as the Lord has promised, so he has provided, that the things should
be effected by means.

For the setting forth of this he uses two similitudes, one drawn from a
ground or foundation: that as in Matthew the house founded on the rock Math. 7.
24.
cannot be overthrown; so they that are grounded on CHRIST, by faith, Matthew
16. 18. the very gates of hell shall not prevail against them. The second
similitude is in the word Settled, taken from the sitting of the body, which
when it is set is more firm, and steady. By which two similitudes he shows
what manner of faith we should have.

For the further proof of this, he uses another reason viz. if yea be not
removed from the hope of those things, you are in expectation of. So that two
things are required: one, that we be not removed from faith nor leese our
faith. Secondly that we be not removed from hope nor leese our hope. The
difference between these 2. graces is this. Faith apprehends and lays hold on
the grace and mercy of God in CHRIST. Hope lays hold on the fruit of this
grace, which is eternal life: and faith regards the word of the promise, but
hope looks to the thing promised. The reason then is, that we should abide in
the truth, because we look and hope for everlasting life, the blessedness
laid up for the children of God.

If there were no other reason, but to abide on the Note.
commandment of God, who commands us to walk in obedience, nay though we
should be damned, yet we are to give obedience to the commandments of God. But
when as God uses this reason of alluring us by propounding everlasting life to
us, that ought much more to encourage us hereunto. Men are naturally bent to
desire honor, riches etc. The Lord here propounds to us the greatest
happiness that can be, even in the kingdom of heaven.

1. Cor. 9. 24. Every man, says the Apostle, runs the race, yet but a few,
shall have the prise. But seeing there are so many rewards in the kingdom of
heaven for all that attain to the end, what a blockishnes is it in us that are
so dull and dead to run this race of Christianity?

Again, in these races they run for perishable Note.
things, and they will for a time abstain from things, that are pleasant, and
content themselves with a hard diet, to the end they may run better and be
more light: and shall not we therefore abstain from, and abridge our selves of
the pleasures and profits of this life for the gayning of an incorruptible
Crown in the kingdom of heaven?

And therefore if we could rightly consider that when that I leese my pleasure
here, and mine honor and wealth etc. if I gain everlasting life in the
kingdom of heaven, what loss have I thereby? And on the other side, if in
this life I seek my pleasure and delight, my credit, wealth, honor, worldly
preferment etc. and take no care nor pains for the life to come, to be
pertaker of the kingdom of God, what a wretched and miserable case am I in?
This would make us more to labor for that which perishes not, and to contemn
these worldly things in comparison of the heavenly, and this life in comparison
of that in the world to come.

The end of the eleventh Sermon.
The twelfth Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 23 to the 26. 23 If ye continue grounded ad stablished in the
faith, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have
heard, and which has been preached to every creature which is under heaven,
whereof I Paul am a Minister.

24 Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the
afflictions of CHRIST in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.

25 Whereof I am a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is
given me unto you-ward; to fulfill the word of God.

26 Which is the mystery hid since the world began, and from all ages, but now
is made manifest to his Saints.


WE have entered into a certain purpose the Apostle has to confirm the
Colossians in the knowledge and profession of the truth received, showing that
there was no true grace unless a continuance in that they had received.

And the drift or end of the Apostle is to strenghthen the Colossians, and in
them all Christians in the continuance in their profession. Reasons we have
heard before: other follow. An other reason of perseverance in the true faith.
As namely that the Gospel, which they received by him, was the Gospel of
CHRIST, and therefore they should continue.

And this Gospel he proves to be the true Gospel, because it was Preached
by his Ministry, and of the other Apostles, which is confirmed by that of the
Prophet, Esaias 2. That the sound of them went through all the world.

And seeing this doctrine was Preached and received through all the world,
therefore it was the true doctrine of God, for no doctrine but this, had ever, or
shall have this spreading, No not the wretched doctrine of the Arrians, which
were only in the East countries: Nor the doctrine of Popery, which never went
over the whole world, for it was not received in the most parts of the world,
no not of the Grecians, which are near, yet stood always at spears point
with it, and therefore it cannot be the true doctrine.

And the excellency of the Gospel of CHRIST is argued to be a wonderful and
marvelous doctrine, as being Preached by poor silly fishermen, and that
without any other sword but of the word, and of the censure and discipline
administered.

Again, this shows the wonderfulnesse of this Note.
doctrine, which is able to pierce and sting the hearts of men, and to subdue
the hearts, which is more then all the Emperors of the world could do: And
therefore must needs be the true word of God, which must so break into the
hearts of men.

It is no marvel though the doctrine of Popery Note.
was so received, because it was a doctrine of licentiousness of living, so
many feasts and holy days, so many indulgences for any wickedness soever they
would commit: besides, in their service so many delights, singing, piping,
ringing for the ears; gorgeous shows for the sight, and every sense has his
playfellow, and therefore it fitted the humors of men notably, and therefore no
marvel though many follow it. But the doctrine of the Gospel does clean
contrary, it reproves the evil corruption of nature, and subdueth it; And
therefore they that have found this effect by the Gospel, that it has subdued
our natural affections, and converted ourformer life to a better, it is a
notable argument to us of the truth of this Gospel.

Iobes friends, seeing all his goods taken away, his children and himself so
tormented, thought it was impossible he should be an upright man, but rather
that he was an hypocrite.

David also though a valiant man, a Prophet and a Psalm. 73.
wise man, yet was much shaken and like to have gone back, because he saw the
godly so afflicted and in misery: So here these, seeing the Apostle, one of the
chief of the Apostles to be so grievously persecuted and afflicted, as him (1.
Cor. 11.) does confess, comparing himself to the other Apostles, whom they
vpbraded him withal, he does rehearse his labors, travels, persecutions,
afflictions, dangers, watchings, nakedness, cold, hunger, etc. And in the
recital of all these his troubles, he was now in bonds in prison, and
therefore they might think he was no true Minister of God, nor beloved, that
God would suffer him thus to be dealt withal.

Paul supplied the passions of CHRIST, and therefore his passions are not
sufficient, but must be peeced and patched with good works: Secondly, they
say, the Apostle suffered for the Church, and therefore the martyrdom or
merits of Martyrs are to be given to Saints for their good.

Cor. 12. And as the wife takes the name of the husband, so do we of CHRIST
being Christians. Now then as our Savior CHRIST went before in afflictions, so
we are to fulfill his afflictions and to follow him. Heb. 2. CHRIST abased
himself that he might make himself like us in suffering, and therefore we
must be like unto him in sufferings. So that we see what an argument they
make, that because we must be like him in afflictions, therefore our
afflictions must merit, nothing less. Another reason in that he says: that
which wanted in his afflictions, is supplied. It is meant in regard of his
feeling and suffering with the^, in their afflictions he suffers as before in
his own body, so now in the person of his Church, and therefore says to Paul,
Acts 9. Saul why persecutest thou me?

He suffered for the Church.

redemption, but for Note.
the confirmation, comfort, and example of the Church, as the Apostle shows,
2. Cor. 1. 6. If we be afflicted it is for our consolation, etc. As if he had
said, I suffer for your cause, that ye seeing my afflictions and patience in
my trouble might take example to follow me, and seeing my constancy through
God that does sustain me, ye might receive comfort and example in continuing
constant your selves, and might wade through the afflictions that come unto
you. And therefore we see what is the cause why the children of God suffer,
viz: for the Churches sake, by standing constantly in the defense of the truth,
which Satan especially aymeth at, to make them depart from it, and his
instruments also not so much look for their life, as the defaming of the truth:
and therefore we continuing constant in the truth, we are co^querers, how hardly
soever we be dealt withal. And therefore we see what slender grounds they have
of the doctrine of merits, and indulge^ces which they give, attributing
salvation to merits of Saints and Martyrs: Where they also deal most
wretchedly and blasphemously against the God of Note.
heaven, and the Son of God, which speak against the imputation of the
rightousnesse of CHRIST to us, and yet give that honor to Saints in that they
will have their righteousness imputed unto others.

Crown, must bear CHRIST'S, Cross.



And therefore in the Epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 2 17. 18.
the Apostle says, he himself was afflicted, as that we might be redeemed, so
also that he might have experience of our troubles, that so he might the more
tender us in our afflictions. As the woman that has felt the pains of
childbirth can tell best what it is. So CHRIST himself knows our troubles,
who has had the sense of troubles in himself.

The Apostle after calls himself, the Minister Verse. 25.
of the Church, as before of the Gospel, both are one. He means that he was
Gods Minister for the edification and comfort of his Church. The end of his
Ministry of the Church: is to fulfill the word of God, How the word of God is
fulfilled.
by calling those that are to be called to the knowledge of the truth wherein
the word is fulfilled, or else fulfilled in hardening the heart of those, that are
not to be saved: for to them the Ministry of the word is to further judgment,
to them, that contemn it, and profit not by it. In the next words he sets
down the dignities of Gods word 1. it is a mystery, Verse. 25.
a secret; secondly a mystery hid from all ages, thirdly reueiled only to the
faithful or Saints. A Mystery. A word taken from the heathen from their
superstitious usage in their diuilish religion* especially among Dignity 1.
the Egiptians, their religion being called a mystery, and their ministry
mystical, or misteriall men, their religion being hid to the Priests alone,
who by pictures of birds and beasts had all their religion expressed that
others might not know it. And therefore we see how fitly this superstition of
the Gentiles may agree Note.
with the Doctrine of Popery, which will have the word hidden from the lay
people as they called them. Whereas God would have his will delivered unto his
servants and people.

The commendation of the Gospel then is set forth by this word Mystery, In
that it is such an excellent thing as that it can not be attained unto by any
wit of men and Angels. And therefore the Angels are said to stoup to look into
this marvelous work of salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 12.
by the Doctrine of salvation.

Men usually of fine wits will be looking into things, that are hard, and
dark, and high, and therefore Solomon says harken my son, and I will tell
the dark parables.

And in another place I will teach thee things of high account wherein the
wisest head may be occupied. So that we see the excellency of the Gospel.

hid from the beginning so Dignity. 2.
many thousand years. But this may seem to confirm an error in Popery, that
this being hid from so many generations, was hid from Abraham and the rest of
the Patriarks, and therefore they could not be saved. But if we be the children
of Abraham and must rest in his bosom, then he was saved. Abraham, but it came
not till now, and therefore in regard of that it was hidden. And again though
it was known, yet it was but darkly known in clouds and figures, and
therefore they could not see it so plainly as we do. For the fathers did not
see the sufferings of CHRIST, as we do, and therefore in that regard it was
hidden.

And this the Apostle to the Ephesians shows, Ephesians. 3. 5.
when he says, this mystery was not opened in other ages unto the sons of men,
as it is now revealed unto Instruction.
his holy Apostle and Prophets. etc. As we go before them in knowledge, so also
in obedience, else it is to our greater condemnation.

Reueiled to his Saints, viz. to those only, that are Dignity 3.
the children of God, not to all men and therefore it is It is rare.
that CHRIST praises his father for hiding this Math. 11. 25.
from the world, yea from the wisest of the world, and for opening the same to
Babes, and he has chosen the foolish, says S. Paul, to confound the wise. 1.
Cor. 1. 27.

Object. But the wicked know the Gospel, the truth of it, which is by the
working of Gods spirit only, and believe it, and can defend and dispute of it,
and yet have no part in it. How then? is it not reueiled to them?

Answer. That understanding is no true understanding, Solution.
because it is not joined with an alteration, in that the Gospel has not
converted them to it: they do (it may be) know the Gospel, but they do not
Note.
obey it, they do not rest in the shadow of it, the Gospel cannot persuade
them to submit themselves to the kingdom of CHRIST, and to obey his laws. The
virtue therefore and efficacy of this mystery is hidden to them, and not
imparted.

The end of the twelfth Sermon.
The 13. Sermon.
COLOSS. 1. V. 27. 28. 29. 27 To whom God would make known what is the riches
of his glorious mystery among the Gentiles, which riches is CHRIST in you, the
hope of glory.

28 Whom we preach, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS.

29 Whereunto I also labor and strive according to his working, which works
in me mightily:


WE have heard how the Apostle commended the Gospel unto all men by most
notable titles given unto it, as first, that it was a mystery and secret.
Secondly hid since the world began, and from all ages. Thirdly that this
mystery was given only to his Saints, and not to the rest of the world,
specially in respect of the virtue, that does attend upon it.

Further it follows, so show other points why this Gospel of CHRIST should
be amiable unto us, viz. that as this mystery comes from God to his Saints,
so it proceeds from his own will. In that he says to whom God would. For
whereas it may be

puddle rather) of our pollution and corruption.

Again, it is not the foreseeing of the good works, Note.
which God saw we should do; for it is false, that many wretched men and
enemies to the free salvation of God (even such as make some profession) say,
that it was the good works God foresaw in Jacob which made God to choose him,
and evil works in Esau to reject him.

But here the Apostle cutteth of all that, that it is Note.
the will of God that does it, and whatsoever he wills, is just and
righteous, which men can not do: And therefore it is a wretched thing, that men
will call the will of God to the bar of their own wil-wits and reason. Thou
have hid (says our Savior) these things Math. 21. 25. 26
from the wise, and it is so, because it was thy good pleasure.

The pot does not reason with the Potter why he made one to stand under the
bed, another for a better use: and yet vile and wretched men will reason with
God why he does this? But we are to learn to rest contented with the will of
God, for that is a marvelous sauciness in men: For will not a Master Note.
count it a great malepertnesse if his servant rise up and control him? and
is it not much more vile malepartnesse and sauciness to rise against God?

up to thankfulness unto God more notably then if he did it through foreseeing
our good works; As the servant which has received benefits from his master
of good will, it will make him more thankful and bound to his master.

Moreover, the Gospel is commended from the Another commendation of the
Gospel.
subject and matter: for as the Trades and Arts that have more excellent
matter, are more esteemed, as Goldsmiths, Printers; and those that sell silk:
and Sciences also are commended in regard of the excellency of the matter, as
Law more excellent then others, and after Physic. So the Gospel is more
singularly commended by the matter, which is Christ, to whom God has reueiled
his will: and therefore the Apostle would know nothing among the Corinthians,
but Christ and him crucified: and Christ is the 1. Cor.
riches, glory, and mystery of his father. Now seeing all these things men
effect, and they are all in Christ, and are offered in the Gospel, what a
madness is it that men so little regard it?

Men desire to be rich: Now our Savior Christ Note.
has all the riches of his father, and he has all honor and glory in his
father, and has the secrets of his father, being in his bosom: yea such
secrets, that the Angels stoop to look into. And all-be-it these be not
transitory, riches and honor, but endure for ever: yet we seek not after them.

Christ is commended to be the hope of glory: 1 he Thirdly,
by whom we look for glory and blessedness for evermore; which selfsame
words the Apostle uses, 1. Tim. 1.
that he is the Apostle of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ our hope. 1. Tim.
1. 1.

expect and look for the enjoying and fruition of that favor, which is
eternal life. And therefore it stands with us to examine our selves, whether
we have this hope and expectation, whether we long and desire after it, and
breath after it, as the Heart after the waters, being smitte^; so whether we do
breath and long for everlasting life. Let us examine, whether if we might enjoy
Note.
all the comforts of the world, and pleasures of this life, up to the knees,
whether we would desire to live and continue in the^? then be we sure that we
have not the hope of everlasting life, and those heavenly joys, and then be we
sure we never believed aright. For it is a toke^ that if we be thus nailed to
the earth, we have not felt how good Christ is: for if we did, we would
contemn all these things to enjoy him and live with him.

In the two last verses is commended the excellency Verse 28 and 29.
of his Ministry: for if the Colossians have a sufficient Minister, then they
should continue in the love and obedience of the Gospel. For me^ if they find a
hole in the Ministers coat, they think it is a good cause to leave the Gospel:
And therefore to remove that objection the Apostle urges the sufficiency of his
own Ministry.

Here 2 points in our Apostles Ministry are to be considered; 1. his
faithfulness: 2. his care, diligence, and painefulnes. For his faithfulness it is
noted in that he is said to admonish all: Where we are to note that the calling
Note.
of the Apostle was an extraordinary calling, whereby he had the field of the
whole world to Till. But the Ministers now a days have only a ploughland in
one Congregation to Till, and therefore that calling ceased. Again, herinis the
faithfulness of the Apostle, that as al were co^mited to him, so he cared for all: So is the duty of every good Minister, that every one that is committed to
his charge, young, or old, of what state, or condition so soever, is to be
regarded by him.

Furthermore it is again to be noted, that he did teach and admonish them,
whereby is meant all those means of setting an edge of the Gospel, that it
might pierce and go through, as admonishing and rebuking the froward, exhorting
of all sorts, the good by persuasion: In the doctrine, reproof, reprehension;
all these are contained in the word admonition: And the word signifies as
much, as a laying of any thing to the heart, which is done by all those means.
So Note.
that we see how necessary it is to have the word Preached and applied, and
therefore far be it to be content with bare reading. For it is not enough that
there be knowledge to enlighte^ the understanding, but that the affections be
moved, and the conscience be wrought, that men may be with-drawne from evil,
and stirred up to good. And therefore those that are reproved, are to yield
obedience unto the reproof and reprehensio^. And the Apostle further shows
that he does both teach and admonish in all wisdom.

This is necessary in every Minister, for as the steward Note.
is not only to lay out that, they receive for the family, but to give every
one according to their state, sick or whole, so in the Ministers.

This wisdom is to be considered in the

Persons. Things belonging to the persons.
In the persons to be considered whether they have knowledge, that they be
gently taught. If they have knowledge and yet no conscience, they must use
sharp reprehension, laying the judgments of God to wake their sleepy
conscience. If there be both then use partly threats, partly gentle dealing.

If any be cast down, then to give them comfortable exhortations laying the
mercies of God before them.

For if men be secure, having knowledge, then to lay the promises of God before
them, would harden them more, so contrariwise in dispairing.

Further it is to be considered whether they be children or men: and then they
must, if they be Babes, have milk, if strong, they must have stronger meat.
Further in regard of the sins of the persons, consider whether public or
private, if private at least to a few, if it be publicly reproved it is a want
of wisdom; If public, then publikly, not privately to be reproved.

Again consider, whether the sin be of infirmity or of maliciousness, if of
malice and contempt, it must be more sharply pricked through.

Thus of the faithfulness of the Minister to preach CHRIST, both by the
Doctrine, and also by the admonition, to give a point to it, that the Doctrine
may enter through.

We have also heard of the wisdom of the Apostle, The end of all this
teaching and admonishing is, to make men perfect, alluding to the sacrifices of
the Priest in the law. For though the minister be no sacrificer, Note.
as the wretched Papists do make of them, yet there is a resembla^ce in the
Ministers to the law, that by the word of God the people are, as it were,
killed and cut, to be a fit sacrifice unto God: and therefore all this care and
wisdom is to be used, that they may be acceptable to God.

people content themselves with beginning, that they think it enough that they
are altered in judgment etc. but they must still labor to grow and increase to
perfection, as we pray in the Lords prayer to do the will of God like the
Angels, in all redynesse and willingness. And we must grow: and not be dwarfes
in Christianity, but still to grow for in Christianity Note.
there is no old age, but in the oldest age is a growth till such time as all
rebellion and imperfection be taken away in the kingdom of God.

Lastly is set down his diligence, wherein he labored, Verse. 29.
signifying a labor with weariness, till he had spent his strength: as Esaias
says of our Savior CHRIST, that he spent his strength in his Ministry.



Another similitude he uses, that he strives, taken from lawyers and
counselors at the bar, and from soldiers with their enemies. Where he notes
the duty of the Minister, not only to labor in doctrine Note.
and admonition, but also to set himself against any thing, that may let and
hinder the Gospel. And therefore it condemns those, that content themselves
with delivering the word: for that is not enough, but they must labor to
prevent, by all striving, that which may arise and hnider the Doctrine
delivered.

Last of all he shows that the Lord blessed his labor in the ministry and
prospered him, which howsoever the Ministers cannot always look for so full a
blessing; yet the ministers have this to look unto, and whereof they may be
sure, that they bring the sweet savor of CHRIST unto God, whether in the
salvation, or in the condemnation of them, that hear them.

The duties then of the Minister are 1. to preach CHRIST, secondly to do it
with faithfulness, wisdom, and diligence. Thirdly to strive, and struggle,
using all endeavor to advance the kingdom of their Master, and to hinder the
proceedings of the Devil against it.

The end of the 13. Sermon
The 14. Sermon.
COLOSS. 2. V. 1. to the 8. 1 For I would ye knew what great fighting I have
for your sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my
person in the flesh,

2 That their hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in love, and in
all riches of the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery of God,
even the Father, and of CHRIST:

3 In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge,

4 And this I say, least any man should beguile you with intising words:

5 For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit,
rejoicing, and beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in CHRIST.

6 As ye have therefore received CHRIST JESUS the Lord, so walk in him,

7 Rooted and built in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.


WE have heard in the former chapter how the Apostle has delivered a short
su^me of the holy Doctrine of the Gospel, recommending the same by sundry
arguments, some drawn from the excellency of the Doctrine and from the matter
of it, CHRIST, and from his own Ministry, faithfulness and diligence.

Now he enters into another doctrine, for having set forth the excellency of
the doctrine, he now sets forth the remedies of certain errors, which
might have ouerturned them from the doctrine.

And first in these verses (as before he had made a preparation) so now he
makes another preparation, for the conuincing and reproving of those errors
that were risen up among. For we know how we are cleaued unto our errors,
and corruptions, and how hardly removed from them: And therefore the Apostle
does here by this Preface lance (as it were) their hearts, by showing them his
exceeding care and love toward them.

As if he should say: That which I said of my Verse 1.
grievous labor and strife for all men, is truly verefied of you: for I would
not have you ignorant of the great a gony and strife, that I have for you, and
for those that are in the Church of Laodicea, and others about you in the
country of Phrygia, notwistanding that they never did see my person.





Gospel does Preach, and set forth unto you is, that no man by apparent and
perswasible speeches do transport you.





Epaphras: abounding in the same faith, and that with thanksgiving, for the
mercy you have received in CHRIST. This is the sense.

The parts are A particular declaration of his care for the Colossians,
together with An exhortation to care for themselves, that they be not carried
away, with any wind of false doctrine, contrary to that he has declared, and
which they had learned of Epaphras.

The sum whereof is a preparation of the hearts and minds of the Colossians, to
receive the rebuke, and reprehension touching the error and corruption among
the^.

First, here is a declaration of the Apostles great care toward the
Colossians, and others of their neighbors countries, Phrigia and Laodicea.

Secondly, an exhortation that they should have care of themselves. For the
first, here is an application of all, that he had spoken before generally, that
he took them to witness, that the care and love which he had, was to
them-ward.

Note.
loving affection, before his reprofe can settle in their hearts, it is
necessary that the persuasion, that he does it in love, be entered into them.

Of the great strife and agony: A similitude taken from the custom of the
Country, where at certain times there was a great meeting to wrestle and run
for mastery: So that as they, which did venture this strife, use all their
strength and might to get the mastery, and so likewise in dangerous fight,
which they had even to blood. Hereby the shows the exceeding pains and great
care he had for them; and therefore the Apostle, besides the outward thing of
banishment, scourgings, shipwracks, etc: had also a great troop of enemies
within: viz: his exceeding cares, which he took, that troubled him
exceedingly. His care appeared not only in earnest prayer continually, but in
writing, exhorting, and persuading the^ to continue and go forward, etc. And
these cares he co^pares to an army or troop of enemies which met with him and
conte^ded with him, such was his care: And no doubt, that seeing his charge was
through the whole world, it must be great. For as the Church is said to travel
in Reu. 12. 2.
bringing forth children, so the Apostle, traveling of so many, even through
the whole world, it being committed unto him, must needs have great care and
pain.

Here we see the exceeding love of the Apostle, that seeing he was absent and
had never seen them, nor they him, yet his care was so great he commend^th his
exceeding love. For the sight of misery does greatly increase the affection and
care, the eye, and the ear beingthe doors by which pity enters in. The cause
wherefore he cared was that they might be comforted in spirit. Now in so much
as his care and love apeared by his writing, which co^sisted of the Gospel:
Mat. 22. 2. the Kingdom of heaven is compared to a Feast; yea to a Kings feast
at the marriage of his son, where no delicate fare can be wanting, but by his
commandment will be brought. So S. John says: 1. Ioh. 1. 4. Acts 2. 46.
This we write that your joy may be full. In the Acts we read, that those
that were called, though they were hated of all yet met together, and
participated in eating of meat, and did eat their common meat with great
joy. This is usual in the Acts, that where the Gospel came, was great joy and
comfort: and therefore when Philip came to Samaria, they receiving the Gospel,
were Acts 8.
comforted. So that that comfort which is in sin, as adultery, etc. is
wretched, and the beginning of sorrow, and that which is in lawful outward
things, is but momentany, But this peace which Christ gives, is constant. My
peace (says he) shall never be taken away.

The first cause of this comfort that we receive by the gospel, is the
knowledge of the truth of the Gospel, as has bin delivered in the chap.
before: for it is a notable comfort when a man knows which is the word of God
and what God has commanded, it is a comfort to do it when he knows it is
commanded by God, and contrariwise it is a comfort, when it is known what is
forbidden.

Whereas on the contrary, to the children of God it is a great anguish to be
ignorant what to do in Gods service, and what course to take, which might be
pleasing unto God.

Secondly not only knowledge, but persuasion, which next follows, to know
that the promises shall come to pass, and the threathings shall be performed,
to be assured of it.

Thirdly, but especially acknowledgement is matter of most singular comfort,
when he not only knows and is persuaded, but applies it to himself: this
is notable comfort, for what profit is it to a man to know this is good for
him, and has it not: to be in a dungeon, and to know the Sunne-shineth. and
yet to have no light, and to be an hungry and to know there is meat and bread,
and yet to have no part, this is rather matter of greater grief.

An other cause of comfort is love, which is compared to the iointures of the
artificers, that when they build any house, by the ioints they set all the
parts together; Or rather to the ioints of the body, whereby every part being
joined are in peace, whereas if one be out of joint, it is a pain to all. So
is the joining of Christians, by a true loving affection one toward another.
In whom are all the treasures of wisdom Verse. 3.
and knowledge hid. Having commended the Gospel, because it brings wonderful
comfort by wisdom and knowledge, now he shows where they are to be had,
viz. in CHRIST, in whom are hid all the treasures of his father viz. touching
his manhood, whereof here it is spoken, which is for us, who from his manhood
receive the graces of God, flowing and running from the head to the edges of
the garment. And in his manhood are all the graces of God, though not
infinitely, yet so far as the manhood can comprehend, perfectly laid up in
CHRIST. For he has all the graces we have need of, and therefore the Gospel
has all, so as here is a converse reason, for CHRIST has all, therefore the
Gospel has all, and contrary, the Gospel has all the graces of God
necessary for us, therefore CHRIST has all. For whatsoever the Gospel has,
CHRIST has, and we receive from him by the Gospel.

This confuteth the Papists, who will have us to have any thing from cannons,
decrees of Popes etc. But the Apostle says that the Gospel has all wisdom
and understanding because it has them from CHRIST.

Hid. Which shows that these graces of God are hid from all creatures, yea
from the Angels themselves, and therefore they labor and bend, even with pain
(if it were possible) stooping to see into these mysteries.

This secret and hid wisdom of God we see in this. For 1. it seems a
strange thing that all men should fall and become the members of Satan, and yet
that out of Satan's hands he would take his children, this was a strange thing,
and a wonderful mystery, and wisdom, to show his love to them the more 2. It
is a strange and a hid thing that God should give his Son to dye, yet it is a
singular mystery, to show the hatred of sin, and love of his children, that
he abased his son for their sake.

3. Again it is a strange thing, that God should suffer his children to be
afflicted in this life, and the wicked to have ease and peace; and the godly to
go to heaven, by hell, to honor, by dishonor etc. But it was that they might
know their own infirmities, and also the better have a feeling of the
comforts, that it might be the sweeter. 4. Again, a great mystery that the
Lord, to the building of the excellent work of the Church should choose such
weak instruments, and such poor means, as fishermen etc.

But it is that in their weakness his power might be manifest. 5. Again it
is a strange mystery in the manner of the delivery of the Gospel, not in
eloquence of men, but in a plain style, that as well the Maid at the mill, as
the Prince in the Throne might understand it. But it was that none might impute
it to the excellency of the tongue.

The end of the 14. Sermon
The 15. Sermon.
COLOSS. 2. V. 3. 4. 3 In whom are bid all the treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge,

4 And this I say, least any man should beguile you with intising words:


WE have heard how the Apostle has entered into the commendation of the Gospel
by many properties and effects in it. And last we heard that it is matter of
singular comfort unto the people of God. And also that it is a mystery hid in
all ages, and in this, but only to the children of God.

There we have handled that it is a perfect doctrine leading us the right way
whither the Lord calls us. For in the Gospel of our Savior CHRIST is laid
up unto us all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge being only found in
him. And therefore the Apostle 1. Cor. 2. would be known of nothing 1. Cor. 2.
2.
amongst Gods people, but of CHRIST and him crucified, and therefore in him are
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid: And the woman John 4 says,
the Messiah shall tell us all things, which our Savior CHRIST confirms:
saying, I am he: And therefore Ioh. 14. he professes that he had taught to
his Disciples the whole will of God. And 1. Cor. 11. what the Apostles received
they gave all to the people, and therefore all wisdom and knowledge is hid in
our Savior CHRIST, and reueiled to us in the Gospel, whereby he is brought
unto us. And therefore this is a notable commendation of the Gospel, which is
able to perfect a man of God, who 2. Tim. 3. 17.
is to teach the people the will of God. And if the word of God is able to make
perfect a Minister, then much more the people, it being needful that he should
have more then they. Which he proves by the effect, that the duty of the
Minister is to teach the truth, and confute errors, which the word will
perfectly minister unto him. And further to exhort the good, reprove
corruptions, and dehort from that is naught. And therefore howsoever the
Papists will not deny that it is a perfect word, yet will they have the Canons
of Councels, and decrees of me^. But the perfection of the word appears here
to have no need of man's inventions.

It is hid) viz: in CHRIST who is the bosom of his Father, and therefore only
can reveal the will of God his Father.

And howsoever a natural man cannot deny the truth of the Law, yet not Adam
himself in his innocence was able to see the mystery of the Gospel, nor the
Angels themselves, though more excellent, yet could not without seeing and
stooping to behold it, understand this secret Mystery.

Here the Apostle incerteth an exhortation: Therefore take heed that no man
deceive you, with probable and likely speech: which may seem at the first to
have a fair show. For this is a mystery and hid thing, and therefore not seen
at the first: Yea oftimes it comes to pass, that a lie is more probable and
likely to be a truth, then the truth it self. Example.

The fruit that grows now in Sodom has a more excellent show then other
fruit, and yet come to feel it, it goes to froth and wind, and that loathsome.
Again, in gold, before it be tried, that which is not gold may have a greater
color and show then the true gold. And therefore men are not to look unto the
eloquent words and fine speeches, and that men carry the matter away smothly,
without any regard of the soundness of the matter: For hence it comes to
pass that men are led away into error: And the danger is not only when false
doctrine is delivered, as here it was, but even when false doctrine is not
delivered, as among the Corinthians, where they did only with eloquent and
brave words mount aloft in their eloquence. And therefore the Apostle doubteh
not to call them false Apostles: For when as men respect the words, and have
little respect unto the matter, and are led away by every wind of doctrine,
there is a seduceme^t. The Apostle then teaches us, that no man's learning,
authority, eloquence, should draw us to believe that is spoken. For not only
eloquence, but authority, and honor does carry us usually away. But the
Apostle says, let no man deceive you: and therefore Gal. 1. Though an Angel
from heaven Preach any other doctrine let him be accursed: or after any other
way: for as the matter which he Preached, viz: the Cross of Christ, is low and
base in appearance, so must the manner of the delivering of it be.

Object. Whereas the Apostle had spoken of his care, strife, and wrestling for
them, they might say that he had no such care as he pretends, because he never
came to them. This secret objection he answers, Solution.
that he is always present with them, which he does by a distinction of
presence, viz: not bodily, but a spiritual presence. Which speech is used to
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6.
who reproving them for that being bodily present, did suffer the incestuous
person without excommunicating him: and therefore says, I present in spirit do
bid that he should be excommunicated. This Note.
presence is not in regard of the substance of the spirit, for that is in the
body, and cannot be in two places, no not the Angels, though nimble and swift,
but only God is in all places. And therefore is meant, by the spirit, that he
is present with the faculties of his mind, viz: in understanding their estate,
and in his affection and will, viz: his love and care.

So that we see the presence of the children of God is other then the presence
of other men, even with those they never saw, if they be in good estate, to
understand and rejoice, and praise God for it: If they be in distress to
grieve and mourn for them, and to pray for them. Let us then examine our
selves, why we desire to hear for news out of other countries? Is it for this
end? We see Nehemias being at the Kings Neh. 1. 2. 4.
Court, when men came from Jerusalem, by reason of the wicked, which troubled
the people, he asked how the Church of God did, and understanding the misery of
it fell to fasting: So are we to do; to enquire of the Churches of God, to the
end, that we may rejoice for their good, or be sorrowful for their evil.

Rejoicing: Seeing by the eyes of his mind and considering Verse 5.
their good order he reioysed: So that the understanding, and seeing, is in the
mind, which must go before rejoicing in the will and affections which
proceeds from it: So that we see that howsoever the children of God, have
many causes of sorrow, yet they have more occasions of comfort, then the wicked
have.

Good order; viz: the good government and disposition of the Church, as is the
disposition of an army: So that in that they had a good order in the Church, it
did his heart good: And then, in that it is said to be set and disposed as an
Army, therein also is further matter of rejoicing. So that here we see in a
Church is matter of joy, when the government of the Son of God is there, and
also when it is practiced: So that where the order of our Savior CHRIST is
not, there can be nothing but confusion, and disorder. Moses, though a man
instructed in the will Numbers 1.
of God would not himself give answer concerning the peoples coming to
sacrifice, yet would not himself give order unto them.

And we see, because the Ark of God was carried in a cart, not by the
Priests, which the Lord had appointed, the plague began to break on the
people.

Again, when as the Arc did shake, and vzzah being but a Leuite, not a
Priest, did but touch the Arc, which none but the Priests might do, yet
because he brake the Lords order, is smitten with death.

Here we see what Church is a happy Church, viz: that which has the doctrine
and word of God, and the Sacraments sincerely delivered and administered. After
the Apostle having spoken of his own cre, he comes to the care of the
Colossians, exhorting the^ as they had received, so they walk in that they had
received. Two things then are necessary, viz: what we receive, viz. not the
doctrine of Antichrist insted of the doctrine of CHRIST, not the doctrine of
error in stead of the truth. And secondly that having the doctrine of truth
that we walk in it.

Walking being an ordinary speech in the Scriptures. viz. as a wayfaring man
not to sit still, or go backward, but to go forward in that way.

The manner of walking is, first that they be rooted, and secondly that they be
knit, viz. that they be constant and steadfast: before in the former chapter he
said that they should be settled, which cannot be easily moved, and to be
grounded.

Here he uses two other excellent similitudes, first to be rooted, taken from
trees, not like to reeds shaken with the wind, but like the Cedars, or as in
Esaias the Oaks, which cannot be removed. And our estate, if rooted in CHRIST, is
far better then the tree, where as if we be not truly grounded Note.
in CHRIST, our condition is worse then the tree: for the tree being cut will
spring up again, and being planted to an other plant will grow again, but as
one of the friends of Job says, if they be once gone and removed, they never
rise again.

But the children of God can never be displanted, Ephesians. 1. 4
being set before the beginning of the world in Gods 2. Tim. 2. 19.
election, which is a sure foundation never to be raised and confounded.

And he says built, viz. grounded on CHRIST, Verse. 7.
and therefore shall never be separated from him. Whereas if we be not built on
CHRIST our cause Ezech. 18.
is more miserable. It must be steadfast by faith in CHRIST.

So that one quality, is, to be grounded and constant: Another is that we
abound, viz. not stand at a stay, but it is required that we run over, as a
vessel filled to the top. So that we ought not only, not be drawn away by
every wind of doctrine, but we ought to increase in grace; and therefore our
estate is compared to the estate of a man, that is first a child, then a young
man, then in the perfect age.

Lastly is set down thankfulness to God for the benefits received, and
therefore we should not be forgetful of them, but carry them always in
remembrance: which thanckfulnesse must appear by our obedience in walking in
the commandments of God, and in the continual practice of our love to God,
and to our brethren.

The end of the 15. Sermon.
The 16. Sermon.
COLOSS. 2. V. 8. to the 11. 8 Beware lest there be any man that spoil you
through Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according
to the rudiments of the world, and not after CHRIST.

9 For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

10 And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and power.


THE Apostle has in the words before in this chapter made a way to come to the
principal point he purposed. And first he testified his care over them, and
moves them to have care over themselves, and that they should take heed of
being carried away by any probability and likeness of speech. Here he
particulerly lays it down what he would have them take heed of; as if he
should say.

slight, or else by the ceremonies of the law, wherewith as by certain
rudiments, or A. B. C. the people of God (as children) were trained to this
perfection of doctrine, which now has shined out unto you, do vanquish you,
and drive you before them as prisoners fast bound in the chains and manacles
of error. Yea take heed of any doctrine whatsoever that either takes any
thing from CHRIST, or does place any the least jot of salvation other where
then in him.



Colossians to take heed they should not be deceived by any false doctrine, and
the reasons, and grounds,

The parts are. Exhortation not to be deceived by Philosophy, and the
beginnings. The reason: because if they be led away they are made a prey.

Again they should have nothing in CHRIST, in whom is all fullness, and though
he was man and inferior to the Angels, yet now, and as he is God he is above
them all, and head of them all.

See, or take heed: Here the Apostle first teaches that a man must have a
sound knowledge and understanding in the truth of God, for he speaks not of
the bodily sight.

Doctrine. It belongs to all men and all women even to all Gods children of
what sort and condition soever they be; (in spite of the enemies of Gods truth
the Papists;) it is required at their hands and commanded, that they should
know and bear away the word of God.

And they must grow in knowledge, for they are not to stand at a stay, for as
they must grow in zeal, so also must they do in knowledge, for better have no
zeal, then zeal without knowledge, which is most dangerous, as a wild horse.
And therefore it is that David, though a wise man, yet stands much on this
point. Psalm. 119.


And if we must proceed in godliness all our life, so also in knowledge. It is
necessary that we have 3. Part.
knowledge to the end we may be able to be defended Gal. 1. 2. Tim. 3. 8.
against the subtilties of the false teachers and deceivers of the world, who
are compared to inchanters Iannes and Iambres which withstood Moses before
Pharaoh, it is necessary that we have knowledge to the end we be not blinded by
them.

He bids them take heed of Philosophy, which is a glorious name, signifying
the love of wisdom. But the Apostle does not take away the use of Philosophy.
For if it be well used, it is a good handmaid for to help the Ministers, if so
be it be not used to make a gloss, and a show to the world. But here that
Philosophy is condemned, which repugneth the Note.
word and Gospel of God, for so far forth as Philosophy will as a handmaid
wait and attend on the word of God to further the Ministers, so long it is
commendable, and a good help to further the Ministers in the word of God.

But when as Philosophy does rise up to go hand in hand, or as Hagar to her
Mistress, to go before the word of God, then it is to be condemned, and cast
out. And the reason, that Philosophy is to be taken heed of, is by reason that
there is deceit in it, as we see in natural Philosophy, that Ex nihile-nihil
fit, of nothing nothing is made.

This is contrary to the word of God. Again in moral Philosophy. They say
that if there be not free will, why should there be punishment, but this is to
be taken heed of. This condemns them, which to excuse their mingling of the
word with Philosophy, they say they do but as the children of Israel did,
which rob Egypt of her Jewels, or be as Moses who was skillful in all the
learning of Egypt, as the schoolmen, Papists and others do. But they do
nothing but rob them of their botches and biles. The reason that Philosophy
does deceive is, because it comes from the brains and invention of men.

An other thing the Apostle wills them to take heed of, is, of the elements
of the world, which were the traditions of God. For might they say if you will
not have us to deal with the inventions of men, will ye deny that we should
use the decrees of God, as the traditions of the law? Here we see whom the
Apostle had to do with all, viz. such as joined with the Gospel the
inventions of men and Philosophy, and the ceremonies of the law. The same do
we deal withal, viz. the Papists: for though they confess CHRIST etc. yet
because they join the traditions of men and ceremonies which the Gospel will
not admit, therefore we are not to join with them, but to oppose against them,
as the Apostle did.

The reason why the Apostle shows they should not be bound unto the
traditions of the law: Because the ceremonies of the law are the elements, as
it were the A. B. C. wherein children are to be taught. Now it is no point of a
good scholar to be always in the A. B. C. so we must not always be babes in
Christianity, for those were the shadows of that truth, which now is, and
therefore these are the days of restoration, and perfection.

Now then if we must not have these ceremonies, which God had appointed, but
that CHRIST must be preached simply and barely without ceremonies: much less
are we to use the traditions and ceremonies of men, which the Papists religion
does wholly consist of. Indeed there is a doctrine in the ceremonies of the
law, which is perpetual, but the ceremonies themselves is at an end.

Persuading them not to be carried away by false doctrine he shows
perticulerly what: viz. Philosophy, and the elements, and in sum what soever
is not according to CHRIST: now he renders the reasons, why they should take
heed, first, because they should be mad^ a prey: To whom?

1. To those, that deceived them: Secondly then to Satan: and therefore they
had need to watch, for if a man fear his house shall be robbed, will he not
watch? then much more ought we to take heed and watch, least we be a prey to
these enemies.

For as when the Romans in triumph having their captives, lead them at their
chariots tails, so if we be deceived, we are led at the tails of those, yea
of the devil himself, and as our Savior says, John. 10. the thief comes
to make a spoil.

Another reason, to be wary, because they are not according to CHRIST.

Doctrine. Here we may know what an error and false Doctrine is, if it take
any thing from CHRIST, and do not attribute all sufficiency unto CHRIST, for
CHRIST, is our Teacher; Priest, and King: if he be our only Teacher, then we
must have nothing but that which he teaches us, for he teaches to his Church
the whole John. 15.
will of his father.

And therefore we may know the Papists are deceivers, which bring in traditions
not according to CHRIST.

Again, CHRIST is our Priest; And therefore as it was the office of the Priest
to offer sacrifice, so CHRIST offered himself a sacrifice for our sins: he
that brings in any other sacrificer is contrary to CHRIST.

Another office of the Priest is to pray for the people, and therefore they
that bring in any other intercessor is contrary to CHRIST.

Again it is the office of CHRIST to be King over his Church, to command, and
give laws, and therefore the doctrine of the Pope to to be head of the Church,
to give laws, to rule, command etc. is a false doctrine.

The reason why CHRIST is sufficient is, because the whole Godhead is in our
Savior CHRIST, yea the Godhead of our Savior CHRIST is really in CHRIST, and
therefore he is only able to furnish us of all: and therefore we need not
any points of Philosophy, or any ceremonies of the Law, to give supply.

Here the Apostle deals as a good Teacher, that there being a controversy
between the false Prophets and him, they aleage one thing, he aleageth
another: Now to confute them, he takes a third thing wherein both agreed: So he
does also to the Athenians: For if he had aleaged the Prophets, they would have
made a mock of him, and therefore he takes one of their own Poets. This is
to be practiced of the Ministers of the word.

Here then the Apostle proves that we are accomplished in CHRIST, For he is
made unto us 1. Cor. 1.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and therefore he is
our whole accomplishment, what then need we to seek for any more or any other
portion? And therefore David says: Psalm. 16.
God is my lot, my portion, and inheritance.

Now if any be asked, if they will have an inheritance, will they not have it
in a fair ground? they will say, yea: Then seek it in CHRIST. This then
overthrows the going to Saints or Angels, to Peter, or the Virgin. For though
it were true, that go to Peter thou shall not leese, if to the Virgin thou
shall not leese, which yet is most salfe; for they cannot help us: But though
it were so, that we might have one piece in one, an other in an other, should
we not rather go to CHRIST, where all our inheritance is laid together?

Lastly, he is above all Principalities) viz: howsoever in his base estate he
humbled himself underneath the Angels, yet he is the Head of them all, and
above all Angels and Archangels, so that none of them are able to cross his
will, or control him in his Kingdom.

The end of the 16. Sermon.
The 17. Sermon.
COLLOSS. 2. V. 11. 12. 13. 11 In whom also ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without bands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh,
through the circumcision of CHRIST.

12 In that ye are buried with him through baptism, in whom ye are also
raised up together, through the faith of the operation of God, which raised him
from the dead.

13 And ye which were dead in sins, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh,
has he quickened together with him, forgiving you all your trespasses.


WE have heard of the graces in our Savior CHRIST, of the fullness,
perfection, and abundance of them, and likewise the Apostle entered into this,
that all fullness of graces are in him, so they are in him, not for himself,
but for us. And therefore the Apostle proceeds in the argument and in that
point still, as if the Apostle should say, ye have heard, etc.



Abraham and other the godly Patriarchs and Fathers under the Law, had this
circumcision of the heart: and yet notwithstanding received the outward cutting
of the foreskin for a seal of that inward circumcision. I grant: And
therefore you have for an outward seal of your inward cutting and purging of
the corruption, the Sacrament of Baptism, a seal that with CHRIST you are
buried to sin, that sin is truly mortified and deaded in you, that it
should no more reign over you, nor you should live unto it. Another fruit
also of this circumcision, whereof Baptism is a seal, is that with CHRIST you
are raised up to newness of life, through faith, which God has wrought in you
by the same almighty power, whereby he has raised CHRIST from the dead.

with him, in having all your sins forgiven you.

The sum is a more special declaration of the fullness, and accomplishment
we have in CHRIST.

The parts are that in CHRIST we have Circumcision inward of the heart, with
the outward sign thereof. Because we have Sanctification. Justification.


Sum: That the Colossians and Christians have no need of the circumcision
which was in times past, and therefore we are to consider of

First the Sacrament of Circumcision to Gods children in times past: Baptism
under the Gospel.

Secondly, of the notable fruits and benefits sealed to us in these Sacraments.

Here we are to consider of the order of the Apostle according to the custom
of the Scripture. For the Scripture uses to set the handling of those last,
which were named first, and the handling of those things first, which were
named last, and therefore the Apostle having spoken of, and named Philosophy
first, and then of the rudements and ceremonies: he first speaks against the
ceremonies of the Law, and because circumcision was most stood upon, and
chiefly regarded, therefore the Apostle does speak of circumcision.

For circumcision was especially commended in the Law, as that which was
performed by all, and was appointed as a badge under the Law, to distinguish
the Church of God from the world, and therefore they that were not circumcised,
were abominable, as Moses was in danger for his son uncircumcised: Exodus 4.
24. Again, because the circumcision was 400. years before the Law was, and
therefore they thought it should not be abolished with the Law. But the Apostle
answers that we are, and need not to be circumcised, because CHRIST was
circumcised for us, having no cause for himself to be circumcised. Now
circumcision is a note of pollution, but we are cleansed in CHRIST. And a man is
not to be circumcised twice, but once we are circumcised in CHRIST, and
therefore need not to be circumcised again. Further, we have Baptism in
steed of Circumcision, and therefore it is not belonging unto us.

Again, he makes two kinds of Circumcisions, outward and inward: The inward
is the circumcision of the heart: The Lord circumciseth the heart, etc. And
Deuteronomy. 10. 31.
therefore the Israelites bragged of this, that they were the circumcised of
the Lord; this is our boasting that the Apostle says: We are glad of this,
that Heb. 6.
the hardness of our heart is taken away, our rejoicing is the circumcision of
the heart.

So also there is two sorts of Baptismes, for which cause the Apostle says:
Among the Principles of religion, wherein every one is to be instructed,
names the doctrine of Baptismes i. inward, and outward; for as the
Circumcision was inward and outward; And therefore it is that Stephen according
as the Prophets Acts 7.
used, vpbraided them: Oh ye stiffe-neeked and uncircumcised: because though
they were circumcised in body, yet not in heart.

It were a strange thing, if a man should say, men Note.
now that have come to Baptism, that they are unbaptized, and to those that
come ordinarily to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that they never received
it, and to those that come to hear the word and prayer, that they never did
it, viz: they never effectually did it, in regard that they have not done it in
heart, in that they have not forsaken their uncleanness and looseness of life.

Nay rather it may be said of them, that they have Note.
received the Sacraments, as seals of condemnation, and the word as a
testimony of their judgment, and prayed to pull the vengeance of God upon
their heads: And therefore we are to look, that as they have the outward, so
we labor and feel to have the hand of God inwardly in reforming us, and
renewing us, and working grace in our hearts.

The fruit of Circumcision and Baptism, is the putting off the body of sin.
It is the use of the Scripture to compare sin to filthy garments, or
nakedness, Apoc 3. Buy of me garments to cover thy nakedness: So it is with
us, that if we have not the righteousness off CHRIST, we are naked, or else
clothed with the rags of sin: And therefore as men are ashamed to come into
the presence of others naked or in filthy rags. For as Joseph might not come
Genesis 4. 14.
before the King, before his prison clothes were taken off. And are we not to
be much more ashamed, to come into the presence of the Lord in our sins,
which are far more loathsome to God, then any filthy rags to man?

Again our state of Christianity is compared to a 1. Cor. 9.
race, which was used among the Romans, where in their exercises, to the end
they might be more light to run the race better, or to do any other
exercises, they used to put of their cloths, so far as with honesty they might,
that they should be no burden or hinderance unto them: Even so sin being a
greater burden then any clothes to hinder our race, is to be cast off.

By flesh the Apostle means the natural and original corruption, viz: the
proanesle and readiness to all naughtiness, and untowardness, and unfitness
to any thing that is good.

And by the body is meant the fruit of it.

By flesh is not meant that the creature it self is this filthiness, for that
is a creature (for then CHRIST'S flesh could not be pure) but it is meant the
spiritual corruption and infection in the body and soul joined together.

In that sin is called the body of sin, it notes, Note.
that every one has in him, or about him, A Body of sin: So that look how
many members of the body every man has, and how many powers of the soul, so
many instruments of sin: it notes that whatsoever part or faculty is in a
man naturally, is nothing but a lump of sin, his hand a hand of sin, his
foot, eye, etc.

Therefore chapter 3. mortify your earthly members of sin, filthiness,
uncleanness, noting that until our members be mortified and renewed, they are
members of sin and uncleanness: Yea they are weapons of unrighteousness,
which until they be purged Romans 6.
and cleansed, tend only to the hurt either of our selves or others.

Here then we may know that we are truly baptized and have the true
circumcision of our Savior CHRIST, if we daily labor more and more to cut
off the members of sin in our selves, whereas if we continue in sin, and go
on more and more in our sins after Baptism, then we may assure our selves,
we have no part in CHRIST, and our Baptism is not profitable.

Abraham and the rest the circumcision of the heart before the circumcision of
the body, and yet it was needful for them to have the circumcision of the body
as being the seal of the other? Why then should not we be circumcised?

Answer. True, they had the inward circumcision before, and the outward
circumcision after, yet we need not the outward: for baptism seals Note.
that to us, which circumcision did to them: for there is but one seal of it:
now they had outward circumcision, and ye have baptism, and need but one seal
for baptism does sufficiently assure you of the inward circumcision.

Ye are buried with him in baptism: Not that baptism does it, but baptism is
the seal of our burying with CHRIST. For the properties of the thing
signified, is often given to the seal: As in the Lords supper the name of the
sign, bread and wine, is given to the thing signified, which is the body and
blood of CHRIST. And baptism is called the washing away of sins, for as
water washes the filthiness of the body, so does the blood of CHRIST,
signified by the water, wash away our sins. So here to be buried is given to
baptism, which is only the work of the spirit of God by faith in. CHRIST,
which does bury sin in us.

Baptism does represent our burial unto sin, because, though it be not
utterly killed, so long as we live, yet it is weakened. In the Romans 6. it is
said that we are dead, buried, and raised up in baptism, viz. baptism seals
all these unto us.

But it is to be observed. That he makes choice of the burial only, rather
then the death, to signify the truth and assurance of our mortification, Note.
that our mortification is certain, true, and without all dissimulation, it is
indeed a hatred of sin.

For as men may seem to be dead, which are not so indeed, but if they be dead
and covered, then we are assured they are dead indeed, so true mortification is
here signified to be a true hatred of sin.

And that was in times past notably set forth by the custom in the primitive
Church, their descending into the water, which signifies death to sin, and
remaining in the water, their burying to sin, and rising out of the water,
rising to righteousness. So that here is showed what ought to be true
mortification. A simile.
For there may be some in a swone or trance, which seem to be dead, and yet
revive again, so there are many, that think themselves dead to sin, if they
can abstain from some sin they have used before, and do some good things
they did not before, yet it does not follow that they are therefore mortified:
for they may do it for some sinister cause, for hope of gain etc. and after
fall to it again: and therefore it is necessary that there be a burying viz.
that for conscience to God, for the fear of God, and love of him, that he has
been merciful unto us, we mortify sin and walk in holiness of life, to
continue in it, which mortification imports.

For he that continues in mortifying sin, he Note.
only is truly mortified: Therefore acts 14. 21. strengthened the disciples
and exhorted them to continue.

Verse. 1.
the law: where we have to confute the wretched opinion of the Anabaptists,
which will not have any Anabaptists Err.
baptized before they come to years of discretion: but if they under the Law,
circumcised under age, then now we may baptize under the Gospel them that are
Infants. Again in the Parents, if one be faithful their children are holy,
and much more 1. Cor. 7. 14.
both being holy, sanctify their children, therefore to be baptized.

Objection. But it is said that the Apostles baptized, it is said they baptized
households, but no mention is made of children, they are not named.

Answer. Could they baptize whole households, Solution.
and not baptize children. Again, in that baptism is the same to us that
circumcision was to the Jews, why should not our children be baptized, as
theirs were circumcised?

This doctrine serves also against the Papists, that Verse. 2.
think that children unbaptized are damned. But The Papists error convicted.
that can not be, because there was no such thing to be feared of those that
died before circumcision being the 8. day. For we see the Lord commanded that
circumcision should not be before the 8. day, to the end that the children
should be strong to abide the great smart of the wounds: now if as many
children as died should be condemned, the Lord should have provided ill for his
people, that for a small temporary comodity would deprive them of everlasting
life: 2. Sam. 12. David before his son died, he had 2. Sam. 12. 16. 17. 20.
23.
fasted and laene on the ground; after he heard that he was dead, he rose up,
and washed his face, and showed himself comfortable, and did make profession
that he should go to him. Whereby it is evident he was persuaded he was in
peace, whereas we see that he mourned for his son Absalom (Whom he loved as
dearly) because he feared his condemnation, for that he had lived and died
wickedly.

Again, if the children be unbaptized, it is not Note.
theirs, but their parents sin, and should it be condemned for the parents
cause?

Again, not the want, but the despising and contemning Genesis 17.
of the Sacrament is dangerous. And therefore they only that were despisers of
the circumcision, Deuteronomy. 16.
were to be cut off. Now the children cannot despise it, and if any despise it,
it is the Parents. Besides, the Sacraments are notes of our salvation, and that
salvation does not depend upon them, but upon Gods favor, and free election
before all worlds.

We have heard of the benefits we have in CHRIST through, baptism, to be the
dying unto sin, and in sanctification. The last benefit we have in baptism,
is the quickening of us in CHRIST, which is the forgiveness of sin and
justification. And therefore seeing we have both this justification and all
sanctification and dying unto sin sealed to us in baptism, it appears
therefore that all the parts of our reconciliation are sealed to us by baptism.

The end of the 17. Sermon.
The 18. Sermon.
COLOSS. 2. 14. 15. 16. 17. 14 And putting out the handwriting of ordinances
that was against us which was contrary to us, he even took it out of the way,
and fastened it upon the Cross,

15 And bath spoiled the Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has triumphed over them in the same Cross.

16 Let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of any
holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days.

17 Which are but a shadow of things to come: but the body is in CHRIST.


WE have heard how the Apostle does propound to himself to refute two errors:
one of vain Philosophy, which appeared to men to be wisdom, but not true
wisdom.

The other was that the Colossians had crept in among them, such, which held
the necessity of ceremonies. We have heard how the Apostle amongst other
ceremonies, which he confuteth, begins at the ceremony of circumcision,
which confutation he having entered upon proceeds in confuting the use of the
other ceremonies, Metaphrase.
as eating of meats, drincks etc.

the hand writing, which was a witness of our sins as of a det, where in we
stood bound to God: which handwriting stands in the rites and ceremonies of
the Law, which by his death is not only blotted out, by the same nails
wherewith his blessed hands and feet were nailed to the Cross, this as it were
was nailed thorough and cancelled.





Therefore as in CHRIST no man ought to condemn you for the use of any meat or
drink, or in respect of a feast day, whether it be new moon or the three
solemn Sabaoths:

The sum is, the doing away of all the ceremonies of the Law by the death of
CHRIST, and therefore of these, which the Colossians erroniously retained.

The parts are the Effect of CHRIST'S death in all the ceremonies of the Law.
Application of that effect to the present errors of the Colossians.

The purpose of the Apostle is that because that the ceremonies of the Law
generally are done away by the death of our Savior CHRIST, that therefore the
ceremonies, which the Colossians made conscience of, are done away.

Here we are to note first, the power of the death of our Savior CHRIST in
taking away ceremonies; secondly, the applying of that effectually to the
particular estate of the Colossians, that they were in by reason of false
Teachers.

For the first, the use of ceremonies of the law were Sundry uses of the
ceremonies.
diverse. 1. To make a partition wall and separation between Jews and gentiles,
that neither should come one to other, till it should be taken away. 2. Another
use in them was to train up the Jews being children, in the principles of
religion.

Another use here mentioned that they were a handwriting, testimony, and a
witness unto the people of their sins, that they were bound unto God.

For what means their manifold washings, but Note.
that they were excedingly filthy, and loathsome in the sight of God. And what
was the killing of the beasts and sacrifices, but to confess, that themselves
were worthy to be slain by reason of their sins? further their circumcision,
which they bragged so of, did note the uncleanness of the whole man, because out
of that part came the seed, which proceeded from every part of a man, and
therefore all these were testimonies of the wrath of God due to them.

But the benefit we have in our Savior. 1. our sins are taken away. 2. The
hand writing is not only blotted out but cancelled, for the same nails, that
went through his hands, perced the handwriting and ceremonies.

And therefore what injuries should we do to our selves, and what injury to
our Savior CHRIST'S death if we should hold the necessity of them? For what is
he, that having the det paid, will not labor Note.
by all means to have the writing cancelled?

Now it were a far more foolish thing if the detter, when he had paid the
det, would desire his creditor to keep the bill still.

And this was not only the sin of the Jews, He means (I take it) such
ceremonies as are urged as necessary and parts of Gods worship.
but now it is the fault of them, and far greater, which will have ceremonies
in the Church, not Gods, but man's ceremonies, which are far worse.

So that here, see the difference of Believers, under the Gospel and Law.

For howsoever the death of CHRIST was Note.
effectual to them, while the Law stood, yet the obligation and writing was in
Gods hand.

Objection. Why then, was the handwriting in the hand of God. Answer. It was
in the hand of the Solution.
good creditours, and it was by Gods will that it should be so, to keep them
under: but now it is his will that they should be taken away, and therefore it
is a fearful thing in us, that when God would have it taken away, we will have
it remain still in his hand.

Here we see that the children of God may have assurance of everlasting life,
and their hope is a certain hope, contrary to the papists which make it
doutfull according to our common speech But the Apostle says: our hope cannot
be confounded. The certainety of Romans 5. 5.
this hope the Apostle proves both by that ou^ sins are forgiven, and the debt
bill is put out.

Another reason the Apostle renders, is for that our Savior CHRIST has
vanquished the Devil* the Prince of Devils, called Powers and Principallities:
For they were created strong and have not Ephe. 2. 2.
lost much of their strength. This is taught by our Savior CHRIST Math. 12.
The strong man, that is the Devil, keeps the house till a stronger comes,
which is our Savior CHRIST. When our Savior was upon the Cross, the Devil
assaulted him most strongly: For at his first entering into his Ministry Math.
4.
the Devil tempted him fore* though he left him for a time, yet he came to him
again: But especially he used all his strength to torment our Savior Christ
upon the cross, when the wrath of God was upon him: that occasion he took to
vex our Savior as much as he could, which in the 22. Psalm. which is the
Psalm of the passion of our Savior CHRIST, the Diuel's compared to Dogs, to
Bulls of Basan, which tore his hands and feet, and compared also to Lions, and
to Unicorns, so cruelly did they use him. And yet whereas they thought to have
triumphed over him, even in the very Cross he spoiled them and overcame them,
and triumphed over them, and led them captives.

And therefore we see there is no cause we should be ashamed of our Savior
CHRIST, seeing he has overcome, and we are conquerous in him, and therefore
to boast in that, as the Apostle says: Death 1. Cor. 15.
where is thy sting? Hell where is thy victory?

And this is matter of comfort, that we are to deal with one, that is
maistred, and conquered already, with one that is a coward, and therefore if we
resist him, he will fly, but if we give place to him, then Iam. 4. 7.
he will use us, and torment us as a Tyrant. And therefore we are to take
courage over him, being thus overcome by our Savior CHRIST. For as the
victory, which David had over Goliath, was for all the A simile.
people of God, so is the victory of our Savior not for himself, but for us.

Thus much for the taking away of the ceremonies by our Savior CHRIST: The
application of this doctrine to the Colossians follows.

Doct. The office of a good Minister is not only The Ministers duty. to
deliver the doctrine generally, for then the Colossians had gone away without
comfort, but he must apply it particularly. And as it teaches Ministers to
deliver and apply perticularly: So the people are to learn that they must be
content to hear of perticulars, as of the general: for will they say, let the
Minister teach of adultery, but let him not speak of me, but Nathan said to
David, Thou art the man, 2. Sam. 12. 7.

Let no man judge you) i; If any man take this boldness to condemn you for
eating of those things, doing those things, let it not grieve you.

The meats which were forbidden by the Law were those which did not chew the
cud, or which chewing it, had not cloven feet, etc. But now by 1. Tim. 4. 5.
Tit. 1. 15. Romans 14. 20.
the Gospel those things are left to our liberty, for if the word of God do
teach us, we may eat it, then we are to eat it, so it be with
thanksgiving. For now to the clean all things are clean. And though this
liberty be left us, which was bought by our Savior CHRIST, yet it does not
take away authority from Magistrates, for Navigations, or by reason of want to
abstain from some meats at certain times in the year.

For the Feasts and new Moon:) In the new Moon the Lord had commanded, in
regard of the benefit which God gave by the lights, they should have Feasts.

Sabaoths) There were three great feasts in the year: First, at Easter when
came their corn in, wherein God commanded them to celebrate a feast of
thankfulness, and therein was the Passover celebrated.

Pentecost was at that time of the year, that the fruit of the Vines were
gathered.

The third feast was of Tabernacles, when all fruits were gathered in.

This is not meant of the Lords Sabaoths: for it is Note.
said Sabots not Sabbath: Again, the Lords day was never no ceremony: for it
was before all ceremonies, even in the beginning of the world, before there was
need of CHRIST. And therefore the Sabbath day here is not meant: but it is yet
to be kept wholly, and holily unto the Lord.

Again, our Savior CHRIST prophesying of the things that should come to pass
40. years after his death, wills them to pray that their flight should not
come as in Winter, so not on the Sabbath Math. 24* 20.
day, whereby the Lords exercises should be hindered, which might increase their
grief.

Last reason* because these were shadows, and therefore to cease, now the Body
was come. For our Savior CHRIST is the Body, and therefore what a madness Note.
is it in men, that being desirous to look upon one, had rather to look upon
his shadow, then upon the person himself.

The end of the 18. Sermon.
The 19. Sermon.
COLLOSS. 2. V. 18. 19. 18 Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by
humbleness of mind, and worshipping of Angels, advancing himself in those
things which he never saw, rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind.

19 And holds not the head, whereof all the body, furnished and knit together
by ioints and hands, increases with the increasing of God.


OF the false doctrine that the Colossians were bewitched withal, and infected
by false Teachers, there were two kinds: One which came of the inventions of
the brain, and wits of men: The other were those ceremonies which were once
Gods ordinances, enjoined by Moses, as the ceremonies of the Law. And first we
have heard how the Apostle has confuted those errors, which were concerning
the maintaining the ceremonies of the Law: Now he sets himself to confute
those errors which were of men's invention. As if he said:

Having spoken of the Elements of the world, which are the ceremonies of the
Law, I come now to the vain Philosophy, I gave you warning of. Against the
which observe this rule: First, that you give no man (of what show soever) this
power over you, that for his own lust, in matters pertaining to God, he
usurp authority, howsoever the doctrine he brings, carry a show of humility.
As for example those that teach the worship of Angels, as means to come the
more easily unto CHRIST: in which thing what do they else, but thrust
themselves into things, which they never knew, only grounded upon a proud
conceit of their fleshly mind, notwithstanding their great pretense of
humility?

Ephe. 4.
and compact together, is both nourished and increased, with that increase,
which God both aloweth, and is giver off.

The sum is to condemn the doctrine of men's brains.

The parts are Against doctrines of men's brain, namely the worshipping of
Angels. The reason against them.

The sum then is, to set forth unto us how they ought to beware of the
doctrine of men, taught by men's own heads, as namely the doctrine of
worshipping of Angels, which is set for all others.

First of the errors, which was among the Colossians, which they were infected
withal.

Secondly, the reasons the Apostle uses, to overthrow, knock in pieces, grind
to powder, this, and all other such errors.

First, for the worshipping of Angels, we are 1. to know that God only is to
be worshipped, that is with a religious kind of honor and worship. Indeed
there is an honor and worship given to Magistrates and superiors, but that is
a civil honor, And therefore Deuteronomy 6. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
not other idol gods: And on that our Savior CHRIST gathers this conclusion,
Thou shall serve the Lord alone: A manifest example of this Math. 4. 10. Revel.
22. 8. 9.
we see, Saint John, being a worthy servant of God, who when the Angel, which
God sent unto him, had showed him such glorious and excellent things, being
ra^ished therewith, fell down and worshipped the Angel. But the Angel being
moved, says: beware, take heed; he cuts short his speech, as those that are
moved with any thing. And he gives him a reason, why he should not, for says
he: I am thy fellow-seruant, for though my message be glorious, yet I am
appointed of God to do it, and am his servant, Hebrews 1. 14. The Angels are
ministering Spirits to serve, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, for as the
Angels are Ministers to serve CHRIST, so they are to his servants, being one
with him, and therefore we are not to serve them.

Object. Whereas we see oft-times of Angels, that appeared, as in the book of
the Judges, the Angel, that appeared to Sampsons mother and Father, when
Judges 13. 15. 16. 23.
they willed him to stay that they might worship him, he bid them, and so in
other places, therefore it may seem Angels are to be worshipped.

Answer, But that does no^ follow: For we are Solution.
to consider that where any Angel was to be worshipped, it was the Angel of
the Covenant, the Mal. 3. 2.
Son of God: who though he took upon him a body to execute the function,
he was sent to do by his Father, which body he presently left off: yet he
appeared to the end that he might signify, that he was afterward indeed to
come, to take our nature, and to unite it unto him: And he was to be
worshipped, being not a created Angel. But for the other Angels, they are not
to be prayed unto. Contrary to the Papists, who wretchedly abuse these places
of Scripture.

And if the Angels may not, much less can or ought the Saints to be prayed
unto. And if any, the Angels rather, who attend upon the Saints of God to their
good, but the Saints know not our estate, and therefore can help us much
less. And therefore Eliah says to Eliseus, being to be 2. King. 2. 9.
taken away, have thou any thing I should do for thee, tell it me now, for
after I cannot do thee any good, And a further reason why they are not to be
prayed unto, nor the Angels neither, because they understand not our hearts:
For we cannot express our own hearts, as Hannah could not express 1. Sam.
1. 1. Cor. 2. 11.
her grief. The spirit of God only does understand.

The reasons the Apostle uses: 1. Let no man (says he) take that authority
over you, and judge over you. Where he takes the similitude alluding to the
custom of the Romans, who in the sports of running* etc. had Judges of the
game, and whomsoever they judged to be worthy had the Garland. But says he,
Let no man be judge in your faith, neither stand upon any man's judgments to
believe that they say: For there is no man Judge or Lord over a man's faith: 2.
Corrinth: 1. 24. We are not Lords over your faith. This the Apostle rebukes
the Corrinthians, for that they suffered themselves to be 2 Cor. 11. 20.
buffi^ed, by the false Prophets, viz: to become servants unto them in their
souls, as to be bound to whatsoever they said or taught, and so also became
to be servants unto them in their bodies: So was it in the time of Popery,
when every Sir John Lackelattine, whatsoever he said, all was believed. So is
it in those, that will yield unto the judgments, and opinions of men in an
error, which is to admit a Judge into the Church of God, whereas there is none
but CHRIST alone. Iam. 4. 12. There is one Iam. 4. 12.
Lawgiver, which is able to save and destroy. And therefore we are not to
take man's authority in the word of God, and matters of religion, but to examine
his doctrine, as the men of Berea did* Acts. 17. 11.
And therefore let no man take that authority, as to desire to have his word
stand in matters of religion, neither are we to give this authority to any.

Here further the Apostle takes away their objection, which come (they say)
in humility, they would not presume to come directly unto CHRIST, but by the
Angels, as unto a Prince we will go by the servant: was not this a great
humility and meekness not to presume to come unto CHRIST rashly? But under
this show the flesh does mask.

Doct. Here we see that we have heard before: errors ofttimes have a fayrer
show, then truth, it self. As the bayt that seems to the fish to be good
meat.

And be it that it be humility, yet is it but a blind humility, which is broken
out without the light of the word.

Doctrine. That whatsoever has not the word of God and is not grounded on the
word, though ever so humble, it is ignorance. Romans 8. 14. 23. If Isa. 8. 20.
not grounded on the Law and the Prophets it is sin. This is one argument.

Another is, that this is not humility, but an intolerable pride and
arrogance. For what an arrogance is this that a mortal man will take upon him
to talk of that he never heard of, of the word of God? Again what a wretched
arrogance is it, for a mortal man to resist and contradict the ordinance of
God! for as there is but one God: so there is but one mediator, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
and if they will have more, they must have more Gods. This is the Apostles
reason. For there can be no mediator between God, and us, but CHRIST alone.
For he is most fit to be a days man that can best agree with both the parties.

And who can be better the^ our Savior CHRIST, for he communicates with God
in his Godhead, which Saints and Angels do not. And he has greater
communication with us in his manhood, then the saints, for he is our head.
This the Apostle has a notable place for Romans 8. If there be another mediator
and intercessor, then there is another has died for us, and another fitteth at
the right hand of God.

To return to their pride. To make another Mediator is nothing but a proud
thing. For is it not a great pride to do contrary to the commandment of God?
John. 13. Peter when our Savior would have washed his feet, he would not, but
denied again and again, which though it seemed an humility; yet it was great
pride, not to obey the commandment of his master.

A greater reason he alleges verse. 19. Because they held not the head: all
errors are dangerous: but this is most dangerous of all to take away the head,
as which take away our Savior CHRIST. And therefore the Apostle Peter says in
the latter ^. Pet. 2. 1.
days shall come such, as shall teach pernicious Heresies, denying the Lord:
For as it is in the hurts of the A simile.
body, those hurts though small, yet being in the vital parts, as brain,
heart, etc. do cost the life, whereas other great wounds will not: so it is in
religion, some errors do not hurt the life of the Note.
soul, but those that are against the head points of religion, kill the life
of their salvation.

Whatsoever does overthrow the foundation does overthrow salvation: As in
Popery, Idolatry, and worshipping etc. making another head of the Church.

And unless it be of the Godhead, all their doctrine is not only errors, but
a clean apostasy: for they corrupt all other points. Indeed there be errors,
if they held only, and none else, as free will etc. They might be saved, but if
they come to this, as to hold worshipping Angels etc. overthrowing the
foundation, they exclude themselves, CHRIST he is the only head of the Church,
which conueyeth life to all his parts, and to appoint worship to any other is
to take him away.

This overthrows the Papists that will have the Pope to be the ministerial
head which is a foolish thing. For as the head is the highest, so is our
Savior CHRIST alone, therefore not the Pope.

Again, the head gives life and motion to all the body, which our Savior
only does, the Pope cannot.

Again, in that they say the Pope is a ministerial head, but our Savior
CHRIST needs none Math. 28.
being present by his spyrit to the end of the world, giving direction to his
Church.

And the Apostle showing that our Savior is the head of the Church describes
it, to be tied as the members of the body to the head, so the Church to CHRIST.

Again, our Savior is the head of the Church to convey life and sustenance to
all the members. And he gives nourishment not to all alike, but to some more,
some less, as they need: for the greater members Note.
have more need of succors, and relief.

Doctrine. Not to envy those that have more then we. For if the Lord has
bestowed more on them it is for our good.

Again, in regard that the members are members of one body and agree with the
head, we learn

That if we be the members of CHRIST and joined unto CHRIST by faith, we must
be joined together one to another.

For as when there is a member out of joint all the other are grieved, so if we
be not joined in heart, it shows that we are not right in CHRIST.

Our unity must be in CHRIST only, O how Psalm. 1. 33.
good and how pleasant a thing is it for brethren to live in unity? Where we
see if we be joined together in CHRIST, we shall be pertakers of all the graces
of God, which being powered out upon CHRIST shall descend as the oil which was
powered on the head of Aaron, which came even to his skirts. And as the dew of
Hermon watreth the valleys so shall it be with us. The Ephesians. 4.
bond whereby we are to be joined one to another is love, which is the Bond of
of perfection.

The end of the 19. Sermon.
The 20. Sermon.
COLOSS. 2. V. 20. 21. 22. 23. 20 Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the
ordinances of the world, why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened
with traditions?

21 As touch not, taste not, handle not.

22 Which all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men:

23 Which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in voluntary religion, and
humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the body, neither have they it in any
estimation to satisfy the flesh.


THERE were among the Colossians two sorts of false doctrines, under covert
brought in among them: one of the ceremonies of the Law, which now were taken
away: the other of the inventions of man's brain. Of the first, viz. of the
circumcision, and Sabaoths, we have heard, and of the use of them now
overthrown. For the other, which had a vain show of wisdom, we have heard,
on the worshipping of Angels, that though it have a show, yet has it no
wisdom at all in it. Now he proceeds to other devices and corruptions, which
were crept in among them, in regard of which the Apostle speaks after this
sort.

Now seeing you are dead with Christ, by whose Verse. 20. The Mataphrase.
death you are delivered from the ceremonies of Gods own law, wherewith as
with certain rudiments the people of the Jews were trained to further
perfection, which now they have attained unto in the doctrine of the Gospel,
why as though you lived still in the world, do you suffer your selves to be
charged with the ceremonies of the world?







The sum is to set forth unto us a confutation of certain ceremonies
intended to be brought in among the Colossians by certain false Teachers. Now
here first, we are to consider of the things and corruptions themselves,
Secondly, of the confutation of the corruptions.

Corruptions are spoken. Generally. Perticulerly, touch not, taste not, etc.

Which though they be not perticulerly named, yet they may be conceived well
enough, as touching of some bodily things, and tasting of meats.

Here we observe that howsoever men be dainty Note.
of their commodities, and of their liberties, and will go to the Prince before
they will go one whit from them. But come there a false teacher into the
pulpit to persuade them from their Christian liberty of meat and drink they
are easily persuaded unto it, though to their own damage and trouble.

As the Jews would easily to make a calfe be brought to forgo their earings.
So that howsoever these things are dear unto them, yet in matter of religion
(or superstition rather) they will spare no cost, as we see in times of Popery,
and therefore the Apostle vpbraydeth to the Corinthians, that the false
Prophets could do what they list with them, and tread them under their feet; so
that in superstition, and contrary to the service of God they will part with
any thing, in Gods service they will not part with a ^ot. In the particular the
Apostle uses a notable figure bringing in the adversaries themselves speaking,
touch not etc. to show how much they had gained of them, and how far they were
carried in their superstition, as not to touch, or taste.

Where we see the Apostle meets with that corruption and superstition in
Popery, as if he had seen it. For we see that none might taste any flesh on
friday, and therefore mothers, if children had tasted it, would have wiped
their teeth.

And for touching, we see, how that none might touch the holy water, and none
might touch the Host, though indeed it was no sacrament, for there was only
the bread, and therefore they must have their gloves on. Howsoever our Savior
himself would suffer himself to be handled and touched, and took children in
his arms. And this superstition of Popery indeed did begin within an. 100.
years of the Apostle, as the stories testify, that in 3. days nay 6. days,
they came to such an abominable superstition, that they would not take meat,
and if they took any, they would take dry bread, or some unpleasant meat. Nay
further, some, to the end they would not take any delight in their meat, they
would not eat but riding. And howsoever in those times the abstinence was
greater, yet for the latter Popery, the profession of this abstinence
continued, even amongst those gluttons, and tun-bellied Monks and Friars, which
lived in their surfeiting and gluttony.

And indeed until a long time there was no Law of fasting, but every one did
as he thought good, but after came in the punishment of the Papists, that they
that eat flesh should be counted Lowlers. For the co^futation of this, the
Apostle says, they are dead with the ceremonies of the Law. For if those, that
were once ordained by God, and were profitable for the trayning up of men to
the service of God, were taken away, then much more ought those, that were
invented by the device of man, and were never profitable, but rather hurtful.

And if those, that were once holy, were rejected, much more ought these, that
were the profane inventions of men, should take no place.

And howsoever indeed the ceremonies of the Law were borne withal for a time,
and (as one says) as an ancient matrone gravely and honorably brought unto
her grave, and therefore the Apostle did bear with them: yet they would never
suffer the ceremonies of the Gentiles to be kept: and rejected them, as being
unworthy of any thing, but to be cast into a hole. And such were the ceremonies
of the Papists, many of them being borrowed from the Gentiles, as the holy
waters. etc.

And therefore this place is a sufficient hammer to batter in pieces all men's
ordinances: for seeing Gods ordinances have given place, much more they.

A second reason against these ceremonies, is for that those things, which they
put holiness in, did perish with the use of them. For the meats going into the
Math. 15. 17.
stomach, and after into the draught, as our Savior speaks, the ceremonies
about them therefore could do a man's soul no good, for they could not come to
any further then the belly, if they come so far, as the holy water does not.
And therefore the Apostle Romans 14 17.
says, the kingdom of God stands not in meats and drinks. And in the
Corinthians, they are of no profit, especially being the ordinances of men.

Objection. Are not outward things profitable, because they perish with the
use? What say you of the water in baptism and bread and wine in the Lords
supper, are they not for the strengthening of the faith etc? and yet they perish
with the use, for if a man do not eat after, they shall not live.

Answer, Howsoever they perish, yat they are the commandments not of man, but
of God, and therefore he gives the blessing unto them, which he has
ordained them for: and therefore they are profitable unto us, to assure us in
the mercies of God in Christ: whereas other things which are men's devices are
not.

to Tresh a quarter a day, and he do a quarter and half, shall he be
condemned? So do we.

Answer. This has but a show of reason and wisdom, Solution.
whereas there is none: For why does the servant more then he is appointed? It
is because his Master knows not how much he is able to do. But God is
infinitely wise, and appoints every man his task as he is able, and none
ought to go beyond, and therefore howsoever we may exceed men's commandments,
and please them, and do well, yet it is not so with God.

Here then we see the abhominablenesse of the works of super-errogation,
that a man can go beyond the performance of the commandments of God, whereas
none is able to perform the least aright, this is a detestable thing.



Answer. But every humility is not commendable, for. 2. Kings. 16. 7. Achaz as
wretched a King as ever was, when as the King of Israel, and the. 10. Tribes
came against him, sends to Tyglath Pelazer, saying to him: Thy son and
servant, whereas he was a King as good as the other, and in regard of the
profession of God, should have gone before all other: In Esaias. 57. 9. it was
said to the Jews, Thou did humble thy self unto the grane: Whereas they
should have humbled themselves to God alone: So in Esaias. 2. 8. 9. it is said:
The people of Israel humbled themselves and croucht to the Idols, which is an
abominable humility and baseness, and a pride in that they rise up against
Gods commandment.

3 Object. This is to tame the body, by fasting.

Answer. Fasting in deed is a good thing if well used, but so to fast as to
dishonor the body, and to disable it to glorify God withal, is to be
condemned. For the body is honored, when it is kept to be strong and able,
cheerfully and thankfully to walk in the service of God.

Thus the wretched abuse of the Papists in their fastings, and Jesuits in
whipping themselves, was a detestable thing unto God, as in the Priests of
Ball. But that humiliation which is by a diligent and careful walking and
laboring in our calling, to the end that by idleness the body be not puffed
up, is a commendable humbling and keeping down of the body, but that of the
Papists was most abominable, seeing they made their whippings and stripes,
answerable to the passion of our Savior Christ.

Again, the Apostle says, howsoever they seem, yet, says he, these are
nothing worth: For howsoever in times of affliction of the Church, and upon
special occasions, etc. there be greater need of humiliations. But of these
ordinary humiliations, when as the body is too much kept under, is contrary to
that which the Lord requires: And therefore it is that the Apostle blames
Tymothy for this, who though he 1. Tim. 5. 23.
were an excellent young man, yet had this infirmity that he kept his body too
much under, for which cause he would drink nothing but water.

4 And the last reason is, that these were, for the filling of the flesh, viz:
they were but belly-matters appertayning to the flesh, and therefore perishable
with the flesh, which has been spoken of before; or for the pleasing of man's
fleshly mind: Therefore to be avoided.

The end of the 20. Sermon.
The 21. Sermon.
COLOSS. Chapter 3. V. 1. 1 If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
WE are now, by the grace of God, come unto the second part of this Epistle,
where the Apostle does deliver certain moral precepts of godly life and
conversation: And here the Apostle sets forth: 1. those things that are
general to the 18. verse of this chapter, and then certain particular duties,
of Parents, Children, Masters, and Servants: and after he returns again to
give precepts unto them all in general.

Being through faith ingrafted and incorporated The Mataphrase. Verse. 1.
into Christ, (as has been said, and as your selves profess) as touching
sin, dead and buried with him; and as touching newness of life, quickened
and risen again: Now if in truth you be risen with Christ, then as Christ
rising remained not on earth, but ascended up into heaven, where under God, as
touching his Manhood, he is exalted in power and majesty above all Powers and
Principalities, in heaven and earth; so you by seeing and seeking after the
graces that come from above, ascend up whether he is gone.

The sum of all, which is a general exhortation to holiness of life, and
sanctification.

The parts are two exhortations. 1 To newness of life. 2 To mortification day
by day till we be slain by death it self.

There are some things to be learned of the comparing that before with this: 1.
After the Apostle had laid down the grounds of true doctrine, and overthrown
the false, he now teaches wholesome duties of good life.

Whence we learn that except we be grafted into CHRIST, we cannot possibly
bring forth any good works; And therefore the Apostle lays down first the
doctrine of Justification by CHRIST alone: And therefore if men have not faith,
the best works are sin, not to speak of Nunneries, which are the nests of
vermin.

Further this is to overthrow the Papists, that think by the natural power,
they bring into the world, before any grace is given them of God, they can do
good works, and after they merit and deserve it: whereas it is evidently taught
here, they are all sin before they be grafted into CHRIST.

A second thing is, that the Apostle, upon the doctrine of Christianity,
builds good works: And therefore in the Epistle to the Romans, he tells that
nothing can be done without faith, then after he exhorts to Romans 14. 23.
good works. So to the Galathians, having Preached faith in CHRIST, he
persuades them to do good works. In vain we make profession of good
works, and bring forth nothing in our life and conversation. Iam. 2. 26. Faith
without works is dead. If a man knew all the things in heaven and the earth,
and he were mounted up as high as the Angels, yet if his life be not
answerable, he had been better never to have made profession.

When the Apostle has spoken against Circumcision, new Moons, and Holy days,
save the Sabbath, of touching and handling, a man will say, what will you have
us do nothing, of this, then let us set the cook on the cook, let us eat,
and drink, and make good-cheere, and take our pleasure: The Apostle answers,
that the Lord has not taken away the yoke to follow our own lusts, but to
glorify God thereby. And therefore it has been found that they have taken
more pains to go to hell then others have done, because we will not fast, and
pull down our bodies: but they condemn Papists alms, because they give none
themselves.

1. Point, an exhortation to quickening and newness of life.

If ye have been raised, etc. where the Apostle lays us to our trial, and
gives us a notable trial, whether we are of CHRIST, for then we are raised up
to heaven, but if we be grouelings, here in the things of this life, then
we are not risen again, but are on earth: for all these go together: for he
that is grafted in CHRIST, he is quickened, and he rises with CHRIST: for
he rose not on earth, but into heaven.

Now let us examine whether we are risen with CHRIST, which is if we ascend,
which may be known if we seek the things above.

Seek, that is to have a care: for that a man seeks, he desires to come
unto, and takes care for, and so the Apostle says: a man must study and muse
with himself. So Solomon wills we should dig, and labor for wisdom,
otherwise it is no sign that we are risen with CHRIST.

Now let us consider if we be in the number of those, that seek after
heaven. There are found many, that seek for things of this life, and change
countries to make themselves rich: But how many have come to seek the word?
nay when they have it brought to their door they do contemn it, these are far
from being raised with CHRIST.

There are 2 things in seeking 1 Knowledge. 2 Practice.

Now let us examine whether our ears are bored, and whether we gape for
knowledge, as the earth does for rain: So says David, when he was in the
wilderness persued by Saul, O how have I desired to Psalm 63.
come unto thy Tabernacle! though he knew never so much. Let us labor to be
in the number of these: but if we have been slack in this, then let us see
what we have been in the other, for it is easier to know the will of God, then
to practice it.

Sits at the right hand. i; where we must continue in knowledge and
practice, as also to teach us that CHRIST sits.

After he sets forth our seeking, by the cause, for if we have no savor of
the things that are above, we will never seek them: For till such time as we
have aloue to the things above, it is impossible to seek for them.

And therefore it was well said, that the delight does perfect the action:
where the desire is, there will be doing.

Psalm. 119. MEM. O how I love thy Law! and therefore Psalm. 119. 97.
my study is in it all the day long: so that without love we should not love
and study after it. O taste and see how good the word of God is if you had once
tasted it, you would seek after it.

The Apostle Saint Peter, exhorts them to avoid 1. Pet. 2. 1. 2.
all malice, guile* and envy, and as newborn babes to desire the sincere
milk of the word ( If you had tasted) And he says tasted, alluding to young
children newly borne, that at first will not taste, but the mother uses some
means, but after they come to it: so if we have tasted of the word, we will
seek after it.

The end of the 21. Sermon.
The 22. Sermon.
COLOSS. 3. V. 2. 3. 4. 2 Set your affections on things which are above, and
not on things which are on the earth.

3 For ye are dead, and your life is hid with CHRIST in God.

4 When CHRIST, which is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory.


WE are entered into the second part of the Epistle, which is an exhortation to
a good life, drawn from the former, in the first Chapter.

Set your. 1. Love not the things that are on earth. Now we are to know what
things we are to savor of, that we savor not of these.

There ceremonies, that were before spoken off, as touch not, taste not, etc.
these are earthly things, which a man must not set his mind on.

There are other things on earth, as goods etc. we must not affect them. 1. not
set our minds on them and our affections, and much less on drunkenesse etc. we
must not have to do with ceremonies, and drunkenesse etc. these we must not so
much as savor, no not have any thing to deal with.

Neither are we to set our mind on those, that are 1. Cor 7. 31.
lawful, as on apparel, goods, nor meats, and drinks etc. We must use this
world as if we loved it not. For these are so contrary that one cannot love
them, but we must hate the other, no man can serve God, and Mammon, Math. 6. 24,

Verse. 3.
needs taste and savor of these. For as CHRIST after death rose again, so if
sin be dead in you, then you will rise to the taste of the things in heaven,
and the reason why we love this world so, is because we have no hope of a
better, and therefore are laoth to leave this. And here also because it may be
said, the Colossians are subject to troubles, besides the sins that they carry
about with them.

To this he answers, it is true it is hidden, that the Solution.
world sees not this salvation, and hidden from you, that is, that you have
not such a feeling of it, as you shall have. And yet as a thing hidden, that it
shall be seen.

Hope is of things, that are not present, then seeing our salvation is by hope,
therefore we shall receive Cant. 1. 4.
it. Things that do scarce appear, yet they are, so of this, Cant. 1. look
not on my blackenesse: it is true that I am black, despised in the world, yet
I am comely, and like the trees of Cedar, and the tents of the Arabians, which
tents were to be removed when they had dwelt a while in a place, yet I am as
fair as those in the curtains of Solomon.

So that we see here that the Church is not so beutified and glorified here, as
it it to be esteemed.

2. Reason, is, because he is the keeper, it is safe, no man can take it away,
and therefore Cant. 26. The Church is compared to a steep rock, where no 1.
Pet. 1. 5.
man dare come to her. And this is that, that Peter sets forth, that we are
preserved by the power of God. It is ready to meet us, when we depart: and the
power of hell is not able to prevail: and therefore it is said, it is hid with
God.

3 Reason. It is hidden in CHRIST, who appears Verse. 4. 3.
not as he is, nay not as he shall be: for he is appointed to have all his
subjects. As it is a glory for a King to have many wait upon him, so he
estemees it a great glory to have his children about him.



For a man regards not his estimation in a strange Note.
country, as at home, no more should we. Here we are strangers, what matter is
it though we be contemned? Another thing, that when CHRIST shall appear, we
shall also appear, that is, in the last day with him in glory. This is a
singular privilege for us to think of.

Esaias. 60. Where describing the estate of the children of God, from that* that
now it is, he uses a fine speech. There shall be as great difference between
your state now, and that estate you shall then be, as there is between the
brass and the gold, and betwixt the wood and the brass etc.

You shall not have the Sun and Moon, it is marvelous delightful to see the
light of the Sun and Moon, but then they shall not need it: for God shall be
their light, and he shall not go down.

This is more notably set forth in the revelation Revelation. 21. 10. 21.
where it is said; That it is a City on a hill full of precious stones,
impossible to be found in the world, the gates of precious stone, the streets
pure gold. These are means to point at, not able to express the glory of it.
If we will hear of this further, it is said that when CHRIST was translated,
Peter took such delight in seeing Moses and Elias translated, that though he
were in his natural body yet he took such delight, that he said: It is good
for us to be Math. 17. 4.
here, let us make our abode here.

And then sure if they had such delight, when they were in their natural
corrupt bodies, then much more when they shall be changed: then the joy shall
be such, as no ey has seen, nor ear has heard etc.

And then it will follow that they will leave those filthinesses that they have
here with them, as it is said in the next verse. It follows;

Mortify etc. This that follows stands in 2. parts, first in forbearing to
do sin, and 2. to do those things that are good, and the 1. lasts to the 12.
verse.

And first for mortification, which is partly laid out in these two verses.

And to the intent you may carefully seek after The Metaphrase. Verse. 2.
them, ye must first savor and set your affections upon the things that are
above, and consequently not to set your affections upon either the former
corruptions of false doctrine, or else upon the defilements of a corrupt
conversation of life: or finally upon the perishable transitory things of this
base world, all which are mere earthly.

feel the daily encumbrance of sin, which dwells in your mortal bodies:
It is true that it is not so apparent, as that which is hidden from the world,
and of your selves not so fully and feelingly understood. Howbeit that ought
not to dismay you: first, for that it is laid up with God, who is a true keeper
of it. And secondly, for that as your life is hidden, so is CHRIST'S life and
glory, who is the head.

4. And lastly, for that when CHRIST, of whom you have life, shall be made
manifest in glory, then shall you also with him appear glorious.

Wherein we have to consider of the exhortation to abstain from certain
vices, secondly the reason, whereupon it is laid, viz. the punishment. It
seems 3. Reasons why sins are termed members. Reason. 1. Romans 7. 25.
very strange that he should call sin the members of a man's body: and the
reason is first because the Apostle else where calls sin a body, and then
it is fitly said that the perticulers thereof be the members of this body. 2.
Our sin may be called members, for that they are so grafted and deeply set as
members in the body. And this is notably set forth in Math. 5. 18. If thy ey
off^nd pluck it out etc. if thy foot etc. Where our Savior does as Paul does
here compare sin to our ey, and hand, and foot: for that we come to them by
our sight, by handling, yet we must pull them out. So violently we must strive
to pull out our sins as a man to have his ey pulled, yea and though they were
sins as dear unto us as our ey, our hands, feet etc. excellent instruments
and dear. Now some will abstain from drunkenness, stealing, and yet are given
to whoring. And therefore Heb. 12. 4.
Paul insinuates that we should strive with sin unto blood. Every Christian,
that does not strive even to blood, if need be, he shall not be cro^ned.

members, because look how many members we have, so many instruments we have
to allure us to sin, which we are the more to be ware of: And therefore as
the Apostle says, as we have given our members as weapons of unrighteousness
to sin, so now let us give our ^^m. 6. 19.
members servants unto righteousness in holiness.

The end of the 22. Sermon.
The 23. Sermon.
COLOSS. 3. V. 5. 6. 7. 5 Mortify therefore your members which are on the
earth, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry.

6 For the which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.

7 Wherein ye also walked once, when ye lived in them.


WE have entered upon the fifth verse, which we are now to recontinue. The sum
and drift is an exhortation to the mortification of sin, and especially of
such sins, as had greatest sway among the Colossians.

Consider the Exhortation in the. 5. verse. Reasons whereon it is grounded,
contained in the 6. and 7. verse.

The exhortation is, mortify your earthly members, or members upon the earth
etc. One reason is drawn from the punishment: because the wrath of God is
against such persons, as offend in these, or any of them.

Another reason, because they had been such persons, and therefore must not be
so hereafter. In the exhortation we have heard that a man is a whole lump and
body of sin, whereof every sin is a member. Again, because sin is so
nerely joined and hardly tied to us that they can hardly be draw from us.

They are called earthly, because they draw us from heaven and heavenly
things. Which is meant not only of the body, but also of the soul, not in
regard of the substance of it, for that is a spirit, but in regard it tends
unto such things.

Now we are to come to the perticularities. The Apostle speaks against
certain sins against the seventh commandment, of adultery. Which the
Apostle names, viz. not those, which all men hold to be sins, and confessed
to be so, as whoredom. etc. But he sets against those sins which the
world does smally account of.

1. Fornication, 2. Uncleanness. 3. Wantonness. 4. Concupiscence.
For the first, fornication. The Apostle speaks against it: for amongst the
gentiles it was accounted to be no sin, or rather a small sin, douting of
it. And therefore acts. 15. In the general council the Apostles concluded
that it should be abstayned from, as a most shameful and horrible sin. So
that passing by the grosser sins he begins with this.

This the Apostle proves to be a shameful and 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20.
vile sin. For hereby God is put out (1. Cor. 6.) of his possession, for
seeing our body should be consecrated unto God, what a shame and horrible thing
is it, when men should make it a stews to the Devil?

Again, an other reason: In that he that commits fornication makes his
body the member of an 1. Cor. 6. 15.
harlot, which should be the member of CHRIST, so that as much as in him lies,
he makes CHRIST also a member of that body.

Again, an other reason: This sin is against the body, for other sins are
without the body, and the occasion, as is the sin of drunkenness: But this is
against 1. Cor. 6. 18.
the body it self, making it filthy and unclean, and subject unto diseases.

This sin the Apostle stands so much upon, because that they esteemed so
light of it: And is not the same thing now that men lightly esteem of it and
count it a Trick of youth, etc. and if the worst come they can marry the party
with whom they have fornicated, but the Lord does not so esteem of it.

2 Uncleanness) Meant all manner of unclean words and deeds, which do not
reach unto the act of fornication, as all manner of unclean kissings, and
speeches tending to uncleanness, though they come not to the height of
fornication; and therefore we see how lightly men esteem of these also, yet
they are horrible and vile in the sight of God. And howsoever men say, they
think no hurt, yet as where we see smoke, we say is fire: so where these are,
there is a fire of concupiscence.

3 Wantonness:) The word signifies passions: but as in other places where the
Apostle speaks of this sin, so here it is taken for wantonness, whereby is
meant all lightness of the eyes, apparel, gates or other behauiours, tending
also to fornication and uncleanness.

Lastly concupisence, which is the least sin against the 7. Commandment,
which is the desire of uncleanness with consent, Mat: 5. 28. for desire
without consent, belongs to the last Commandment, which our Savior CHRIST
notes.

Another sin, which the Apostle speaks against is covetousness, coming
near to that uncleanness.

First, by covetousness is not only meant when any do wrest and wring
whatsoever they can lay hold on. As the Prophet ( Jeremy 8.) says, They get
their goods falsely: But there is besides an other thing, when they have an
earnest desire of the muck of the world, which cannot be satisfied, as the
Prophet Esaias says, They desire to join house to house, etc. signifying Esaias
5. 8.
an excessive desire of riches, which cannot be satisfied.

But further, another coueteousnesse, which here is to be abhorred, when a man
reioyseth in his riches, and takes them to be his credit or honor, as in Job
31. where he purges himself, as of trusting in his ricches, so also of his
rejoicing in his riches, though he was the richest man in all that country.

Thus he that is not content with his estate, but thrusting himself into
diverse Trades and Occupations to enlarge himself, is a covetous person. And
this is a notable sin, and so much the more fearful in that it is not called
in question by men, by the Church, nor punished.

This the Scripture speaks against, as that it is a vain and unprofitable
thing, for whatsoever they scratch they shall carry nothing out.

Again, 1. Tim. 6. 9. It casts a man into diverse evils and noisome lusts,
for it makes him to have a shipwreck of conscience, and so is that which
depriues him of all good arguments of comfort.

But of all places none more notable against this Note.
sin then this place here, that it is idolatry. Now idolatry is strictly and
largely taken.

Strictly, when a man does fall down and worship idols and images in steed of
God.

It is also taken more largely: for that when a man's heart is drawn and stolen
from God, and is set upon any thing whatsoever, as upon meat and drink: the
glutton makes it his God, etc. so of uncleanness, etc. But yet more notably
covetousness is called Note.
idolatry, because first it makes him that is covetous to be proud, and lift
himself above others. Again, it makes him to trust in his riches, which
adultery, and fornication, and other sins do not work in a man. For none is
proud and confident in their filthiness, etc. And therefore it is that the
Apostle both to the Ephesians and here, calls this idolatry. And therefore
Ephe. 5.
idolatry is not only among the Papists, but even to be found amongst us that
have renounced Popery. And would they could not charge us of this idolatry,
when they say there is so little alms to the poor, etc.

And the Apostle names this idolatry to the Colossians, from whom Idolatry was
abandoned, and therefore notes that it is a shame for them having abandoned
idolatry to maintain this. Thus much of the exhortation from sin.

The reasons follow: The first is drawn from the punishment of God, that the
wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience in these things.

This is a great and fearful thing to have the wrath of God against a man.
The loving countenance of God is a great and excellent thing: And therefore
David says, thy loving countenance I desire Psalm 4
above gold, corn or oil.

Psalm. 31. In the loving countenance of God is life and joy: so on the
contrary, in his wrath is death and sorrow.

Saloman says that the anger of a Prince is like Prou. 16. 12.
the roaring of a Lion after his prey: what is then the anger of the eternal
God?

By the wrath of God is noted the effect of the wrath of God, that punishment,
death, condemnation, which is the reward of the wickedness, spoken of before,
proceeding from the anger of God, as the cause.



I answer, to the end that we should as loving Solution.
children, more fear and be grieved at the wrath of God, then at the
punishment.

Another reason because where the wrath is, there will come punishment: if God
be angry he will certainly punish.

And howsoever men do not regard this, because the Magistrate does not punish,
yet if he neglect, yet the Lords sword is ready drawn, and fearfully will
revenge. And it is a fearful thing to fall into the hand of the living God.
Heb. 10. 31.

In that he says ( is upon) in the Present Tense, it notes Verse 6.
a continuance of the punishment of God, so that even the very sin it self is
a punishment of God. And therefore Romans 1. when men would not hearken to the
word, the wrath of God from heaven is powered upon the sons of disobedience,
by all that rabble of sins there recited in the most of that Chapter, which
are judgments of God.

So that howsoever men feeling no smart upon their bodies, yet if they could
feel indeed the wrath of God in these, they should see how fearful a
punishment it is to be given over to drunkenness, fornication, and the like.
We see the effects of Gods wrath on this sin. In Numbers we read of twenty
and four thousand slain for this sin: And for the defiling of Dinah a whole
City was destroyed. Gen 34. 27.


And therefore seeing sins unpunished upon the whole land, therefore it
behooves the Magistrate to look narrowly so far as the law will reach, to
punish this sin sharply. The not punishing of the rauishing Judge. 19. and 20.
46. 48.
of the Leuits wife, cost the Beniamites much blood and loss.

And howsoever we renounce the error of the Maniches, yet we in practice
affirm their assertion, that God was a fierce and sharp God under the Law,
but a merciful God under the Gospel: But God is the same, and will the rather
punish Psalm. 102. 27.
this sin, because we have received more graces then they under the law, and
perforce we are to look for greater and heavier judgments if we do provoke
him.

And this belongs to russians, and to them which say, so that I be spared unto
the end, I care not, God is merciful. yet let them know, that if they defer
their Note.
repentance till the end, and live in their pleasure, yet though they live the
life of Methushelah in their pleasures, one moment in hell shall exceed in
torment all those pleasures.

Upon the children of disobedience.) Where we see that Verse. 6.
the Lords judgments are executed upon the unfaithful and wicked; which the
Lord does (as the Lacedomonians) Note.
who to make their sons hate drunkenness, would make the servants (which
they loved worst) drunken. So does God after a sort, who to make his children
hate their sins, does punish the wicked, but his children are not punished;
and yet they escape not free: for we see David for his adultery 2. Sam. 13. and
15. and 16. 22.
and murder what judgments followed, his own Concubines were defiled by his
sons, he was almost driven from his kingdom, and one son slew another;
yea after his death blood ceased not from his posterity, as in the beginning of
Salomons reign; yet this is not a punishment: for a punishment is death, which
only is to the wicked, but to Gods children a Correction.

Another reason which the Apostle renders, is because Verse 7.
such they had been in times past: and yet were received to favor and mercy by
the Lord. And therefore it behooved them to beware of their former sins, to
walk like new men, being received into a new state.

For what a mercy of God is this to receive us, when we have even spent our
selves in sin? What master, when a man has spent himself and his Note.
strength in another man's service, will take this man to himself, and make him
his servant? But the Lord does so, he takes us, though we have been gross
sinners, and he does account us as if we had not sinned: As in Ezechiel he
says: If the righteous Ezekiel. 18. 21.
man forsake his righteous ways, I will forget his righteous deeds. Contrary:
If a wicked man repent, and do the thing that is good, he shall not dye, but
live.

It is sufficient 1. Pet. 4. 4. 3.
(says S. Peter) that we have spent the time past, as do the Gentiles.

Again, we are wounded by sin, and therefore Note.
we ought to return to be healed: for what wounded man would not desire to be
healed? and therefore we are to return betimes to the Lord, to forsake our
evil ways, how long soever we have lived in them before.

Walked.) Here the Apostle makes a difference between the wicked man, that
goes forward in sin, and the children of God, that fall by infirmity: as
DAVID, that having falled, yet continued not in it.

When ye lived in them.) This is the cause that they Verse. 7.
walked in sin, because sin was strong in them: it was so powerful with
them, as that they lived in it. And therefore we are to mortify sin in us,
that it may decay: for the life of sin is the death of a sinner, and while a
man lives in sin, he is in the state of death.

And therefore let us examine our selves whether sin have that force, that it
makes us come at a call; let us search if we live in it: for if we do, then
shall we walk and run after it, and perform the desires of it; Therefore he
says: Wherein ye walked, when ye lived in them. Verse 8. This Metaphrase
should have been placed in the beginning of the Sermon.


Wherefore being assured of another life, mortify your members that are
earthly and carnal. If you ask what? I cannot reckon up all, but I will touch
some, those specially that you are infected with, whereby you may easily
conceive of the rest, such as are fornication, unclean behavior, wantonness,
evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which (besides the excessive desire of
goods) is a kind of idolatry, for that men do put their trust in riches, that
are covetous.





The end of the 23. Sermon.
The 24. Sermon.
COLLOSS. 3. V. 8. to the 12. 8 But now put ye away even all these things,
wrath, anger, maliciousness, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your
mouth.

9 Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his
works.

10 And have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of
him that created him.

11 Where is neither Gr^cian, nor Jew, circumcision, nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scithian, bond, free: but CHRIST is all, and in al^ things.


THE Apostle proceeds in the exhortation begun. The drift as we have
heard, is to move us to holiness of life and good example, which he has
spoken of in the second Chapter before. But now (says he) put you away all
these things, wrath, anger, etc.

As if he should say, seeing that you are called The Metaphrase. Verse 8.
to the hope of a better life, lay aside far from you, as things the which
you cannot abide to be in your sight, not only the grosser sins before
mentioned, but also all manner of sin, without endeavor whereof there is no
true mortification. For example, anger, heat, from whence comes malice,
which breaks out at the mouth, by railing and reuiling.





Barbarian, and Scythian is in a far worse case then the Roman, and the
servant but a beast, in respect of the freeman: yet with God there is no
difference, seeing CHRIST, whom by a new birth they have put on, is in all, and
is all that God respects, and accepts of.

The sum of all which is a very earnest exhortation to godliness and
holiness of life: The which stands: first, in the proceeding of
mortification, and putting off the old man.

Secondly, in the quickening and putting on the new man.

Now lay aside) as if should say, heretofore ye have Verse. 8.
walked loosely before ye were called, but now ye are called: this state
requires another condition, another kind of life. And therefore those, that
have heretofore lived in idolatry, wantonness, drunkenness, Note.
seeing now they have gotten a new name, and profession, must walk after a new
sort, holily.

And therefore the Apostle exhorts in another place after this sort, ye live
not now in darkness: but 1 Thessalonians. 5. 4.
by the Gospel are called to the light of the Gospel: Now men in darkness
have on ragged garments, but in the light will go more cleanely. And therefore
the Apostle says: they that are drunk, are drunk 1 Thessalonians 5. 7.
in the night: but now that ye are called to the Gospel, your light can never
go down in that regard: And therefore it is a shame for you to give your
selves to drunkenness, uncleanness, covetousness, malice, evil speaking,
etc. So that it is a more fearful sin which is committed under the Gospel.

Thrust away all) the word signifies a violent thrusting away a thing with
hatred.

Doct. We learn that we are to loath and to abhor, and cast away sin
from us.

And there is a great cause we should abhor sin, which is a most
abominable thing, which the Prophet describes speaking of the graces of God
Esaias 4. 4.
to his children, says: God will wash away their blood, and not only that,
but their filth, viz: comparing it to dung and the most filthy excrements,
which can come from us.

So that if we cannot abide our excrements nor the savor of the excrements of
others, much more ought we to abhor this, which is more detestable. And
therefore if we being in our sweetes, and fine apparel, and yet have these
about us, what are we but most loathsome and abominable?

All these things) Here is a notable exhortation to mortification, by the which
we may learn this, viz:

Therefore if thou abstain from murder, and that Iam. 2. 11.
as thou think for conscience of sinning against God, though thou do not
kill, yet if thou commit but adultery, thou art guilty of all the Commandments
of God: for he that has no conscience of Note.
foam one Commandment, has no conscience of Gods Commandments at all, for
Gods cause.

It follows; wrath, anger, malice, etc.

More particularly these words, (...), and (...) signify both one thing,
how-be-it in regard of the diverse dispositions of them, in whom they are, they
be distinguished* (...) is anger, which continues in some by nature, that are
long ere they be angry: but if they be angry, it is hardly quenched, being as
the coals of Juniper: and these, because they are not easily provoked,
therefore they favor and flatter themselves that it is no such great sin.

Again, the word (...) is also an anger according to the disposition of an
other sort of men, which will be soon hot, and soon cold, and therefore
think it a small sin; but both these the Apostle here condemns: For anger
is a grievous and fearful sin, and therefore many Heathen have writ against
it, as that which for a time bereaueth a man of his wits. In a man of much
anger is much sin: For anger is cruel, Prou. 27. 4.
and wrath raging, Ephesians: 4. 27. anger is a giving of place to the Devil, if it
exceed. These sins are the causes: the sins that follow are the effects of
these:

and they are either Inward, viz. malice or outward Evil speaking, reuiling,
and lying.


Sometimes for the word used for malice, sometimes taken for all manner of
evil and sin, sometimes Math. 6. 34.
for cares, as in Matthew: the malice of the day is sufficient for the day.

Here it signifies with anger, a desire to be aduenged, and a seeking also to
be aduenged. This is contrary to the mildnes, which is spoken of before, and
follows, which is a willingness in men to do good.

This is a thing clean contrary to the nature of God, and therefore ought to
be clean contrary to the nature of man, for as the Apostle says, none will
hurt his own body. Now we are the flesh one of another: Ephesians. 5. 29.
and therefore the Heathen men say, that every one is a God, or devil, one to
another.

Evil speaking: This is a grievous sin, as that which takes away the good
name of a man, for we know a good name brings comfort unto a man: therefore
it is compared to the sweet ointment, that Ec. 7. 3.
comfort a man, and therefore he that takes away a man's good name, is as it
were his hangman, and murderer, in the time of his trouble, when this comfort
should most stand him in stead.

Again, besides that the name of men, the name of God also is blasphemed, for
every child of God carries the name of his father in the forehead of his
profession. And therefore Romans 2. the Apostle says that the Jews caused the
name of God to be blasphemed.

Another fruit of malice is reuiling, as we see when men are maliciously bent
toward any, we see nothing is so vile and filthy, but we will give it in their
teeth; And though this be expounded of adultery and uncleanness, yet because
that has been spoken of before, and this is the common place of anger, it
seems rather to be referred to it, though the other be an abominable sin.

Again, malice has another foul and shameful effect, viz. to bring forth
lying one of another. For if they can get any shameful report of others, which
is true, they will not stick, but cast it forth: but if they can get no truth,
they will invent lies against them to disgrace them. But the Apostle says,
that though it be truth, yet we ought not to revile one another, nor to use any
such reports, by repeating their sins: for it is the duty of the magistrate
or minister to rebuke, not of a private man in his own quarrel to revenge
himself.

Another reason he uses in bidding us to put off these old rags of sin,
where he uses a notable metaphor, comparing mortificatio^ to a putting off, of
our clothes and sins, to filthy torn rags. And Note.
therefore as a man will be ashamed of filthy rags, and therefore will cast
them off before he come in company; So ought we to do, being come into the
Church of God.

But especially when we are to come into the presence of God, into the service
of God, we are to cast of these tatters of sin, for as if we are to go
before a Prince we will not go in any loathsome apparel, much less coming
into the presence of God should Math. 22.
we come in our sins.

And therefore our Savior CHRIST, when the man came not in a wedding garment,
but was in a beggars garments, bids cast him out.

Objection. But he called beggars, and therefore what other garments can he
look for at their hands?

Answer. It is true, we are all beggars, and worse. Solution.
nay worse then the vilest rogues and vagabounds, before we come to him: But
being admitted into his house, he offers us royal garments, which if we put
not on, casting away our old rags, our judgment is the greater.

The old man 1. the original corruption, which Verse. 9.
is the root of all sin, and therefore is called Romans 7. 14. 23.
sin it self, and a law of the members, for that it gives direction to all
the members, as a law, to do that which is naught, as it gives direction to
the Note.
hand, foot, eyes, and tongue, to sin. Therefore in Romans 7. 25. the Apostle
says, I serve in my flesh the law of sin. And it does not only give
direction, but as a law, it rules us: for we can no sooner have a wicked
motion, put into us, to be moved to a wicked thing, but presently it sets us
in hand, and sets us about it, till we be regenerated.

The second part of the exhortation to quickening: put on the new man: where
regeneration and newness of life is compared to a new garment, which is to be
labored to be put on of us, because it pleases God, and his holy Angels, and
Saints.

And if we desire ornaments to deck our selves before men, much more to deck
our selves with those ornaments, which may be acceptable before God. And
therefore these are said in the Proverbs to be ornaments, abiliments, precious,
chains, bracelets etc.

That it is called the new man, as that which makes a man a new, though he be
but young: and though he be an old man, yet by this means an old man is made a
new man, if he have piety and godliness in him, it makes him to flourish and
bud again; though his hand fail him, yet if he have the hand of faith, if his
^oot fail him, yet if he have the foot of holiness and righteousness to
walk to heaven, he is in an excellent estate. Whereas contrariwise, he that is
young, and is not regenerate, is an old man: and therefore he that is both
vn-regenerate and old in body, he is in a pitiful case.

What is it to be a new man? to be renewed in holiness and righteousness.
Hereby is set forth what we are by creation, what by nature, what by grace and
regeneration. For the first, when we were created, we were made holy, like unto
God, not of the nature of God, but like in holiness and righteousness.

But what are we now? void of knowledge of God and of righteousness. For what
we know, we only know so much, as should make us inexcusable: no saving
knowledge, much less are we able to walk righteously before God.

The excellent estate, that we are restored unto, is here set forth, and in the
Ephesians more plainly, Ephesians. 4. 24.
to be renewed first in the knowledge of God, secondly in the walking holily
before God, and thirdly in walking justly and uprightly before God.

So that now we are to see the excellency of our regeneration. For howsoever
the creation of man was a more excellent work the^ to make the world, and
therefore the three persons are brought in consulting Genesis 1. 26.
together showing an excellent work. But Note.
to make a Christian man is a greater work, then to make a man: for then in
the creation there was no let nor hinderance: But now since our fall, there are
hindrances* as namely Satan hinders, and our own corru^tion hinders, and
therefore this a more excellent work.

Again, we are restored to a better state then Adam, for his was earthly, and
uncertain: for he might ler. 32. 40.
fall, as he did: we may slip, but we can not fall eternally, being once called
truly, Ps* 37. 24. 28. and. 1. Pet. 1. 5.

Again, Adam was subject to temptation, and therefore by temptation had a fall
of the devil: but the time shall be when the devil shall have no power to
tempt us in the heavens: And therefore our estate is more excellent* and this
work more excellent.

Quest. Why then did God let Adam fall? Answer. To show a greater favor to his
children in CHRIST:

Lastly, whereas he says, there is neither Grecian* Jew, Barbariam, free,
bondsman, but CHRIST is all, and in all things. He shows that all, which are
pertakers of this regeneration, and are renewed after the image of God, are all
of like account in the sight of God, for God accepts not the persons of any,
more then of another. The which serves for the comfort A comfort for servants
and mean people.
of those that are servants, or in baser estate then other men, that they need
not be discouraged thereby: for if they feel themselves renewed in knowledge,
wisdom, holiness and righteousness, their estate is as good, as of any, in
the sight of God.

The end of the 24. Sermon.
The 25. Sermon.
COLOSS. 3. V. 12. to the 16. 12 Now therefore a^ the elect of God, holy, and
beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering:

13 Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel to another: even as CHRIST forgave you, even so do ye.

14 And above all these things put on love, which is the bond of perfectness,

15 And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in
one body, and be ye amiable.


WE have heard how the Apostle after he has set down unto us the doctrine of
the Gospel, has exhorted all men to holiness of life, consisting in
mortification and quickening.

Of the first we have heard, and entered into the second: we have heard a
general exhortation to quickening, which we have heard to be described, by the
new man, and is more perticulerly expounded, and set forth in this text. As if
he should say.

To come to a more particular description of the Verse 12. The Metaphrase.
new man, deck your selves (as it becomes the Elect of God, and such as are
holy through his love, the cause both of your election and holiness) with
tender compassion, easiness to be employed, humility, mildness,
long-suffering.







The sum is a declaration and setting forth particularly of the new man,
which we are exhorted to put on.

First, he sets forth the particular virtues: then the mother of them.

He had before exhorted them to put on the new man, renewed in knowledge, and
holiness:

Now a man might ask what this new man is? and therefore he sets forth
what it is by every quarter of it: what cloth and cote we must put on.

Here the Apostle notes that naturally we are all Note.
naked, and shameful in the sight of God: and therefore as modest persons will
be ashamed to look on their own nakedness, so we naturally are naked and
detestable in the sight of the Lord* and therefore we must be ashamed of our
nakedness, and labor to get on those garments, whereby we may be holy and
covered in the sight of God, which else are abominable in his sight.

This was it that the Lord exhorts the Church of Laodicea, That she thought
her self rich, etc. but thou art naked and poor: and therefore come and buy
white clothing of me to cover thy filthiness and Reu. 3. 17. 18.
shame, which provoke me: But how shall we buy, seeing we have nothing to
give the Lord? The Prophet answers, buy for nothing. And therefore seeing
Isay 58. 1. 2.
for costly apparel, comely only in the sight of men, we will both give
exceeding much, and go for it, what a shame is it for us that we will not go for
this apparel, which makes us costly in the sight of God?

And these are not only comely, but precious garments, and costly: In
Proverbs 4. and in diverse places they be called Jewels, and Pearls, and
precious ornaments, and bracelets, etc.

Here first he sets the causes, then the virtues. The causes, 1. because
we are chosen and elect: therefore to do good works, to walk holily, and put
on the cloth of righteousness, as the Apostle says to the Ephesians: He has
chosen us, that we should be holy Ephe. 1. 4.
and blameless: Where we see what a false charge the Papists give upon the
holy doctrine of Election, that it is a doctrine of looseness, whereas the
Apostle teaches us it is a doctrine to move to holiness of life.

Another reason, Because ye are holy. Here he takes a similitude from the
vessels of the Temple, set apart for the service of God in the Temple: And
therefore we see the fearful judgment of God upon Bal^asar, for profaning
the vessels of God in his Dan. 5. 3. 30.
banquet. Even so, we being separate, and set apart by holiness of life, to
the service of God, it is a shame for us to give our selves to serve men, or
our own lusts and affections.

A third reason is in the word Beloved: ye are loved of God, therefore love
the things that he loves.

Quest. How shall I know that I am the beloved child of God?

Ans. If I find in me the fruits of the grace of Solution.
God; I must examine my self therefore, whether I have faith, whether I have
the love of God in me, or no; whether I have any righteousness in me, or no.
And therefore the Apostle Peter shows, that we 2. Pet. 1. 10.
may make our election and calling sure by good works; And therefore the cause
that men stumble, and break their necks in matter of election is, that they
will go to the University of Election, before they have been at the
Grammar-schoole of Calling, and Sanctification. And therefore they argue: He
that is elected shall be saved, live he as he list. Which yet is false: for
Note.
the elected shall live holily: And so contrary, If I be a reprobate, I shall
be damned, live I never so holily and godlily. But this also is false: for as
he that is elected to salvation, must needs be sanctified; so he that is not,
cannot. And therefore we are not to climb to the top of Gods Council to know
our election, but must begin below by our sanctification.

Now we are elected all of us, only by the love and grace of God, we have
nothing of our selves, and therefore none are better then another, nor can
help our selves any whit. And because we are elected by the free grace of
God, it is another reason to prove that we should put on holiness.

The virtues follow. Bowels of Compassion, viz. the tender affection one
toward another, 1. Kings. 3. 1. King. 3. 26.
which was showed when as the child should be cut in sunder, the right mother
her bowels were moved within her at the danger of the child, and by no means
would have it divided. This is the compassion which we should have one toward
another, even when we see any in danger; much more when they are in trouble,
which we see to be often in our Savior CHRIST.

Secondly, Easiness to be used: for so the word signifies, whereby a man is
ready and easy to give himself to the use of other, contrary to the
perverseness and frowardness that is in many. This is a necessary thing: for
as inwardly there ought to be compassion, so outwardly there should be
cheerfulness of countenance, and readiness to be helpful unto other. This
is as belonging to all, so to rich men especially, because they are ready to
fall into this roughness, being puffed up with pride, by reason of riches, as
we see in the churlishness of Nabal to David. 1. Sam. 25. 10.


Thirdly, Modesty and Humility, whereby we think basely of our selves, and
highly well of others. The contrary whereof we see practiced amongst us, in that
men think too well of themselves, and therefore set a cheap prise of other
men, contrary to the Apostles precept. Phil. 2. 3.

Quest. But I shall then think a lie: for shall I think that he has more
knowledge then I, being ignorant?

Ans. We are not so to think, but yet not to think Solution.
our selves better then we are. And this is especially meant of sanctification.

And therefore when we see a man live without any Note.
outward blot of disorder, we are to think better of him, then of our selves,
because We know more evil in our selves, and can accuse our selves of more
sins then we can do another man, whom we cannot know so well as our selves,
and which has peradventure less knowledge then we.

Fourthly, Meekness, whereby anger is both prevented and pacified: for whereas
he had spoken of two kinds of anger, one sudden, and another continued. This
does take them both away.

Fifthly, Long-suffering, when he will not be provoked to anger, but put it
off. This brings forth: first, bearing one with another, and not presently to
revenge, as the manner is: And secondly, to forgive, for that is the right and
true bearing one with another: for else we do not forbear: for there be many
that will forbear for a time, but will put it off till a further time of
revenge, which is a more horrible sin, as we see in wicked Absolon, that did
make a show of love to Ammon, and said to 2. Sam. 13. 20. 28.
his sister: He is thy brother, yet after revenged that injury done to him in
his sister, with his death.

This forgiveness the Apostle proves by the example of our Savior Christ,
who exhorteteth also to forgiveness, if our brother offend, not only seven
Math. 28. 22.
times, but seventy times seven times; and seeing the Lord has forgiven us
infinite talants, we ought much more to forgive our brother our debt, which is
not an hundred pence in respect of the other.

Having set down all these, he after commends one principal virtue, viz.
that which is the mother of them all, viz. Love, where we are to see the
opinion of the Papists, who make love the cause of all the other virtues,
because it is the mother.

True, we will grant that Love is the Mother of Note. 1. Tim. 1. 5.
them, so that they grant that Faith is the Grandmother, from which Love it
self proceeds. And therefore as the branches come indeed from the truncke, A
Simile.
and receive sap by it, but from the root: so do these graces come of Love,
from Faith. So that Love is indeed the mother of these, as the Apostle, 1. Cor.
13. shows, that the fruits of Love are Long-suffering, etc. For as the mother
for Love does think all pains A Simile.
to be nothing, because of the affection she bears toward her child, even
so, if we have love, it will be laborious and stirring. And therefore it is
not enough outwardly to bow, and make courtesy, unless love be in the heart.

Love, the bond of Perfection. id est, wheresoever love is, there will be the
performance of all duties. For if there be love toward me, I shall have this
man to be Note.
my hand, to help me; that man to be my foot, to carry me; and the Minister
mine eye to direct me, etc. So that hereby it is that we are all bound and
tied together in all good duties.

Peace of God to rule us, where he notes, that by nature our spirits are
contentious, and ready to fall out; and therefore it is necessary that we let
the Spirit of God be the controller of our out-ragious affections, as the
Controller of the house.

Lastly, Thankfulness: This is another fruit of Love, and a singular Nurce of
peace and quietness; when by gifts men give one to another, and requite one
another, they testify their thankfulness one to another. This was the
practice of the children of God in their Feasts and Solemnities, as we see in
Hester 9. 19. according as we use at the beginning of the year, to send
New-yeares-gifts. And therefore it is a commendable thing, and necessary to
maintain love one amongst another, to use to give mutual gifts, and to bid
one another to Feasts.

The end of the 25 Sermon.
The 26. Sermon.
COLOSS. 3. V. 16. 17. 16 Let the word of CHRIST dwell in you plenteously in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord.

17 And whatsoever ye shall do, in word or deed, do all in the name of the
Lord JESUS, giving thanks to God, even the Father by him.


THE Apostle in his Exhortation, tending partly to

Mortification, forbearing that is evil, Quickening, and doing good works,
has exhorted to diverse duties which are good and necessary to be done of the
godly, and dehorted from the evils to be eschewed: Now he comes to a more
general exhortation, whereby they might be furthered unto all those good duties
before spoken, and all other holy duties, which cannot be particularly
reckoned up. And whereby also they might be kept from all evil things which
are forbidden.

To the end you may refrain all the vices aforesaid, Verse 16. The Metaphrase.
and practice all the virtues afore-spoken, together with all other vices to
be avoided, and virtues to be embraced, it is necessary that you be
exhorted, that the word of God be as familiar unto you, as if now in one house
it dwelt with you, that you have it also plentefully, and as it were treasured
up against the day of need. Last of all, that you have it in all wisdom,
making choice both of the things that are most important in it, and especially
that which does most concern your selves, and your own particular use,
avoiding all curious questions, tending rather to strife, then to edification
of God, which is by faith. And as you must have it for your own use, so also
for the use of others, as well in teaching those that are ignorant, as in
admonishing those that walk not according to their knowledge they have received.

And in your meetings to make merry, let your mirth be showed forth in
Psalms, singing as well with instrument as with voice: also with Hymns of
thanksgiving for benefits received: and for further variety against
irkesomenesse, which our nature ealy falls into, with songs of praising God
for his noble acts: all spiritual unto the Lord, not only with the voice, but
especially with the heart, with such both tune and gesture as may give grace to
the hearer.



The sum is an notable and excellent instruction, and direction for us in all
the ways, we have to walk in.

First, consider of a special duty Of all Christian men Secondly, a general
duty

Special duty, which is to sing, and to praise the Lord.

The other general to all men.

The special duty toward God our selves. Men and other men:

To our selves, he requires of every man the propper use of the word to
himself, the word of Christ dwells, etc. It is called the word of CHRIST,
because he is the Author and object of it.

Here he requires, 1. that it must dwell in us. 2. it must be richly in us:
3. with all wisdom.

For the first it must be familiar with the word of God, for as Eliphah
shows the means to be familiar with God, is to be familiarlly acquainted
with his word: And therefore we must be acquainted with it as with that, which
dwells in our house with us. As a man may have other acquaintance and other
business, yet his special acquaintance is in the house: So ought we to be
with the word of God. And therefore it is said we must have the word of God
dwelling in us, it must not be loose, as Math. 13. the seed by the way-side:
but it must be rooted in us, as the Apostle says: And Saint James says it
must be ingrafted Iam. 1. 21. Heb. 2. 1. 2. 3.
into us, as the graft into the stock. And Heb. 2. Seeing CHRIST is above all
Angels, it behooues us to take heed to his word that we hold it well, and be
not as riuen vessels, that let it run out. This the Apostle speaks here,
is notably set forth in Psalm 119. 2. Psalm. 119. 11.
part: He covered the word in his heart, as the husbandman that covers the
seed in the earth, that it may take root and bring forth fruit: So that this
is to be acquainted, and to have the word dwell with us.

Secondly, we must take care that it dwell richly in us. We count not him a
rich man, that can talk of wealth, but that has his treasures and
storehouses richly filled to draw out in time of need. So must we be rich in
the word. And therefore as the rich man A simile.
corruptly dealing is never satisfied, but is still desiring more, and is never
content with a little, so ought we for the word: Again, as the rich man takes
all pains and never rests: so we are to labor with diligence for the
treasure of the word: for nothing comes by idleness. And hence it is that
because we are Note.
not treasured with the Word, and have it not in store, we are driven to such
distresses in time of affliction and trouble: and therefore we are to labor
to have the word richly dwelling in us, that so we may draw out of our
storehouses in time of need.

Thirdly, and especially the word must dwell in us in all wisdom: It must not
only be delivered discreetly by the Minister (which yet is necessary that it
be wisely and fruitefully delivered to every one) but we must see that it be
in us, in all wisdom, which

is both in Affection: and use.

First it is necessary that we come to the Word, not Note.
for any sinister end and affection, for to be counted wise, and to talk of
the Word, or for to have the report of men, but that we come only to it, with
the love of it.

Secondly, in regard of the use of the word, we are to come to the Word, not to
learn to maintain our own errors and heresies, or to mainetaine our sins.
As because of the drunkenness of Noe, or by the filthiness of Lot with his
daughters to take occasion to maintain drunkenness and whore domes, this is
an horrible abuse of the Word: In Amos we see Amos 6. 3. 5. 6.
them reproved that would play with David's instruments, having no skill or Art,
that is no heart to use them well; Whereas David had skill by them to stir up
his affections: So do they that mainetaine their filthy dances by David's
dancing.

In regard of the use of the word, the wisdom required of us is, that we
seek and labor especially for the greatest and chiefest points of Religion,
as holiness of life and heart, righteousness, temperance, etc. Math. 23. As our
Savior rebukes the Scribes and Math. 23. 23.
Pharisees; These things ye should not have neglected, but especially you should
have regarded Justice, etc.

Such are they in our time, that follow after the doctrine Note.
against ceremonies, which they should know, but not neglect other more weighty.

Another point of wisdom is, as to mark those things which belong most
especially and generally to all Christians: so to mark and learn those things
especially, which most especially concern ourselves, and our state, and
condition. Contrary to which are they that when they hear any thing, which is
against the sins of others, take hold of that presently* but let pass what
concerns themselves. Inferiors look to those things, that are rebuked in
their superiors: and superiors to those things, that are reproved in their
inferiors, not in themselves, which we ought to regard most. As if we feel
sluggishnesse in our Note.
selves, we are to mark the doctrine, which may most stir us up: if we feel
hardness of heart in our selves, we ought to give ear to the doctrine, which
may soften us.

Thus much of the use of the word in regard of our selves: In regard of others;
we, even all generally, are to help and teach others in the word, so as that
we go not out of our callings, usurping public authority, being but private
men: Thus those that have knowledge, should teach and instrust them that are
ignorant in that which they know not: and in this regard a woman may teach
another, one brother another, those that have knowledge to teach the ignorant,
and in reforming them in that, which they know amiss. Col. 3. 16. Heb. 10. 25.


Another duty we owe to others, in regard of the use of the word to our
neighbor is, if he fall to admonish him of his sin, and thereby to help him
up: And therefore the Apostle says admonish one another. And by admonishing is
also understood a comforting of those, and exhorting of them, that do well.

Here we see what a shameful doctrine of Popery it is to take away the word
from all but Ministers. Whereas the Apostle makes it a duty to all, even to
women, whom they can not abide to be teachers, which yet they may in their own
houses, giving place notwithstanding to the men, if there be any, but yet they
may reprove those, that offend in their houses.

Thus much of the behavior toward men. Toward God the duty is set down, that
when we are merry and Verse 16.
cheerful to sing psalms and Hymns unto God.

And therefore Saint James says, if any be merry, Iam. 5. 13.
let him sing Psalms; so that it is a good thing that pertaking of the
blessings of God we should be merry and glad: but our mirth must be to the end
we may glorify, and praise God for it.

This praising of God. 1. with Psalms, which were Psalms used with the voice
and instrument both, and Psalm. 108. 2. Psalm. 50. 4.
therefore David says, arise lute and harp, and bids us sing upon the organes
etc.

And that this word signifies thus, it appears, Dan. 3 7.
because in Daniell there is an instrument called a Psaltery: (...) a Himne is
a song of thanksgiving for a benefit received, and therefore our Savior
Math. 26. 30.
after his supper sang an Himne, viz. for a particular benefit.

Lastly, a song is a more general thing then either the Psalm, or Hymn, viz.
wherein we give thanks not for particular benefits, but for general blessings
received at Gods hands, as when David praised the Lord for the works of
creation, as the heavens etc.

This teaches us that we should not be a weary Psalm. 104. Doctrine.
with singing praise unto God. And therefore to prevent our wearines, and to
meet with that corruption of ours he says, we must change thus, when we are
weary of one manner of singing, we must sing an other.

spiritual songs, viz. holy Psalms and songs, not profane and wicked
loue-songs. Which condemns the wicked practice of men and women, that though
they have so many excellent psalms, yet sing foolish songs to stir up their
minds to wickedness.

Again we must sing with grace, viz. both with Note.
a comely and reverent gesture, and with a decent and sweet tune, that it be
not a rude tune, but such as may be both understood, and may stir up our
selves, and others to glorify God the more.

Again, especially it must be with the heart: for seeing our hearts are ready to
be stolen away, we must Note.
lay especial weight unto our heart, that all the power of the heart and soul
be present and applied in singing to the praise of God, and yet the voice to be
used too.

Here we see condemned the songs of the Papists, which sing that which they
understand not, and therefore with what affection can they do it? and be it
that their affection be good, yet their understanding, being wanting, they sing
not aright. Clean 1. Cor. 14. 15. 16
contrary unto David that psalm. 103. bids his soul, his heart, and mind,
and all that is within him, to praise the Lord. And therefore though the
Papists should sing never so unto the Lord only (which yet they do not) for
they have their songs also unto the Saints etc.) yet it is no true singing,
which the Lord requires when they sing with the tongue only.

Lastly, we must sing them unto the Lord alone: and to him we must sing songs
of praise, and thanksgiving, and therefore not to the Saints, nor to any
other creature whatsoever.

The end of the 26. Sermon.
The 27. Sermon.
COLOSS. 3. V. 18. 19. 20. 21. 18 Wives, submit your selves unto your husbands,
as it is comely in the Lord.

19 Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

20 Children, obey your parents in all things: for that is well pleasing unto
the Lord.

21 Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged.


THE Apostle having discoursed severally and perticulerly of sundry duties of
Christian men, general to all men of what states and conditions, sexes, and
ages soever they be, he now comes to the particular duties belonging to every
one in their particular calling. Verse 18. The Metaphrase.


Having instructed you in the duties which are general to all, I come to
inform you in those that are special, according to the several callings of
every one of you, as those which will easily come from you, if you have well
profited in the former. Now according to the order God himself keeps in the
fifth Commandment, I will begin with the duty of inferiors.

You wives therefore, notwithstanding you have other duties, I exhort you, as
to that which is hardest for you, wherein you are customably shortest, and
being performed, others will easily follow; that you be subject and obedient,
as to others that may be above you (as Parents and Magistrates) so especially
unto your own husbands, as that which is the most comely thing of all, because
you (I know) strive to comeliness. Which obedience and subjection is not yet
so absolute, and so general, but it has this exception, so far as you are
commanded, things not unlawful by the word of God.







The sum of all which is an Exhortation, which the Apostle gives to the most
straightest bonds amongst men.

The first of the Wife, and Husband. Which are the straightest bonds between
men. The second of the Parents and Children.

But first we are to speak of the last verse of the other text: Whatsoever ye
do, or say, etc.) The Apostle Verse. 17.
had traveled in setting forth unto them many special duties they ought to
perform, as Christian men and women. And because it were an infinite thing to
set down all duties particular to Christians, he wisely comprehends all,
both those duties spoken of before, and all other duties in this verse, saying:
Whatsoever ye say, or do, let all be done in the name of our Savior Christ.
The like does our Savior Christ, who having spoken in the 5. and 6. and part
of the 7. of Matthew, of the duties to our neighbors, does comprehend all the
duties which we owe to our brother, in all the Law and Prophets, in this: Do as
ye would be Math. 7. 12.
done by. So here the Apostle does. The like we have, 1. Cor. 10. Whether ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Note.
do all to the glory of God. Here we have a very Notable rule, that we should
not speak, nor do any thing, but that which we may commend unto God in prayer:
And therefore every man ought to purpose with himself in the day, to do nothing
else but that which is good and right: and this will be a means to keep him
from whoring, drinking, and all dishonest things, when as he is to do only that
which he should desire a blessing in prayer of God in; and for which after we
are to return to God in thanksgiving again, which none is so senseless as
that he will do for his sins, and wickedness he has committed. And indeed
there is no good thing, whatsoever a man does, as to speak of Law, Physic,
etc. which of themselves are good, and therefore cannot be good unto us (though
to others they may be) unless we commend them unto the Lord in prayer.

Here also we are taught, in that we are to pray to God, and thank God for all
good things, we say and do, we have them not of our selves, but from the Lord.

After the Apostle does set down a notable Exposition Verse. 18.
of the fifth Commandment, 1. beginning at the duties of the nearest bonds:
and first he sets the duty of the inferiors to the superiors. And first he
shows forth the duties of those which owe common duties together one to
another mutually, as husband and wife: and then the duties of them jointly to
those that are underneath them both.

And this is the order which the Apostle uses, who having set down general
duties of Christianity before, he now comes to particular; thereby
insinuating, that those that have labored to observe the general, as of
Holiness, Temperancy, Long-suffering, Love, etc. they shall more easily
perform these particular duties. This is a notable doctrine, and therefore we
see Iethro counsels Moses to choose such Exodus 18. 21.
rulers to help him, as hated covetousness. This is a general duty to hate
covetousness; noting, that if they were faithful in that, they would be good
Governors, and Magistrates* and Captains. And therefore we see Joseph, having
all which his master had, Genesis 39. 5. 9.
under his hand save his wife, is said to have ordered all things well: the
reason is, because he feared God, that is, because he had the general duty.

Again, therefore we see, that servants by the general duty of doing their
duty in the sight of God, are persuaded to obedience to their masters. So that
this is to teach us to labor principally for to have the love and fear of
God, and to do our duties as in the sight of God, which is a means to help us
in our particular calling.

And as it is a true thing, that if I love all men, and perform duty to all
men, as much as I can, then much more will I do it to my wife, children, and
those that depend upon me, according to this Rule of the Apostle.

And as that is true, so also the diligent and true performance of the duties
of our particular calling, is a great means to help, and to confirm us in
the general duties. 1. Romans The Apostle taking an oath, and calling God to
witness, confirms the faithfulness of his oath, by his faithfulness in his
particular office of his Ministry. And to Timothy he says: 1. Tim. 3. 5.
that he that is not able to govern his wife and family privately, is not fit
to govern publickely in the Church, or Commonwealth.

For the particular duties first of Wives. In the Epistle to Titus, though the
Apostle requires Love of Tit. 2. 4.
the younger wives to their husbands, and children, yet they are not so ready to
be behind hand in Love, as in this duty of Subjection: for when she is
admitted to the friendly and amiable use of her Husband, that she has Power
over his body, as he of hers, therefore 1. Cor. 7. 4.
she thinks she is shut out from subjection to his authority: and therefore it
is that the Apostle so stands especially upon that duty of subjection: for
concerning love it is usually more exceeding in women then in men.

And therefore David in his verses on Jonathan, says: 2. Sam. 1. 26.
his love exceeded the love of women.

But he insisteth upon her obedience: And he brings this reason, because it
is comely: It had been a notable reason to have persuaded her to subjection,
because the Lord commands her will to be subject unto her husband: And
howsoever before the fall she Genesis 3. 16. 1. Cor. 14. 34.
was subjected unto him, yet after the fall, her yoke was heavier, and therefore
the Lord says: Thy will shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee. Again, as 1. Cor. 11. 9. He might have said the woman was made for the
man, not the man for the woman. And Genesis 2. 18.
the woman was taken out of the man, not the man out of the woman.

And a more notable reason is in 1. Tim. 3. 14. The woman was deceived, not the
man: for he was led away by affection to her, and was not deceived: And to
Titus, the Apostle renders another reason of this Tit. 2. 5.
subjection, least the Gospel be evil spoken of, therefore the wives should
be subject to their husbands.

But here the Apostle renders this reason, that it Note.
is comely: because women delight in neatenesse and comeliness. And howsoever
they think it a disgrace to be subject, yet the Apostle says, this is more
comely to be subject. And S. Peter stands much upon it, 1. Pet. 3. 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6.
teaching that the comeliness of a woman, which is most comely in the sight of
God, is, that she be quiet, humble, and obedient: And therefore if women will
have their rings, Jewels, and bracelets, as an ornament and comeliness to
them, let them be decked with this, to be humble in obedience to their
husbands.

And yet this subjection is restrained, that it be in the Verse 18. and Ephe.
5. 24.
Lord, if he be too severe, and command things not fit, yet she is not to
reject the yoke of obedience, but go under it, but if he give commandment
contrary to God, she is not to obey therein: following the Apostles rule, It
is better to obey God then Man. Acts 4. 19.


Then he sets down the duty of husbands: Verse 19.
And howsoever there are many duties enjoined the^, yet the principal duty the
Apostle requires is love, because men are usually short and cold in that
affection. Indeed in the affection and love for fornication they will be
oftentimes exceeding hot: but in this true love are far short and too
strait-laced.

The Apostle sets forth this affection of a man in Ephe: 5. saying that he
should love his wife, as his Ephe. 5. 28. 1. Pet. 3. 7.
own body: And the reason is, because she is weaker, and full of infirmities,
and weaknesses, and therefore he is to cover them by love: For if he have
maymes, or Prou. 10. 12.
blemishes in his body, he will be ready to use all means to hide them, so
must the man do to his wife, being his own body.

And the Apostle Saint Peter, shows a general 1. Pet. 4. 8.
duty of love, to cover many infirmities: Above all things (says he) have
fervent love, for lour shall cover the multitude of sins. And the Apostle
says further, Note.
he is not to be bitter, For love has no gall in it, and therefore the
husband is to exercise his love toward his wife by avoiding all manner of
bitterness toward her.

The twenty and 21. are handled in the next Sermon.

The end of the 27. Sermon.
The 28. Sermon.
COLLOSS. 3. V. 22. 23. 24. 25. 22 Servants be obedient unto them that are your
Masters, according to the flesh, in all things, not with eyeseruice as men
pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God.

23 And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men.

24 Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance:
for ye serve the Lord CHRIST.

25 But he that does wrong, he shall receive for the wrong that he has done:
and there is no respect of persons.


THE Apostle comes from the general duty belonging to all Christian men, to
the particular duties of men in the household. And having spoken of the duties
of husbands and wives, and of parents and children: he comes now to the last
couple in the household, of Masters and Servants. As if he should say;

You servants, from a mind subdued, obey your Verse 22. The Metaphrase.
Masters, whose commandment over you, is but for a time whiles you are in
this frail estate, and that in all things which may stand with the keeping of
a good conscience. Now your service must not be alone when your Master stands
by and look on, as seeking only to please your Masters: but in singleness
of heart as fearing God, whose eye is always upon you, when your Masters eye
is off.







The sum is, the setting forth of the duty of the last pare and couple in the
household, id est, of the Masters and servants.

But first we are to speak of that, which remains of the other Text; of
Children and Parents.

First, children are commanded to give obedience to parents: Verse 20.
by obedience is meant all duties which children owe to their parents, which
are diverse. And first of a duty, which belongs to all them in the household,
husband, wife, parents, children, masters, servants, viz. to pray perticulerly
one for another, and more perticulerly then for others: for parents, that they
are bound to it, we see it in Job, that he prayed Job. 1.
for his children being at feasting, least they should let any sin ouerpasse
them in their feasting, wherein they might offend. And by the same reason
children are bound to pray for their parents. And also by the commandment the
subjects are commanded 1. Tim. 2, 1. 2
to pray for their Princes. And so Princes to pray for their people, as David
does in sundry psalms wherein he makes prayer for himself and his people.

1. Kings 18. Solomon also does the like in second Chronicles 6. 21. But to
come to more particular Particular duties of children,
duties of children to their parents 1. Reverence, viz. a special reverence,
which they are to carry to their parents above others, secondly, love, a
particular love of their parents, in regard also that they are set over them of
God. These are inward things. Outward, duties are first a reverent behavior in
their countenance and carriage toward them, in their words and in their
works, to be ready to obey and do those things, they are commanded, not
contrary to God.

And therefore it is said in all things, viz. not to Note.
obey their parents in that which they themselves like, but in all things,
though hard and contrary to their own liking, if it be not against the word of
God.

And one special duty of obedience, is to bear with all, and cover the
infirmities of their parents, as Sem and Iaphet did to their father Noah. Gen,
9, 23,


Further, if the parents have need, they are to relieve, and maintain their
parents, 1. Tim. 5. 4. for if the children be able to maintain them, the
Church is not to be burdened.

Amongst other, a most notable duty is that, whereby Note.
children are to yield obedience to their parents in being bestowed by their
parents in their occupations and manner of life. And therefore we see that Adam
bestowed his sons, one in tilling the land, the other in keeping cattle.

But more especially in marriage, they are not to suffer themselves to be
bestowed without their parents consent: Where we see the wretched disobedience
of children, that will give themselves at their own pleasure, contrary to
their parents consent. And a wretched and foolish peeuishnesse-crept into Note.
the hearts of children, that they will take it in great dislike, if their
parents be spoken unto before themselves, clean contrary to the example of the
Scripture, and even contrary to the practice of heathen and natural men.

As we see Ismael would not marry, but by his mothers consent: and contrariwise
what a hart-breaking was it to Isaac and Rebecca, that Esaw married Genesis 18.
contrary to their consent? So that this is a special duty of children, both
sons and daughters, not to marry, or choose their husbands or wives, without
their parents consent. So that their parents do match them so, as may be equal
and fit for them, in regard Note.
of age, estate, etc.

Whereas if parents force their children contrary to reason for gain etc.
they deal wretchedly in that. And as parents are not to force their children,
so children are not to disobey their parents, when in age and condition they
find out fit matches for them in any sort.

And a reason, that parents are to be obeyed of Note.
their children in those things, that are good, is because they are obedient
also in the same unto the Lord. And we know it is an easy matter, if with one
whiting a man may paint two walls, it is more easy for him to paint one. But our
obedience therefore must be in the Lord, viz. only in those things, only
wherein they command according to God. And therefore Ioh. 2.
our Savior CRHIST, when his mother bid him change water into wine, refused,
he denied her, because the time was not come. But we may not speak as he
spoke: for we must, if they command us contrary to the word of God, with all
reverence deny to do it, and not in any controlling or snappish fashion.

In that he says parents, he means both father and mother, for children,
because the father has more authority, and because peradventure the
inheritance lies upon his disposition, will obey their father, but they care
not for their mother.

Howbeit obedience is commanded to both. And Ex. 10 12.
howsoever it comes oftentimes that the children are disobedient by the too
much tenderness of the parents: yet the children are not to trust to that, for
if they leese their parents love through their wicked, behavior, they can not
assure themselves of Gods. Note


A foolish son says Solomon does overthrow his fathers estate, and drives
away his mother, viz. both overthrows and drives away both, and makes
parents that they cannot abide the sight of them.

As the hatred of brethren is strong, because their A simile.
love, which was great, is broken. So if parents love, which is far greater,
be broken, the hatred will be the more.

The duties of parents are diverse 1. To see the Parents duties.
disposition of the children, and according to their fitness to dispose them
in this or that calling; specially Ephesians. 6. 4.
to bring them up in the fear and information of the Lord. Secondly to lay up
for their children, 2. Cor. 12. 14.

And further, not to provoke them by indiscreet Verse 21.
correction, in not correcting them, according to their sexes and ages, as when
they correct their sons and daughters, and all alike: which may provoke them,
or give occasion at the least (for children ought to bear it patiently though
they be iniuried) yet they may discourage their children by indiscret and too
hard correction.

And on the other side, parents are to take heed that they kill not their
children by too much pampering them, which is often times the cause of the death
of their soul and body, as David did his sons, who when he was loath to
displease them, Absolon sought his kingdom, and his life, and defiled his
Concubines.

Then he comes to the next couple, of servants and masters. And servants are
commanded to be Verse. 22.
obedient to their masters in the flesh. So called, first because they are
only for this life, and can reach no further; mitigating the sharpness of
service in those times, wherein servants were bond-slaues, so that all, that
was the servants, was the masters.

For otherwise, 1. Cor. 7. 22. The Apostle shows that servants be Gods
freemen, as well as the masters, if they be Gods children. Secondly, masters
of the flesh, because they cannot command their souls, but only their body.

The dutyfullnesse of servants consists in 2. things: first that it be done
with faithfulness, not with ey service, but as in the presence of God.
Secondly that it be done willingly, and freely, and frankely. For the 1. Cor.
9. 7.
Lord (2. Cor. 9.) loves a cheerful giver.

And therefore the Apostle says, they must do it, Verse. 23.
as unto God. Examples we have of Abraham's servant, whose faithfulness we see,
who being sent to fetch a wife for his masters son, when he came to the Genesis
24. 12.
place fell upon his knees, and prayed, and commended his business to God.
Which teaches that servants Note.
must not only be faithful, but careful by commending their business unto
God: and therefore they are to pray both for strength, and wisdom in their
masters business.

Again, we see in him a singular diligence, in that coming to the place, set
up the camels, and saw them served, before he would rest, though he was a
weary, and would not eat before he had his answer. And chapter. 31. in Jacobs
faithfulness to Laban his uncle.

In Jacob we see his diligence, and pains, both in the heat of the day, and in
frost of the night. And as the greater and waightier the business of his
master is, by so much the more he is to commend his business unto the Lord,
and ought to be more careful.

A reason the Apostle renders, that whereas if the servant have an unkind, or
a poor master, that cannot, or will not repay, nor recompense his pains, he
is thereby made careless, yet the Lord tells Verse. 24.
him, that if he be faithful, he is the Lords servant, and he will reward him
with an inheritance, accounting him as a child.

He that does injury. This is brought as a reason both to the master and
servant, that if the master be injurious unto the servant, the Lord will God is
no respector of persons.
not spare him, because of his wealth and high estate, because he is above his
servant: as earthly judges will oftentimes be partial. Nether will he spare
the injurious servant, because of pity to his poverty and inferiority.

The end of the 28. Sermon.
The 29. Sermon.
COLOSS. 4. V. 1. 1 Ye masters, do unto your servants that which is just and
equal, knowing that ye also have a master in heaven.
You Masters, look that you yield unto your servants both wages, and meat,
and drink, as that which is right: and with moderate rest, and recreation,
some further recompense, according to the good service they have done; as that
which is equal: considering that as your servants are to render an account
unto you, so you must give an account unto your Master which is in heaven.

THE duty of masters is. 1. To do justly, viz. that they give that, which they
agree upon Duties of Masters to their servants.
according to the law, in regard of their wages.

Secondly that they deal equally toward them, viz. with consideration besides.

And therefore it is requisite that the master account the servant in some sort
as a child, and in that regard to carry an equal hand to him, as to his child,
and to love him. And therefore we see that Naamans 2. King. 5. 13.
servant called his master Father.

And Joshua, being a magistrate, called Achan, Josh. 7. 19.
though a thief, son: such affection is required of masters and servants one
to another: the master should rule and command as a father, and the servant is
to be dutiful as to a father.

By that which is equal therefore is meant all Note.
things meet, besides their meat, drink, and apparel (which is of their
bargain) but especially for their instruction, that they be taught and
instructed in the will of God: and therefore ought they to have liberty both to
go to the public service of God, especially on the Lords day, and also that
they have beside some time for honest recreations.

And therefore better it is to be many men's Note.
Horses, or Oxen, then their servants: for to their oxen they will give meat
for their work.

But peradventure to servants they will deny that: and especially will have
little regard that they serve God, for they will hardly spare them so long from
their drudgery.

Furthermore according to their servants faithfulness, and as they have
profited their master by their service, so ought they to reward them. Deuteronomy. 15.
14. For it may be that the masters life may be saved by his servant, and
therefore accordingly he is to have regard unto him.

And therefore in that place of Deuteronomy. Howbeit a stranger might be kept as a
servant all his life, yet the Jews are commanded, that if one of their
brethren. 1. one of the twelve tribes, if he were a servant, he should go
out free at Deuteronomy. 15. 12. 14.
the end of seven years, at which time his Master is commanded to give him of
his wine, and of his oil and corn, and of what God did bless him with: for
that he has been a means, whereby that has been increased. Even so Masters
are taught that Note.
according as God has blessed and enriched them by the labor and means of
their servant, so they are to recompense them, over and above their wages: It
follows.

VERSE 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 2 Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with
thanksgiving.

3 Praying also for us, that God may open unto us the door of utterance, to
speak the mystery of CHRIST: wherefore I am also in bonds.

4 That I may utter it, as it becomes me to speak.

5 Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the time.

6 Let your speech be gracious always, and powdered with salt, that ye may
know how to answer every man.


WE have heard of general duties to all men, and particular to some sorts.
Now he comes to a third kind of duties, which is of another sort, as it were
compounded of both, being partly general, and belonging to all others, partly
particular, which did after a more particular sort belong unto them, viz:
prayer, and thanksgiving, etc. As if the Apostle should thus speak;

And now to return again to the general duties, Verse 2. The Metaphrase.
and yet such as for the most part belong rather unto you, then unto other
persons, and Churches, not so stated or affected as yours, I exhort you to take
pains, and to continue in petitions, and requests unto God, with heed taken
that it be not done carelessly and drowsily; the which both with continuance,
painfulness, and watching, must be done and performed in thanksgiving, for
graces, already received.

Timothy, that God would open our mouths wide; as a gate (otherwise shut) is
set open, that we may speak the secrets of CHRIST, naturally, hidden from all
men, and by despensation of GOD always to the coming of CHRIST, obscurely
known to the faithful, yea to the Angels themselves, for which I am in hold.







The sum is an exhortation unto certain Christian duties, especially
concerning the Colossians, though belonging also to all Christians.

First a duty toward God, viz: prayer.

Secondly toward men, how to carry themselves, whether within or without the
Church.

For prayer in general, we are to consider, that it consists on two parts,
petition and thanksgiving, and therefore by prayer he only means here
petition, and suit unto God, because of the other part, viz thanksgiving, he
after exhorts them them too.

Concerning prayer, the excellency of it is not here to be spoken of: as that
it is a key to open all Gods treasures, etc.

But we are to consider that which the Apostle speaks of here, viz:
exhorting them to continue, and to be watchful unto prayer: by which, both
continuance and feruency in prayer are understood: For continuance in prayer,
it is the same as to pray always, as the Apostle requires in another place,
when he says: pray continually: It is not meant 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
that one should do nothing but pray: for then we should not eat nor sleep.
But he means that we ought to keep a steady and continued course of
prayer, not only publickely, but privately, and particularly in our closets.
For we have not only general, but particular matters to pray for, which
concern our selves particularly.

And the Apostle says that men are to continue this ordinary course of private
prayer: For many will begin, but will soon be a weary of it: And therefore
he means that the ordinary course, which we see used to be three times a
day ordinarily, is not to be left off. And therefore it is called the ordinary
sacrifice, which was only in the morning and evening offered, yet called the
continual Exodus 29. 38. 40. 41.
sacrifice, because it was continually offered every day.

Secondly, in that he says, watch unto prayers, he Note.
notes that it must be a fervent, not a drowsy prayer, and we must keep our
minds close unto God, that they do not wander abroad: And that it be done
with earnestness, not drowsinesse, which is often turned into sin: which
comes either from the cares of this life, or from sorrow: As the Disciples,
when our Savior exhorted them to pray, they by sorrow for his departure were
overcome with Luke 22. 45.
sleep.

But furthermore, as we are to ask in prayer, so we are to return unto the
Lord in thanksgiving, contrary to the custom of men, that are watchful
enough to ask, but return not with thanks: and a general fault it is that
we are long in our Petitions, and short in our Thanksgiving.

This corruption we see in the nine Leapers, Luke 17. 17. 18
that were earnest in their petitions unto CHRIST, but forgot to give thanks,
when they had received their desires.

But the Apostle exhorts us to be as watchful to thanksgiving, as to
petition, contrary to our corrupt nature.

And seeing by reason of the benefits of God we want, and our great wants, we
have need to ask supply of God.

So is there none of us, but we have received many and ample blessings of God;
and therefore have as just cause to return him thanks.

But many men have their eye all upon their wants, that they will never look
upon the graces and blessings of God, bestowed on them, whereof they are
forgetful.

And as many are faulty in this, so there are more which are guilty of this
fault, as to think all is well with them; and therefore cry Peace, peace to
themselves, thinking they have need of no more grace of God: and therefore
neglect to cry and sue unto God earnestly for further graces and mercies. And
as it is a general sin, in regard of men's particular estate, so also in
regard of the general estate of the Church. This is a general sin, that men
forget to pray for things she needs, and to give thanks for favors showed her.

And many there are, who have their eyes still upon Note.
the wants and blemishes of the Church, and are still crying out upon them; And
because of that, are never thankful unto God for those mercies that God has
bestowed upon the Church, as the Word, and Sacraments, which they may freely
come unto in peace: yet they say, that all is but as Popery, so unthankful
unto God are they for these mercies, contemning them, as nothing, because they
want those which are are also convenient.

Another sort of people in the Church there are that seeing themselves better
then other Churches, in other places, content themselves with their estate,
which they have, as though there could be no amendment, nor remouall of those
corruptions which are yet remaining: whereas yet there ought to be this care
in every one of us, that as we ought to be thankful for the mercies. God
gives unto the Church, which are to be thanked for; so further we being not
our selves by our place able to reform the wants, yet ought we to go to the
Lord for redress.

And the Magistrates especially are to labor for the reformation, according to
the word of God, of those things that are amiss. And thus much of prayer in
general.

Then he comes to exhort them to pray particularly, Verse. 3.
for them which were Ministers. Indeed prayer is a principal duty, which a man
can perform unto others; which duty we owe to all men, but especially to those
which are over us; as the Magistrates, though 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
evil, much more if they be religious. And as for others, so for the Ministers
we are to be careful to 1 Reason why Ministers should be prayed for. 2
Reason.
pray for them; because the Lord has set them to be the special means of his
glory in the ministry of his Word, wherein they advance the kingdom of
Christ. Again, they are the means of our calling, by delivering the word of
God for us; and therefore they are the ordinary means of our salvation.

Again, they are to be prayed for; because in their 3 Reason.
fall the Devils kingdom is exalted: And contrariwise, by their standing the
Devils fall is procured, and the kingdom of God advanced. And we are to pray
for them, that they may both teach, admonish, Note.
comfort, and exhort, and reprove us for our good.

And the Apostle teaches them the cause why they should pray for him, viz.
that he may be losed: viz. seeing now he was in prison, and could not preach,
as before time, indeed being bound, yet the word was not bound: for he labored
by Letters and Epistles, which he sent abroad to this City, and that City:
And therefore he wills them to pray that he may have free liberty to speak: and
therefore compares the opening of his mouth to a door, that it may be
thoroughly opened, to preach the whole will of God to all men freely, without
any flattery, or restraint. And he gives a reason that they should pray for
the opening of their mouths, because it is a Mystery; signifying that the
Gospel is a hid thing, a thing hid from the wit and reason of men: for
howsoever the knowledge Note.
that there is a God, and the creation be no mysteries, because every one has
that knowledge naturally in him, though the Atheists would gladly put out that
light: yet the redemption by our Savior Christ is a mystery hid from the
reason of Men and Angels, before it was reveled. Again, it is a mystery,
because in a sort it was hid from the Jews, before the coming of Christ,
being not so plainly known as afterward. And seeing it is a secret of God, we
ought to desire to Vese.
have it opened, as men will be desirous to know the secret councels of a
Prince when they are published.

And he says further, that they pray that he may Verse 4.
speak as he ought to speak: which is in

Matter, Manner.
Matter, that he may teach the truth of God, and all the truth of God, as the
Apostle says to the Ephesians.

Secondly, that he may preach that is was profita^le, and therefore not those
things that tend to breed contentions.

Thirdly, men ought not only to pray that the Minister speak truth, and that
profitable truth, but those things especially which the people have most need
of: for some things are more needful for one people then for another.

The Manner, that it be done with the love of God sincerely, and with the love
of the people, and desire of their good: and that it be done, not with the
fear of any man, or pleasing any: nor of envy, malice, nor any other evil
affection, and boiling of heart. But as the Apostle Peter says: Let him that
speaks, speak as the 1. Pet. 4. 11.
words and Oracles of God. Thus much of the duty to God.

Toward Men, he exhorts to duties also: for he Verse 5.
says: Walk wisely toward them that are without. In the Epistle to the
Ephesian^ he uses the selfsame words, Ephesians. 5. 15.
but there generally toward all men: But here he uses it particularly, to
walk wisely, to those that were without. For besides Christians there were in
this City Heathen men uncalled, and Jews, which held of their ceremonies; and
therefore the Apostle wills them to walk wisely, because the corruption of
men is ready to catch any thing against the Gospel, by the professors of it,
speaking ill of it, if they spy evil in them. And also error is like to a
Canker, that if it Asimile.
begin, it spreads further, and corrupts as it goes, 2. Tim. 2. 15.

The end of the 29 Sermon.
The 30. Sermon.
COLOSS. 4. V. 7. to the 12. 7 Tychichus our beloved brother, and faithful
Mininister, and fellow servant in the Lord, shall declare unto you my whole
state.

8 Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your
state, and might comfort your hearts.

9 With Onesimus a faithful and a beloved brother, who is one of you. They
shall show you of all things here.

10 Aristarchus my prison-fellow saluteth you, and Marcus, Barnabas sisters
son (touching whom ye received commandments. If he come unto you, receive
him.)

11 And Jesus, which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These
only are my work-fellowes unto the kingdom of God, which have been unto my
consolation.


WE have heard how the Apostle having first admonished and taught of the things
belonging to all Christians, proceeded to those things which belonged to every
particular estate of Christians. And now he shuts up his Epistle with
certain other things, which are neither general, nor particular, but of a
middle sort.

Tychicus unto you who shall inform you of all my estate, whereof I know you
will be glad to hear: whom that you may receive as it becomes, I commend
unto you for a brother, worthy to be beloved: also for a faithful Minister,
and my fellow in the Lords service.



Onesimus* a brother both faithful and worthy to be beloved, howsoever he has
slipped in time past; who is also one of the members of the same Church: these
two shall give you to understand of all things that may concern you, that are
done in those parts.

Aristarchus in love saluteth you.

Mark and Jesus: whom that you may be provoked to love again, I would have
you to understand, that touching Aristarcus, he is me, fellow prisoner for the
Gospel: touching Mark, he is sister son to Baraabas, that not able servant
of God, of whom you have had commandment, that if he come unto you, you
should receive him accordingly.

And touching Jesus, his conversation has been such as thereby he has gotten
the surname of. Just. And of them all three together, there are great causes
why you should respect them, for that they are of the race of the Jews, with
whom God has made special covenant: especially seeing that of so great a
number of Jews that are here, only these three, help to advance the kingdom
of heaven by giving assistance unto me.

The sum of all which, as well of this, as of that that follows to the end
of the Epistle, is to give to understand their mutual estate, as well his to
them, as theirs to him, together with certain salutations from some, and to
some.

But first we are to speak of that in the former Text, Verse 5.
which remains to be handled, wherein the Apostle had exhorted them to walk
wisely, and warily. One sort of wisdom is that they be not infected by the
pitch and canker of the naughty corruption of the wicked.

Secondly, that they so walk toward the strangers, that they give no occasion
to them to speak evil of the Gospel, and that by their godly conversation
those without may be called to the truth.

And it is necessary that dwelling among wicked me^ Note.
we should walk warily and wisely, that we be not corrupted by them, because
by reason of the infection remaining in us, we are as ready to take infection
from others, as the tinder to take fire.

Which how dangerous it is, we read in the example of diverse of the notable
servants of God: As of Lot, who by covetousness choosing to live in the
fattest country of Sodom, learned their to be drunken, with Genesis 19.
which he was overtaken by his daughters.

And Joseph himself though a notable young man, as the like was not in those
days, yet in the Court of Pharaoh learned to Court it and dissemble, and
swear fearfully by the life of Pharaoh: And therefore much Genesis 42. 15.
more ought we to take heed of this infection.

Another cause why we should take heed of walking Four reason^ of walking
wisely toward them, that are out of the Church. Reason. 1. 1. These. 4. 11.
wisely, is because the wicked will be ready to take all occasions of speaking
evil of us. And the occasions are diverse, that the infidels will have regard
unto: as in the 1 Thessalonians. 4. the Apostle bids them to walk quietly, not to be
trouble some: for they will mark, if we be such as be busy to meddle in other
men's matters, and therefore we ought to be ware of that, which without wisdom
we cannot avoid.

1. These. 4. 11.
should be constrained to beg at their doors,

Thirdly, another cause why we should walk wisely is to the end that we might
call the^ to repentance 2 Pet. 2. 12. and. 3. 1. 2.
by our godly conversation, having care especially to be wary in those things,
which the adversaries of the Gospel have by the light of nature a special
in-sight 1. Pet. 3. 16.
in* else we shall be a great offense unto them. Lastly, that men, that speak
ill of us, might be ashamed.

After the Apostle exhorts to another matter, Verse. 5.
that we redeem the time: the word signifies an opportunity of time, and
fitness. Which warynesse the Apostle draws from the practice of merchants,
that having had any great loss, they will watch all markets, and oportunities
to recover that loss, which A simile.
they have had, and to make up the breach, they have made in their substance,
so are we to watch to recover, that we have lost. by taking all good opportunity.

And we are to do as the wayfaring man, that having Note. A simile.
slep't to long, or been to long at dinner, will make the more have after. So
ought we to consider how in our life time we have spent the time lent us by
God, and wherein we have been behind hand in the service of God. That whereas
if our life were a 1000. years, (as none never came unto, which yet is but a
moment to the life to come) it were too little to spend in the service of God.
And therefore if any of it has not been so spent, we are to be careful to
endeavor our selves according as the Apostle Peter exhorts us, that, if we have
spent the time in drunkenesse gluttony, lusts, wantonness, we should now leave.

Redeeming the time: signifying that if possible we can, we are to buy it out,
and to buy it out even with much money, nay with our life it self, if need be.

And therefore it shows the notable corruption of us, that the time, which we
ought to redeem and buy out by much cost, we are so careless of it* that we
spend it in our worldly gaynes and pleasures. And therefore we see how men
fpend and pass the time in cards and dice, and other vanities. We see our
Savior Luke 14. 7. 10. 13.
Christ Luke 14. being on the Saboth called to a feast, see how he redeemeth
the time. First seeing them strive for high places, he there takes occasion to
tell them a no^able doctrine, not to exalt themselves: and again he counsels
them to bid the poor.

And further, upon the speech of a man, which said, Blessed is he, that eats
bread in the kingdom Luke 14. 15. Math. 22. 2.
of God, he propounded a parable to instruct them therein.

Another notable example of our Savior Christ, that redeemed the time, he we
see in his taking occasion with the poor woman, which was an harlot, to call
her, Ioh. 4. And after, with the disciples, one seeing the harvest takes
occasion to give a notable speech to his Disciples, to pray unto the Lord to
send forth reapers into his spiritual harvest: Math. 9. 37. Luke 10. 2.
which teaches us to redeem, and take all good occasions of speaking and
doing good things; contrary to the wretched practice of filthy persons, that
take all occasions of filthy speeches and deeds, as of Herodias against John
Baptist, Mark 6. 23. 24.

After he comes to a notable doctrine about Verse 6.
the tongue, that in regard of their godly conversation to the Infidels they
should have especial regard to use their tongues well. For it is as a rudder of
a ship, or fire, that being well used is profitable, if otherwise dangerous:
And he will have them to order their tongues wisely, that their speech be
seasoned, viz: that they know when to speak, when to be silent: And in
speaking that they know how to speak according to the persons present, so to
direct the speech according as is most fit for every ones condition and estate.
Which as it is requisite in the Minister, so in all men: Therefore the Apostle
wills Tymothie to admonish an 1. Tim. 5. 1. 2.
old man, as it becomes a father, and the young men as brethren: And Solomon
says, Answer not a fool Prou. 26. 4.
according to his folly, viz: in words and babbling: for that will breed
further brabling without end. And yet answer him in his folly, to stop his
mouth, meaning, according as is most fit for to be answered unto him, least he
be wise in his own conceit. Prou. 26. 5. Verse 7. and 8.


In this Text the Apostle sends these messengers to understand the estate of
the Church, and to signify their estate: and further for mutual comfort, and
to strengthen the Church: he therefore sends these worthy men, Tychicus and
Onesimus.

Flock to know the estate of the Minister: For the Minister, it is necessary
that he know. For as a good Shepeheard will know the estate of his Flock, so
Prou. 27. 27. A simile.
ought the Minister of his spiritual charge, that he may accordingly lay
forth unto them his admonitions, exhortations, and may commend them in their
wants unto God.

The people are to understand the state of the Minister: Note.
not to the end to pry out his faults to have matter to accuse him, as the
custom is now: but to the end they admonish him, if he be faulty, as after
shall appear in the end of this Epistle.

Secondly, that if there be any such want, they may the more commend their
Minister unto God, to have supply for their instruction.

So is the Minister also to do for the people, And so is the duty of every
Christian to enquire of the state of the Churches, and of the Ministers in all
places, to the end that for the good we may be thankful unto God, for any
evil we may be earnest unto God in prayer.

Men for the end their Merchandise may prosper, will be inquisitiue of the
state of the place, and of A comparison.
the traffic: Much more ought we to be of the Churches of God. And
therefore we see an example in Nehemiah that when Ambassadors came unto Neh^.
2s5s6.
the King out of his Country, he was inquisitiue of their estate, and went
unto the Lord in prayer, in regard of their great afflictions: So ought we to
do.

Here also we see the great love of the Apostle that parts with Onesimus,
which (as is in the Epistle to Verse 9.
Philemon) had been unthrifty, but was now very profitable Philem. 11.
unto the Apostle: and therefore writes to Philemon, that if he would receive
him, he should, yet he was very profitable unto him. And notwithstanding he
sends him to the Colossians, and spares him from himself, which was much
more to spare Tychicus, which was a Minister.



After the Apostle sends salutations of diverse, Verse 10.
but of three especially, Aristarchus, Mark, and Jesus, to testify their love
to the Colossians.

Doct. The duty of Ministers is not to disgrace one another, but to commend and
praise the good things in their fellow Ministers to the Church, that they may
nourish and increase the good opinion, which the Church has of them, to the
furthering of their Ministeries.

These three he especially commends to be chiefly accounted of by them, in
regard of the things common to them all, as namely they were of the
circumcision, being of the Jews, and yet continued constant unto the truth:
Then that they were fellowlabourers with him in the Ministry, and that they
were very comfortable unto him, abiding and staying with in his persecution.

Particularly he commends Aristarchus unto them, for that he was his
fellow-prisoner, susteyning the same bonds with him; Jesus he commends to be
such a one. as that by his godly conversation had gotten this good report,
amongst the children of God, that he was surnamed lust.

And Mark he commends, for that he was the sisters son of Barnabas, a
worthy man, and an Apostle, and therefore worthy to be acounted of by the^: and
well entertained if he should come unto them: Where we may see what was the
cause of the falling Note?
out of Paul and Barnabas was, why Barnabas took Marks part, when as Mark
having fainted by the way, by reason of the hot persecution, Paul refused Act.
15. 39. 40.
to take him with him, whereas Barnabas was earnest to have Mark: But it
seems that in the controversy Barnabas was in fault, in that the Church,
joined with Paul against Barnabas, who as it is likely was too much carried
away with affection.

How-be-it we see here that Mark having (as we may well gather) confessed
his fault, and professed his repentance, and reconciled himself to the
Apostle, Paul, was received again of him. Note.
Where we see the tender love of the Apostle who upon testimony of his
repentance receives him and loves him again, after that he had begun to slip
and start aside.

The end of the 30. Sermon.
The 31. Sermon.
COLOSS. 4. V. 12 to the end. 12 Ephaphras the servant of Christ, which is one
of you, saluteth you, and always strives for you in prayers, that ye may
stand perfect and full in all the will of God.

13 For I bear him record that he has a great zeal for you, and for them of
Laodicea, and them of Hierapolis.

14 Luke the beloved Physician greeteth you, and Demas.

15 Salute the brethren which are of Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church
which is in his house.

16 And when this Epistle is read of you, cause that it be read in the Church
of the Laodiceans also, and that ye likewise read the Epistle written from
Laodicea.

17 And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry, that thou have received
in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

18 The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bands. Grace by with
you, Amen.


WE have entered upon the salutations sent from Paul, and from those, that were
at Rome with him, to the Colossians. And the Apostle does here proceed in that
matter, as if he should say after this sort. Ephaphras saluteth you, between
whom and you V. 12. The Metaphrase.
there is a special bond, by reason whereof even now absent from you, yet he
is one of you: and being as you know a worthy servant of Christ in the
Ministry of the Gospel, whereby his prays are more effectual,



Luke the Physician, one worthy to be beloved, saluteth you, and so does Demas.

Nimphas and his family; which for their piety and good order in it, I may not
unfitly term a little Church.



Archippus your Pastor and ordinary Minister, from me, that he look more
diligently to his charge of ministry, which he has received of the Lord: that
he do it not by halues, but that he perform it in every respect, both of
cheerful teaching, and of good example of life unto the flock.



And further, my humble prayer is for the grace of God, to be with you: and so
I am assured that it will be.

Here in we are to consider of the salutations, and secondly of certain
commandments given.

For the salutations; they are those, which he sends from them, that are with
him, and such salutations, as he sends by them unto the Church of Laodicea.

There remains the verse before to be spoken off. Verse. 11.
For having spoken of Aristarchus, Mark etc. he gives every one their
several commendation. And towching Jesus, he gives him this commendation,
that he was a Just man, that by his upright dealing, and carriage toward all
men he had gotten this name to be called Just. As we usually call him, that
walks honestly, Le bonne homme, A good man. An example hereof we have in acts
the. 1. of Barsabas, one of them, which stood in election for the place of
Judas. This Barsabas had gotten this name to be called Just, Act. 1. 23.
and had it given him by the Church. For as is in the 4. of the Acts, the
Church being in great affliction, Act. 4. 36. 47.
he sold that, which he had, and distributed it amongst the Church, whereupon
they give him that name Barnabas, the son of consolation, because of the
comfort, he was to many in the Church. This shows the miserable times now a
days, wherein few Just Note.
men are found, and therefore we had need to have a greater light, then of the
noonday, to find such an one, or one that deals so justly, that one may
bargain with him in the dark, whereas we ought to be more just, having so
plentiful means of knowledge of the Gospel. And what a shame is it that so
few there are, which can have the name of Barnabas, the son of Comfort?

Again in the name of this man, called Jesus, we see a notable abuse of the
Papists of this name Jesus, that whenever it was named would make courtesey
in Note.
token of reverence. Whereupon arises many absurdities. For first they make an
inequality in the Trinity, not giving that reverence to the names of the other
persons.

Again, what a shame is it for them, that if it be such a necessary duty, why
use they not that reverence to the name of Christ in the markets, and in the
houses?

Further such was their ignorance, that if this name of this man Jesus which is
the same in Greek, that Iehosuah in hebrew, they would, when they hard it, do
worship to it, which were an horrible idolatry, to give the worship to the name
of a man, which though a good man, yet a sinner.

Jews, giving great honor unto them thereby. By which we see it is an honor
to be a Jew: which condemns the wretched practice amongst us, that hate the
Jews: and when any disgrace is given to any most vile, we will say, hate him
as a Jew. And yet we see our Savior Christ says, salvation is from the John.
4. 22.
Jews. And from whence were all the Apostles but of the Jews? yea the chief
Apostle of the Gentiles, the Apostle Paul himself: yea our Savior Christ
himself was of the Jews, and therefore why should we so hate them. And
consider that before they were rejected, and before the Gentiles were called,
how often have we in the Prophets, that they prayed for us before we were called?
And in the last of the Canticles, we have a little sister: and therefore a
shame for us so Cant. 8. 8.
to hate, and contemn them.

And further consider that they have a promise Romans 11. that they shall be
gathered to the Church, which no other nation have, therefore ought to be
loved, and prayed for of us.

He further commends these, that they only of the circumcision there at Rome
were help^rs unto the Verse. 11.
kingdom of God, which was a notable commendation unto them, for that God
vouchsaued them, which were men, to be helpers to his kingdom. As it is a
great honor for a subject to be counted a defendour A simile.
of the Prince, as the Princes Champion.

And here we learn in that our Apostle commended them being so few, and that
because they were so few that helped him: therefore we are to learn that, if
any of the Jews be called to the Gospel (as some are now) they are so much
the more to be esteemed, and commended, though but few. Then he showed wherein
they were helpers to the kingdom of God, viz. in that they were comforters to
him, which was a chief Apostle: which was a notable commendation unto them, to
be helpers unto him, that had a great sway of doing good in the Church. But a
greater commendation to help one in such a great place, then. 1000. beside. As
he, that A simile.
defends the King, does more, then to defend many others. And therefore when
David would have 2. Sam. 18. 2. 3.
gone with his army divided into. 34. bands against Absolon, they would not let
him, alleging to him that he was worth ten thousand of them.

Then he proceeds to set down Ephaphras his commendations Verse. 12.
unto them. And he sends his commendation, describing him to be of them, one
that had planted the Gospel with them, and with the Laodiceans which was a
minister, not as now they are, but an Euang^list.

And he says that Ephaphras prays for them* Note.
commending his prayer in that he was the servant of God, to wit, a prophet and
minister, and therefore his prayer more excellent and effectual then of a
private man. As the Lord says to Abimelech, which would have defiled Abraham's
wife, the Lord forbids him, laying a curse upon his house, but bids him Genesis
20. 7.
restore her, and he shall pray for him: for he was a Prophet.

And the matter of his prayer he sets down to be. 1. that they may continue
unto the end without any slacking or starting back. 2. that they may be
increased in grace, until they should be accomplished in the end, which should
not be perfected before they were dissolved.

And further he does testify his zeal and care toward Verse. 13.
them, and mindfulnesse of them, which himself was an ey-witnesse of, though
not of his private prayer. After he sends salutations of Luke, viz. the
Verse. 14.
Physician (not the Evangelist, for then he would have given him that title)
and he shows that this man is to be loved, because of the good to the Church
in his skill of Physic.

Demas his salutation he sets down, but gives him no commendation: because
that (as it seems) he began now to slide away, which after he did shamefully.
Then after this he desires them to remember his salutations to the Church of
Laodicea. Where Verse. 15.
we learn, as in all the other salutations, so in this, that it is a necessary
duty to send salutations to our Note.
friends, especially to those of the Church, which profess the truth.

And amongst this Church, he commends himself Verse. 15.
to one Nymphas, and to his house, which by reason of the good order and
government in his whole house, might be called a little Church. For in his
house there was obedience of wise, children, servants etc. Where Note.
he shows what a notable mercy of God it is when a family is well ordered and
governed, that all the family join together in their duties to God, and one to
an other: and therefore this commendation by this Epistle of this man remains
to the end of the world. And therefore shows what an excellent commendation
it is that the household join togegether in singing unto God and in other
religious duties. And therefore shows our great infidelity, that are so
careless of this duty, looking not for the blessing of God, which he has
promised. But if for one person, as for one Joseph in Putiphars house, the
whole Note.
house was blessed, for one Jacob Laban blessed, and for ten good men Sodom had
been spared, then when Genesis 18. 32.
husband, wife, children, and all are religious, when those, that command,
command a right, and those that obey, do it as they ought, observing their
duties in their place, and order, there must needs be a great blessing of God
upon that whole family, and upon every one in the same.

After he wills that this Epistle be read unto the Verse. 16.
Church of Laodicea, as that which not only bell(...)d to them, but unto the
whole Church of God, being the word of God; for the word of God (as one says)
is the Epistle of God to his creature. Which teachet^ us Note.
that this belongs not only unto them, to who^ ^t was sent, but also unto us.
And in that he commands it to be read, we have therein (if there were no Note.
other place) a manifest and plain confirmation of the public reading of the
word in the Church.

Then he wills them to warn Archippus (which Verse. 17.
was their minister) to fulfill the ministry, which he had received of the
Lord. Where he seems to reprehend him of some slackenesse, and negligence in
executing the duty of the ministry, where we learn that it is the duty of the
minister to be careful and diligent in the ministry, which the Lord has
called him unto, and that he fulfill the work committed unto him, and therefore
must labor to increase in knowledge, using the means, that he may be more and
more able to be of use unto the Church of God: Ier. 48. 10.
for as the Prophet Jeremy says, cursed are all they, that do the work of
the Lord negligently: Which howsoever there it is spoken of the magistrate, yet
it belongs as much also unto the Minister.

Then doing his own salutations, unto them. Verse. 18.
He desires them to be mindful of him in his bonds and persecution, which
afterward he suffered does in. Which we have heard of before which teaches us
as to be mindful of all, that are in bonds for the truth sake; so especially
of the Ministers.

Lastly he commends them unto the grace of God, desiring the gracious favor
and blessing of God upon them.

And says Amen, assuring himself of the grace and (...) of God toward them,
that God would hear (...)yer for them, and show his favor toward (...). And
thus much of this Epistle, wherein ^e have heard the preface and the Epistle it
self, in which the Apostle perswads them unto a constant embracing of the pure
doctrine of Christ Jesus, without the mixture of man's inventions.

FINIS.
Trini-vni Deo Gloria.

