THE Hammer for the stone: So named, for that it shows the most excellent
remedy that ever was known for the same.

Lately devised by Walter Carry Master of Art, and student in Physic.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham dwelling in Pater noster Row at the
sign of the Star. 1580.

To the Reader.
COnsidering with my self (gentle reader) how common a disease the stone is,
and how little help the parties grieved have by the vsvall means of Physicians
in this our time, and of long time have had: and also hearing it diverse times
objected, that the most learned Physician can neither prevent the stone, in
those, who naturally are inclined thereunto, neither cure it in those in whom
it is ingendered, I did endeavor my self with all study and diligence, to find
out something, which might far excel the remedies now daily used for the cure
of the stone.

Whereupon taking mine invention from Etius, who used very much the powder of
Goats blood for cure of the same: also being further persuaded thereunto by
authority of diverse, writing of the nature of goats blood: I did with my
great charge attempt to draw a pure and clear liquor out of the blood of the
male goat, which with the patience of the Physicians, I will be bold to call a
Quintessence.

And having made experience thereof now two years, and better, with diverse: I
thought good to publish the same, to the relief of many, which are grieved
with that disease, and that in such sort, as it shall appear unto the world,
that I rather seek herein to benefit my Country, than any private gain to
my self.

For whereas no man troubled with that disease, can have the help of the
Physician, without his great charge: I have devised that mean, that any man
so diseased may have such ease with very small charge, as I dare boldly
avouch, cannot be had by any usual means.

But for the commendation hereof I leave it rather to be commended by the help
and ease of those, who feel the passions of that most terrible disease, than
use any long Rhetorical persuasions, knowing that good wine needs no garland,
and that the fairest garland can be no long credit to sour wine.

But for better performance of my promise, I think it very necessary, to
signify unto such as are inclined to the stone, and to those that are already
troubled with the same: First, The division of the book into four Chapters.
the causes of the stone, and whereof it is ingendered. Secondly, the
difference of stones ingendered in man's body. Thirdly, the usual way, both
to prevent and cure the stone. And fourthlie, the way or mean now late devised
for preventing and curing of the same. VVherin being somewhat instructed, they
shall be the better able to govern themselves, in avoiding and curing the
disease, as not needing the Physicians continual counsel, but being
Physicians to themselves.

Yet I would not have any man think, that I mind to make any long or curious
discourse of the stone, touching all the deepest points of the same, as
endeavoring to make the Readers perfect Physicians herein: but only to show
them a superficial knowledge, sufficient to direct them in the taking of my
Quintessence, both for the preventing and curing of the stone.

And thus (gentle Reader) have I divided that, whereof I mind to write into
four parts, wherein I will not endeavor my self to speak whatsoever may
conveniently be spoken: but rather to speak nothing that may conveniently
be left out.

W. C.

The Author to those that are vexed with the stone, in verse, as follows.
THy silver, gold, thy precious stone,
Thy mucke, thy worldly wealth,
Naught helps now thy grievous groan,
No ease it gives, no health:
Now do thou lie
Amidst thy friends a prisoner,
A piece of pining claie.
Thy hope for want of hearts desire,
Does fail and vade away:
Thou seek'st to die.
Thy friends eye tears, thy heart drops blood,
Thy lims and ioints do quake,
Thy stomach vomits that is good,
whose force makes bedsted shake:
An endless woe.
Thy doleful life to thee is death,
And death were life to thee,
For pain does cease with thy last breath,
But life heaps misery.
Come death! why so?
what? what? sends God a malady,
and not a mean for ease?
No Physic good? no remedy?
This raging grief to appease?
Though Physic fail,
Behold a faithful friend unknown,
(To do his Country good,)
will ease this grief and heavy groan,
with water of Goats blood:
Then do not quail.
Though dreadful death an action brought,
This Goat thy bail will be:
And though the cause be slilie wrought,
The verdict goes with thee:
Lift up thy heart,
His harm, thy hope: his woe, thy wealth:
His heart receives the knife,
He yeeldes his blood to bring thee health,
His death shall be thy life,
And end thy smart.
Lo, thus the Author greetes thee well,
Thy friend without desert:
He craves but thanks, and so does sell
A salve for wounded heart:
He seeks good will, gives ease of pain,
Good words for ware: an easy gain.
Vale.
The causes of the stone, and how it is ingendered in man's body. The first
Chapter.
IT is not unknown unto such as have bestowed any time in the study of
physic, that as well the old as new writers, with one consent do all agree,
that there are two causes of the stone: the one material, Two causes of the
stone.
the other formal. The material cause is an earthly, gross, thick, and
slimie humor: the formal cause is the heat of man's body, digesting or
baking the said humor, until it be hard, which then remains in the nature
of a stone. This will I make more manifest unto you by a familiar example.

Claie of it self is an earthly and slimie substance, which I will compare
unto the humor whereof the stone is ingendered. Also the fire I will compare
unto the heat of man's body, whereby you may see how the stone is ingendered.
For this claie being baked in the fire, is made a stone, and loses his nature
of claie.

Here also I think it good to note, that nature requires always a fit matter
to work upon. For one only action of nature, at one time works diverse and
very contrary effects: which happens, because of the contrariety of the
matters whereupon she works, and not by any diversity of her action.

For as by fire, claie is made a stone: so chalk being a stone, by fire is
converted into powder. And as claie by fire is made a fast and firm substance
which before was soft, and easy to be dissolved in water: so chalk being
before a fast and sound lump, is by the same fire made fit to be dissolved in
water, because of the discontinuitie, or separation of his parts.

Whereby you may gather, that this slimie humor, being in man's body, has a
nature very apt to be turned into a stone, which otherwise, by so small heat
could hardly be. And therefore I would wish every man to have a special care
in refusing meats, and other things, which are apt to breed the stone, and in
using the contrary, which hereafter in place convenient, touching the
preventing of the stone, I will not omit.

The difference of stones ingendered in man's body. The second Chapter.
I Have (according to my promise) briefly spoken of the two causes of the
stone. Now with like brevity I will speak of the difference of stones
ingendered in man's body, which I find by experience to differ in Five special
differences of the stone.
place, color, form, quantity, and hardness.

As touching the first, there are two usual places where the stone is
ingendered, the kidneys, and the bladder. Unto the stone of the kidneys, the
middle aged, and they that somewhat decline, are most subject. And these stones
of the kidneys are also of two sorts. For they are either ingendered in the
hollow vessels of the kidneys: or in the substance or flechie parts.

But unto the stone of the bladder, children are most inclined: which
happens, for that all children (for the most part) first eat often, before
that which they eat before be digested. Next after they have eaten, they use
violent exercise, and motion of their bodies continually, whereby they force a
thicker and more gross juice or nutriment, from the stomach into the body,
than nature requires: and that gross substance settling in the bottom of the
bladder, by the temperate heat of the child, is converted into a stone. As in
the making of the artificial wines, if you let them pass through the strainer
gently, of their own accord, they come clear: but if hastily you force them
by wringing, they come thick, and being settled, will be full of grounds in
the bottom.

Secondly for color, there are some stones white, some black, others
yellowe, some red, some ash color, and some mixed of diverse colors. Which
diversity happens chiefly by difference of the matter whereof the stones
were ingendered: and somewhat by digestion of the stones, either by smaller or
greater heat, with either longer or shorter time.

The third difference of stones, is in form or fashion. For some are round, as
a ball: some like an egg, some like a pease, some like a barlie corn: some
sharp, some piked, and of diverse and sundry other forms, whereof I need
not speak.

The fourth difference is in quantity. For the stone differs in quantity,
from the bigness of a pins head, or less, unto the quantity of an egg, or
greater. And the smaller sort of stones, are (for the most part) ingendered in
the kidneys, and that either in the hollow vessels of the kidneys, as I said
before: which being but small, the stone cannot exceed the bigness thereof,
and therefore must be small also. Or else in the substance or fleshie parts of
the kidneys, here and there dispersed, which also are never found to be great.
But the greater sort of stones are always ingendered in the bladder, for that
the vessel being great, will also admit the generation of a great stone.

The fifth difference is in hardness. For there are some (as I have often
seen) which are scant congealed or baked, so that one may break them to grit
with his finger and his thumb. Others somewhat harder, and not easy to be
broken. And others so hard as they will not easily yield to the Hammer. The
stone that breaks gently, is (for the most part) red or yellowe. The middle
sort is of diverse colors. The hardest, white.

The usual way how to prevent and cure the stone. The third Chapter.
IN the two former Chapters I have briefly touched the matter, whereof the
stone is ingendered, and the difference of stones. Now I will show the usual
means, both to prevent and cure the stone, which (amongst the Physicians of
our time) are now daily practiced.

The stone in those, who only fear the disease, and are not yet troubled
therewith, is prevented by two special means. The one is, by abstinence from
meats, and things which are apt to breed the stone. Which are of two sorts
also. For either they breed in the body a fit matter, easy to be converted
into a stone: as Ueale, Pigge, Lamb, Ling, Greenefish, Eeles, Cheese, Milk:
and generally, all very gross, slimie, sweet, and fat meats. Or else they
cause an unnatural heat in the body, and inflame the kidneys, and other
parts: as, heating the back at the fire, lieng much upon the back, also great
use of Pepper, Ginger, and other spices, or any thing of like nature.

The other by purging that humor, which being in the body, is not as yet
digested to the nature of a stone: which is done by two means also. Either by
purgations, and laxatiue medicines: or otherwise, by those things, which being
of a very subtle, thin, and pearsing nature, pass suddenly through the
liver, the kidneys, and the bladder, and violently carry with them, such
stimie and gross humors, as they find by the way: as, white wine, and Rhenish
wine, and such like taken fasting: which being not taken fasting, work not
this effect. For being used either with, or soon after meat, they hasten the
digestion, and carry gross and raw humors into the body, whereby they
work a very contrary effect, and engender the stone being much used.

But the stone being already ingendered by the usual means, is to be cured
chiefly by things, which cause the stone to break and void: as Saxifrage,
Parslie, Pellitorie of the wall, Gromwell, and other things infinite, whereof I
have named four good, pleasant, and easiest to be taken. There are also
diverse other means: as letting blood, purging, glisters, vomits, and
mollifieng or distending the narrow and straight vessels with oiles, etc.
wherein the stone sticks. But for brevity sake, all these I let pass.

The preventing and curing of the stone, by a new mean late devised. The
fourth Chapter.
IHaue hitherto briefly touched the causes of ye stone, the difference of
stones, and the usual means for preventing and curing of the stone. Now I
mind to show the way, both to prevent and cure the stone* by the Quintessence
of Goats blood. But the manner of making this Quintessence, the choice of the
Goat, the time of the year, the diversity of the blood of the artery, and of
the vein, and the order of distilling, and circulating the same: also, the
preparation of the Beer in which it must be taken, I will not here speak of:
but will deliver it in writing, to the right worshipful and most learned
company of Physicians in London: wishing them to appoint certain
Apothecaries, which shall be sworn for the just and true making of this
Quintessence: which being so made, the Physicians may direct the same to be
given, as to them (their patients, and circumstances rightly weied) shall
soeme most meet.

But in the mean time you shall have of this Quintessence (although no great
quantity, yet so much as shall be sufficient for the trial of the same with a
great number, and of the Beer prepared, in which it must be taken) at Master
Graies house the Apothecarie The place where the Quintessence is to be had.
in Fanchurch streate: whose honesty and good dealing I dare boldly commend
unto you. The order of using this Quintessence, is this.

Take every morning fasting half a wine pint of the Beer prepared, into How
this Quintessence is to be used.
which the Apothecarie shall add a quantity appointed of the Quintessence.

But because the diversity of patients will make a diversity of the
quantities of the Beer, and that the elder sort are able to take more, and the
younger less, let this be a general rule.

Every one take a very good and hearty draught, according to the ability of
the person, in the morning, and fast one hour after it. And if he be not as
yet vexed with the stone, it is sufficient to use this twenty days in the
Spring, and twenty days in the fall of the leaf: which will preserve him
from the disease. But if he be troubled with the stone, let him use it as long
as he finds any gravel to void: which is a certain rule to know when he is
cured.

Also he must use no violent motion of his body, but gentle walking, or such
like, whiles he takes it: least the stone beginning to break, the pieces
thereof fall into the narrow vessels, between the kidneys and the bladder: or
from the bladder into the yeard, to the great torment of the Patient.

You shall have this half pint, with the Quintessence therein, sufficient for
one quantity for four pence: which I have thought good to set down certain,
that every man might know the same: and considering the charge in buieng the
Goats, and keeping them, also in making the Quintessence, I think every man
may easily satisfy himself the benefit to be very small.

And now to end this my short work, I let pass that which a number of writers
set forth of the nature of the Goat, and the virtue of his blood against the
stone. Only I allege one sentence of Fuchsius, an excellent, wise, and
learned Physician, which I find in his book De medendis morbis. Writing of the
stone, and the cure thereof, after he had showed diverse remedies, he ends
thus: Sanguis denique hircinus, ad calculos cum renum, tum vesicae praesens
remedium est. Nam praeexistentes soluit, and per vrinam excernit, and vt alii
amplius non generentur prohibet, ac dolorem sedat. And to conclude, Goats
blood is a present remedy, both for the stone of the kidneys and the bladder.
For it dissolueth those that are there already, and voideth them by urine, and
suffers no more to engender, also takes away the pain.

Now I think it good to note, that if any person dwelling far from London,
would take of this Quintessence, and cannot have the Beer fresh carried, in
which it ought to be taken, let him buie at Master Graies of the Quintessence,
which he shall have for five shillings the wine pint: and when he will use it,
boil half an handful of Parslie in strong Ale, half an hour or less: and
into one hearty draught thereof, add two spoonefuls of the Quintessence; and
drink it in the Morning fasting, and fast one hour after it, at the least.
Use this order twenty days together.

The cause why I wish the Parslie to be used is, for that it is a great
opener, and will help the Quintessence to pass more swiftly to the kidneys
and the bladder, where it ought to work, which otherwise continuing long in
the stomach, would not work so effectually.

But least this most excellent medicine should perhaps be standered: as also,
if any person whatsoever desires to have conference with me for his greater
ease, not finding (perchance by some abuse) such remedy as I have promised,
and he looked for: let him (if it seem good) repair to my house in great
Wickam in the County of Buckingham, where he shall find the Author, without
either penny or penny worth, ready to do what possibly he may, for his
further cure. And if by taking ought, herein he break his promise, let him be
thought rather a deceiuer, than one seeking the benefit of his Country.

FINIS.

