TIME Complaining, gives a most godly admonition, and very profitable
Instruction to England in this our dangerous Time.

Whereunto is added a comfortable prayer to be used in this Time. By JOHN
CARPENTER.

Eccl. 3. 1. Every thing has a Time, yea all that is under the Heaven, has
his convenient season. NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO: Luke 4 Verbum Dei manet in
aeternum: I W

printer's device of John WIndet

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin,

To the Worshipful mine especial good friends, John Wal rond of Bouy
Esquire, and to Mistress Jane W. his wife the blessing of of God be multiplied
and continued.
THE great desire and godly delight, which J know to be in you both, to
hear, read and meditate in the Law of GOD, with that blessed man, whom David
describes: the bringing up of your children with Abraham in the way of the
Lord, and the exercising of your family in godliness, with your worthy examples
unto others, and virtues thereunto correspondent (besides your manifold
friendshippes toward me, your poor neighbor): have often times moved me to
praise GOD for you, and to commend your happy lot: And at this time to unfold
some part of my grateful good will, by sending unto you this little token
(the complaint of Time). I beseech you to accept it gladly at my hands, in
regard of my good will, chiefly in respect of the thing itself, which (though
as brief a Jonas Sermon to Niniue) expresses great matter for instruction,
admonition, exhortation, commination, and consolation, in all piety. The Lord
make us thankful for his gracious benefits, and so to use the happy Time of
our peace, that our great prosperity, beyond other Nations, may rather further
us, than hinder us in that good course of godliness which we have begone, to
the attaining of eternal life in Christ Jesus. And that howsoever all the world
be affected, we may fully resolve to serve the Lord as Josua did, with our
families: and not forget to pray unto GOD with Hester and her Maidens. Then
shall we enjoy the benefit of our blessed time with Hezekias, and obtain
that safete iagainst our enemies, which other godly have obtained by the
mercy and loving kindness of our good GOD. To whose blessed protection I
commend you and yours. London, this last of June, 1582.

Your W. Poor Neighbout and friend in Christ Jesus John Carpenter.

To all true English hearts: faith, peace, thankefulnes, and all godliness is
wished in the Lord our Savior.
THE greater your benefits are, which ye have received from the Lord (dear
brethren) the more should be your thankfulness unto him: and having much
forgeuen you, ye should with Mary also love much, ye have enjoyed a most
blessed and long time of peace and prosperity, under our most gracious, godly
and sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, whom GOD long preserve: and through her
Christian government, such excellent blessings, both for the body and the
Soul, as the like no nation under Heaven at this day does enjoy, for which
the Lord expects your thankful hearts and faithful love toward him. But
alas, your long peace and prosperity has brought too many men into such a
careless security and contempt of the true Religion so long used amongst you,
that thereby the opportunity of so blessed a time is justly occasioned to
lament, and to wish rather an end of her course, than that her continuance
should yield long Liberty to such men, so to abuse the Lord and his creatures,
by their horrible sins and iniquities. As the old Israelites recompensed
their long peace with all kind of ungodliness: so have English men rewarded the
Lord evil for good, to the great grief of his Soul, the sorrow of the true
English hearts, and abuse of his blessings. The benefit of their time also
they either do not know, or have forgotten it: for they endeavor not to use
her, but every way to abuse her, and wast out the time in their worldly
vanities, which being once let gone, is never recalled again. Neither may you
think, that only the Lord is grieved, your selves are sorry, and Time
lamenteth: but that also all the Creatures of GOD (as Paul testifies) To. 8.
which senie for man's use, feeling how monstruously they are abused by the^
which should in godliness use them with thankfulness, do altogether in one
harmony and consent groan and sigh for speedy deliverance, not willing, as it
were, to serve any longer to the benefit of ungrateful men. And that, were it
not, for your sakes which trust in your Lord (as in Joshua his house under so
gracious a princess) which pray heartely to the Lord even in the night when
others sleep, which perform true fidelity and obedience to GOD and your
Sovereign: it could not otherwise be, but that the treacheries conspired,
and horrible plagues threatened against us would take effect: which yet the
ungodly consider not, and therefore they endeavor neither repentance nor
holiness of life, nor use time, nor to take time thereunto. Howbeit, I beseech
you, for the tender mercies of Christ, that you hold on, as ye have begone in
faithfulness and true obedience to GOD and your Queen, to live in unity and
love within your selves, and to fight against your enemies with that Spiritual
Armor which Saint Paul has appointed you. Then shall ye be stronger than your
enemies, Ephesians. 6.
be they never so many, and be able to beat down the very hammer of the
earth to his shame and confusion. Then shall Goliath fall down before David,
and Senacherib before Hezekias yea Sisara shall perish before Deborah, Haman
before Hester, and proud Holofernes shall be slain by a woman's hand. The Lord
give us his grace, to redeem the time because the days are evil, to know the
time of our visitation, and what belongs to our peace, to seek the Lord,
whiles he may be found, and pray unto him now whiles he is near: that we may
thereby enjoy the benefit of our happy time, that the true hearted may
rejoice in spirit, that the Creatures may be willing to serve for our comfort;
and that the Lord may be moved thereby the sooner to lead us to his
everlasting peace through Christ Jesus our Lord Amen.

Rather yours then mine own in Christ. I. C

Time complains, for that she is so vainly consumed of worldly men, as
weary of continuance.
WHen high Iehoue did men embrace
In Paradize, with great good will,
Then Lady Time had pleasant face,
And did with him rejoice her fill:
But when man fell, and sinned sore,
She wysht to die, and live no more.
O worthy power, that me began,
And framed man a Saint of joy
But oh alas to sinful man,
That did procure his own annoy*
Which caused Time to loath his lore,
And wish to end, and be no more.
Yea, though the Lord has proffered peace.
In Christ his son, for all his crime:
Yet Lo alas, men still increase
Their faithless facts, and wast out Time.
And should not Time, then wish therefore,
To leave her life, and live no more.
Although it be man's proper crime,
Which does deserve the chief dispraise:
Yet every man cries out of Time,
And says, how evil are these our days?
As if Dame Time, and days began,
This noisome harm to every man.
What ears can hear to be belyed?
What tongue would taste the bitter gall?
What nose would poisoned airs abide?
What sight would see his lofty fall?
What sense can serve to daily pain?
And how should Time men's sins sustain?
Old* Heuah cracks Gods right decree:
By Satan's shifts, and Adam falls.
Now Cayn killes Abell cruelly.
The sons of Seth to lust be thralls,
Cham can disclose his fathers shame:
And breasts do burn in Sodoms flame.
The daughters both of aged Lot,
Can frame a frawde for soire Sire:
And Absolon, now fears not,
His fathers heart to set on fire.
Now Esau voweth Jacobs blood,
And Joseph's breathren thinck no good.
Such are the sins that swell and sway,
In woeful wretched worldly place:
These be the dolours of this day,
That frame by fraud Time to deface:
And these be they (alas) which stand
Now entertayn'd in every Land.
Ah wretched wightes, may Time therefore,
With grief complain, with sorrows cry:
Why should I live, and any more,
My self unto such bondage tie?
Should worldly men thus God requite
Ingratefullie with such despite?
Should England now gin to recoile,
And yield to that which God does hate?
Then England shall full shortly toil,
and groan her griefs and staggring state:
Except Repentance timely turn
From her the wrath, which now does burn.
For lo, the instruments of Ire
Are ready pressed, and draw them nigh:
The Lion, Woulfe and dragon dire,
The Foxes with the Assyrian fly,
The Satyrs, fawnes, and spirits of hell,
Do stand and dance where men do dwell.
Therefore (O Land) thy languish fly,
Be wise in Time, look well about,
Repent with ancient Niniuie,
Yer God do blotte thine honor out:
Else Lady Time yet will implore,
That she might sleep, and wake no more.
Then shall thy friends lament thy lorne,
Then will thy foes clap hands and joy:
Then may men's minds be rent and torn,
And pleasant places lodge annoy:
Then Lady Time no more will turn,
To build the walls that foes shall burn.
O Gracious God that lodgest love
In breast divine with mercies hie,
With pity yet this people prove,
And save our souls from misery.
Grant Grace and Time, as erst of yore
That we may praise thee evermore.
Though mirth and pastime have their tides,
when peace and safety Sway:
Yet now the Time exhorts men,
to weep, to fast, to pray.
FINIS.
(...). Here follows a very profitable dialogue between Time and England:
moving all persons within this land to esteem of Gods mercies thankefully, to
repent, and tend to the end of their deliverance, by serving God in holiness
and righteousness before him, without delaie.
Time Now leave and let me rest in peace,
Oh England, be content:
It does me good, to think on rest,
For why, my Joys be spent.
I love not thus to languish long,
Nay rather let me die,
Since all the Creatures in their kind
Resound this Harmony.
Oh come (O Christ) and set us free,
From bondage, Pain, and Sin:
And quickly end the tedious toils
That we do labor in.
Ah Lord! Sold I abide this thrall:
This anguish, Grief and woe,
That for the sins of sinful souls
I suffer? Surely, No.
Nor could I be content (except
That thou had so decreede)
To proffer forth my tender pappes,
Their thanklesse wombes to feed.
Oh land, now go therefore to God
before that I go hence:
Beseeching him to stay the strokes
of rightefull recompense.

England. Ah Time; and art thou discontent
with me? And will thou fly?
Nay, rather tarry as of yore:
oh live and do not dye.
For Noah yet prepares his Arc
as glad with me to dwell,
And Lot is here (though faint for fear,
and preaches passing well.
I have the Arc in custody:
oh Time, fear not therefore.
And God is good and gracious yet
to me, as once of yore.
Yet David lives in the land,
yet Solomon does reign:
Yet Hezekias is in place,
Josiah does remain.
Yet Christ is in Jerusalem,
the Apostles preach and pray,
I have the peace, and grace of God:
oh Time, now therefore stay.

Time. These godly Saints, these graces great,
this peace, thou have misused
Unthankfully: and Lady Time
full often have abused.
Therefore the righteous do depart; Isa. 57. 1. psalm. 12. 1.

and perish from the land,
And faith and truth from sinful Souls,
will vanish out of hand.
Which if it come, calamities
will shortly fall on thee:
And thou no longer shall disdain
these godly Saints, and me.
For when that Noah is embarke, Genesis 7. 1. 10. Genesis 19. 22. 23. 24. 1. Sam. 4.
21. 22. 1. King. 2. and 11. and. 12. 2. King. 20. 17. 19. and 22. 19. 20.

the floods will flash from sky,
And when from Sodom Lot departs,
with fire will Sodom fry.
If once the Arc be taken from thee,
thy glory will depart:
If David die, and Solomon,
then woe shall be thine heart.
If Hezekias thou entumb,
and Josias enterre:
Alas, who will pray for thy peace?
who can thy plagues defer?
And if thy Savior thee forsake Math. 23. 37.

and holy Saints, for sin:
Alas, how can thy peace be kept:
and Candle holden in? Eccles. 3. 1. 2.

And as for me: If once I fly,
I am not stayed with hands:
As balde occasion, that is turned,
and byrds escaped out of bands:
Therefore, since Christ knocks at thy gate,
in Time him entertayne: Reu. 3. 20.

And pray him heartily that Time
may longer yet remain.
Then as one bound, I will abide, To. 8. 20.

in hope, and him obey.
But ah, against his holy will,
entreat me not to stay.

England. Dan. 9. 3.
Therefore to thee (O Christ) I come,
my Refuge sure and strong:
And I confess with weeping eyes,
that I have done thee wrong.
For though with many a benefit
thou have enriched me:
Yet most vnthanckfully I took
the same (as all men see)
I am the gratelesse vine which naught Isa. 5. 4.

but sharp Labruscas yield:
I am the fruitles fig tree set Luk 13. ^*

within the fruitful field.
I am the son, that promised
to work, but went astray: Mat. 21. 30. Luke 17. 17. 18.

I am one of those lepers nine,
which thancklesse went away.
I am not worthy of thy word:
not worthy to be graced:
Nor worthy of this peace, and prince,
which thou in love have placed.
Therefore thy wisdom worthily
has threatened to me pain: Isa. ^.

To take away my Sovereign Queen,
and grace from me again.
And well I know: If thus I should
consume out precious Time,
By living in my lewd delight,
increasing sinful crime:
That plagues will soon light on my head,
and vengeance shall ensue, Deuteronomy 28.

To cast a down my hawtie horns,
and bring my fearful rue.
That all my fair profession, then
shall nothing help at all,
Nor beauty, policy nor strength
shall save me from a fall.
Then they that would not learn by laws
by wisdom, threats and schools:
Shall learn at length by painful proof
the rod of froward fools.
And finally, then shall I cry,
as forced thereupon,
With tired Time, to utter forth
my Cairopenthicon. That is the complaint of peereles time.

But seeing thy mercy (O good God) Dan. 9. 9
in goodness thou have meant
Unto the sinner that returns
in time, and does repent:
Let me retain a faithful hope
of mercy, I thee pray:
And grant thy grace, and healthful Time,
in peace, with me to stay.
Oh let thy Candle give me light:
and banish night away.
Oh let my Princess reign in peace,
and let her foes decay.
Oh give her joy, and comfort me,
that Time no more may sing,
Her heavy Chronopenthicon,
but praise thee heavenly King.

Amen.
That Prayer is necessary in this our dangerous time.
WHen that proud Senacherib had sent to blaspheme the God of Israel, to the
great discomfort and horror of godly king Hezekias and his people: Hezekias,
notwithstanding the ordinary mean of defense by the calling of his strong men
together, and fortifieng the walls of Jerusalem, knowing that the strength of
the Lord is far above the might of man, and he guides every battle, as
pleases himself, repaireth unto the Lord, humbles himself, proclaims a
fast, and prays before the Lord with a faithful heart, and hereby he found
the shining beams of Gods mercy on himself and his people. By this example,
let us be moved in this time of extremity, when all our enemies conspire
together against us, to run unto our good God and crave the aid of his hand
to help and defend us. For as he was to Hezekias, so to the godly now: as he
might say then, so we say now: the Lord is our God, our rock, our defender in
whom we trust, by whom we escape death: And turning unto him with faithful
hearts and repentance let us pray unto him in this manner.

A Godly and comfortable Prayer.
O Most gracious God and merciful Savior, we pray and beseech thee to be
merciful to our sins, according to thy great mercy, as thou have forgeuen
us even from our bondage in Egypt until now. Give us not over, O Lord, our
most gracious father, least the heathen which despise thee, behold our
misery, and say in derision: lo where is now their God in whom they trust?
And although when a man puts away his wife, and she goes from him and
marieth with another, then the question is: should he resort to her any more
after that? And the land is vnpure and defiled, committing fornication with
many lovers: yet Ier. ^1.
turn us again (O GOD) and we shall be turned. And because thou art merciful
and of long suffering, loving and gentle to them that offend, not willing the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should convert and live, repress the
vehement heat of thy fire with godly pity, stay thine hand from our
destruction, and look favorably unto our Sovereign Princess, Elizabeth thy
servant, as thou did unto David, Hezekias and Iosia, and so to the whole
land. And send us peace, yea an happy peace. Bless us al with thy spirit,
defend us with thy right hand, shroud us under thy wings against our enemies,
that so we may serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
lives. Let it not be said: how long shall the land mourn, and all the herbs
of the field perish for the wickedness of them that dwell therein: let not the
creatures have such cause for us to desire to leave us: let not Time say of us:
these be they that grieve me, waste me out riotouslie, make me complain and
wish to rest and rise no more. But let it be said: behold the Lord lives
for ever worthy of praise, because he has bin merciful unto sinners,
causing them to believe, repent, and turn unto him and be saved. And though
thou once spakest to Ier. 15. 1.
Jeremy against thy own people being disobedient unto thee, saying: Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet have I no heart unto this people, drive
them away, that they may go out of my sight, some unto death, some to the
sword, some to hunger and some to captivity: yet we know (O our good Lord)
that when Ephraim was heard lamenting and praying Ier. 31. 18. of 6. 1. Io. 2.
10.
heartily unto them in his distress thou thoughtest upon mercy, as a father
pitying his own children. And though Jonas cried out, destruction destruction
against Niniuie: yet seeing them to turn from their evil ways, thou did
repent, and laid not that evil upon them. Let us therefore presume on GOD,
to call for mercy upon repentance, and let us hear that sounding in our
ears, which Hezekias proclaimed in all his provinces saying: be not you
stiffnecked like as were your fathers: but yield your selves unto the Lord, 2.
Chro. 30 8.
and enter into his holy place which he has sanctified for ever: and serve
the Lord your God, and the fearcenesse of his wrath shall be turned away from
you. Let us not only hear this, but obey this, that we may find the
comfortable commodity thereof. Grant us grace (O father) to forsake our evil
ways, and our own imaginations, Isa. 55.
and turn heartily unto thee. Oh grant, it that we may put displeasure
betimes Eccles. 1 and. 12.
out of our hearts, and in season remove evil from our bodies, that we may not
any longer delight in Childhood and youth, which are vanities: that we may
fruitfully remember thee in these our tender years, while we have liberty to
go where we list, before the Time of trouble come, and the days approach
wherein we shall cry out: oh these days be evil: they do not delight us.
Grant (O good Lord) that thy grace may guide us, that we may not contemn, but
most gratefully entertain our faithful Jacob: if for nothing else, yet in
regard of these our present commodities, whereof his departure will shortly
deprive us, if we continue unthankful. That we may retain him as good
Abraham and Lot did the Angels, as Rahab did the Spies of Iosuah, as the widows
did the prophets, Elias and Elizeus as Zacheus and Martha did our savior
Christ, and as Lidia did the Apostles: that so we may obtain thy mercy, enjoy
thy favor, abound with blessings, be increased in our treasures, defended in
thy faith: and preserved from our enemies, whom, we beseech thee, either to
convert and bring home to thee, or else to cast down before us: that we being
in peace under our vines, and 1 King ^. 25. 2. 2. King. 17.
fig trees may freely serve thee to thy glory. Grant we pray thee (O good
Lord) that though the ramping Lions of Samaria seek to spoil us, we may not
have any just cause to fear, because by faith in thee we shall suddenly resist
them: thy fear (O father) shall shield us and their treacheries and deuelish
pretenses shall fall on their own heads. Though the flies Isa. 7. 8.
that swarm about the water of Egypt, and the Bees that be in the Assyrians
land fly together, and light in all the desolate valleys, in the hoales of the
stones, and upon all thorny and bushye places: yet we may not then fear, nor
be discouraged, because they have conspired wickedlie against us thy people:
against our gracious Sovereign Lady, thine anointed, yea against thee our
GOD, whom we serve, whom we honor, on whom we depend for whose cause we be
persecuted, under whose banner we fight, and through whom we stand: which in
mercy to us, and in justice to them, haste promised upon our repentance, and
hope in thee, and thou will surely perform (if our sins hinder it not, and
provoke thee to wrath against us) that it shall not so go forth and come to
pass, as they have imagined. And so long as thou art pleased with us, we
shall not be delivered into the hand of bragging Holofernes. Though the great
red Dragon Iud 2. 5. Reu. 12 and 20. 2.
with seven heads and ten horns bend his force against us, though with his
tail he draw down the third part of the stars of heaven, though he
persecute the woman and her child; though the kings of Psalm 2. 2 and. 99.
the Earth and the mighty Potentats of the world rise up and take counsel
together against thee, and thine anointed: though the people tremble, the
Earth be moved, the heavens bend, the Sea do rage, and all the Creatures look
sower, and cry for deliverance: yet shall we not be dismayed we shall not tremble,
nor be shaken, as long as we trust in thee, lean unto thee, and rest upon thee
and the Rock of thy truth: for thou art our God for ever, mighty, strong,
terrible and glorious, which sit between the Cherubins: thou art great in
the midst of Sion, and high above all the Nations of the earth: thou hear
them, thou rulest them, thou sendest them forth and restraynest the fury of
Leuiathan in Job 40. 1 and 41. 1
the Sea, and of Behemoth in the wilderness: Be thou with us continually, hold
us by thy right hand strongly; guide us by thy counsel wisely, and receive us
into glory victoriously. And if thou be with us, who dare be against us* For
thou art stronger then al they that be in the world. Therefore with a true
faith, and hearty repentance we come unto thee. Bless us (O father) both
without and within. Be thou our guard: thy word our guide, thy spirit our
comfort, thy Son our Savior, and thy servant our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth
our loving Mother in Israel. Give us grace (O heavenly King) to account the
Time of grace pretiouse, to redeem the Time, because the days are evil: to
use the Creatures gratefully, to entertayne faith hope and charity, and
grant, that we may no longer by means of our transgressions constrain Jacob
to depart, Jeremy t^^ment, Joseph to be aflicted, the Creatures to groan, and
the peereles Time to sighe and cry for perpetual rest. But rather that we our
selves may bewail our sins and the miseries of this life, with the godly,
with the Creatures, with Time, and to cry out unto thee Lord in hearty and
humble desires: O come good Lord, come Lord Jesus, Reu. 22. 20.
how long shall the ungodly triumph? The just be afflicted? the creatures
groan for deliverance? Finish soon these sinful days: cast down the
Dragon, the old serpent, Antichrist and all thine enemies into the bottomless
pit of everlasting torment, and receive thine holy elected Saints into thy
sweet bosom, with this comfortable call: come ye blessed, receive the
kingdom Mat. 25. 34.
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Into the which Kingdom we
beseech thee, O loving father to receive us, for the sake of thy dear son
Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy ghost, three distinct persons, and one
eternal God, be all honor, glory power and dominion, now and for evermore
Amen.


