A Discourse. Wherein is plainly proved by the order of time and place, that
Peter was never at Rome.

Furthermore, that neither Peter nor the Pope is the head of Christ's Church.

Also an interpretation upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians, the second Chapter.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London, by Tho. East and H Myddleton: for William Norton. Anno
salutis. 1572.

To the right honorable Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the honorable order of the
Garter, Lord President of the Marches of Wales, and Lord deputy of Ireland.
R.T. Wishes. etc.
HE dishonesteth himself, and so much as lies in him diffameth his master,
who has bin prentise seven years, and at the end of those seven years,
neither understands his art, neither can show any reason thereof, neither is
able to profit himself or others.

Are not we al bound, yea do we not al promise in our baptism, and are
commanded of God, to show out the glories and virtues of him, that has
brought us out of darkness into light? But it is to be feared that a number of
us that profess Christ, (though we have bin prentice to him seven years,
perhaps seven, seven, and seven, neither have so much knowledge as to
instruct our selves, neither to defend our master Christ against the Turk,
Jew, heretic, and antichrist. Will the Turk admit any man to his religion,
that neither can, nor will defend Mahomet? Will the Jew receive any that is
not furnished with the Scriptures falsely interpreted against Christ? Will
Heretics accept any man that is ignorant in their erronius opinions? Will
Antichrist allow any man which will not maintain his Idolatry and
superst^tion? We profess Christ in words, and outward shows,
notwithstanding we are not able too defend him in the midst of his enemies.
Lack of knowledge causes many to hold their peace. Ignorance is the root of
error: the contempt of the study of Gods word, is the high way to perdition.
Who can please him whose will he knows not? Who can proceed in his Princes
affairs, that knows not his commission? How can he execute his commission, if
he neither read it, nor understand it? Is he a Gramarian that cannot speak
congrue Latin? A Logician that cannot reason probably? A natural Philosopher
that knows not the generation and causes of Rain, VVinde, Snow, and such
Meteorologicall things? Is there any Surgen that has not read Johannes de Vigo
or Alexander benedictus? Or Physician that is ignorant in Hippocrates, or
Galen, or Celsus? and shall ignorance who is condemned of all artificers
commend a Christian? I therefore the least of all the members of Christ, hearing
daily Antichrist and his artificers (I mean the Pope and the Papists) so
cunning in the Cannon law, and Popish doctors, that there is nothing in them
that they do not both exactely understand, and also utter, to the maintenance
of their head the Pope, thought it necessary somewhat to say and too refel
their errors. Among the which this is not the least that the Papists go
about, to prove the Pope to be head of the Church, which unreasonable error,
being plainly in these two little treatises confuted, I have thought good to
dedicate the same unto your Honor, whose desire (as I am thoroughly persuaded)
is too see the utter confusion of Antichrist, and the perfect establishement of
Christ's Religion. And therefore the bolder to set those things forth under your
Lord ships protection, which may please Christ, displease Antichrist, be
acceptable to all Christians, grievous to all Antechristians, pleasant to all
professoures of Christ, bitter to al his adversaries. And as I trust a plain
overthrow of the Romish Church.

Your honors most humble* R. T.

A description of the Pope.
THough Poets pen has fables feignd
Of monsters marvelous:
Who diffring far from common kind
were thought prodigious.
As Briarchus who had hands
an hundredth as they tell,
And spitte forth fire from fifty mouths
like flashing flames of hell:
Though Ephialtes with Othus
of natures fierce and fell,
Did strive with strength of stretched out arm
in Jove his Throne to dwell.
Who heaped hills on mountains high
Of^a on Pindus back,
And placed Pelion on them
the Starry sky to sack.
Though these two impes of ougly shape
whose father Neptune was,
Growing nine inches every month,
in bigness mounts did pass.
Though Poliphemus were as huge
and ougly as the rest,
Who for his strength and sturdines
might match him with the best.
And though Chimera a monster were,
of three conioynd in one:
The first a Lion, next a Goat,
and third a fierce dragon.
Though Minotaurus were as hugh
and monstrous in effect,
Whose sundry shape with nature fell
his Parents did detect.
Though Cerberus that chorlish Cur
and three hell headded hound,
A monster rare, with other more
which are in writers found:
Though these I say, unseemly shapes
foul fashioned, out of frame,
Dame nature made thus monsterous
as we have learned by fame.
Yet I can show more monsterousnes
comprised here in one,
Who for his huge prodigiousenesse
may match them all alone.
But this is neither God nor man
as he himself does tell,
He is a mean between them both
yet rules both Heaven and Hell.
In Purgatory puttes to pain
in earth he bears great swaie,
The Heavenly Angels at his call
are ready to obey.
He can forgive men's sins on earth
and site hell hounds by post,
And he can lose from lothesome lakes
damnd souls and griesly ghostes.
He is a God the Papists do
affirm with wonders mo,
Whose bestely body being blasd,
judge you if he be so.
His head a harmefull helmet is
of poisen pestilent,
His eyes are like to flames of fire
that are from Vulcane sent.
His ears they trust al tryfling tales
and credit blasing brute.
And such again as will not hear
the just and humble suit.
His nose does snuf forth hellish fumes
his tung e is stinge of Death,
His face of mischeef mirror is
and poisoned is his breath.
His teeth do gnawe the blessed bones
of such as are elect,
His mouth does babble blasphemy
and Gods word does reject.
His throat an open sepulcher
does swallow every hour,
The silly sheepo and woolfes does spare
the lambs for to devour.
His breast a chest and cofer is
of al iniquity,
His arms are strong Princes to strike
if they not Christ deny.
His filthy fingers nimble are,
to scratch for nedlesse gain
Which will be sure to snatch a share
though other take the pain.
His legs are swift to shed the blood
of Innocents giltlesse,
His feet are ready Emperors necks
to tread down and oppress.
His body is Pandoras box
which plageth young and old,
And he prodigeous Antichrist
whose deeds of John are told.
Which beast although that he be strong
yet stands on slppery ground,
Foq him this book does flatly foil
and utterly confound.
FINIS
THE ARGUMENT.
FIrst I prove by Scripture that Peter could not be at Rome until the.6. or as
Hierom and others collect until the.8. year of Claudius. Secondly I prove by
the order of time and place that he could not be at Rome until the second
year of Domitian which was after the passion of Christ.52. or 53. years which
should have bin after the destruction of Jerusalem which was after Christ.73.
years, the 8. day of September. In the second discourse I prove that neither
Peter nor the Pope, is the head of the Church, confuting such objections as
they allege to the contrary, wherein ye shall find their arguments refelled,
their Cannon law confuted, the Popes errors in Doctrine detected, their
sillogismes answered, and finally certain antitheses between Christ and the
Pope proving him Antichrist, with an interpretation upon the place of Paul.
2. Thessalo. 2.

THE FIRST DISCOURSE, wherein is proved that Peter was never at Rome.
PETER before Christ's passion and death did not depart out of Iewrie, but was
either with Christ, or with other of the Apostles, or else labored in his
vocation, for he was a fisherman, as is proved by the Gospel of S. Matthew,
Cap. 4. versu. 18. cap. 8. verse. 14. cap. 10. verse. 2. cap. 14. ver. 28. cap.
15. ver. 15. cap. 16. ver. 16.17.22. cap. 17. ver. 1.26. cap. 18. ver. 21. cap.
19. ver. 27. cap. 26. ver. 33.35.37.69.75. Marc cap. 1. ver. 16. cap. 3. ver.
16. cap. 5. ver. 37. cap. 8. ver. 29. cap. 11. ver. 21. cap. 13. ver. 3. cap.
14. ver. 29.33.37.54.66. cap. 16. ver. 7. Luc cap. 5. ver. 3.4.5.8.10. cap. 6.
ver. 14. cap. 8. ver. 51. cap. 9. ver. 28.32. cap. 12. ver. 41. cap. 22. ver.
31.34.55.60. Ihon cap. 1. ver. 42. cap. 18. ver. 11.15.16.17.18.25. cap. 20.
ver. 3.6. cap. 21. ver. 2.7.

Where Peter was the first year after Christ's Ascension.
THE first year after the death and resurrection of Christ he was with the
rest of the Apostles on the mount Olyuet, Where Peter was the first year
after Christ's Ascension.
beholding the Ascension of Christ, and then Act. 1. ver. 9.10.11.
returned to Jerusalem, lokinge for the descending of the Holy Act. 1. ver.
12. Act. 2. ver. 4.
Ghost, and there with the rest did chose Mathias in the place of Act. 1. ver.
26. Act. 3. ver. 6, 7
Judas, and made an eloquent oration, Act. 2. from the.14. verse. unto the.41.
And he tarried at Jerusalem, Act. 3, ver. 12. Act. 4. ver. 3.6.7.8.
and cured a lame man, and in the Temple made an excellent Act. 5. ver. 1, 2,
3, 27, 29.
Oration. Then was he with the rest of the Apostles laid in prison, and the
next day let out, and examyned by what power they had cured the lame man, Act.
6. ver. 2.
unto whom Peter answered effectually, neither went he out of Judea that
first year after Christ's Ascension, Peter sent to Samaria.
as apereth manifestly. From Jerusalem the Apostles sent Peter and John to
Samaria, where Philippe the Deacon had laid the foundation of Christ's
Religion, and had converted the Samaritaines. Act. 8. ver.
5.14.15.16.20.21.22.23.
Peter and John obtained by prayer, Act. 8. ver. 15.
that they might receive the Holy Ghost. Peter and John after they had preached
in Samaria, returned to Jerusalem, and there he remained until the second
year after Christ's Ascension: The second year after Christ's ascension.
in the which year Paul was converted to the faith, as he went to Damascus,
where he preached immediately. And in Arabia where he preached three years,
and then returned to Jerusalem, The 3. year after Christ's ascension.

The 4. year after Christ's ascension.


where Peter was with the rest of the Apostles: Read diligently the first
chapter to the Galathians, Uers. 16.17.18. Act. 9. Uer. 23.24.25. in the which
verses, conferred with the 17. and 18. verse. of the first chapter to the
Galathians, ye shall understand, that after Paul had spent three years in
preachinge in Arabia and at Damascus, which is a City of Syria near unto
Arabia, he went (being let down by the wall in a basket) from Damascus to
Jerusalem, where he did find Peter and James with other Disciples. Peter at
Jerusalem, the 5. year after Christ's ascension.

Peter at Lidda.

Peter at por^ Iaphe.

Act. 9. ver. ^^.34, 40.41, 4^ Peter with Cornelius at Cesarea.

Act. 10. ver. ^.24, 25.

The 6. year after Christ's ascension.

Act. 11. ver. 2. unto the 18.

The 7. year after Christ's ascension.

The 8. year from Christ's ascension.

From ye death of Christ, 11. years.

Peter at Jerusalem.


Neither was Peter at any time hithertoo out of Jury. In Jury he went about
and came to Lydda, a Town of Jury, where he cured Aeneas who had been sick
of the pallesy eight years: and at port Iaphe in Jury he re^^o^red Tabitha
to life. From port Iaphe Peter was sent for to Cornelius, who was a Centurian
at Cesarea a City of Jury also. Peter, when he had instructed and baptized
Cornelius and his howseholde, returned to Jerusalem, where the circumcysed
reproved him for uttering the Gospel to the Gentyles, who he pacifyeth and
persuadeth by his Oration. This was the sixte year after Christ's passion, and
the fifte year after Paul's conversion. All that time that Paul was out of
Jerusalem in ^harsis a City of Lycia, from whence Barnabas fetched him to
Antioche, a City of Syria was Peter at Jerusalem, and from thence went to
the same city of Antioche, where Paul reproved him, because that he
withdrewe himself from the Gentyles, with whom he did eat, before that
James came in with certain that were circumcised, whom Peter feared to offend.
And this was seven years from the conversion of Paul. And the eight, from
Christ's passion, which is not only proved by order of time, but also it is
noted Galat. 2. Uers. 11.12.^3.14. Act. 13. Uers. 2. All that time that Paul
and Barnabas were with the Gentyles, Peter remained at Jerusalem till their
return, sauinge that he conveyed himself at that Easter when Herod Agrippa
was there, for Herod Agrippa came from Cesarea to Jerusalem the feast of
Easter, what time he beheaded James, and laid Peter in prison as is evident in
ye 1.2 3.4.^. and 9. ver. of y^ 12. Chapter of the Acts. And this was the
twelueth year from Christ his passion, The 12. year from Christ's ascension.
and the eleventh from the conversion of Paul. Peter fearing the tyranny of
Herod Agrippa, after that the Angel had delivered him out of prison,
conveyed himself out of the way, and as the text says, into an other
place, until Herod Agrippa should depart from Jerusalem, which was
immediately after Easter, Act. 12. ver. 17.
purposing in his mind to make war with the Tyrians, Sydonians, or as Luke
utters more effectually tynomachem. And as God would, Act. 12. ver. 17 19,
and 20.
the said Herod Agrippa, a great defendour of the Jews Laws and Ordinances,
and a persecutour of Christians, From ye death of Christ.13.
dyed miserably the ^ame 13. year after Christ's passion, which was the third
year of the Emperor Claudius: for Agrippa the same year of Claudius was
strieke^ with ye Angel, eaten with woormes, and dyed miserably. Thus may you
see evidently y^ Peter went notout of Jury until ye iiij. year of Claudius,
nor the neither until the death of Claudius, Act. 12. ver. 13
Peter in Iu^y the 4. year of Claudius.
as I shall prove a little after. Now you may see, y^ Peter was at Jerusalem
and in Jury, the first, ij. and iij. year of Claudius, as is evidently proved
by Luke in the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 12. ver. 17.
Now let us consider what place this was, that Luke says that Peter c^nueyed
himself too, less that they should say, that he conveyed himself to Rome.
Surely, he hid him self secretly in some place of Judea* Act. 12. ve. 20
until that Herod Agrippa should return to Cesarea, where he purposed to
have prepared an army against the Tyrians and Sydonians. Act. 23. ver. 26. and
cap. 24. ver. 7, 22* 24. and cap. 25. ver, 12, 16, 17, 18, 25, and ca. 26. ver.
28, 13, 22.

Act. 13. and 14 The 13, 14, and 15, years after Christ.

The 16. year after Christ's ascension.


Wherefore Herod Agrippa returned after Easter to Cesarea, where he died
miserably. After the death of Herod, Peter was out of danger, for Judea was
ruled by the Lieuetenantes of the Romans, as Festus, Lysias, and Felix, which
did rather press the Jews, than the Christians, as the history of Josephus
declares, wherefore those seven years that Paul and Bernabas departed from
Antioche of Syria unto the Gentyles, Peter was in Judea, yea he was at
Jerusalem the 16. year after Christ's passion, and the 15. of Paul his
conversion, as is manifest, for there makes Peter an Oration to the brethren,
and this was the sixte year of Claudius, as is proved by the history of the
Acts written by S. Luke. What authority have the Papists, Act. 15. ver. 4 6,
7. Galat. 2. ver. 1 Theophilus, lib. 9. in the conversion of Paul. Be^a in Act.
Uincent. Galat. 2. ver. 7 8, 9.
which affirm and swear, that Peter went to Rome the second year of
Claudius? But let us proceed in the history: of their errors in this matter,
I will discourse a little after. Peter was appointed at that same time a
teacher of the Jews, and Paul of the Gentyles. For, says Paul, Barnabas
and I, were charged to preach to the Gentyles, and Peter, James and John, to
the Jews. Were not the Romans Gentyles? Was not Paul and Barnabas charged
with them? Notwithstanding, after that Peter and John had sufficiently
instructed the Jews, From ye death of Christ, 16.
they also taught the Gentyles. Wherefore unto the sixth year of Claudius,
which was the 16. year from Christ his passion. And the 15. from Paul's
conversion, Peter never departed out of Jury, saving only to Antioche of Syria,
as I have noted before. Now I will declare the rest of Peter's peregrination,
partly by such testimonies as cannot be refelled, partly by probable
arguments, necessary conjectures, and sufficient reasons: Where Peter
preached. 1. Peter. 1. ver. 1. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 1. Lib. 2. cap. 35.
As Peter did write to the dispersed Brethren in Pontus, Galatia, Bithinia,
Capadocia, and Asia, so did he preach in them all. * Nicephorus writes, that
Peter preached in Palestina, Syria, Phenice, Pontus Galatia, Capadocia,
Bithinia, and to be brief, in all the quarters of Asia and Europe. Wherefore,
after this council which is in the 15. of the Acts, he went out of Jury,
Pontus. The 17. and 18. year after Christ's ascension. Where Peter preached.
into Pontus Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bithinia: Them he instructed, them
he visited, them he furnished with the Gospel, them he exhorted to faith,
to good works, to obedience, to temperancie, to do their deuties, with them
he tarried and was conversant so long, until that they had laid a
foundation, and builded substantially upon it. What a long time he tarried in
Pontus, and what Cities and Towns he did instruct, and brought from
superstition to Religion, from idolatry to the Truth, from error too the
right way, from cruelty too lenity, and from all iniquity, to all patience,
justice, and humanity: He may easily conjecture who reads and knows the
descriptions of Countries. What a number of goodly Cities far distant one
from an other were in Pontus? Bythinia.
how many in Bithinia? In them stood Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Apamia, Heraclea,
The 19. and ^0. year after Christ's ascension.
and the great city Nicea, where that famous council was holden, called The
Coun^ell of Nice. What shall I speak of Asia? in it stands Troia, Assum,
Autandros, Addramitium, Ephesus, where Dianas Temple was had in such honor:
Arogilium* Milet, Guidus, Act. 19.
Troas, with many other mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles: Who does not
know but that Galatia is as great as any of the others. Unto this S. Paul did
write in his epistle to the Galathians, Galatia. The 21. and 22. year after
Christ's asce^sion.

Act. 13 Nota, every degre^ is lx. miles. Asia.

The 23. year^ after Christ's ascension.


in this Country stood Antioche, of Pisidia, where Paul made an eloquent
Oration. Some part of Galatia differs in longitude from other some of it
two or three degrees, in latitude five or six. And Ephesus which stands in
Ionia* a Region of little Asia differs from Antioche of Pisidia, which is in
Galatia, in longitude seven degrees, in latitude two. For Ephesus in longitude
is 57.20. minutes, in latitude 37. and 40. minutes. And Antioche in longitude
62.30. in latitude 39.15. And there is no less distance in the Cities of
Capadocia: Wherefore to pass over and through them, leaving any monumentes and
foundacions of Religion, Capadocia. The 24. year after Christ's ascension.
he must needs have tarried there a long time. Consider the long journey, the
untowardness of the people: the hard hearted paynime Priests, old rooted
superstitions, their Forefathers customs, and ye shall and may be easily
persuaded, that he must needs continewe in these Countries, a very long
time. Thus writes Mantuan: The Cities of Assyria Mantuan, Fast. 6.

Peter converted to the faith.
There 14. years he did bestow,
As Mantuan proves and says.
And after this did pass the sea
Capadoces, Bithine, Pontus,
Galace, and lesser Asia,
Preaching the Gospel gracious.


Let it be that he was not above seven or eight years in all these
countries, From Christ 24.
notwithstanding we must bring the history to the 24. year after the
passion of Christ, and to the 23. of the conversion of S. Paul: and this was
the 14. year of the Emperor Claudius. Wherefore, by this description, and
order of time and place* neither could he be at Rome the second year of
Claudius, neither in his time. And if Peter should have been put to death at
Rome the 14. of Nero, as the papists affirm, then could not he have been Pope
at Rome 2^. years and 7* months, but only 14. years. But now I will
proceed and declare that he could not be at Rome none of these 14* years of
Nero* Peter was not at Rome in the time of Nero.
which when I have pro^ed, what can the Romish Catholics, or the Romish
church have wherewith to prove their Romish Peter.

After Peter had watered the dry barren countries of ^on^^s Gal^tia,
Capadocia, B^thin^a, and Asia, with the streams of the Gospel, Peter in Egypt

N^^^phorus lib. 14. cap. 39


he departed from thence into Egypt^* there to do the like* for he was at
Alexandria, as Nicephorus reports, and there ordained S. Mark bishop, or
rather an Ouerseee^ and Teacher to the res^e. And this agrees with Dorotheus
in the life of S. Mark, S. Mark.
who off riueth that he was cast down upon the ground by the ^dolaters* and
trailed by a rope put about his neck from a streat of Alexandria, called
Bo^kolou, the hog heard, unto the places called aggelon of Aungelles or
messengers. When Peter had visited this Alexandria in Egypt, whose longitude is
60.30. and latitude 31. and had planted the Gospel, Babylon in Egypt.
he went to Babylon, a city in Egypt also, where the longitude is 62.15. and
latitude ^0* 1. Petr. 5. v^r. 12.
from whence he wrote his first Epistle by Syluanus* declaring that the same
doctrine and grace, which they s^oode in, and he h^d preached unto them, was
true, infallible, and immortal. True against the enemy, infallible to their
expectation, immortal in contineuance, comfortable for the Soul, necessary to
salvation. Munsterus G^ographus 6. S^rabo 17, P^ol^m. 4.
And this Babylon is meaned to ^ee that famous City of Egypt, now called in
the Hebrewe tongue C^^rum, where the Sultane lies: the circuit about is 13.
or 14. Ge^mane miles. From this Peter wrote this first Epistle, which is
manifest by the 15. verse of the fifth chapter, ^
where he says, that the Church of Babylon did salute them, and his son
Mark, who as Dorothe^^ writes, was burned at* Alexandria in Egypt* Now must
ye graun^e, that Pe^ers journey, from Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithinia, and
Galatia to Alexandria and Babylon in Egypt, was very long, for they differ in
latitude 11. or 12. degrees, and therefore the time must be prescribed in
such sort, as he might not only taste of Nilus, (as the proverb is) but
also te^che the ignoraunte, instruct the simple, persuade the stubbe^^o,
plant^ good doctrine and manners, deteste and banishe superstition and
Idolatry* (...) (as you may read every where) they woorshipped Cattes, Cicero
(...).
Ea^ues, Crocodilles, Dogs, and such other beasts, and were given over to
Magic, and all other iniquities* This required a long time, an whole body, a
careful (...), singular diligence, (...) will, and a continewall per^euerance.
I know some call this Babylon, Rome, by an Allegory: and other some, Babylon
of Chalde, but their proof is easily reproved, their ass^rtion uncertain,
their opinion wavering, and their judgment without reason or authority. For
all others write of Marks being at Egypt, and at Alexandria, and there to
have preached that some Gospel, which he has committed to writing. And for
the familiarity that was between Peter and Mark, Nicephorus 2. c. 15. and
cap. 43.

Nicephorus Lib. 2. cap. 43


Peter calls him his son. And in deed, he was his Sisters son
adelphidous* But what needs us any more proof of Peter's being in Egypt, when
as Peter's words prove it. If Mark suffered his mar^yrdome the eight year of
Nero his reign, i. Petr. 5. ver. 13. Colo. 4. v. 10 Lebeus in the conversion
of Paul.
as Hierome writes in Catalogo. And Eusebius Lib. 2. Cap. 24. And
notwithstanding was at Rome the second or third year of the said Nero, as is
manifest. For that year Paul wrote the Epistle too the Collossians from
Rome. Than of necessity Peter must have been in Egypt* before the eight year
of Nero his reign, because that Peter being in Egypt* says, that Mark
does salute the dispersed* Brethren of Asia. If before the eight year, Ergo
he must needs have been in Egypt some part of Nero: if some part, then was
not he at Rome all the time of Nero, if he was not at Rome unto the 14. year
of Nero, and 11. years before: than quaileth the opinion of the papists, that
say, that he was Pope at Rome twenty five years.7. months, 7. weeks, 7.
days. For Peter must needs have been in Egypt before the death of Mark, for
if Mark had been dead, Peter would not have said that Mark had saluted the
dispersed brethren. But that this matter may be plainly perceived, and the
inconstancy of Romish Registers detected, their fraud espied, and their
errors ^efelled: Consider, A brief repetition.
that Peter was the third year of Call^gula cast in prison by Herod, the
ninth year after Christ's passion, and the eight year of Paul's conversion,
wherefore Peter fearing the tyranny of Herod, as I said before, Act. 12. ver.
13.
conveyed himself out of the presence of Herod. And all the while that Paul
and Barnabas preached to the Gentiles, Act. 13. and 14
Peter remained in Judea, which was about seven years. And thus are we comme
to the sixthe year of Claudius, the sixtenth afer Christ's passion, Act. 15.
ver. 7.
and the fiftenth of Paul's conversion. After this Council (how long I can not
certenlye conjecture) he took his journey into Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Bithynia, and Asia, where he tarried seven or eight years and more, Leut* 1.
lib. 2. cap. 10 Bu^^hinger.
as I have specified before. Others apointe but * five years, put to seven
years, in which they say he was at Antioche. By this order of time we have
brought it too pass even according too the prescription of the Papists, and
after such an infallible supputation, that it can not be denied, Before
Christ's passion, 30.
unto the sixth year of Nero, which was the.xxx. year after Christ's passion,
and.xxix. after the conversion of saint Paul. In so much that he could
neither be.xxv. years at Rome, neither seven moonthes, neither seven days,
neither one year of Nero. If any man can refelle any part of this discourse,
we will give him thanks, partly for that he shall deliver us out of
error, and also for that he shall set forth the truth. If Peter lived
after the death of Nero, as this Historye declares, how could he be put
too death by Nero? I have proved before, that he was at Babylon in Egypt,
which is distant from Rome ten or eleven degrees in latitude, and in
longitude.xxx. which must needs be a long and tedious journey. ye must
ascribe some years to this long journey.
For Babylon of Egypt stands in 62.25: 30.0. and Rome 36.40: 41.40. It
apereth that Peter was at Corinthe also: for it is written, that some hold of
Paul, some of Apollo, and other some of Cephas, which was Peter. 1. Corinthians 1.
ver. 12.
If the Corinthians had never seen Peter, never herd of him, never had been
conuersaunte with him, why woold they have holden of him? It may be that he
went to Corinth when he was in lesser Asia, which differs not from Corinth
above six or seven degrees in latitude, and as much in a manner in longitude.

Peter dyed not at Rome. Gala. 2. ver. 7 Ma^th. 13. ver. 34.
Let us comme too an end. If he suffered not death at Room, where died he? It
appears that he died at Jerusalem, because that he was appointed a teacher
of the Jews. For Christ says, that ^ee sent too the Hierosolymitanes
Prophets, wise men, and learned men, and he prophicied, that sum of them
they should kill and crucefye: Euthim upon Math. 23.
by these he means the Apostles and other teachers. Which of all the
Apostles was crucefied at Jerusalem? But sum must needs be crucefyed
there, Peter crucified at Jerusalem.
or else Christ's words should seem not too be true. Wherefore Hier^m and
Lyra with the interlyned Gloss upon this place affirm, that Peter was
crucefyed at Jerusalem by the Jews.

Thus mutch as concerning the history, life, peregrination, and death of
Peter. Those presumptuous and legend lies, with Festival fables, which they
aduouch, are dissonant, contrary, and varyable among them selves. Sum say as
Eusebius, Eusebius 2. ca. 25 The inconsta^cy of them that aff^rme y^ Peter was a^
Rome.
that Peter came too Room the secound year of Claudius, sum the third,
sum the fourth, as Damasus: when as all this time he was noot out of Jury.
The discord of writers causes suspicion. Discord is contrary too concord.
Where is truth if concord be absent? Consider their discord: Eusebius
says, that Peter reigned at Room.xxv. years, Hierom. xxvii. Beda. xxix.
Damasus affirms that he came too Room in the time of Nero, Michaell.
Buechinge. rus.

It was not Damasus work but thrust in by ^ ^yer Crab. Molin contra a^us. Pap.


which was the fourtenth year of his Reign, and notwithstanding was at Room
whole.xxv. years, two months, and seven days. How is it possible that
Peter came too Room in the time of Nero, and suffered in the last year of Nero,
and yet tarried there xxv. years, and all in the time of Nero, who reigned
but.xiiii. years. Mendacem memorem esse oportet. Can you make.xxv. of xiiii. or
xiiii. too be.xxv? Buechingerus says, that Peter was at Room.xxv. years,
seven months, and eight days. Buechingerus.
Sum say, that Peter suffered at Room the.xxxiii. year after the death of
Christ, sum the.xxxviii. year. Nicephorus says, Niceph. 3. ca. and lib.
14. ca. 39
that Peter was the first Bishop of Room, Clement in the first book Recognit.
says, that Barnabas was the first that was at Room, and the first that
planted any Church there: Hierom says, that Peter was Bishope in the East
five years, Beda seven years. Nicephorus says, Buechingerus.
that Peter went from Antioche too Room, and from Room too Antioche, and
agein from Antioche too Room, where he suffered. Fabularum plena sunt omnia.

Quo te^eam nodo mutantem Prothea vultus?
Biblia^der life of Mark
Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum.
Ireneus and Dorotheus say, that Mark was alive after the death of Peter and
Paul: other say, that he suffered the eight year of Nero. As they do
disagree in Peter, so do they in the rest of the first Popes. And think ye
not that they disagrace Peter, in making him of an Apostle a Bishope, of a
Disciple of Christ a Pope of Rome? But too our purpose, sum say that Peter
made Linus, Cletus, and Anacletus, Bishops of Rome. Sum say, Eusebius. 3.
cap. 2. and 4 Lib. 5. ca. 9
that they were his fellows and cohelpers: their foundacions are weak, they
lean too a broken staff. Sum say, that Clement succeeded Peter with Linus
and Cletus, Marianus Scotus. The first that planted Religion at Rome were
neither Bishops nor Popes.
as cohelpers: which as the said Scotus writes in Anacletus life, denies that
they were either Bishops or Popes. There is no mention of Cletus in any good
Author, neither can it be proved sufficiently, whether ever there were any
such, or no. Sum say, that he was Pope twelve years, other sum, seven.
The old writers place Anacletus immediatlye after Clement, either despising
Cletus, or else forgetting him, Ecclesiast histo: Cento. 1.
or else being ignorant of any such, omit him. I cease too number all the
discordes, for Room it self woolde scarce hold them all.

Now, as we have proved by the truth of the history, that Peter was neither
at Room. xxv. years, Peter was not at Rome
neither dyed there: So let us prove the same by probable arguments, that they
may

Act. 18. ver. 2
Luke woolde have specified it, who describes the Apostles Acts diligently
and exquisitely. After Christ 20


It is evident both by Suetonius Tranquillus and others, and also by S. Luke,
that Claudius the Emperor did charge all the Jews as they loved their lives,
too depart out of Room: if Peter had bin there than, which was the tenth
year of Claudius, and the.xx. Rome 16. ver. 3.
Paul saluteth Aquila and Priscilla by name, who were at Room before the
commaundment of the Emperor, Gala. 1. ver. 18
with whom he tarried.xv. days at Jerusalem? If Peter had been there, and had
herd the proclamation of Claudius, which he must needs have heard, if he had been there, he would have shaken the dust of his feet, following the precept
of Christ. And neither could he have tarried at Room, neither he woolde: he
could not because of Tyranny, Act. 13. ver. 5^ Mar. 6. ver. ^ Luke 9. ver. ^.
and woolde not because the city was not worthy of such a message as he
brought with him. How can they now say, that he tarried there.xxv. years vii.
months, and vii. days? But why did they not make Paul the first Pope,
seeinge that he was not only appointed too be a teacher too the Gentiles, but
also Luke affirms, that he was at Room: Act. 28. ver. 16 Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 21. and cap. ^^
and Eusebius makes him the first Bishop of Rome? They woold rather have made
Paul an Heretic, if they had could, because that he inueyeth so much
against the Antechrist of Room. There was one brought before a Justice of the
West country for religion, who answers, being demanded of a matter of
religion, that Paul says so: Paul? says he, if Paul were here he
should go the same way that thou shall go, and ye were both worthy to be
Coloss. 4. ver. 12 and 14.
Paul being at Rome in the time of Nero, wrote to the Colossians, saying that
Epaphras, Luke, and Demas saluted them. Was Peter inferior to them? was he
not worthy to be named? were his salutacions to be despised? wherefore if he
had been at Room, 2. Timothe 4 ver. 10. and 11.
he woolde have Dalmatia, Epih. and theodoret.
desiring him to bring Mark with him, because only Luke was with him. If Luke
was there only, surely Peter was not there. To Philem^n. ver. 23 and.24.
And Paul writing to Philemo^ says, that Epaphras his fellow prisoner,
Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, his cohelpers, saluted him. If Peter had been there being an earnest professor of Christ, should not he have be^
apprehended as soon as Epaphras? should not he have been as good a helper as
Demas? as Ari^tarchus? as Luke? was he not worthy of naming?

Hithertoo I have observed as appears by the text, too prove every thing by
order of time and place, The old Authors discourse upon Peter.
and also by other circumstances: now I think it good also to recite the order
that Hierom and other old writers observe in this matter, who gather their
history out of Luke and Paul, as we do: which order though it be not so
probable to sum, notwithstanding it makes better for our purpose. For after
the order which I have described hitherto, Peter was at Jerusalem the sixth
year of Claudius the Emperor, the.xvi. year of Christ's passion, and
the.xv. year of the conversion of saint Paul. But Hierom and others will
have the Council, which was holden at Jerusalem in the.xv. of the Acts, to
have be^ the.xvii. year of Paul's conversion, and in the eightenth year from
Christ's passion, and in the eight year of Claudius. And they are persuaded by
the first chapter to the Galatians verse. xviii. and by the second chapter verse.
j. where Paul expressly makes mention of.iij. years spent at Damascus and
in Arabia, The year of Christ. Act. 15. ver. 7.
and after those.iii. years too have comme too Jerusalem too the Council,
the.viii. year of Claudius. With what countenance than can the Roomish
catholics say, that he went to Rome the second year of the Emperor
Claudius? If we interpret the places of the first and second chapter too the
Galatians as Charles Molyneus, Molineus
an Advocate of the high Senate and Parliament of Paris, does, than must we
say, After Christ ye 18 and 19. year Act. 15
that Paul continued at Damascus, in Arabia, and his return to Damascus,
full five years: and than.xiiii. year after both Paul and Peter too have been
at the Council. Than must we af^rme, that Peter was at Jerusalem the.x.
or.xi. year of Claudius, which was the.xix. or.xx. year after Christ's
passion. After Christ's passion the 20 year.
And in the.xvii. or.xix. year of Paul's conversion, which was ye.xi. year of
Claudius, Peter departed to Antioche, where he was the^ reprehended of Paul.
Then both by Molyneus supputation, and by the other, After Christ ye 23.24.
252^ 6* 27.
which we have recited before, Peter could not comme too Room the second
year of Claudius. And therefore whatsoever the Papists build of Peter *, it
is soon shaken down, as grounded upon the sands. Ecclesiast. his. Ceut. 1.
libr. 2. cap. 10.
If Peter continued full seven years at Antioche in Syria, as the Papists
affirm, then could not he have been at Room until the.iiii. year of ye
Emperor Nero, which was.xxvii. years after Christ's passion. After Christ
27. year.

Molyneus co^tra Abusus Pap^rum


By this discourse he could not have been Pope at Room.xxv. years, as the
Papists dream, unless that he had lived after Nero, after Galba, after Otho,
after Vitellius, Vespasianus, and Titus, unto the time of Domitianus, as
manifestly appears by their Reigns. For Nero reigned.x. years, after
the.iiii. years which I have specified: Peter not at ^ame,
Galba.vii. months, Otho.iii. months, Vitellius.viii. months, which was a
year and a half, Vespasianus.x. years, and Titus.ii. years. So that
these.xxv. years, that Peter should have been resident at Rome, should have
^atended too the.ii. year of the Emperor Domitianus. So that Peter should not
have dyed in the time of Nero, as the Papists report, who affirm with one
voice, that Peter was crucefied at Rome, with his heels upward and his head
downward, Egesip. li^. 3. cap ^.
the.xxxvii. year after Christ's passion, and the.xiiii. year of Nero: when
as we have proved by their own reports, Chronicles, Histories, Buechingerus.
Sab. Lo. ^iopol.
and Authors, that he lived.xv. years longer, even too the second year of
the Emperor Domitian, which was after the passian of Christ lii. or liii.
years.

Hithertoo we have proved by the hi^tory, and by argument, and also by
authority, that Peter was never at Room. Now let us confute their
presumptions and objections.

They object, that the old Authors saee, that he was there: The. 1. ob^ection
I answer, that those old Authors have no staff too stick too, no scripture,
no sufficient authority, not one word, neither out of the old Testament,
nor of the new. Let us confute Egesippus, out of whom they have all their
fables, whereby they woold prove Peter to have bin at Room. First this
fabulous and lying Egesippus is not he that Eusebius makes mention of Lib.
fourth. Cap. 8.22. For he gathered his books out of the Gospel ^ecundum
Hebraeos and Syros, and he wrote commentaries, wherein he wrote the doctrine
and acts of the preaching of the Apostles in an homely and simple style
inmanner of an history, and did contend erfectually against Heretics: this
fabulous Egesippus wrote in Greek. Secondly, this Author writes an high
style, and affects an other kind of phrase: the other is an homely style, as
Hiero^ notes. This suborned Egesippus writes five books of the destruction
of Jerusalem, out of Josephus: the other the acts of the church, from the
passion of Christ to his own time, which was after Christ's nativity about.145.
years. Thirdly, the true Egesippus wrote the acts of the preaching and
doctrine of the Apostles, out of the Gospel secundum Hebraeos and Syros: this
suborned Egesippus gathered his books out of Josephus, neither does Hierom nor
Eusebius make mention of them.

Fourthly, this Eusebius that we have, makes mention of Constantinople, unto
the which the city of Rome was equal in dignity. This was done in the time
of the Emperoures Gratian and Theodosius in the year of Christ, as Pantaleon
notes, 383. The true Egesippus was about the year of Christ, 146. and this
Council spoken of in the latter Egesypus, was about the year of Christ 383. so
that now it is manifest, that this latter Egesippus was 200. year and above
after the former, and therefore such a one as served to set out fables for the
mayntenance of the Pope and his superstition: read more in Cornelius
Gualterus, upon Egesippus, and in Vilierius. If a man do well consider those
fables, that Egesippus writes lib. 3. c. 2. how that Peter and Simon Magus did
contend whyther of them should renine Nero his Cosen that was dead, and how
that, if Peter could not do it, he should dye for it: and if Simon could not,
and that Peter could do it, then Simon should suffer death. And how that
Peter met Christ at the gates of Rome, and asked of Christ, Domine quo vadis?
And how that Christ answered, I come again to be crucified: and that Peter
returned and was crucified with his heels upward. It may be easily considered
that he was one of the Popes friends, etc.

Ireneus in the first chapter of his third book writes, that Matthewe wrote
his Gospel what time as Peter and Paul preached the gospel at Rome, and
founded the hurch there. If Peter was at Rome at that time when Mathewe wrote
his Gospel, then did not he come to Rome in the second, third, or fourth
year of Claudius, as the Catholics report. For as yet Caligula was alive,
and in the third year of his Empire and reign, Matthewe wrote his Gospel.
Neither was Paul at Rome in the time of Caligula, in whose third year Matthew
wrote his Gospel, even eight year after Christ's ascension, and 41. years
after his nativity. For it was 24. years after Christ's death, before Paul
came to Rome. How could Paul preach at Rome the eight year after Christ's
ascen^ion, when as he came not to Rome until the 24. year after Christ's
ascension? Could he preach at Rome before that he was there? It was the
second year of Nero, that Paul came to Rome, as shall appear most
manifestly to them that will confer the 28. of the Acts of the Apostles,
with the order of time, with the years of the Emperors, and with Eusebius in
Chronice, and Hierome in the lives of Ecclesiastical writers. Consider whether
that Ireneus can make the 3. year of Caligula, which was the eight year after
Christ's Ascension, to be the second year of Nero, which was the 24. year
after Christ's ascension. Now, if Peter came not to Rome till Paul was there,
or if he were there with Paul at any time, then could not Peter be there
till the second year of Nero, so that he was neither at Rome in the time of
Caligula, who reigned three year: nor in the time of Claudius, who reigned 14.
year. So that by this order, and plain demonstration, Ireneus words are
neither of force, neither worthy to be read, and much less, to be credited.
Hierome writes, that Peter came to Rome the second year of Claudius, which is
no trewer then this that the same Hierome says that Peter was the prince of
the Apostles. Was he the Prince of the Apostles, when Paul withstoode and
reproved to his face? Galat. 2. ver. 11. whom Christ called Satan? who calls
himself but an Elder with the rest? 1. Petr. 5. who was sent by the other
Apostles, Acts. 8? Could Peter come to Rome the second year of Claudius, when
as Hierome himself in the same place says, that first he went to Antioche,
where he was Bishop, and from thence he went and preached to the dispersed
Brethren in Ponto Gallatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, and then went to
Rome the second year of Claudius and continewed there 25. year. If he came
to Rome after that he had been at Antioche, and in these other countries, as
Hierome reports, then came not he to Rome the second year of Claudius, as
the same Hierome contrudeth. For this year was the sixth year of Nero, which
was after the second year of Claudius, 17. year, as I prove in this book,
and as it follows necessarely by the computation of years, and order of the
historiographers. As concerning Eusebius, he was an Arrian, and gathered his
history out of those books that were condemned in codice Sancta Romana, 15*
did. 11. And when he was an Arrian, he wrote this history Tripart. lib. 2.
cap. 7. Read lib. 2. cap. 11. of the said Tripartit. He is contrary to
himself, for he says lib. 3. cap. 2. that Peter came not to Rome till the
last year of Claudius, read Molineus and Rhenanus, and you shall find many mo
reasons whereby ye may confute Eusebius. If there be any other authors in this
error, they may be as easily rejected as these. De^tro. 4 ver 2. Proverb. 30
ver. 6.

Apocal. 22. ve. 12.19.


And if we are forbidden to ad any thing, or take any thing away: if ye old
authors may cause Peter to be at Rome without authority, we may affirm yt he
was not at Rome with authority: if they of their own heads hold that Peter
was at Rome, we may by evident demo^strations, assured arguments, and
infallible reasons, prove that he was not at Rome. If they say and not prove,
and we booth say and prove, whether is of more Authority? They say that he
was at Rome 25. years, and came either in the time of Claudius, or Nero: we
prove that all that time he was either in Jury, Antioche, Asia, or Egypt.
They say that Eusebius, Molineus proves himan Arri^ in his book against the
Pope.
an Arian or counterfeyt Damasus says so: we say that Christian Luke, and
true Paul prove the contrary. They write contraries: we concordances, they
obsurdities: we sensible arguments, they allege fables, and we truths:
Objection
They say that Peter was at Rome both quick and dead, we deny both. They
say yt Peter, when he died, willed Clement then (being at Rome) to write to
James of his death. Epistola* decretales ^illir. James his death. Eusebi. 2.
cap. 23.
But James was dead by their own authorities, before Peter suffered, seven
years, for James was cast down of the pynacle of the temple at Jerusalem the
30. year after Christ's passion, and Peter (as they reported) suffered 37.
year after christ's passion: could Clement, Monst. G. (...) Lebeue.
being alive, write to James being dead? who should carry the letters? If he
went to purgatory, who knew where purgatory was, for than it was not
invented? If he were in Heaven, thither ascends none with letters. Poli^or.
libr. 6. cap. ^

(...) Plato Uola^.

Niceph. libro. ^ cap. 23.


Perhaps Clement should send the letters and lay them upon James grave, that
he might rise on the night and read them, as in the council of Nyce they say
that Chasantus and Musonius, two Bishops of the council of Nice, did subscribe
to those matters that were concluded in the council, desired bythe rest, who
laid the acts upon their graves, requiring them to subscribe for a better
assertion, and the next morning they resorted to their graves, and found both
their hands subscribed. Egesippus. 3 cap 2.
They write that Eusebius reports that Peter was reques^ed of his brethren
and fellows, Objection
to depart out of Rome, least Nero should persecute him to death. Peter went
out at their request, and when he came to the gate he met Christ and said
thus: God save you Sir, whether go you? you were best to return, here is to
hot being for you and me. Then said Christ, do thou not know me Peter?
O Peter, Peter, return, Doc. Smith. there he was Cura^e.
hither I am come to suffer again. Nay says Peter, God forbid, I will
go: and so Peter returned, and suffered at Rome. This doctrine taught Doctor
Smith, I heard him in Whitengton college in London, in Queen Mary's days.
He moved many affections, and told the tale on this wise: Masters, says
he, Doctor Smithes Sermon.
you are in a great error, as concerning the blessed Sacrament, and all your
trust was in Cranmer, Rydley, and Latymer. As for Latymer, he said in open
disputation in Oxforde, that he had no learning in that matter, but out of
Cranmers book. Besides this, I disputed with Latymer 20. years agone: and
then he had no learning. As for Cranmer, he said that his learning came
from Rydley. And as for Rydley, Doctor Smithes Argument.
I disputed with him my self now at Oxeford the other day, and I proved my
Argument thus: Ille, cui Christus obuiauit Romae, fuit Romae: At Christus
obuiauit Petro Romae: Ergo, Petrus fuit Romae. He whom Christ met at Rome, was
at Rome: But Christ met Peter at Rome: Ergo, Peter was at Rome. By this
Argument I prove two things, and singular mysteries of our faith. First, that
Peter was at Rome, against them that clatter that Peter was never at Rome.
Secondly, that if Peter met Christ bodily, as Abdias reports, and which I am
sure is true, or else such an ancient, and holy Father would never have
written it. Then consequently he may be as well bodily in the blessed
Sacrament, as he was met bodily. To this Rydley stood like a block, and
feelinge him self convicted, answered nothing. Then said I, Cur non
respondes haeretice, haereticorum haereticissime. Did not I handle him well?
Then denied he the minor, which I proved thus: Christ met Peter goeing out of
Rome, and said, good morrow Peter, whether go thou? Peter answered, good
morrow good man, whether go thou? Then said Christ, I go to Rome too
suffer, what? says Peter, I trow, unless I take my marks amiss, you are
Ihesus Christ, good Lord, how do you? I am glad I have met you here. Then
said he to Peter, go back and suffer, or else I must et pro te and me. When
Rydley had heard this my proof, and Abdias authority, a Doctoure ancient and
irrefragable, he answered never a word. And thus I cenfuted Rydley in the
audience of a thousand, that he had not one word to say: yet you say^
that Christ was never in earth since the Ascension bodily: believe with me,
that he is under form of bread and wine. Let this argument of mine
confound you as it did Ridley your chief champion. Thus mucth Doctoure Smith,
and more in Whitengton college church in London, standing in the streat
called tower Ryall, a little above the three Cranes in the Uynetree. 4.
Objection.
If, say the papists, we hold not and defend against these heretics,
that Peter was at Rome, than our churches estimation is done, our prerogative
perishes: our preeminence no better then others: our glory diminished: our
holiness empayred: our authorities annihilated: our honors negnected: our
dissimulation detected: our customs wa^e cold: our perdones perverted: our
Jubilees iested at: our Religion rayled upon, The solution. of the.4.
Obi^c^ion.
and all our pomp fall to nothing. I answer, Peter sought no such vanities.
Christ wills him that would presume above the rest, to be inferior to the
rest. Paul gave no place to Peter. Galat 2. ve. 11 Chrysostom upon ye 20. of Mat.
Chrysostom says, that he that in earth seeks supremacy, shall find in
heaven confusion, neither shall be nombred among the servants of God. Hierome
says, that wheresoever a man be Bishop, Hiero. ad Euan. distinct. 93 can.
legimus. distinct. 95. Can. Din.
whether at Rome, Engubie, Constantinople, Rhegij, Alexandria, Thebes, or
Guarmaria, the office is all one, the merit all one, and degree all one. Who
soever says Gregory, calls himself the universal priest, or desires to
be called so, is a foreronner of Antichrist, read Gregory Epistola
76.78.79.83.92.194.

Here ends the first Discourse.
THE SECOND DISCOURSE, wherein is proved that neither Peter, nor the Pope, is
the head of Christ's Church.
AS we have hitherto proved in the former Oration, or discourse, that Peter
was not at Rome. The second Discourse.
So let us in this second Treatise conclude, that neither he neither the
Pope, neither any of his Successoures is the head of the Church, neither the
Church or Seat of Rome to be preferred before others. As out of the head and
brain, which is the seat of the senses whereof ryseth all knowledge (as the
Philosophers and Physicians write) and also as of synowes wherewith the parts
of the body are knit and coupled together, proceeds the life vital and all
mouinge. Theodoret. upon ye Colos. cap. 2. ver. 19.
Even so from our head Christ, the fountaynes of grace are deryued, and flow
to water our souls, the synowes and sensible doctrine to instruct the mind,
Christ is the head of the Church.
and the spirit of regeneration to renew the whole man. As the head and
brain minister too the whole body feeling and moving: so is Christ the head
of distributing to every man several gifts of the Spirit. Ephesians. 4. ver. 16.
He that is the head of the church (which is the body of Christ) must needs
give life, spirit, moving, b^eing, senses, feeling, understanding, grace, The
first Argument.
and all gifts of the holy ghost, Ephe. 1. ver. 23
but the Pope can give none of these. Therefore the Pope is not the head of
the church. He that can not forgive sins, is not the head of the Church.
The Pope is not the head of the Church

The 2. Argument.

The 3. Argument.

Luk 5. ver. 21. Ephesians. 5. ver. 23.

The Church Confer the.2. to the Cor 11. ver. 2. to the Romans cap. 7. ver. 3.


The Pope cannot forgive sins, Ergo he is not the head of the church* Solus
Deus condonat peccata, Only GOD forgyueth sin: The Pope is not God, Ergo he
forgyueth no sin. As the man is the head of the Wooman, so is Christ the
head of the church. This Church are all the faithful of all ages: the
faithful before the floode: the faithful after the floode: The Faythefull
before Christ, the faithful after Christ. If a wooman should have two
Husbands to her head, were she an honest woman? were she not an Adultres?
were she not to be divorced? Ergo, if the Romish Church^ have two heads,
Christ and the Pope: She is a Strumpette, an Harlotre, a Curtesane, and the
Church of Satan. Moreover, Christ is zeleous over his congregation, he will
have no fellows, he is sufficient alone, he needs not the Popes aid. The
Popes head may be drunk, Christ's is always sobre: his franitique, Christ's
perfect: his fantastical, Christ's substanciall: his feeble, Christ's strong:
his mortal, Christ's immortal. He that makes him self the head of the
Church, he must make him self her husband: but what an husband is the Pope?
Surely an adulterer, if he presume too take an other man's wife. Is not the
Church Christ's wife? Tha^ is she not the Popes, because that she can not
have two husbands at once. If he be an adulterous head, ergo he is
Antechrist.

How could Peter be Pope at Room, when as it was not lawful, nor permitted
to teach, but priuatlie in houses? Where was his authority? where were both
his swoordes, Temporal and Spiritual? Neither had he the Temporal to
repress Nero his tyranny, neither the Spiritual to rule the Clergy. Was not
Paul as good as Peter? Gala. 2. ver. 11
Did he not resist him to his face? Was Paul inferior to any of the
Apostles? How chances it, that Peter could not rule them, that put him to
death? where was the mighty power of M. Pope? Is he the head of the Church,
whom Christ calls Satan? Math. 16. ve. 23.
Is not that Satanas church, which Satan rules? But Peter is called Satan,
Ergo that church which Peter rules, is the church of Satan. But say the
Papists: Our Church is founded upon Peter. After he had said to Peter and
upon thee I will ^wilde my church, he calls him Satan. And Paul reproved
him after this.

Gala. 2. ve. 14 Ergo ye Pope may and does err.

John. 6. ve. 71 Apoca. 21. ver 9.10.


Then is the foundation vicious, the buylding odyous, the pillars, which are
the college of Cardinals, very rotten and corrupt, and the palace of
Prelates pestilent, and all that they do beastly, sensual, carnal and of
Antechrist. For Christ says to Peter: Away Satan, hence Dyuell: for so
signifies the Hebrewe word: thou offendest me, thou sauorest of earthly
things, and not of heavenly. If the head be Dyuelish, what are the members?
what is the body? The Romish church is the body, is this church without
spotte or wrincle? is this of God? is this the pillar of truth? is this the
Kingdom of God? Nay, it is as Petrarche writes, the sink of sin, and
pudle of Gods ire: A den of Wolfes, Lions, Foxes, Dragons, and Tigres. Peter
sauored of earthly things, and sought earthly things, and so do the Popes.
Did not Peter move Christ, that they might make in the mount where Christ was
gloriously transformed, three tents? he sauored of none other thing, then of
earth. Ma. 17. ver. 4
And did Pope Leo any other thing, Leo the 10. Pope.
when he answered Peter Bembus a learned Cardinal, alleging a sentence out
of the Gospel to him, that it was known well enough in all ages, Busgradus.
And B.
how much that fable of Christ did profit the Popes and their successors and
adherentes? And that ye shall understand that the Church is neither founded
upon Peter, nor of any other man, saint Paul says, that Christ is only the
foundation. And Christ, 1. Cor. 3 ver. 1^
when the Apostles did strive for superiority and y^ preeminencie, said to
them, reproving their ambition, that he that presumed to be highest, should be
lowest, and a minister too the rest. Mat 22. ve. 26 Luke 22. ve. 16
Which words declare, that Christ would have no superiority among his
Apostles. Did not Peter deny Christ three times? Math. 26. ver 34.
Is he worthy too be the head and steward of his family, that denies his
Master? that swears that he never knew him? Luke 9. ve. 18
Such are Peter's Successors, for they swear that they never knew such a John
23 Pope denounced the^ too be heretics ye affirmed y^ Christ had no worldly
substance.
beggarly body as Christ was. For say they, Christ was poor, Psalm. 8. ve. 67
we be rich. Christ a beggar and had nothing, we have the whole world. And
it is prophesied by David of us: Mat. 26. ver. 51.
Omnes subiecisti sub pedibus eius, oues and boues and pecora campi. To the
Pope God has laid all things under his feet, sheep, oxen, and all cattle.
Peter did fight and cut of Malcus ear, the Popes cut of the Emperors heads,
fight with them, subdue them, and tread upon them. Their foundation is the
sword, fire, fagotte, tyranny, and all iniquity. This sword Christ bad Peter
put up, they draw it, and shakes it over all Nations. Where prove they that
Peter was the chiefest of the Apostles? where prove they, him too be the best,
or such a one as all the other should obey? was he the Uicegerat of Christ?
can he do all that Christ can do? who was reproved of Paul, the least and
lowest of all the Apostles? Gal. 2. ver. 11 1. Cor. 15. ver 6.
where was his sword than? where was his courageous stomach? Did not little
Paul drive great Peter away? Wherefore ye see that the Pope founding his
authority, ambition, vain glory, Supremacy, dignity, and superiority,
upon Peter, must needs fall, it must needs be grounded upon errors and
iniquity.

That which has two heads is monstrous, but if Christ be head, (as he is
the only head) and the Pope also, than is it a monstrous body. But more
monstrous is that body, that has three or four heads: M^n^ Popes a^ once,
to many to be good.
for at once there were three or four Popes together, and every one called him
self head. Which of them was the head? let them answer, if they can: if they
can not, let the head fall with the body. If Rome make the Pope holy, if the
seat where the Pope is, The place makes the Pope holy.
can not err, if his church be catholic and universal, how chanced it
that at one time in the year of Christ 1411. Clement was Pope at Auenion in
France, Pope Vrbane at Room, Benedict the.xiii. succeeded Clement at Auenion
in France, Gregory the.xii. was the Pope at Rome, John Pope at Bononia, and
all deposed in the Council of Constance. One of these reviled an other,
blasphemed an other, cursed, excommunicated, calling one an other Antechrist,
Traitor, Murderer, Sons of Beliall, Servants of Satan, Heretics,
Scismatiques, and Cruel Tyrauntes. If the presence of Peter make the place too
be the best, and of most authority, why was not Jerusalem the chief City,
the high See, and the Metropolitan of the whole world? For there Peter
preached first, and converted many thousands. And ye can no^ read of one that
he converted at Room, when he was never there, as the former discourse
proves. Where gave Christ, and at what time, the authority and prerogative of
^osinge and ^ynding? He gave it before his death, and in Iurye: than by good
reason that time should be better than this, and Jury holyer than Room: for
many hundredth years after was Room established. Now, because neither time nor
place is esteemed among Christians, but faith in Jesus Christ: there is the
Church, where Christians woorshippe him in verity. Then Rome is not too be
preferred before the whole world, neither a City before Cities, a Town
before Shy^es, a small part of Europe, before Asia, Africa, and America.
Besides this, why is not Antioche, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia, Asia,
Egypt, and Babylon, too be preferred, seeing that there he preached, there
he planted, there he grafted, there he did sow, there he watered, there
he taught and instructed, and brought the people from error to truth, from
Superstition to Religion, from Tyranny to Clemency, Epis^. Peter. cap. 1.
ver. 1.
from Fraud too Synceritie, from Dissimulacion and Hypocrisye too Ueritie,
from Avarice too Frankenesse, Genesis 49. ver. 33. Luke 16. ve. 22 Ge. 35. ver 29.
Da. 12. ver. 13 Luc. 23. ve. 43
from Wickedness too Virtue, from Earthly things too Heavenly things, from
the admiration of worldly pomp too the contemplation of heavenly things, from
Hell too Heaven, from misery too felicity, and from earthly possession too the
inheritance of Jacob, too the bosom of Abraham, too the possession of Isaac,
too the let of Danyell, and too the Paradise of the blessed thief.

NOW, I haste too the confutacion of their Arguments, whereby they go about
too prove that Peter and the Pope is the head of the Church. But first I will
declare a true history, from time too time, and that briefly, what they were
that were before the Pope, The History. Luc. 4. ver. 17
and how the Church of Rome came too such a prerogative and dignity.

Christ him self disputed and reasoned with the Doctoures, opposing,
aunswering, and con^uting them: So did John the Baptiste, so did the Apostles,
so did Stephan, so Aquila, Apollo, and all other that had any of these gifts,
which are repeted in saint Paul. And this order of every man too utter his
gift, continued unto the time of Theodoret, 1. Cor. 14. Theodoret. upon the
1. to the Cor. 14. Decree.5. titule.8. cap. 14
and unto the time of Gregory the ninth Pope of that name, as appears by his
law: for he made laws, that no Lay man should preach of whatsoever degree
he were, Noble man, Gentle man, and other. An Elder and a Bishop were both
one at the beginning, Act. 20. verse. 17.28. A Bishop.
which two verses conferred will show you that there is no difference between
an Elder and a Bishop. An Elder.
The which Paul proves, Philip.1. ve. 1
and Hierom and Theodoret upon the same chapter. Paul in that place calls
Bishops and Elders such, as taught the people and instructed them: Deacons.
and Deacons such as provided for the poor, like too our Church Wardens.
Afterward they began too alter this order: for Eusebius libro.4. and.5.
affirms, that the Church was a virgin immaculate until the death of John the
Euangeliste, and than errors to have creeped in, who dyed from the birth of
Christ.xxv. years. And about ^. years after his death, (...) Martyr says
(...) ^ho was in the year of Christ.145
or before the Church began to have one as cheef, whom they called, a
President, or one as an Ouerso^er of the people: and here says Beza, the
Devil began to practice his peruersitie, and lay the foundation of his
Tyranny. Beza upon ye (...) the Philip ver. 1.
Every City and Town had a Bishop that taught them: but among them there
was no Supremacy. The Emperoures afterward which had certain principal
Cities in every Shyre one or more, Metropolis.
whereto all the country about resorted to the Law, and to decide other
matters, gave greater authority to the Bisshoppes of the Moother cities (for
so they were called) then too the Bishops of other Uillages in the country.
Carthage (...). Calcedo (...).

An^iochine counsel.


And as they called the mother cities Metrapoleis, or matrikous kathedras* or
meizonas, poleis: so did they call the Bishop or Minister thereof or Pastor,
protonton, protenonta, proestota, or patriarchin, or Metropolitin* As they call
the great Cities, Moother Cities, Moother Seats, The first seats, or greater
Cities: so did they call the priest thereof, Nycene coun^cel in the year of
Christ.324. or 326. or 328.
or mynister, or Bishop, or pastor, the first, the chief, the president, a
Patriarche, or Metropolitan. We read in the council of Nyce, that
Alexandria was chief over Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, and Antioche was chief
over the countries about, as Rome was in Italy. Constantinople council 2.
Anno Christi ^83.

Rome was not superior, nor ye^ the Pope,

Uielerius de stat. primat. ecc^^si^

Arche bishops etc.


Where was there any superiority more at Rome then at Alexandria, or at
Antioche? In the second council holden at Constantinople, it was decreed, that
the Bishop of Alexandria should govern the Cast countries, and that Antioche
might have that dignity that was appointed in Nycene council, the Bishop of
Thrace his country: the Bishop of Pontus his, the Bishop of Rome Italy, and
so of all the rest. Socrates in his history repeteth several Metropolitanes,
which are called Patriarchs: for they were booth of one Authority. As
Nectarius over Megapolis, meaning Constantinople and Thrace, Helladius over
Pontus, Basile over Cesarea of Cappadocia: Otrius over Miletene in Armenia:
Amphilochius in Asia at Iconiam: Optimus at Antioche of Pisidia: Timothe to
Alexandria of Egypt: Pelagius to Laodicia: Nicene. council. cap. 7. and Just.
novel constitu. 123
Diodorus to Tharsus: Meletius to Antioche: The Bishop of Jerusalem, to
Jerusalem. These same Metropolitanes they called also Archebishoppes. They
(say the false framed Epistles ascribed to Clemens and Anacletus) were chief
cities Metropoles: where were Archiflamines and Protoflamines, and therefore
Pontianus in Atheneus calls vinum omnium malorum Metropolin, and so say these
forged Archiflamines were turned into Archibishoppes.

Because that the first Emperors were at Rome, The 1. council at
Constantinople. ca. 3. Uielerius Calcedon council. cap. 28.
therefore it was called ta presbeia it is timis, that is, the chief honor was
given to Rome: It was the first: and Constantinople was the second Of this
equality or Superiority, or inferioritie read the Council holden at
Chalcedon in the year of Christ.453. And Vielerius, where it was concluded
that Constantinople was of the same authority with Rome, though it be the
second after, and Alexandria the third, and Jerusalem the fourth. In the
year of Christ 590. Ihon Bishope of Constantinople, ambitiously desired to be
Supreme head oikoumenikon pasis it is oikoumenis, John Bishop of constanti.
the Uniuersall Bishop of the whole world that was habitable. And therefore
Gregory the first Bishop at Rome of that name, called the same John, the
forerunner of Antichriste, alias maleface The first that called himself. Pope.
Boniface.3 Phocas.
Epist. lib. 2. cap. 194. Half a score year after, or little more, Boniface
the Third of that name was made Bishop at Rome, and the first that was
ordained or named Pope, or Summus Pontifex, the High Bishop, and this did the
Emperor Phocas to have aid of the Pope, which killed the Emperor Mauritius.
his wife, his brother, and his son, with many other, and made himself
Emperor. The Pope had this beginning. After him every Pope increased his
authority with privileges, statutes, decrees, and precepts, till that they
grew to such dignity, that they created Emperoures, who were wont to create
them, they deposed them, they fought with them, they trod on their necks,
they rebelled against the^, they cursed them with book, bell, and candell
lighted, they pardoned them all that would fight against the Emperor.

The first Objection.
They allege Scripture for their purpose, Mat. 4. ver. 6 Psalm. 91. ver.
11.12.13.
as the devil did to Christ. They object this place of the Gospel written by
Saint Matthew: Thou art Peter, and upon this Peter I will buyld my Church.
Peter, say they, is the foundation of the Church, of him it depends, in him
it rests, and he is the head thereof. Let us answer this Objection with
the true Interpretation, and Exposition of Christ's mind. Thou art Peter, etc.

Thy name, says Christ, is Simon, but henceforth it shall be Peter, Math. 16.
ve. 18.
a Rock, or stone, or rather one depending of the rock, as I promised in the
first of John, ver. 42. that thou should be called Cephas, Christ's is the
rock^ and not Peter.
a stone, but I alter it into Peter, because thy name shall be deryued of me.
For I am Petra, and thou Peter: I Christ, and thou a christian: I a Rock, and
thou rockye, or builded upon the rock. The Allusion and affinetie of the
Greek word proves this sense, sy ei petros, etc. Thou art Peter, because
thou beleeuest in Petra, Math. 16. ve. 18.
that is in me the Rock: upon the which I will build my congregation, whom I
will to be called Peter's, as thou art, deriuing their name of me the rock:
every faithful man is a Peter.
because who soever shall believe in me as thou do, I will give him ye same
name that thou have. Wherefore who so confesses me as thou do, shall be
called Peter of me Petra: that is, a christian of my name Christ. Hierom upon
the 8. of Matthew affirms, that Peter had his name of Petra, which is Christ.
All are Peter's which believe in this Rock: I will build my famelie and
congregation upon it: 1. Cor. 10. ve. 4
wherefore al my famelie and people are Peter's. Peter in this place is put for
all christians: Peter.
and is a general word signifying all believers and confessoures of Christ.
Therefore Hierome upon the sixte of Amose, terms all christ's Apostles
Peter's. And ye Christ founded not his church upon Peter (as our Romish
catholics contend) but upon this rock, which was Peter's confession, ye shall
understand by the text it self. What was his confession? that Jesus christ was
the son of God. Than this faith of peter's is the foundacio^ of the church
cleaving to Christ: which foundation Paul defines to be Christ, 1. Cor. 3.
ver. 11. This church and congregation, because it confessed the same Christ,
that Peter did, is very well termed and described by Paul, The Church. 1.
Timothe. 3. ver. 15.
to be the establishme^t and pillar of truth: and by good reason, considering
it is defined to be Christ's body, out of whose head is derived whatsoever
nourishes the body. Who soever has this faith, and is a member of Christ's
body, is a Peter. As Christ is called a stone, so are his people and servants
named lively stones by participacion: 1. Peter 2. ve. 5.
as they are the light of the world, and salt of the earth: because the light
and salt that they have, is derived and proceeds from him, as of Petra,
Peter's, of Christ, Matthew. 5. ver. 13.
christians.

That this is the true meaning of this place, it is evident hy the 18. chapter
of Matthew, ver. 15. where the same doctrine is applied to all Christians,
Math. 18. ver. 15.
when he says: If thy brother trespass against thee, tell him his fault
between thee and him: If he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. What is
it too win a man's brother, but to loose him from his sin, wherewith he was
bound? To win a man's Brother.
By the which, if he will not be corrected, let him be as an Heathen and a
Publicane. And thus he is bound, because he will not repent. For, says
Christ, (speaking to all christians) what soever ye bind or loose upon earth,
Ma. 18. ver. 18
shall be bound and loosed in heaven. Adam and Eve in Paradise were the true
church, who when they heard the promise, how that the seed of the wooman,
Jesus Christ, should burst the Serpents head, believed it: upon y^ which
belief Christ builded his congregation: To bind and l^^se.
and this is the Rock. They did bind themselves in eating of the fruit, in
not obeinge the commandment, in offending the law. They loused themselves in
confessing their fault, obeying christ's voice, lamentinge their fact, and
believing in him, who should be borne of the seed of a wooman: their faith
and confession of their offense with amendment of life, were the keys of
heaven. The Keys.
By them they repossessed their felicity, which was lost, and reentred into
heaven. Christ granted to two or three gathered together in his name, Math.
18. ver. 20
their requests, and he to be among them. If this power and prerogative be
equal and particularly given to every christian, and generally to all: than is
it not only proper to the Pope. If all the congregation may bind and loose,
then is the Popes authority nothing, and he himself to be excluded as a
reprobate, abhorred as a dissembler, defaced as an hipocrite, rejected as
Psichicus in Tertullian was, Tertullian in his book de Castitate.
(who bragged as the Pope does, that he had authority to forgive sins)
deposed as an usurper, and condemned as an Antichrist* The congregation is
builded upon the rock. Who is the Rock? Christ, not the Pope: faith in Jesus
Christ, not execrable pardones: hope in the Lord, not in man. 1. Cor. 3. ve.
^ Esaias 5. ver. 1. 1. Cor. 3. ve. 9
If the Church and Congregation be a buyldyng, as Paul declares, and an
hasbandrie, and vyneyarde as the prophets testify: and if Christ be the
buylder, as is manifest, and the Husbandma^: than has the Pope no authority.
Peter.
That every man is Peter that confesses Christ with the same faith that Peter
did. Hear Origin his interpretation discoursing upon this place, who was
within 235. years after Christ. If we affirm and confess says Origene,
Origins.
that Christ is the son of the immortal God, as Peter did, then are we
Peter's, and shall obtain the same felicity that he has obtained, because
our confession and his is all one. If we confess Christ to be the son of
God, the father revealing it too us, it shall be said to each one of us: Thou
art Peter, and upon thee I will build my congregation. Every man is Petra, a
Rock, and lively stone, that is a follower of Christ, of whom they drank,
which drunk of the spiritual Rock following them. Upon every such rock is
the congregation of God builded. 1. Cor. 10. ve. 4
If a man ymagine the whole congregation and church to be builded upon Peter
only, Marc. 3. ve. 17
what will ye say of James and John, the thundering children, and other of
the Apostles? In deed it was spoken to Peter, Math. 16. ver 18.
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Congregation:
Notwithstanding it is spoken in like manner to all the Apostles, and to all
perfect and faithful men: because they are all Peter's and Rocks, and upon
all them and the prophets is Christ's church builded: Ephesians. 3. ver. 20.
And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against any of them. These gates of
hell, are vices, sins, and other corruption of man's nature, which shall
neither reign in their mortal bodies, neither prevail. Do thou think that
the keys of the Kingdom were only given to Peter, and to ^one other, Math.
19. ve. 19.
neither any other should receive the^? If these words were not common to all
men, as they are (I will give unto thee the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven)
how can all those sayings and things which are applied to Peter before be
commune to all men? For Christ thus spoke in commune to them all: whom do you
say that I am? Math. 16. ver. 13.14.1^.
And Peter answered in the name of them all: Does he not utter the same in
playner words, In the 20. of John, ver. 22.23. saying to all the Apostles,
brething upon them: Receive the holy ghost: whose sins ye forgive, they
shall be forgyuen, and whose ye retain, shall be retained. They were all of
like authority with Peter. All they that are imitators of Christ, are likewise
called Peter's, and rocks, as Christ and his faythefull, of whom spiritual men
drink spiritual drink. Of Christ all his are called Christ's or christians,
according to the Prophet, who says, he would save his Christ's. As Christ
is called righteousness, and wisdom* so are we called rightuous, because
Christ is our righteousness and wisdom. So are christians named by other
properties of God. Thus far Origin, Psichicus like the Pope Tertul in libr de
cast.
with much more. Tertullian in his book of Chastity, who was but 210. year
after Christ, writing against Phisicus, the high Bishop of Bisshoppes, who
took upon him to forgive sin, adultery fornication, and other vices,
says thus: Show me examples of the Prophets, and of the Apostles, and I
will acknowledge thy holiness, divinity, and godhead. If thou can do so, I
will grant thou can forgive sin: If thy office be only to teach and
mynister, then is it not to forgive sin? Ma. 18. ve. 22
How have thou this authority? thou presumest of this place. But Peter was
commanded to forgive his brother so often as he offends: which sentence
perteyneth to all men. The church is not the number and rabble of Bishops.
This authority is of the Lord, and not of his servant: of God, not of any
priest. Who is without sin? no man. Than no man can forgive sin. Who dare
attribute to man that which is proper to God? who can loose an other man from
death, save only the son of God? He in his passion delivered the thief
from death. Wherefore, if thou followest him in forgyuing sins, and can
say, thou have not offended: I pray thee suffer for me. If thou be a
sinner, how can thy oil serve both for thee and me, for thy light and mine?
It is in Mat. 9. ver. 2. that Christ had power to forgive sins, and know men's
hearts, but thou can do neither. If thou presumest, prove by scriptures, or
by miracles, as Christ did. Thus far Tertullian, with much more.

Augustine writes thus upon this place: Upon this Rock, which thou
confessed, Peter: upon this rock which thou acknowledgest: saying, thou art
Christ the son of the immortal God. Upon this Rock I will build my
Congregation: that is upon my self the son of the immortal GOD: upon me
I will build it, and not upon ^hee. Men being disposed to build upon men,
said, I hold of Apollo, an other of Paul, an other of Cephas, which is Peter.
The same Augustine upon the.xxi. of John, says, this congregation can not
fall, because it is founded upon the Rock, of the which Rock, or Petra, Peter
has his name: for Petra, which is the Rock, has not his name of Peter, but
Peter of Petra the Rock. As Christ has not his name of a Christian, but a
Christian of Christ. Thus far Augustine with many mo reasons. Christ is the
end of my faith, says Ambrose upon the ninth of Luke, the end of my faith is
the Son of God. Wherefore believe as Peter did, that thou may be blessed.
The grace of Christ is great, which has communicate almost all his names with
his Disciples. John 1. ver. 4 8.9. John 8. ve 12 John. 6. ve. 51 1. Cor. ^0.
ve. 4 Ma. 5. ver. 14 Math. 16. ve. 18.
Christ is the light of the world, the lively bread, and the Rock, and yet his
Disciples are the light of world. We are all one bread, 1. Cor. 10. ver. 17.
Neither did Christ deny his Disciple the strenght and sowndnes of this word,
because he had the constancy of his faith of Petra. The Rock is the faith in
Jesus, and faith is the foundation of the church. If thou be a Rock, thou
shall be in the church, because the church is builded upon the Rock. Thus
far Ambrose. And after this sense do all the Greeks and Latins interpret
this place.

Hell gates shall not preuayl against this faith, this rock, and against such
as confess Christ, Hierom upon ye.38. of Esai. Hell. Gates. Gen..22. ve. 17
Job. 31. ve. 21
with as good a faith as Peter did. The Metaphor is taken of the Gates, wherein
the Jews and Gentiles exercised their Judgments, as appears in Moses and
Job. And because wicked Judges did there give false sentences, absolved the
offenders, and condemned the innocents, therefore false Judgment, and
Tyrannical Judges, and injurious Magistrates, are called Hell gates, that is,
the Gates of death, the Judgment seats of death. Origin and Ambrose
understand by Hell gates all vices. Such a strong rock, such a valiant membre
of Christ, and such a lively stone of Christ's congregation, was Jeremy, whom
God said, Iere^. 1. ve. 18
he woold make a strong defenced Town, an iron Pillar, a Wall of steel,
against the hole land, against the Preistes, Kings, people, and the mighty
Princes of Judah, and such Tyrauntes Jeremy entreats of in the end of his
fystenth chapter. Math. 16. ver 18

1. Peter 2. ve. 5


If every good man be a lively stone, as Peter him self writes, and all the
congregation, a Spiritual house, and the house of God, the pillar and ground
of truth, and likewise Christ's own body, and the fullness of him that fills
all things: 1. Timoth. 3. ver. 15.

Ephesians. 1. ver. 23.


Than is not the Pope, Cardinals, and Clergy, the church and pillars, in
whom dwells no virtue. Neither Peter had any other keys than Adam, Seth, Noe,
Melchisedeck, Abraam, Job, Moses, and all the faithful had from the beginning.
The keys of the Kingdom of heaven, are the opening and interpretacion of the
Scripture. What keye (says Tertullian in the.iiii. book against Mar.) had
the Doctors of the Law, The keys of heaven.
save interpretation? Tertullian inuehing against the Eustix, affirms the
keys to be given generally to all, the which every man when he departs
hence, carries with him. Wherefore, who so ever confesses his sins,
repents, and believes in Christ, has these keys, wherewith he opens the
lock, and enters intoo heavenly felicity. Every man may bind and loase him
self. Augustinus de doctrina lib. 1. cap. 8. says: Too bind, is too persevere
in error, Math 18. ver. 18.19.

To bind.

To louse.


and too proceed in vice: too louse, too repent him of his sin, and believe
that here in earth his sins shall be forgiven him. And this is too bynd and
louse.

The second Objection.
He that gives authority too the Church, is supreme head. But the Pope
gives authority to the church, ergo he is supreme head. I deny your
assumption, called otherwise the Minor. We prove it (say they) by S.
Augustine, who says: I would not believe the Scriptures, if the catholic
church should not move me. I answer: This church that Augustine speaks of,
is not the church of Rome: and therefore the Pope gives no authority to the
church. If Augustine had meaned the church of Rome, then their argument might
have seemed to have had a good ground. But Augustine meaned the church of
Christ, as the Creed it self expounds it. What is the Catholic Church? The
Catholic church.
The Creed answers and interprets in these words: A communion, society, or
company of all Saints and Godly men.

Now, if Rome be all the world and a communion of Saints only, then is it
the only Church: but it is neither all the world, neither a communion of
Saints, therefore it is not the Church. Are shameful sinners Saints? horrible
offenders Holy?

Augustine meaned by the Catholic Church, Christ and his Disciples, and the
consent of all them, which saw Christ, which heard him and his Disciples: and
therefore is it called in the common Creed of Nice, the Apostolic church. If
Augustine did imagine that the Scriptures should take authority of the church,
it had bin an absurdity: considering that there is no congregation so perfect,
no company so holy, no men so pure, which do not daily desire God too forgive
them their offenses, as they forgive them that offend against them. If we
say, we sin not, we are liars, and there is no truth in us. 1 Epist. John
cap. 1. ver. 8.
Let us prove both by Reason, which is the Law of Nature, infixed in man
Naturally, and by Scripture, that the Church does take her authority of the
Word, and not the Word of the Church. If Cleantes, and other Philosophers,
The churches authority of ye word.

^e natura (...) 2. ve. 3 (...). 1.


as Tullie testifies, affirm partly by the Natural motions of their minds,
no doubt moved by inspiration, that there is a GOD: partly by the presciencie
and foreknowledge of the things to comme, partly by the commodities which
proceed of the temperature of the air, the plenty and abundance of all
things necessary for man's use: partly by tempests, thunder, inundacions,
hayle, lightening, earthquakes, storms, wonders, miracles, blasing stars,
eclipses of Son and Moon, of the revolution of the heavens, of the constant
and certain course of the fixed Stars and Planettes. Than must we confirm
with David and Paul, that Gods power, nature, and divinity, is known by
visible things subjected to our senses. Psalm 19. ve. 1.123.

Paul. Romans ^ ve. 30.


If David and Paul prove by the natural courses of the heavens that there is
a God, neither any people to be so ignorant, any Nati^n so rude, any country
so Barbarous, which have not heard their voices: for David says: Cicero (...)
Their sound are gone through all the world. Or as it is in the Hebrew: Their
rule and course is known through all the world. By a figure the sound and
voice is attributed in the.19. Psalm. to the heavens, because they declare unto
us with their constant course moving, and other marvelous dispositions,
constellations, and influences, that there is a God. And by this means Paul
proves the Gentyles to be without excuse, Romans 1. ve. 20 And as the woorked
of God are not ye causes why there is a God but as witnesses, so is the Church
a witness, but no cause.
because they might have known God by his creatures, and did know, but did
not glorifye him as God. By these it is evident, that the heavens and Gods
woounderous works are not the causes why there is a God, but God is the cause
of them, and they are as witnesses, and testimonies, that there must needs be
a God. And because all the Scriptures teach nothing else but God to be the
maker, defender, and gouerner of all, we are assured that they are the true
scriptures, because they agree with this law of Nature, with this Heavenly
description, and celestial disposition, whereby there is understand to be a
God. If David and Paul prove the divinity, power, and providence of God by
his creatures, so must we allow the scriptures by the same means, because
they differ not from the discourse. Wherefore the church takes no authority
of it self, but of God: nor the scriptures any power of men, which are full
of erroures.

We know, Moses, Danyels, Salomons, Jobs works, and the rest of the
scriptures to be of force, because they agree with the rule of nature. They
are witnesses, but no authors. If a Lawyer answer by the Law, he does his
duty: but if he answer of his own brain, it is naught, neither will any
man believe him. He is a wicked Judge that attributes more to his own wit
and will, than to the law. This does the Pope, contrary to all the ancient
Doctors, and virtuous writers, who affirm no man to be believed, unless he
allege the scriptures. If an Ambassador go from one Prince to an other, and
be commanded neither to add to his commission, nor diminishe, he is a
traitor if he do. How much more the Pope, who by his false embassage, does
not only add and diminishe where he lusts, but also changes, peruerteth,
corrects, depraueth, and abolissheth the Scriptures, setting up his own
constitutions and braynelesse Decreees. The Prince to whom this Ambassador is
sent, cannot tell whether his commission is true or no, but by conferring of
the other Princes letters, out of the which he must have the truth: So must
we run to the scriptures, and try by them whether the Pope and other impure
spirits do well in usurping such authority. The Church may be a witness,
the Church a witness.
that these are the Scriptures, as the heavenly bodies, that there is a God:
are the scriptures any better, although they be as testimonialles? The church
may be witness, the faythefull people may testify that these are the
scriptures, and yet the scriptures perfect, constant, and certain of them
selves. Augustine lib. 2. cap. 14.32. wills Cresconius to omit the
authority of Cyprian, Augustine interprets him ^^lfe.
and allege the scripture, the which, if he could he would give place.
Against Maximinus he wills him to let the councelles alone, and bring
scripture, that thereby the truth might be tried.

The third Objection.
The Pope is called in the first chapter of the Gospel of John, ver. 42.
Cephas, and Cepha in the Greek tongue is Caput, a head, Ergo the Pope is head
of the church. Lira. upon. ye 1. of John. Cephas. says Lire 15. Capitan.
Ibidem. Anacletus.
Your ignorance is intolerable: you despise the tunges, ye will rather cleave
to your old errors, and gloses, then to seek for the truth. You forsake the
fountaynes, and dig and drink of pudles and kennelles: You wrest and turn
the scriptures from the meaning of Christ, too satisfy your own opinions.
Your reading in the Text Cephas, which is a Syrian word, thought that it had been Cephale, a greek word. For, say you, Cephas is an head in greek, and
comes of Cephale, John. i. ve. 42
and therefore you say that Peter, who was called Cephas, is the head of the
church, when as Cepha, the Syrian word, which signifies a stone, being turned
into Greek, sounds Cephas. Thus ye turned white into black: y ee choppe,
ye change, ye turn, ye peruerte and deprave all for lack of knowledge. For
Christ says, Euthim. upon this place,
that whereas Peter was called before Simon, his name should be changed and
called Cephas, which is a stone, as John himself interprets it. Because that
not only Peter, but also all they that believe in Christ, John 1. ve. 42
are lively stones. As out of a stone comes fire, so does burning charity
out of godly men. As a stone or Rock is strong, steadfast and firm, so is
every Peter, I mean every Christian, against whose faith no Tyranny, no Hell
gates, no persecution, no affliction, can prevail. What do I say, do they
not preueyle? yea, they prevail against the body, the Soul they cannot kill.

The fourth Objection.
Is not he the chief and head that is first named? Is not a King named before
his subjects? The husband before the wife? Peter was first named.

I answer, Is Priscilla better then her husband, Matt. 10. ver. 2. Mar. 3.
ver. 16. Luc. 6. ve. 14. Act. 18. ve. 26. Cor. 11. ver. 3. 1. John. ve. 4^
because that she is first named in the text, and Aquila after her. But that
cannot be, for S. Paul says that the man is the woomans head. This word
Protos, as Theophilacte interprets, has his respect only to his brother
Andrewe, who was called before, and Peter after, for they two were protokleti.
And notwithstanding that Peter is named first in some places, yet is Andrewe
named before him, as in the first of John, ver. 44. Philip, says John, was of
the same City that Andrewe and Peter were of. And in the 24. ver. of the 20.
chaptes of Matthew, the other 10. were offended with James and John. In ye which
text Peter was not named the first but only with the rest. We are forbidden to
give Supremacy too any Bishop. Esoitai oi eschatoi protoi. Kai oi protoi
eschatoi oi eschatoi.

The fyfte Objection.
The Popes may lawfully depose Emperoures. The same. wrote Paul the 4 pope of
that name in ye year of Christ 1556. the.4. day of may in his bull which I saw
in prynte. psalm. 91. ver. 13.
For as the Moon takes light of the Sun, so does the Emperor of the Pope.
And the Pope may tread upon the Emperoures neck, as Pope Alexander did
upon the neck of Frederick, the second Emperor of that name. And that was
prophesied long before by David, a friend of ours, in these words: Super
Aspidem and Basyliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis Draconem and Leonem: Thou
shall walk upon the Adder and Basyliske, and shall tread upon the Dragon and
Lion. O you Tyrauntes, O you rebels. Where is your Truth, where is your
Obedience? Was it not spoken of Christ, and so generally to all good men,
against whom the force of the Devil should not prevail? Do you so entreat
your King and Prince?

How dare you be so bold, as to call your Emperor Aspis, Basylick, Lion
and Dragon? much less ought you to tread upon them, too put them too
death, and too depose them. They have authority by Gods word too rule over
you, Theodoret and Chrysostom upon the.13. to the Romans
too have you in subjection, and not you them. You allege Scripture as though
the Dyuell did too Christ: and the next verse, too that which the Dyuell
alleged: as though the Dyuell and the Pope were saying Matynes toogether.

The sixth Objection.
Well say what ye will, our holy Father may do what he list. What, if he
should sell the whole world, perhaps ye will say that it were Symonie: but I
will swear upon a book, that it were no Symonie, though he sold the whole
world, because that he sells but his own: for so our old friend David
prophesied upon him: Psalm. 8. ve. 6.7
Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius, oues and boues and pecora campi. Thou have
put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea all the beasts of
the field.

O heaven, O earth, the Dyuell alleged Scripture more probably. Surely David
speaks of man, too whom God has given all things for his use and
commodity: and Allegorically too Christ, whom he has made Lord and King
over all.

The seventh Objection.
Did not Pope Agatho write in an Epistle to the Emperors in the fourth Action
of the Synod at Constantinople, Cent. 7. c. 7. p. ^29. linea. 52.
that the church of Room did never err, neither was possible that it should
err? Is not this enough? Is it not a goodly saying? Is it not worthy too be
embraced? O what a goulden sentence is this? Where can you read the like? I
assure you it is not possible too be answered.

I answer, that I am able too prove that every Pope has erred, if sin be
error. Moreover, the most just man sins seven times, Prove. 24 ve. 16. 1.
John 1. ve. 8
and he that says, that he has no sin, is a liar, and there is no truth
in him.

The eight Objection.
Panormitane an Archebishoppe did affirm and reason in a Council at Basile,
Eneas Siluius libro. 1. and.2
in the.xxxix. Session, that the Pope ought too be above all Bishops.

I answer, that the said Panormitane made an Oration too that effect, and made
the Pope Lord over the Church: notwithstanding the Bishop of Argens, John
Segouius, and Fraunces de Funx, Divines, confuted that error in the said
Council, and proved Pope Eugenius the fourth of that name to be a relapse,
and an heretic: because yt he took upon him too dissolve, transporte, and
prorogue that Council. Can he be Lord over the Church, that should be a
minister, and as he writes him self, Seruus seruorum? 1 Peter. 5. ve. 3.
matt. 18. ve. 17.
Peter wills no man, no Bishop, too rule over the Chuch, but too be ruled
by the Church.

The ninth Objection.
Oraui pro te, Petre, ne deficiat fides tua. I have prayed for thee, Luc 22,
ver, 32.
Peter, that thy faith should not fayl thee. He can not err, whom Christ
prays for: but Christ prayed for Peter, ergo Peter could not err.

I deny the proposition, which you call the Mayor, for Christ prays for all
men, as well as for Peter, John 17. ve. 9 Luc. 23. ve. 34
and also for them that persecute him: ergo by your argument, all men should
be head of the Church, yea even they that persecute Christ, as the Pope does.
Augustine writes, that Peter figureth all Christians, Augustine upon ye
psalms
and the universal Church: ergo when Christ prayed for Peter, yt he should
not err, he prayed also for all Christians, and for the universal church,
that it should not err. And that this is Christ's meaning, Mat. 26. ver. 75.
Galat. 2. verse 11.14.
ye shall understand by the often fall of Peter after this prayer of Christ:
for he denied Christ thrice, and was also reproved of Paul after this prayer.

The tenth Objection.
Peter, feed my sheep: these words give too Peter a superiority. John. 21.
ver. 16.17. Act. 20. ver. 22 23.


I answer, that Christ did command James and John with the rest of the
Apostles to do the like Did they not feed the sheep of Christ also? Did not
James preach at Jerusalem, and John at Ephesus?

Moreover, Paul exhorts the elders of Ephesus too feed the flock and church
of God committed too their charge: Act. 20. ver. 28
wherefore too feed Christ's sheep, is as well proper too all men that have
the gift, as too Peter. Of this matter read Ambrose in his pastoral.

The.xj. Objection.
Pope Calixtus. did. 12. ca. non decet.
As Christ came too do the will of his Father, so must you do the will of your
mother the church of Rome.

I answer, that you call the church of Rome the Pope and his Cardinals, Matt.
18. ver. 19.
but Christ calls his church general, and not special, a communion of
Saints, and not a rabble of Bishops, as Tertullian writes, Catholic and
not Private. For Christ says, wheres^euer there be two or three gathered
together in his name, there is he among them, Matt. 18. ver. 19.
yea though they be Lay men, as Tertullian notes. Is the Pope the churches
son? or is he her father? If her son, what a son is he, that usurps
and prefers him self before his mother? Therefore says Augustine: God will
not acknowledge him self to be his father, that will not confess the church to
be his mother. If her father, ergo not her child.

You say, the Pope is the head. I answer, that when the Pope is cut of by
death, where is your head? is it not dead? where is the body? is it not dead?
But the body that is the Church, lives always, either Militant, or
Triumphant, or rather both: Ergo we must look for an other head, that can not
dye, even Christ above.

The.xij. Objection.
Had not Pope Paschalis in the year of Christ.1100. a girdell having seven
keys and seven seals, in token of his seuenfolde power, according to the
seuenfolde grace of the holy Ghost, of binbing, loosing, shutting, opening,
sealing, resigning, and judging.

I answer, that it is blasphemy to compare the Pope with the holy Ghost. Is not
he Antichrist, that attributes to him self all the gifts of the holy Ghost?

The.xiij. Objection.
No Council may be called without the Pope.

Act. 1. ver 4
I answer to this objection on this wise: We read that Christ called the first
council, willing the Apostles not too depart out of Jerusalem but to look
for the promise of the Father. In the election of the seuent deacons (which was
the second council) Peter did not call the council, but.12. Act. 6. ve. 5.
Apostles called the multitude. The third council was called in the.15. of the
Acts. Act. 15. ve. 18
Where it apereth that James was the chief and not Peter. Was the Pope called
to any of these councels? Nay surely, they never knew him.

And many years after Christ all the councels, til the Pope began to rule,
were gathered together by the Emperors, Ki^^es, princes, and other magistrates.

The.xiiii. Objection.
Omnino definimus, declaramus, pronu^ciamus, Bonifacius extra de. mayor. et
obed. c. vna in.

An Article of the faith.


omnem creaturam subesse Romano pontifici de necessitate salutis.

We define, declare, and pronounce that every creature must be under the Pope
of necessity, or else it cannot be saved.

I answer that salvation comes nether from the East nor the west, neither
from Rome, neither from priest, prelate, nor Pope, but from God only. Your
wealth and riches give you authority, you are rich in revenues, but poor in
heavenly treasures.

Blessed be the poor in sprite, Mat. 5. ve. 3
you are arrogant and presumptuous since that venym, I mean riches, entered
into the church, as the Lord Cobham said, whom the Archbishop of
Caunterburie, An. 1387.
Thomas Arundell asked what he meaned by that venyme. I mean (said he) your
Possessions, Lordeshippes, and Jurisdictions. For than cried an Angel in the
air, as your own Cronicles make mention, woe, woe, woe: Now, even this day is
venyme powered into the church.

Christ was meek and merciful: the Pope is proud, and a Tyrant.

Christ is poor and forgave: the Pope is rich and a malicious murderer.

Rome is the nest of Antichrist, and out of that filthy nest, come out
unclean birds, Prelates, Priests, Monks, Cardinals, which are the body of
Antichrist: and the pilde Friars the Tail, which cover his most filthy part.
For they preach lies, and therefore are the tail behind.

The xv. Objection.
Hierim. 1. ver. 10.

Pope Bonif. 8. extra, c. vna^ Sanctam.

Pope. Ioh 22 e^tra. c. supra. Gentes.

Rome over al Nations.


Jeremy prophecieth of the church of Rome, saying, behold I have set thee over
all Nations and Kingdoms, to pluck up, and to break down, and build, and to
plant. I answer, that God commanded Jeremy to pull up the weeds of
superstition, and to pull down all the monumentes of Idolatry. But the Pope
draws this godly sentence to the defense of his usurped power, perverting the
mind of the holy ghost, and deprauing the Text of Jeremy: and by this Text
he usurps that he may pull down the Gospel, and set up his decreees: root
out the truth, and plant heresy or superstition, as it is written of him in
another place: Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis.

The xvi. Objection.
Johannes de turre cremata, a holy Cardinal, writes thus: Papa est Rex Regum,
The Pope Lord of Lords
and Dominus dominantium, and verus Dominus totius orbis, iure, licet non
facto. The Pope is King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and the true Lord of the
whole world, by right, though not in deed. And that Constantinus when he gave
him Rome, restored to him but his own, John. 1. ve. 11 mark how ye Papists
deprave the Scr^ptures.
for the Pope, as S. John writes of Christ, in propria venit, and sui eum
receperunt: He came into his own, and his own received him.

I answer, Is not he Antichrist that peruerteth the Scriptures, and that
either adds or takes away: but he takes away Non, and attributes the
Text to him self, which utterly peruerteth the Text. Ergo he is Antichrist.
What a presumptuous Prelate is he that calls himself King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords? If ye read the letter sent to Cardinal Poole, by Stox^ye
Bishop of London, and Tunstall Bishop of Durham, and the book of Obedience,
written by Stephan Gardner Bishop of Wynchester, which all were rank
Papists: ye shall understand that they prove that the Pope is not the head of
the Church. The said Poole did say that Zuinglius opinion in the Sacrament was
most probable, which he could be content to follow, if the Church of Rome
had not decreeed the contrary.

The 17. Objection.
None has power against the Pope, no more then the Axe against the Hewer. Pope
Nico^, did. C. inferior.


I answer, that he may well be compared to a Hewer, which by his Axes and
cruel tyrauntes hew down the good timber, and if he could, would cut off
the Emperors and Princes necks.

The 18. Objection.
You heretics object, that the Canon Law says, Gloss. extra de sede
vacant. ad Apostolatus* Pope leo. causa. 1.4.7 c. nos. numbers.22. ver.
27.28.29 The pope balaam.
that Balaam when he was reproved of his Ass figureth the Pope and Prelates,
and the Ass their subjects. Ergo, say you heretics, the Pope may be
reproved of his subjects, but that is no example to be followed. For it
pleases not our holy father to be Balaam or his Ass.

I answer, that if ye admit other parts of the Canon Law, why will ye
not admit this? Does Balaam signifye Prelates? Surely your own Law
subuerteth it self. For whether was Balaam or his Ass wyser? If his Ass, as
she was in deed, then are the Popes subjects wyser. For the law says, that
the Ass signifye them.

The 19. Objection.
The Pope may not be accused of any crime, Hugo in glo^t did. 40. ca. non
nos. did. 4 ca. si papa. Exodus 26. ver. 13.14.15. Act. 8. ver. 9 1. Timot. 1.
ve. 9.10. 1. Cor. 6. ver. 9
niether of murder, neither adultery, neither symonie, or such like.

I answer, Is not murder contrary to the sixte commandment? Is not
adultery against the seventh? And theft against the eight? And Symonie an
offense against the holy ghost? And other vices against wholesome doctrine?
Besides this, neither murder nor adultery shall enter into the kingdom of
God.

The 20. Objection.
He that disobeyeth me, is as much to be cursed, August. de an co^a. glos.
ord.
as he that denies the Omnipotency of God.

I answer, that this is the voice of Antichrist, and therefore not worthy to
be answered.

The 21. Objection.
It may seem well verifyed of me that was spoken of Christ, Antony* su^me,
mayor. 3 part. did. 22.
Psalm. 8. Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius, oues, and boues, and vniuersa
pecora campi, volucres coeli, and pisces maris: Thou have subdewed all things
under his feet: Sheep, Oxen, and all cattle of the field, the birds of
heaven, and the fishes of the sea.

I answer, Is not he the child of perdition, that chalengeth that which was
proper to Christ, and compares him self with God? Hostiens. in ca. quar. de
translat: proel. ex summa casuum. Fratris baptist.
2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 4. They say he is all in all, and can do all that God can
do, Claue non errante. Do you not understand by Oxen the Jews, and
Heretics: by cattle, Paganes: by sheep Emperors, Princes, and Prelates: by
birds, the Aungelles and Potentates of heaven, over whom he has power, and
whom he does excel in four points, in Jurisdiction, in administration of
the Sacraments, in knowledge, and in reward. By the fishes of the sea,
Antonius. 23. q. 5. ca. ^mniu^.
are meaned the souls of purgatory, as Gregory ye Pope did deliver the
Emperor Traiane out of hell.

The 22. Objection.
Glos. in causa. ^1. q. 3. cap. absit.
The Popes law says, that if any of his Clergy should be found embracing a
woman, it must be expounded and presupposed, that he does it to bless her.

1 Thessalonians. 5. ve. 22.
I answer, that we may not only absteyne from doing of evil, but also from
all suspicion of evil.

The 23. Objection.
Glos in causa. ^^. q. 3. ca. absit.
The Pope in his supremacy, is Abell, in government the Arche of Noe, in
Patriarchdome Abraham, in order Melchisedech, in dignity Aaron, in authority
Moses, in seat Judicial Samuel, in zeal Helias, in meekness David, in
power Peter, in unction Christ.

^^. Ge. 4. ve. 8.
I answer, the Pope cannot be Abel, for the Pope persecuteth, and Abell was
persecuted. The Arche figureth the Mystical body of Christ: but the Pope
presumes to be the head, Ergo, he is not the Arche. Hebr. 7. ver. 2.
Abraham gave Tithes, the Pope receives: ergo he is not Abraham: Melchisedech
he is not, for none is after the order of Melchisedech, but Christ only: As
Paul proves evidently. Heb. 7. ver. 3.11.15.16.17. Heb. 5. ver. 6. Psa. 110.
ve. 4. Heb. 7. ver. 3.
But the Pope is not Christ, Ergo, not Melchisedech. Moreover, Melchisedech is
without father or mother, beginning or ending, the Pope is not.

Aaron ruled not over Kings, the Pope rules over the whole world: Ergo he is
not Aaron.

Moses ruled over Jury, the Pope over Asia, Africa, Europe, America, heaven,
Angels, hell damned souls, and the poor wretches of purgatory, Ergo, etc.
Samuel granted his authority to a securall Prince, even to Saul, the pope
denies it, ergo he is not Samuel.

Helias killed the priests of Baall: 1. Reg. 9. ver. 22. 1. Reg. 18. ver. 40.
the Pope promoteth such like: ergo he is not Helias.

David forgave his enemies, the pope reuengeth: ergo he. etc.

The Emperor Nero persecuted Peter, as they write, but the Pope persecuteth
Emperors: ergo, etc. Luc. 9. ver. 18.


Christ was anointed of the holy ghost: the Pope of men, ergo he is not Christ.

The 24. Objection.
We have a place out of David Psalm. 19. ver. 4. Fundamenta. de elect. in sexto.
say the Papists which no heretic can deny. Their sound is gone thorowgh the
whole world. In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum. The sound of our holy father
and of his successors is gone through the world, his pardones, his legates,
his belles, his bulls, his commissions, his grace, his power, his prerogative,
his athoritie, is in every corner of the earth. I answer that this place of
David proves that the merueylous works of God, as the Stars, the Moon, the
Sun and the descryption of the heavenly bodies, declare that there is a God, and
because that David expresses the matter more effectually in his natural
tongue, thus he says.

Hashamaim, mesapperim Cheuod el, oumaguas hiadeue, magid harachiang, tom leiom
iabbiang omer, velaiel lelaiela iecaue daguath. En omer, veen debarim beli
nishmaug colam. Be call haharets iatsa cauam ou bictse tebel nullehem, lashemesh
sham ohel bahem. Ve hu Cerhatha^ iotse mecuppatho, iashis che gibbor larats
orac. mictse hashamaim motsao ou to couphato gual chet sotham, ve en iustar me
canematho. Hitherto I have repeted and confuted (although they need no
confutation, they were so falsely alleged) some objections although not al
which they collect out of the Scriptures, or out of other probable authors. Now
I will note certain such absurdities, as they bring out of their laws,
decrees, decretals, and out of such as have for lucre, promotio^, and for
flattery bestowed their time in uttering absurdities, and such absurdities, as
do more effectually overthrow and deface their doings, then any of our
answers or confutations can. These I thought good to signify, least that any
man should think that the time is evil bestowed in writing them, worse in
reading: and worst of all, in printing. Ye shall therefore understand, that
there is nothing so abominable, nothing so absurd, so unreasonable and
contrary to all sense, which they dare not both speak, write, printe,
aduouche, and also defend. As for example:

What say they, though Julius the second Pope did throw Peter's keys into
Tyber, Julius 2.
and swore an horribe oath, that seeing they would profit nothing, he would
try what Paul's sword could do. Julius 3.
And what, though Julius the third blasphemed for his hoggos flesh, saying:
putano de Dio, dispetto de Dio, bring me my hogs flesh. And likewise for
his Peacock, when one asked, why his holiness was so moved, he answered: If
God cast Adam out of Paradise for eating of an Aple, what would you have me
too do for my Peacock? Is not my peacock better then an Aple? And thus they
answer such blasphemies: that, in that the Pope was a man, he offended, but
in that he was Christ's Uicegerent, he could not sin: For, say they,
though he were a desperate man, yet the seat and place, makes him holy.

Now I come to their Objections which they allege out of their Canons and
Doctors.
The first Objection.
HE is, say they, the head of the Church that rules the whole world. But the
Pope rules the whole world* Ergo he is the head of the Church.

I deny the Minor. They prove it by Thomas, the irrefragable Doctor, in these
words: The Pope (says he) is chief Bishop. For as a King rules his
realm, so does he the whole world: and Bishops, for his help and ease, are
joined in every city, as Judges, Thom. secund. secund. 4.98. art. 9. and 4.20.
art. 4. What an argument is this of Thomas of Aquine? Is it a good comparison
to compare a subject with a King? or rather prefer him before the king of
the Romans?

1 Where was his authority, when Nero persecuted (as they say) Peter? 2 Was
not Linus (as they report) the second Pope at Rome, Many of the first learned
men whom they call Popes, put to death.
in the year of Christ 82? Where was his universal power? where was his
might, when he was put to death of Saturninus, the Consul of Rome, who was
inferior to Vespasian, being Emperor at that time? 3 Did not Domitian kill
Anacletus? an. 84. 4 Did not Trayane fasten an anchor above Clementes neck and
cause him to be cast into the sea? anno. 102. 5 Was not Euarestus murdered by
the same Emperor. 6 Did not Aurelianus the Liuetenant the like to Alexander.
an. 121. 7 And was not Pius killed in the time of Antonius verus? an. 121 8 And
likewise Anicete? an. 159. And Sother? an. 169. 9 And Eleutherius beheaded? an.
177.191. 10 And Zepherinus in the time of the Empe. Aurelius. an. 220. 11 And
Ca^ixtus in the time of Seuerus apprehended, beaten with clubbes, cast in
prison, thrown out of a window headlonge, and his body cast into a pit? an.
^26. 12 And Vrbanus at the same time banished, and at length killed? an. 233.
13 And Pontianus at the same time was banished into Sardinia, tormented,
afflicted, and suffered death? ano. 239. 14 And Autherius in the time of the
Emperor Maximinus? an. 243. 15 And Fabianus under Decius, An. 250. 16 And
Cornelius also. anno. 253. 17 and Lucius under Valerianus. ann. 255. 18 and
Stephan under Galienus beheaded. an. 257. 19. Sixtus the second of that name
was likewise martyred, An. 267. 20. So was Dionysius, An. 277. 21. So Felix,
an. 282. 22. So Eutichianus, an. 283. 23. So Caius, anno. 295. 24. So
Marcellinus, an. 303. 25. So Marcellus, anno. 308. 26. So Eusebius, an. 309.
27. So Melchiades, an. 314.
The Papists say, that all these were Popes. I pray you, how ruled they all
the world, as Thomas says, the Popes do? where was their authority above
all Kings, Princes, Emperors, and Monarchs? If of God, or of Peter, or of
them selves, why did they not resist? why were they put too death? If they had
none, as none they had in deed, than of whom had the Popes following their
power and tyranny, to kill innocents, to depose Emperors, to disgrade
Bishops, to rule in hell, heaven, earth, and purgatory, to absolve a poena
and culpa, to do what they lust, to oppress, banish, and murder?

The second Objection.
Well say what you will, the Pope is marvelous, for he has his name of
merueling. And he is to be wondered at, because he is Peter's vycegerent in
the earth, Papa stupor mu^di.

Galfridus in Clement.


for he has his name of Papae, an Interiection of merueling. And without
doubt, he occupies not the place of a pure man, but of the true God. Textus
est in Codice int. corpor. de transl. Episcopi. I answer: You say that he has
his name of Papae, an Interiection of merueiling, and in deed the Revelation
and Paul says, that Antechrist, when he shall come, Apoc. cap. 17. ver.
3.4.5. 2. These. 2. ve. 4.
which is the Pope, shall work meruailes, and do false miracles by
Necromancie and iniquity.

The third Objection.
Has he not a great preeminence, when as no man neither may, nor dare, ask
him in any matter why he does so. De poen. did. ex person.

The fourth Objection.
Neither is the Pope Peter's vicegerent, but he occupies the room that Peter
occupied. Gloss. in Clement. vna. de iure iur. in verb. vicar.

The fifth Objection.
Do you not know that the Popes name is changed in his Creation,
Consecration, and enstalling, that by the changing of the name the man may
likewise be changed. Glos. in prohemio vi. decre^e in verbo boniface.

Polidor. libro.4. cap. 30.

Plat. volat.


For where he was a pure man before, now is he become the Uicegerent of the
true God: as in example: Who was a cruel tyrant before, is now changed and
called Clemens. He that was hurtful, is now Innocent: He that was a
maleface, Boniface: and so forth of the rest.

Has not the Pope both the swoordes? Is not he an heretic that breaks the
constitution of the Pope, or that holds, that the Pope is not able to make a
constitution? he is a paynim that will not obey the Pope. The Pope may depose
the Emperor without a Council, yea with a cause or without a cause: Stat pro
ratione voluntas.

These Objections are thus to be answered, that, as none of these are
contained in the scriptures, no more are they to be credited than fables of
Homer, or Ouide. In changing their names, they detect their hypocrisy: who
will believe that the chaunginge of a man's name will make an evil man, a good
man: of a dishonest, an honest? Besides this, is not the Pope a man still,
though he be anointed consecrated, enstalled, and entromyzed? Is not an Axe,
an Axe, though he have a Childs coat upon his back? ought he to rule the
Empernur? Is not he bound too give too Caesar, that which is Caesar's? Luc.
20. ve. 25. James de terra.
Notwithstanding one cursed James de Terano, Chamberlayne to Vrbane the sixth
Pope of that name in the year of Christ 1385. interprets this place of Luke,
of the Emperors before Christ's passion, but after that Christ was ascends
into heaven as victor and conqueror, he writes thus: When I shall be lifted
up from the ground, I will draw all too my self, John. 1^. ver. 32.
that is (says the said James) I will take away all Empire, Kingdoms,
Jurisdictions, and Dominions of the world from the Emperors and Kings, and
give them too the Pope, who when he has subdued them, and brought them in
subjection, he may use the Royalty, riches, gorgeous apparel, and all other
things, Augustinus de ancona. (...). Antonius tit. 22. ca. 17. after Christ
1330.
as subject too him. This cursed James, as Molineus terms him, is too be
condemned of treason for forging a false coin. For where it is in John, that
Christ by his death should ouercom death, hell, and all the world, he applies
it to the Pope, of whom John did not once dream, unless he prophesied of him
amongs other Antechristes in his Epistles, whom he there describ^th. And as
for the place of Luke, Luc. ^0. ver. 25^
it is to be understood of Civil and temporal Magistrates, and not of
Spiritual and Mystical inu^ntoures of Iniquities, and so understands
Chrysostom, Origin, and Theodoret upon the.xiij. chapter of S. Paul to the
Romans, proving that all Bishopes and such as we call Spiritual men, Romans 13.
must needs be under the Jurisdiction of Civil Magistrates, obey them, and
pay them Tribute. Besides this, this James proves, as Augustinus de Ancona
did.lxxx. years before him, that the Pope had not only authority over all
Kings and Emperors that were Christend, The Popes power.
but also over Turks and Paymins, because that Christ gave his full authority
too the Pope when he ascended, and that Iuditiary power (for these are his
terms) over every creature, because that he left the Pope both the keys,
Temporal and Spiritual.

The sixth Objection.
He is the head of the Church that has two keys, the one too open Heaven
gates to his friends, 2. Keys. 3. Crowns.
the other to shut out his ennemies. And he has three Crowns, because that
he is a King, a Caesar, and a Bishop: or rather, because be has authority
in Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory: or else, as Gregorius Doctor Hispanus did
preach in Cambredge, he said, that the Pope was counted in Spain, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and that was signified by his three
crowns. A golden hammer.

Beza upon. 2 Thessalonians. 2 ve. 4.


Moreover, in every year of Iubile he has a golden hamer, wherewith he
knocks at the gates of Paradise. Is this no preeminence? is not he the head
yt has this authority? I grant that the flattering Glosers of the Canon
law write such things, but they are too foolish too be credited, too false
and absurd too be approved, too ridiculous too be aduouched, and to
detestable to be admitted.

The 7. Objection.
He that has both the temporal and spiritual swoorde, must needs be the
head of the church: but the Pope has both, Ergo, Two sword^
he is the head of the church.

I deny the Minor, we prove it thus: Do you not read, that Boniface the
eight Pope of that name, came out in a solemn feast day in the apparel of a
Bishop, as gloriously as ever was Aaron with the spiritual sword, to frame
the Spirituality withal. And on an other feast day he came out in the apparel
of the Emperor with great pomp and glory, with a naked sword, shaking it,
and saying: This is my sword to correct the Temporal withal: yea even
Kings, Princes, and the Emperor. I answer, that this he does by this
rule: Sic volo, sic iubio, stat pro ratione voluntas. For that he did without
reason or authority.

The 8. Objection.
Is not he the head of the church that is above Kings, Cesars, and Councelles,
and above the whole world? The Pope above all power.
Innocent. 9. quest. 3. and gloss. ibi. and vlt. ext. de elect. significasti.

The 9. Objection.
And though all the world should give sentence against the Pope,
notwithstanding his sentence must stand, because that he may dispense with
all things: Iud. Glossat. de Capell. Papa si vult. etc.

The 10. Objection.
The Pope is above all Councelles and Statutes, de elect. cap. signif.

I aunsw^re, If his authorities be above councels, then councelles be vain,
and need not, when as we may go to the head and spring, who is above either
councelles or Laws. For you say, that all the laws are in the chest of the
Popes breast.

But we credit not these sayings, because they are made by Popes without
authority, either of Gods word, or of old Doctors. Wherefore this is that
Antichrist, that is described in the Revelation, cap. 13. cap. 17. cap. 18.

The 11. Objection.
Peter ye head of the church.
He that has the same authority that Peter had, is the head of the church.
But the Pope has the same authority that Peter had. Ergo the Pope is the head
of the church.

I deny the Mayor, for Peter was not the head of the church, nor any better
then the other of the Apostles. Moreover, Peter was a mere man, and a mere
man was not the head of a spiritual church.

The 12. Objection.
The Pope above all.
Is not he above all that can dispense with the law of nature, with Moses, with
the old Testament, with the new Testament, with Christ, Peter, Paul, and the
rest of the Apostles.

I answer, that none does so but* Antichrist. For of Antichrist, Paul
writes so in the second epistle to the Thessalonians, the second chapter. ver.
4. But you say, the Pope does so: Ergo, the Pope is Antichrist.

The 13 Objection.
There may no man Judge of the the Popes dooinges, neither the Clergy, Causa.
9. ques. 3. c. patet. vilierius. de. stat. private. eccles. c nemo ^^. ques. 4.
did. 40. c. si Papa. et ca. 2. eiusdem. did.
neither Kings, neither Emperors* Shall the Judge of all be judged of any? Is
it not known through all the world, that the church of Rome does judge all the
world, and it may be judged of none? who dare dispute of the Popes dooinges?
who doubts of the Popes holiness, who is in such authority? If he lack
goods deeds, or any other thing, it is enough for him to trust in the
predecessors of that place. These blasphemies answers Paul in the second to
the Thessalonians, second chapter, ver. 4. where he writes, that this
Antichrist makes him self God.

The xiiii Objection.
Remundus rufus, a noble defendor of the holy Sea of Rome, Rufus
reasons thus, the Pope is the chief because he is the first in time,
reverence and power. In time, for Peter was at Rome the first Pope: in
reverence for who is too be reverenced more then he? in power, what Bishop,
what Prelate, what Monarche is to be compared to him? I answer to the first,
that Peter was never at Rome, and therefore was neither first Pope nor last at
Rome: moreover Paul was at Rome before him, by ye testimoni of their own
writers.

And Peter was no bishop, ergo no bishop of Rome: Peter was an Apostle and no
bishop. A bishop kept in a certain place: Peter no vis.
an Apostle went above every where. As for his reverence, what reverence should
the Pope have above others? Math. 20. ve. 26.
if he will be first he must be last, as Christ writes. As concerning his
power, what is it? Who gave it to him? He is or ought to be a servant, no
lord: a minister, no master, a member of the body and not the head.

What if Rome were utterly destroyed by the Turk (as it may be) and the Popes
name, glory, dignity, and memory, clean extinguished, where should the Romish
church be? where should be all her decrees? should not all be utterly
abolished? 2 Thessalonians. 2. ve. 8.
shall not Christ destroy him with the sprite of his mouth?

The.xv. Objection.
Do you not remember what Nicolaus the first Pope of that name did write? He
said and also determined, Nicolaus the Pope.

The Pope is God.


that no christian magistrates should have any power above the Pope, because
that he is called god, as Antonius writes. tit. 16. If no magistrate have
jurisdiction over him, if no man, may appeach him, if he be god, is he not
worthy to be the head of the Church? I grant that he takes upon him all these
tytles, and so the deuel would have done, who moved Christ to sit down and
worship him, and he would give to him the whole world. Matt. 24. ver. 15. 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 3. Job. 40. ve. 10.

Jeremy. 5. ver. 10. 2. Cor. 6. ver. 15.

Psalm. 22. ve. 16. Apo. 12. ver. 3. 2. Timothe. 3. ver. 4.

Ioh 6. ve. 7^. John. 10. ve. 1. Za. 11. ver. 17. John 10. ver. 12.

Esau. 27. ver. 1.

E. 27. ver. 1. Bembus. libra. 13.

Ioueus lib. 8. The Pope can make of nothing some thing etc.

Gloss. in clem. He swears by his holiness Geminianus. 1. Timo. 3. ve. 2.

The Popes power in heaven. etc.


Wherefore he is the Abomination of desolation, the child of perdition,
Behemoth, Bell, Beliall, a Dog, a Dragon, a Traitor, the Deuell, a Thief, an
Idol, a Wolf, a Serpent, Leuiathan.

The 16. Objection.
The place, nor the Pope cannot err but only in that, that he is man, but in
that, that he is Christ's Uicegerent, he cannot err: how say you by this?
crack me this nutte.

And although that Peter Bembus calls Alexander the sixte a murderer: and
likewise Julius the third: yet we protest, that, if Bembus had been learned in
our Canons, and Gloses, he would not have written so. I maruayle what men
mean to speak so against our holy Father, seeing he can make of nothing,
something, of injury, justice, potest facere de nihilo aliquid, and de
iniusticia iusticiam, and mutare quadrata rotundis. Pauor. post hoc, in, etc.
The Pope calls himself to witness, because there is none greater by whom
he may swear. Though Paul writes, and wills that a Bishop should be
without fault: notwithstanding the Pope may dispense with him: though he be an
unthrift, a Ruffyan, a liar, a thief, a coniurer, a perjured man, and such
like. Geminianus lib. 8. cap. 49. Jesus good Lord, what, and how mighty a
Prelate is our holy father the Pope: has not he authority over the Aungelles
in heaven, and also over the damned souls in hell, as Petrus Costus reports?

I answer, that all these sayings are full of iniquity, and rather to be
punished by the Magistrate with the swoorde, then answered with the pen.

The 17. Objection.
How say you to this golden sentence. Sext. decret. that the Pope makes the
place holy, and therefore Rome is without spotte or wrincle.

I answer, if he be an evil man, he depraueth the place, and that the Pope is
evil, his fruits do declare.

Distinct. 40. Cap. si. papa.
The 18. Objection.
What if the Pope, says Busgradus carry all the world too hell with him, or
believe that there is no life to come, (as some did) or be an homocide, or a
Sodomite, or as blasphemous as Julius the third, or as evil as the devil, or
if he blaspheme the virgin Mary as a ruffian, as the said Julius did, we must
believe that we must be saved by him, or else we must be dampened without
redemtion: for whatsoever he does we must believe it as an article of our
faith, for who may or dare ask him why he does so. What shall we answer to
these blasphemies, they are not worthy to be repeted, to horrible to be
mentioned, to absurd to be confuted, to vile to enter into any man's ears.

The xix Objection.
How answer you this authentical sentence, of the gloss of the Prologe of the
Clementines, that the Pope is neither god, nor man sed Neuter inter vtrunque?
If he be neither god nor man, but neuter between them both, than is he a
monster, or if he be neither god, nor man, he is surely the deuel, or else
some Antechrist.

The xx Objection.
Is not he the head of the Church that is better then the virgin Mary, but the
Pope is better then the virgin Mary: Ergo he is the head of the Church. What
if I should deny the Mayor, ye could not prove it: but I will deny the Mayor:
he that can make him that is better then the virgin Marye, is better then the
virgin Marye: But the Pope can make a priest, which is better then the virgin
Mary: Ergo the Pope is better then the Uirgin Marye. A priest is better then
the virgin Mary in this point, Bullengerus, in Apocalips.
that she bare Christ but once, but the priest every day. I could answer this
by the like absurdity of yours after this sort. You say that a priest can
make god: But he that can make god, is better then god: Ergo the priest is
better then god. A Priest makes God.
But the Pope can make a priest, if the priest who is an inferior can make
god, what can the Pope make who is superior to a priest? Surely a thing above
god: does not the Pope in making of god, exalt him self above god. Therefore he
is that man of sin and child of perdition that is spoken of in the second to
the Thessalonians. cap. 2. ver. 3. and.4.

The 21. Objection.
He is the head of the church that can give the names of dignity, and tytles
to all Princes, Kings, and Monarchs, and may crown them: But the Pope can
do this. Ergo, the Pope is the head of the church. I deny the Minor. I prove
it thus: What King has not his title given of the Pope? name one if you can.
To be brief, he gave this title to the French King to be Christianissimus,
most Christian King, and to the King of England to be Defensor fidei,
Defendour of the faith. I grant he did this, but he chalendged this
authority falsely, and then he did as the scripture prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
ve. 4.
that he should do, Exalte himself above all power.

The 22. Objection.
He that curses, when, and whom he will, is the head of the church. But the
Pope can both curse and bless when, and whom he will. Ergo, the Pope is the
head of the church.

I deny the Minor. I prove it thus: Was not England cursed by the Pope, and
our holy father Iulie the thixde of that name did of his mere mercy, give one
drop of Christ's blood (reserved at Rome) to perdon England withal: or
rather of his holiness and absolute power perdoned England. In the year of
Christ 1553. the 19. day of October? non obstantibus constitutionibus, and
ordinationibus Apostolicis* caeterisque contrarijs quibuscunque:
Notwithstanding the constitutiones and ordinances of the Apostles, or any other
whatsoever they be to the contrary. Are you not ashamed to take the honor
from God, and give it to a man? From the Creator, and give it to the creature?
you say, that though the Apostles, or any other (in which words, both God
and Christ are contained) did ordeyne and decree the contrary, that the Popes
blessing must prevail, his judgment stand, and he to be all in all.

The 23. Objection.
Pelagius, many years agone, ordained that the church of Rome had not her
authority of men or of Synodes, Did. 21. que vi^
but of christ. And Gregory the seventh, and Nicolas the third, were more
plain: For they concluded that the Pope was the Supreme head without all
controversy. Supremacy when it began


I answer, that by these it is manifest, that it was 560. years after
Christ, before that any mention was made of any supremacy for these two first
forged supremacy: that which was first, is most probable: but at the first
there was no supremacy: Ergo there should be none.

The 24. Objection.
He is the head of the church, that gives authority and license to all the
other Apostles to preach, to be priests, Peter de Palude de* potes^. apost.
artic. ^.
and to minister the seven Sacraments: But Peter gives all these. Ergo Peter
is the head of the church.

Peter Palude is the author of this argument, a man of great woorship.

The 25. Objection.
He is the head of the church, whom the Chair doothe bless, although he
were Judas, or a murderer. But the chair blesses the Pope: ergo the Pope, if
he were Judas, or a murderer, is the head of the church.

The 26. Objection.
He that is God, is the head of the church: But the Pope is God, ergo the pope
is the head of the church.

The second proposition is proved by the authority in the margin. hosi. in
confess. petriconien. c. 29. did. 94. satis euidenter. Marcel. in conc. late.
sess. 4. Card. in co^. trident.

Extra. John. 22. cum in ter. in Glossa.

Imprinted at lions. 1555.

In con. lat sub leon^. 10. ses. 10 Extra de constat. canon.

Gregor. hamburg* in appel. Sigismundi Ducis Aust. Prier. against Luther.

De potest. col. Apost.

Durand. ^. de. min^^tr. and ord. De tran. epist. quanto host Co^nel y^ ^ish*
of bi^^nt^ in y^ coun. of trent.




The 27. Objection.
He that is head of Angels, and Archaungelles, is the head of the church:
But the Pope is the head of Aungelles and Archaungelles: Ergo the Pope is the
head of the church.

The Minor is proved in the margin.

The 28. Objection.
He that is above the scripture, is the head of the church: But the Pope is
above the scriptures: ergo the Pope is the head of the church.

The assumption is proved by Siluester Prierias.

The 29. Objection.
He is the head of the church, that is the light of the world, which
illuminateth every man, that comes into the world: But the Pope is that
light, which illuminateth every man, that comes into the world: Ergo the Pope
is the head of the Church?

The xxx. Objection.
Did. 80. in illis. Mat. 5.
He that has authority to break laws is of more force then he that came not
to break laws: but the Pope came to break the laws and Christ came to
fulfill the laws and not to break them: Ergo the Pope is the head of the
Church.

The xxxi. Objection.
If there were nothing to prove the Pope to be head of the church saving his
apparel and ornaments, yet surely they might persuade any man too believe, to
maintain, and to glorify, our holy father the Pope, The special power of
the Pope.
does not Buechingerus and Inocentius Libro. 3 de Altaris mysterio ca. 1. et.
10. affirm that there are.9. special ornaments: his hose, his shoes, or
sandalles, his succynctory or girdell, his Tunicle, his Dalmatica or long
sleued Gown, his Meter, his Gloves, his Ring, and Staff. In these consists
the special power of the Pope, even to give orders, to bless Maids, to
consecrate Bishopes, to lay on hands, to make grese or Chrisma, to consecrate
clothes and vessales, to call Sinodes, to dedicate Temples, and to depose them
that are disgraded, and do many other merytorious works.

What shall I speak of his two horned mitre? of the hemmes of his garment? of
his cross and staff? of his chimer? and other vestements. His shoes pardoned
venyall sins, his staff has many virtues, the crooked horn, fetches in
them that go astray, the end knocks the obstinate, refourmeth the
disobedient. What shall I speak of his breches, and handkirchef. Of his knives
and twoedged Swerds? of his goulden hamer I have spoken before.

I answer that these more comend the Pope and set forth his praise, then his
virtues do: He glories in his apparel, Paul in Christ his cross, he in
outward things, Paul in inward, he in pomp, Paul in poverty, he in vain
glory of the world, Paul in the joys of Heaven. Is not all this apparel
corruptible? will it not consume? will not his crown in time wear away and
decay? But the immortal crown which Peter speaks of, will never. You are
not ashamed to put your trust in worldly things, 1. Petr. 5. ^e* 4
but in scriptures you put no trust, them you cannot abide: Does not James
Hocstrate in his book intytuled, Of praying to saints, A grip. against ye
Louan. arti. 2.
pronounce him to be an heretic, that flies to the scriptures, and that
custom ought to be followed before the scriptures, because a common error
makes a law. A common error makes a Law.


We have hitherto proved our holy father to be the head of the Militant Church
here in earth, (though the Lutherians say, that he is head of the Malignant
Church). Now will we prove that he is the head of the Triumphant Church,
which is in Heaven.

The first Objection.
HE is the head of the Triumphant Church, that Canonizeth Saints, Pope.
Hildebr^nde called Gregory. 7. plat. in vita Gregorij. Alexander. 3. ti. ul. 46.

Antoninus in 3. part sum maioris.


and has authority over Angels, that makes of the triumphant church whom he
lists: But the Pope does this, Ergo he is the head. I deny the Minor, we
prove it, Let us see if you find any day in the year dedicated to any Saint,
which the Pope did not dedicate, and consecrate. He made the Apostles days:
the four Lady days, made Corpus Christi a Saint, S. Peter's cheynes, S.
Grave or S. Sepulcher, S. seven Sleepers, s. Sunday, s. Grimbold, S. Chrisogon.
s. Gorgon, s. Rooke, s. Dunstone, s. Thomas Becket, whom King Henry did
vnsainte, and disgrade: holy John Shorn, holy King Henry: many a Prelate,
Bishop and Pope, and in fine, al his benefactours, for whom he commands
every Priest to pray for in his Canon of the blessed mass, which we trust he
will make a Saint, one day, for surely she is our good Mistres, she prospers
Prelates, exalts Hermits, aydeth Hunters, purges Pigs, helps Hogs, causes
rain, and fair weather, delivers out of Purgatory, and directs general
councelles. Finally she were as worthy to be a Saint as any of them all.

I answer, that the Pope takes upon him to do and say so. But think you
that he can do so? Surely he has made some saints that are deuilles, and
some that there were never none such. What manner of Saint is saint Sunday?
or Rymon, or s. Gyners, or s. Redygons, or s. Apellinare for tootheache:
Ualentine for Lovers: Lo for Smithes, Crispine, Martine and Chrispinian for
Shoemakers, Nicolas, and Cletus for Clerks, and yet many write there was never
none such as Cletus: Eusebius. Ierom, Mar. Agrippa. con. Louan. ca. 26.
George for warriers, Andrew for Scotland, Denis for France, James or Jacques,
for Spayn, about Louane Urbane, whom they Crown and carry about with great
pomp to Tauernes, if they have plenty of fruits: if no, they spitte upon him:
they reuyle him, and throw him into the kennelles. They painte with John and
Bernard the devil, with George like to ye Egyptians a Crocodile, with Rooke a
dog, with Antony a sow. The Hollanders use Paulyne, as Louanians Urbane,
although that there be no part in man's body so honest, unto the which ye
Pope has not appointed a saint: and none so uncomely, which has not his
saint. Neither any absurdity that you can name, but they have a saint for
it: yet say they, the Pope cannot err, although it is evident that he
Canonizeth (as they say) these Saints, booth contrary to Scriptures,
Councelles, ^o. 8. ver. 34*
and Doctoures. It is in saint Paul, that, if God only iustifyeth, who can
condemn? can the Pope?

Thus I reason, He that cannot iustifye a man, he cannot Canonize. But the
Pope cannot iustifye, Ergo he cannot Canonize. That the Pope does not
iustifye, all those places prove, which prove Christ too be our only Head,
1. John. 2. ve. ^.2.

1. Tim. 2. ve. 5 Romans 3. ve. 24*


Redeemer, Iustifyer, and Glorifyer.

To Canonize
To Canonize is to glorify, to give felicity, to make a Saint of a man, and
to introduce him into eternal joy, and this does only Christ. Ergo not the
Pope which Paul proves by this climax, this gradation, this induction, and
sorites. Whom God has predestinate, To. 8. ver. 30
them he has called, whom he has called, them he has justified, and whom
he has justified, them he has glorified. But the Pope can predestinate no
man, Ergo neither iustifye them, then neither Glorify them, and per
consequens, not Canonize them. Revelation. (...) ver. 10.

Dancel. 3. ve. 18.


We may woorshippe neither the Uirgine Marie, neither the Apostles, neither
any Saint, neither make holy days, or Temples for them, much less Canonize
them, which comprehends all these. This does Epiphanius prove at large, Tom.
2. in 27. Haeresie, and Theodorete upon the second Chapter too the Collossians.
August. contra Faustum, lib. 2. cap. 21. de Ciuit. lib. 10. cap. 1. lib. 21.
cap. 26. lib. 22. cap. 10. upon the Psalm 113. Ambros. upon Romans 1. and the
Council of Laodicia.

The second Objection.
He that cannot err, can Canonize Saints: But the Pope cannot err, Ergo,
the Pope can canonize saints.

I deny the Minor. For I will allege out of their^ own Authoures such
Testimonies, as they write, by the which ye shall perceive that the Popes did
as well err in doctrine as in manners.

The first.
Marcellinus, in the year of Christ, 295 denied Christ, offered to Images and
Idolles. Notwithstanding he repented him, and suffered death after that, for
Christ. Hier. in Chro. and fortunat.


2 Liberius, in the year of Christ, 354. through ambition became an Arian.
Amia. marcel. lib. 27. Ruffin. lib. 1 ca* 1^0.


3 Damasus, in the year of Christ, 368. after much slaughter done in a
church at Rome, was made Pope.

4 Sericius, in the year of Christ. 382. prohibited the Priests of the West
churches to be married, Grati. did. 8^ Poly. lib. 5. ca. 4. Platina. Grati. de
con. did. 2. Aposto. Sabellicus. Isodo. can. 9. q. nemo. etc. Treneus.
and deuorced them that had married wydowes, and excluded second marriage.

5 Anastasius the first, in the year of Christ, 392. rejected them from the
ministry that had any mayme.

6 Innocentius the first, in the year of Christ, 406. decreed, that the Seea
of Rome should be preferred before all others, and too be judged of none. He
caused too annoyle the sick persons: he compelled them which he called
Heritiques to come to the Catholic faith of Rome by violence. Romana fides
inquit Mantuanus, id est falsa. He granted to such as had bin all the days of
their life, cursed, and wicked, pardon and repentance of their sins in the
panges of death.

He excluded from the clergy seculer Soldiars, and such as had bin twyse
married.

Isodorus volateranus.
7 Sozimus decreed that the Sea of Rome could decree nothing against the word
of God, and he was in the year of CHRIST* 420.

Sabel. Sigeb Polyd. 6. ca. 4. Sigebius.
8 Bonifacius, in the year of Christ, 423. turned Vigiles intoo fastes.

9 Xistus or Sixtus in the year of Christ 440. made Peter's chains a Saint.

Socrat. lib. 7 ca. 17. Great, did. 38. null. volat.
10 Celestinus, the first in the year of Christ 430. made Introitum of the
mass, with the Graduall, with the Responsories.

11 Leo in the year of Christ 445. made the holy sacrifise the immaculate
Host, Sige ^oly. lib. 5. cap. 10. vol. Sabel. Poli. lib. 6. ca. 11. Isod.
Great. did. 34*
and more. He commanded Sunday to be kept holy day, he instituted procession,
he was cursed and excomunicated by the Bishop of Alexandria.

12 Hilarious in the year of Christ 463. confirmed the general councelles,
published the common Law, removed from the degrees of the Church them that had
bin twice married, and them that had married Wydowes, and them that were lame,
and first forbad priests to wear lay men's apparel.

Isodo. ^n sum
13 Simplicius in the year of Christ 475. did much contend with the Bishop of
Rauenna, to increase his authority.

Isodo, in felix
14 Foelix the third of that name, in the year of Christ 481. excluded them
that were Baptized or rebaptised of heretics from the ecclesiastical
Chivalry. Theodoret upon the 2. to ^he Coloss. Isodorus in consilijs Gra. cap.
9. quest. 3. Polid. 5 ^. 10. Isodo. Sige.
He made Michelmas day against the council of Laodicia.

15. Gelacius the second, in the year of Christ 489. decreed that neither he
nor his successors should be judged of any man in the earth.

16 Anastatius in the year of Christ 496. favored the Euthichians and
Nestorians.

17. Simachus in the year of Christ.498. after long strife with Laurence and
Peter, was Pope. Uolat. great. did 79. did 17 concilia.
He patched and framed the mass in order: he decreed that no Council should
be of force any where without the Popes presence.

18. Hormisda in the year of Christ.513. ordained after he was at quietness
with the East Churches, that the decrees of ye fathers, Isodorus.
and Councelles, should bind all Nations, whereas at the first^ they were
ordained for certain Persons and Countries.

19. John the first, Great. distinct. 96.

Si imperator


in the year of Christ.525. ordained that y^ Emperor should be under the
Subjection of the Pope.

20. Foelix the fourth in the year of Christ.526. commanded masses to be had
only in a hallowed place, and y^ the Clergy should be divided from the people.
The Clergy in the quire, Sab^ll. Isod. volat.
and the people benethe in the body of the Church, and that men lying at the
point of death should be a^oyled*

21. Vigilius in the year of Christ.537. decreed that Rome should be the
mistres and mother of all other Churches. Isod. in vigili^.

Great. Plat. Polid. ^. ca. 2. et 8. Great. in distinct. 21. cap. quam vis.




22. Pelagius the first, in the year of Christ.556. put in too the mass to
pray for the dead, and committed an Heretic to the seculer Magistrate to be
punished* This Pope did affirm first of all other that the Supremacy of the
Bishope of Rome was given of Christ and not of any Sinode or of men.

23. John the third in the year of Christ.563. decreed against his
predecessor, Did. 99. nullus.
that none ought to be called an high Priest or an universal Bishope.

24. Pelagius the second, Sigeb. Poly. 5. cap. 4.

^olat. Plat. Gregor. lib 4: Epist ca. 88 and li. 9. ca. 4.5. et. Lib. 11. cap.
2. (...) 40. cap ^^bi. Great. (...) 5. ca. 1^ (...) lib. 6. c^. 6. (...) 8. ca.
^. (...) 8. lib. 5.


in the year of Christ.577. added many things to the mass, he put
Subdeacons from their wives, and from other Ecclesiastical of^^ces, and made
seven fourmed Letanies to appease the wrath of God for the great Pestilence
y^ was at Rome.

25. Gregory the first in ye year of Christ.590. did many things well and
many things evil, he called himself servant of servant, and forbad that
any should be called a general Bishop. He put many things to the mass,
Letanies Processions, Antiphonas, Psalmodies, Alleluya. Nine Kirieleysons,
Offertorie, three peticions in the Canon. He forbad them that fasted to eat
flesh, milk, cheese, or eggs, and granted at certain times of the year
forgiveness of their sins, he forbad monks to Baptize, or Images to be
broken.

26. Sabinianus in the year of Christ.607. Appointed the day and hours to
be divided and known by Ringing of Belles, Plat.
and Lamps to burn in the Temples, and caused Gregorius his Predecessoures
books to be burned.

Plat. Sab.
27. Bonifacius the third in the year of Christ.610. obtained of Phocas the
Emperor that he might be called Pope, and Supreme head, and chief Prince of
all Bishops. Although John the 3. After Christ.565. year, and Gregory the
Pope after Christ.590. had appointed and decreed most Prudently the Contrary:
Polyd. lib. 5. cap. 6.
This said Boniface appointed the Aultares to be covered with white Linen
clothes,

Sab. great.
28. Theodotus in the year of Christ.618. decreede that no man should mary his
goddaughter.

Sigeb. Sabel Uolat.
29. Boniface the 5. in the year of Christ 621. appointed Sanctuaries, for
Malefactoures, that Coluthes should not touch the Relics of Martires,
Sacrilege, to be punished with the dart of excomunication, and that Monks
being preistes might bind and louse.

Plat. Uolat.
30. Honorius the first in the year of Christ.626. made the Cross of Christ
a Saint, and took the Brazen Tiles of the Temple of Romulus, and covered
Saint Peter's Church with them and builded many Temples.

Sigeb in Chron. Leut.
31. Theodocus in the year of Christ.640. the son of a Bishope was Pope at
what time Carcombert King of England first commanded Lent to be kept in
England.

1. Tom. Com. great. did. 27. Diaconus. Can. 12.4.2 nulli.
32. Martine the first in the year of Christ.650. compelled the Clergy to
vow chastity.

33 Eugenius the first in the year of Christ.660. appointed that Bishops
should have a prison to emprison the Clergy, and that Bishops might not, nor
ought not to convert the goods of the church to their own uses.

Plat volat.
34. Vitelianus in the year of Christ.661. brought first into the Temples
Music and Orgaines.

Platina.
35. Donus in the year of Christ.681. divided the Clergy into certain orders.

36 Agatho the first in the year of Christ.680. commanded that all the Laws
of the Pope should be taken as confirmed by the mouth of God. Great. did, 19*
sic.


37. Constantine the first in the year of Christ.708. went toward
Constantinople, Plat. Blond.
and in the journey Justinian the Emperor met him and kissed his feet. He
commanded Images to be had in Temples and to be painted. Polyd. Lib. 6. Cap.
13.


38. Gregory the second in the year of Christ.715. forbad a man to mary.
Presbyteram, Dyaconam, Monacham, Tom. 1. Cone
and a spiritual godmother: and made Leo the Emperor his subjects too rebel,
because the Emperor had pulled down Images of Saints out of Temples.
Blondus. 10*


39 Gregory the third in the year of Christ.731. brought in Images again,
cursed Leo the Emperor, who resisted him, Plat. Sab.
and despising the Emperor caused Martellus King of France too make war
against the Lumbards.

40 Stephanus the second in the year of Christ.751. caused Pipinus to invade
Lumberdie, Eutrop. li. 22. Urspangensis Pope borne. Po^id. 4* ca. 10
he pardoned Pipinus against his oath made unto his king Childerique, and
this was the first Pope that was borne upon men's shoulders, and caused Images
to be worshipped and much Idolatry to be committed.

41. Paul the first in the year of Christ.760. excomunicated the Emperor:
Plat. Premonstratensis.
in his time Stars did fall from heaven into the earth.

42. Leo the third in the year of Christ.800. after his banishment, Hieron.
Marius.

Polyd. 5. c. 10


being restored too his Popeshippe by Carolus Magnus the Emperor made the
Gange days, and Frankencense, and preferred the degrees of the Popes before
all the wrytings of the holy Doctors, and affirmed that a cross of wood made
for Christ's ^rosse did bleed the very true blood of Christ.

43. Gregory the fourth made all soul day. Plat. Sab.


44. Sergius the second in the year of Christ.841. was the first that
changed his name, and cauled himself Sergius, Sigebus.
whose Christian name was Hogs mouth. He crowned the Emperor Lodouike, and
caused the Sacrament too be divided intoo three parts.

Plat. volat* sigeb.
45. Leo the fourth in the year of Christ.846. made men kiss his feet, no lay
man to be in the quie^ at the mass time but the clarks. And made Ethenwolfus
of a monk king of England, and therefore he rendered to the Pope of every house
in England a pennye. Peter pense.


Houedenus.
46. Johan a woman Pope, in the year of Christ.853. borne at Moguntia in
Germany and called an English woman through the familiarite that she had with
an English monk, with whom she went to Athenes being appareled like a young
man, proceeded and excelled in learning in so much that she was consecrated
Pope, gave orders, made Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Abbottes, song mass,
hallowed Alters, Fonts, and Temples, ministered the Sacrament, crowned Lodouike
the second Emperor of that name with her hand, Plat. Sab. Ethelwolfus
Revelation. 17
and with saint Peter's blessing, Ethelwolfus King of England reuerencing this
holy mother, I should say, holy father the Pope, even the harlot of Babylon,
gave the tenth part of his Realm to clerks and monks, to pray for his soul.
This Pope was gotten with child of one of her Cardinals, delivered a child
as she went on procession, and so died, after she had bin Pope two year and a
half. Then ^he holy fathers made provision lest they should be deceived any
more, and did set him whom they would make Pope upon a stool that had a hole
in it, Plat. sab.
and caused a Deacon to put his hand under, and to know whither he were a man
or a woman: Behold the Romish Church even after mistres I. Bu^chinge^^^ a
Papist put^eth her in the number of ^ Popes, who wrote in the year of Christ
1556.

^^at did. 96 ^binam. Anto^inus li^. ^6.


Pope had said a mass of the holy ghost did offend, if it be an offense too
be an harlot. Funcius says that it was done by the singular providence of
God, to ^eclare the abomination of the whore of Babylon and the Sea of Rome.

47. Nicolas the first decreed in the year of our Lord.861. that no Prince,
not the Emperor should be present at any council of the Clargie, unless it be
some chief point of the faith: He decreed that no lay man should judge of the
Clergies lives, nor dispute of the Popes power, neither any Christian
magistrate too have power over any Bishop, because the Bishppe was called
God, and compelled priests too live chaste, and that none shall hear the mass
of him that has a concubine.

48 Martine the second in the year of Christ 882. was made Pope by Nigromancy.
Uolat.


49 Stephanus the 6. in the year of Christ 890. abrogated al y^ Acts of
Formosus the Pope for on old grudge, Plat. Sab.
he took his body out of his grave, cut of two fingers of his right hand, and
threw them into Tyber, and buried him among the Laytie.

50 Romanus in the year of Christ 896. disanulled the Acts of his
Predecessor Stephanus, Plat Tyranny*
and approved the Acts of Formossus.

51 Christophorus* in the year of Christ 903. did cast Leo intoo prison and
handled him miserably. Plat. Uolat.


52 Sergius in the year of Christ 907. deposed the said Christopher and made
himself Pope: Plat. Sab. Tyranny.
and for hatred took up Formosus once again, and set him in the Seat of the
Pope as though he had bin alive, and cut of his head eight years after he
was dead: he cut of three of his fingers, and threw his body into Tyber, and
commanded all the Romans to confirm this act, Candlemas day. Luth. prandus
lib. 3. ca. 12,
and too subscribe. He first ordained candelles to be borne upon Candelmasse
day. He begotte John the 12. Pope of that name, of an harlot called Marozia,
and did many such miracles.

53 Laudo, in the year of Christ, 913. was Pope, Premonstrat. Uolat.
and begotte John the.11. Pope of that name, in adultery.

54 John the eleventh, Premonstrat. Luth. Pran. lib. 2. ca. 13. Buechinger.
in the year of Christ 916. kept Theodoca, an impudent Harlot. This John was
rather a warrier then an Apostle, as Platina writes. At this time holiness
fled from the Popes to the Emperors.

55 John the twelfth, in the year of Christ, 934. son to Sergius, was
deposed by Leo the sixth. Plat.


56 Stephanus the eight, in the year of Christ, 937. was so wounded in a
civil sedition, that he was ashamed to come abroad all his life time. Plat.


57 John the 13. in the year of Christ, 964. given too all mischief, to
dyce, cards, games, robberies, sacrilege, fornication, Luth prandus li. 6.
Uolat. li. 12. Plat. Tyranny with all mischief.
and to all other evil acts, from his youth: whom Volaterane called a cursed
man. And Platina Monstrum hominis. He cut out the eyes of some of his
Cardinals: their tounges, their fingers, hands, noses, and members. He was
accused that he did not say his Matynes and Hours, that he did not
communicat^ in his Mass, that he did make Deacons in his stables, that he
did lie with two Sisters, that in playing at dyce, he required the Devil too
help him: he made children Bishops: he deflowred Maids and strangers:
made Lateranense (that holy Palace) a Stews, and brothall house, that he did
deflowre Stephana, his fathers concubyne, the Widow Rayner, and the Widow
Anne, with her Niece: put out his Spiritual fathers eyes: he hunted, he
warred, he burned, he brake doors and wyndowes, he drank, and pledged the
Devil with wine. Wherefore he was deposed, and Leo placed. But afterward his
noble concubines caused him too be restored and Leo deposed. He ordained that
the Emperor should always, after that be crowned of the Pope of Rome. A man
took him with his wife, Capgraue in Catal. angla^.
and thrust him through with his dagger. He made saint Dunston (being a
Necromancer) Archebishoppe of Canterbury.

58 Boniface the seventh, in the year of christ, 973. stale all the Treasure
of Saint Peter's church, and fled too Constantinople, and there sold it.
Platina*
He returned to Rome, and with that money paid his creditoures: hired
Ruffians, and deposed John the.15. whom they had made Pope: put out his eyes,
thrust him in prison, where he dyed miserably.

Plat, Stella.
59 John the 16. in the year of Christ.983. a priests son, was hated booth of
the clergy and of the Laytie, he gave all too his kyndred.

Premonstrat. Uolat.
60 Syluester the second, in the year of Christ, 997. studied necromancie,
asked of the Devil, how long he should be Pope. The Devil answered, till
he should singe Mass at Jerusalem. He fell sick in a certain place in the
church of the holy cross, called Jerusalem, and there hearing an horrible
noise of Diuelles, Poly. 6. ca. 8 Volat.

Read of this matter at larg in Polyd. lib. 6. ca. 8


as Petrus Premonstratensis, reports, dyed.

61 John the 18. in the year of christ, 1001. appointed all soul day,
persuaded by Odylo, an Abbot, who heard a pitiful noise in mount Ethna,
supposing that there were the Souls departed, and that Purgatory was in that
hill of Sicilia.

62 Petrus Damianus, a Cardinal, Platina.
writes that Benedict the 8. Pope of that name, in the year of Christ, 1008.
did appear after his death, sitting on a black horse, to a Bishop, one of
his acquayntance: which Bishop being astonished with such a spectacle and vision,
said: Art not thou Pope Benedict, Pope benedi.
whom we know is dead? He answered, Sum ille infoelix Benedictus. I am that
unhappy Benedict. The Bishop answered, How is it with you O blessed Father?
Then answered the Pope, I am greeuous^ie tormented, but there is remedy
enough: Go thy way and tell my brother John, who is now Pope, that he cause
too be dug up certain treasure hidden in the ground, and give it too the
poor. He appeared also to Pope John, saying: I trust to be delivered, and
woold to god, that Odylo, that holy Abbot, would pray for me, that invented
purgatory.

63 John the 20. of a Lay man was made Pope without any orders, Uolat.
in the year of Christ, 1020.

64 Benedictus the ninth, in the year of christ, 1032. obtained his popeshippe
by Art Magique, and did Sacrifice to Diuelles, Beno Cardinalis.
in woods and mountains, and made woomen to follow him thither, and to love
him by a Sparrowe. He knew what was done in all the world. He sold his
Popeshippe, libris mill quingentis: At this time came in the name of the
Cardinals. Sigeb. Uolat.


This Benedict, as he was coniuring in the wooddes, was strangled by the
Devil: Buechingerus. Carranza.
and after his death was seen of an Hermit in body like a Bear, in head and
tail like an Ass, and being demanded how chaunsed it that he was so
transformed, he answered: I live in this state because when I was Pope, I
lived without reason, without Law, without God.

65 Syluester the third, in the year of Christ, 1043. sold his popeshippe
to Gregory. Blond^s. (...) Plat. Oth^^r. Godft^d^s. Benno.
The Cardinals called this Gregory a Murderer. Then there were at that
self same time three Popes: Benedictus was in the palace Lateranense:
Syluester and Gregory, Buechinge. Mirandensis Platina.
and Clement the second was elected the fourth.

66 Damasus the second, in the year of Christ 1048. invaded by violence, and
made himself Pope by force, at what time it was lawful for every man to
aspire by what means he could, Quo iure, quaque iniuria.

Corin. Pol. Urspar.
67 Victor the second, in the year of Christ 1055. was poisoned drinking in
the Lords Challyce.

68 Alexander the second, in the year of Christ 1062. after he had ^ought a
great battle commanded that no lay man should give any Benefice. Harmannus
contract. Bon ^in. deca. 2. li. 3. Buechinge. Platina

Causa. 16. qu. 5 decimas Ben. Nanclerus. Ursparg. Co^radusa Liech. Cranezius.
5. ca. 8. Mut. 15 did. 83. si quis Buechinge. Lampertus. Haruelden. Sab. Sigeb.




69 Gregory the seventh, in the year of Christ, 1069. forbadde any Lay man to
possess Tithes: he poisoned six or eight Popes: he carried about with him
always a book of Necromancie, of the which matter read Benno at large: he
excommunicated the Emperor, and made him to stand three days without the
gate of the city, in a cold winter with his wife, and his young Son
barefooted, from morning to night without meat or drink. And when the said
Emperor desired most humbly: at the end of the three days, answer was made
to him on this wise: O abominable Antichrist, the Popes holiness has no
leisure too speak with you. But notwithstanding, on the fourth day his
familiare friend and Concubine Mathilda obtained, that he might come too the
Popes presence. But neither would give him his crown again, neither perdon
him, neither absolve him from excommunication, till he should confirm by
writing all his decrees, which he did, and notwithstanding would not restore
him.

Carsul. Stella.

Uincentius. Antoninus Platina.


70 Calixtus the second, in the year of Christ, 1119. fought a battle with
Gregory the eight, Pope of that name: overcame him, and did set him upon a
Camel, his head too the tail, and so brought him to Rome with such despite.

71 Alexander the third, in the year of Christ, 1158. instituted, Sigebus.
that no man should marye his brothers wife. He used the King of England and
the King of France for his footmen: As Hadrian the fourth Pope before him
used the Emperor Frederike, who came too the Pope, and held his left
stirroppe, as he should light of his Horse. Plat. Crantzius. lib. 6. ca. 16.

Otho. ^ris. lib. 2. et. 7. digest. ^rid.


You should (said the Pope) have holden my right stirroppe: The Emperor
smiled being not a littell offended, and said that he was not wont to hold
stirroppes, for you are the first that ever we did any such duty unto: And
I woold know of you whither it is of duty or of good will, if of good will,
why do you accuse my negligence, if of duty, I owe you no such service, the^
what matter makes it to what side he comes that comes to do reverence. The
next day (thus being admonished of the Pope) came to his right stirroppe and
brought him into his Tents. Blond. 5.
This Alexander the third decreed that none should be King of England but whom
the Pope should assign and create, Polyd. historia. tornalensis de rebus
Angliae.
and compelled Henry the second king of England to go barefoote to Thomas
Becketts Tomb at Canterbury with bleeding feet.

72 Innocent the third in the year of Christ. Urspar: decree tit. 6. cap. 34.
Polyd. 5. ca. 5. et. 11.

Paulphrid: Cran^zius. 7. cap. 15.25.


1195. made Emperors, cursed them, and excommunicated them. He invented and
commanded Auriculer confession, and commanded the Host to be reserved. Thou
have O Rome says the Abbotte of Ursprage, that thou did desire: Sing this
song that thou have overcome the world by symony, ambition, malice, cruelty,
presumption, deceyt, arrogancy, and violence, but neither by virtue, nor
Religion.

73 Gregorye the ninth, Plat. Crantz. 8. ca. 2. et. 6. decretis.5. tit. 8. ca.
18.
in the year of Christ.1221. promised eternal life to all them that would
sight against the Emperor. He forbad lay men to preach.

74. Innocens the fourth, Buechingerus.

Polyd. lib. 4. ca. 9.

Plat. Sab. Uolat.

Distriensis. lib. 7.

Polyd. 6. ca. 8.

Uernierus. Buechingerus.


in the year of Christ.1242. gave to the Cardinals read hattes for the
defense of Religion, and that they should ride on horseback through the city.
There was a voice herd in the Popes court, saying, Come thou damned wretch into
the judgment of God, the next day he was stricken as though it had bin with a
club, and was found dead.

75. Vrbane the fourth in the year of Christ.1262. made Christ's cross a
saint, and Corpus Christi likewise.

76. Boniface the eight, in the year of Christ.1290. gave in the year of Iubil
full remission of their sins to al the^ yt came to Rome. He came out to the
people upon a solemn day in the habit of a Pope in his Pontificalibus, and
gave the people his blessinge. The next day he came forth in the apparel of
an Emperor, with a naked swerd borne before him, satte him down and cried
with a loud voice, lo here are two swerdes, signifieng that both the
temporal and spiritual jurisdiction was his. He entered as a Fox, reigned as a
Wolf, Buechingerus.

Robert. gag. l^b. 7.

C^antz. lib. 8. ca. 36. decretis lib. 3, tit, 2.


and died as a Dog: He decreed that he was the key bearer of heaven, and
that no man might judge him although he carried innumerable souls to hell
with him.

87. Clement the 5. in the year of Christ.1313. did translate the Romish
Seat to Auenion in France. vernicrus. gagneus. li. 7. Acmilius.
Where his successoures remained 74. years.

78. John the 22. in the year of Christ.1318. taught that the sowles departed
should not see god before the last day. And that he him self is the head of
the Church and in the stead of Christ, Mass^us. John mandeuilla li. ^. ca.
7. H^llyricus in ^^st. de veritat
unto whom the Greeks answered thus: we know your power over your
subjects, your intolerable pride we cannot abide, your covetousness we are not
able to satisfy, the Devil be with you, for the Lord is with us.

79. Vrbane the 6. in the year of Christ.1388. put 5. cardinals in a sack
and drowned them. Plat.


80. Clement the 6. in the year of Christ.1343. commanded the Aungells of
paradise to bring out of Purgatory those souls that were perdoned, ^ius bull^.
and to carry them into the glory of paradise. He granted also to them that
made a cross in their forehed, that they might deliver 3. or 4. souls out of
purgatory whom they lusted.

81. Julius the second in the year ^o Christ.1502. a man full of al mischife
threw Peter's keys into Tiber, Tilio. gilbertus duch. mela^chto. Brunscius.
Huttenus.
he licensed Henry the 8. King of England to Marie his brothers wiffe what
soever ordinance is to the contrary set out by the Apostles: Quibuscunque
decretis Apostolicis non obstantibus. Cai^tanus. Agrippa


82 Leo the 10. in the year of Christ 1512. cauled the Gospel a fable. He
caused his comissioners to persuade the people, Hieronimus* Marius. Bebus.

Carrion.liii. Masseus. Ten shillings brings a soul out of purgatory.


that for ten shillinges, they might have whose Soul they would out of
purgatory, they preached that if it were one jot less then ten shillinges it
would profit nothing, for they said it was an infallible rule that God would
do what they would have him to do according to this text. Quicquid soluries
super terram. etc. These pardons Luther began to confute, and therefore was
cursed by the said Leo. At this time there was such lightening and thunder at
Rome that it shaked the Temple, where the Cardinals were chosen on such sort
that Christ our Ladies young son was smitten out of her arms, and the keys
out of saint Peter's hands, which many interpreted to signify and foreshowe
the Ruin of the Romish seat, and to that end, there were many verses written.

83 Clement the eight in the year of Christ 1524. was a bastard, Comentarius
super Artiparis.
a Coniurer, a Murderer, a Sodomite, perjured, a Robber, full of Sacrilege,
and the Master of all mischieefe.

84 Paul the third, in the year of Christ.1534. Bucerus. John Tili.
Uergerius. Ochimus. Sleidon. Anselmus. Dria^der. Paul* 3
Excomunicated England, he compelled his sister to lie with Pope Alexander the
6. that he might be made a Cardinal, he poisoned his natural Mother and his
Nephewe, that all the inheritance might come to him self, he poisoned an other
Sister whom he had defloured because that she loved other better then him. He
promised a noble woman marriage, lay with her and deceived her, with changing
his apparel, he was taken in bed with his Niece, an other man's wife, and
wounded sore of her husband, he lay with his own daughter Constantia, and
killed her husband, he regystred 45. thowsande whoores, of which he had monthly
a Ducate.

85 Julius the 3. in the year of Christ 1549. beside the Blasphemies which
he used for his Hogs flesh and Peacock, Marius Uergerius. Ochimus. Julius*
the Cardinals demanded him why he did make such an ungracious Boy called
Innocentius too be Cardinal and what he saw in him. He answered I pray
you what did you see in me that caused you to make me Pope? is it not ye
course of fortune to advance whom she will without desartes?

As I have in repeting certain acts of the Popes uttered some that are not
wicked and some that are most detestable, so in declaring these Antitheses and
contrarieti^s, I must needs declare some good things, but most part
detestable: Neither does the Devil speak always evil though his intent is
to that end, in these Antitheses ye shall see their discention in words,
discord in matter, diversity in judgment and variety in opinions. Repugnancie
in writing is the subversion of that thing which you go about to defend.

They say that the Pope cannot err in doctrine though he offend in manners.

One Pope against another.
1. Did not Stephan the first, Pope in the year of Christ.260. decree that
such should not be rebaptised which did revolt and were heretics? Sistus or
Sixtus in the year of Christ.260. decreed the contrary, the one must needs
err.

Plat.
2. Marcellinus in the year of Christ.295. denied Christ, offered to Images and
Idolles, but repented and suffered death afterward for Christ.

3. Liberius in the year of Christ.351. through ambition became an Arrean.
Hierom. in. Chron. et fortunatiam. Caitanus. Agrippa. Isod. Uolat. Isodorus.
His successors condemned that opinion.

4. Julius the second in the year of Christ.1502. granted King Henry the
eight to marry his brothers wife, whatsoever ordinances either of the
Apostles, or any other are to the contrary. Sozimus in the year of
Christ.420. decreed the contrary.

5. Simachus in the year of Christ.498. did strive with Laurence and Peter,
and they with him.

Isodor. sigeb.
6. Anastasius the 2. in ths year of Christ.496. favored the Eutichians and
Nestorians, his predecessors and Successors condemned his opinion.

Great. in did. quamuis.
7. Pelagius in the year of Christ.556. did affirm that the Supremacy of the
Bishope of Rome was given of Christ.

8 John the third, in the year of Christ, 563. decreed the contrary. And so
did Gregory the first, in the year of Christ, Distinct. 99. nullus. Uolat.
Plat. Plat.
590.

9 Sabinianus, in the year of Christ, 607. caused Gregorius his predecessors
books to be burned.

10 Boniface the third, in the year of Christ, 610. obtained of the Emperor
to be called Pope, and Supreme head, Plat. Sab.
and chief Bishop of all Bishops. Did. 99. nullus. Uolat. Plat:


John the third, in the year of Christ, 563. and Gregory the first after
Christ, 590. decreeed the contrary.

11 Leo the third Pope of that name, in the year of Christ, Great. did. 63.
in Sinodo and Hadria. Sab. Aenead. lib. 8 Plat.
810. granted to the Emperor, too elect and confirm the Pope.

Hadrianus the third, in the year of Christ, 883. decreeed the contrary.

12 Stephan the sixth, Anno 897. abrogated the acts of Formosus, Plat. Sab.
his predecessor.

Romanus, in the year of Christ, Plat.
903. disannulled the Acts of his predecessoure Stephanus, and approved the
Acts of Formosus.

13 Syluester the first, Plat. Antoninus.ii.16.
Anno. 310. permitted Priests to have wives. Nicolas the first, in the year
of Christ, 861. decreeed the contrary, with many mo.

14 Gregory the tenth, Anno. 590. and Martine the first. Uolat. Plat.
Ann. 647. deny Priests to have concubines.

Donus did grant the contrary. Anno. 670.

15 Sergius, in the year of Christ, Plat
907. deposed his predecessoure Chrystopher, and made himself Pope.

16 John the twelfth, in the year of Christ, Plat. Uolat.
934 was deposed by Leo the 6. Plat. Platina:


17 Boniface the 7. deposed John the 15.

18 There were three Popes together, all ready too cut one an others throat.
Plat. blond,


19 Alexander the third, in the year of Christ, 1158. forbad any man to marye
his Brothers wife.

Julius the second did the contrary. Sigeb.


ALL THE POPES AGAINST CHRIST.
Here I have added certain Antitheses, declaring the difference between
Christ and the Pope, whereby ye may know him to be that Antichrist,
mentioned in Paul 2. to the Thessalonians. 2. Chapter. Uer. 4.
CHRIST obeyed the Scriptures, and would do nothing against them.

Mat. 5. ve. 19 and 27. Illir. in catal.
The Pope dispenses against them, against the Apostles, against the Evangelist,
against Moses, against the old Testament and new. For (says Hocstrate) he
is an heretic, that cleueth to the scriptures, Agrip. art. 2.

Mat. 15. ve. 18
Christ makes no difference of meats and days.

Illir. in catal.
The Pope does.

Christ had not where he might rest his head.

Luc. 9. ve. 58
The Pope has houses and palaces.

Christ admits marriage.

John. 2. ver. 1 etc. Grati. did. 22. Pol. 5. ca. 4.
The Pope forbids it.

The Pope says that Christ dwells in Temples made with men's hands.

The sprite of Christ, in Paul, denies it.

Act. 17. ve. 24 Ma. 26. ve. 46
Christ prayed only to his father.

The Pope to saints, and new invented hallowes.

Matthew 5. ver. 24. and 25.
Christ wills us in this life to be reconciled to our adversary.

The Pope in the next.

Christ in the earth.

The Pope in his Purgatory.

Mat. 20. v. 26 Theodoret. 13 Roma.
Christ will have none to be superior in his church: none too be supreme head
but himself.

The pope makes himself the head and universal Bishop.

Mat. 19. ve. 5
Christ admits and commands matrymonie.

The Pope proves by this place of Paul Romans the fifth and eight cap. that
married men cannot please God, Qui habitant in carne, Deo placere non possunt.
Paul means, that carnal men and such as are given over too all sensuality,
cannot please God. The Pope says, they that are married dwell in the flesh,
and therefore cannot please God. If they please not God, ergo the Devil. If
the Devil, then are all men servants to the Devil. Eccles^. Hist. cent. 5.
cap. 10
Thus reasoned Innocentius the 8. Pope of that name.

Christ alleges Scripture for him and his fathers will. Mat. verse 19 and 27.


The Pope alleges his own will and pleasure, and denies that he should
show any reason of his acts. If any require it, he is offended: he rages,
he persecuteth, and adds always this verse of Iuuenal. as Hildebrand,
otherwise called Gregory the seventh did: Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione
voluntas. Gerochus, one of the greatest friends that Hildebrand had, Illir. in.
cata.
writes so upon him and his life. Mat. 26. ver. 52.


Christ commanded Peter and his successoures, too put up his swoorde.

Hildebrande willed his to draw it. For he took upon him too bind, loose,
curse, absolve. He excommunicateth the Emperor: Anentinus. writes thus.
he satte in the church of God as God, above all that is woorshiped for God.
He pronounced that he could not err: he invented fables: Illir.
he corrupted scriptures by false interpretation too serve his lust, and
affirmed, that, whatsoever he did, was the law of God.

Christ says, that he that calls another Racha, Mat. 5. ve. 22.
should be in danger of judgment.

Pope Hidebrande calls others, beasts, dastardes, fools, Illir in catal.
stocks, blocks and Asses.

Christ refused to be made a King. John. 6. ve. 15 Sigisvertus. Hillir.

Auentinus. Mat. 5. ve. 33 Pope very AntiChrist.




The Popes do not only not refuse, but also fight for it.

Christ forbad perjury, manslaughter, civil wars, murder, treason.

The Pope caused his Priests too preach, that these mischiefs pleased God,
and such like, as to rebel against the Emperor, to rob, to burn, steal,
kill, spoil, shead blood, to oppress their neighbors. He has in his
foreheade written, Nomen contumeliae: the name of despyte: I am GOD, I cannot
err, etc.

ca. 7. verse 8.
Read Auentinus and Hillircus, and ye shall see, that the Pope is very
Antichrist, and the little horn in Daniell.

Christ exhorts to charity: The Pope to debate.

Christ to the study of Gods word.

Mat. 5. ve. 24.
The Pope from that knowledge. If (says Arnulphus, in the year of Christ,
991. in a Sinode before a great number of Bisshoppes) the Pope, Pope is
Antichrist.
though he be gorgeous, though he sit in a seat of state with purple
Robes, glistering with gold: if he be without charity, and have learning
only, he is Antichrist, sitting in the seat of God: boasting himself as he
were God. If he have neither charity nor learning, he is an Image or Idol,
no more able to answer, then a stone. Though ignorance were tolerable in
other Bishops, yet it is intolerable in the Pope. Why should not he that is
Superior in place, and inferior in knowledge, be contented to be judged by
him that is inferior in place and superior in knowledge? Thus much writes
Arnulphus, with much more: reproving superiority, condemning ostentation, and
repressing the intolerable arrogancy of the Pope.

Christ wills, that a man shall not forsake his wife for any cause but for
adultery.

Mat. 19. ve. 5
The Pope appoints twelve causes: Boner bishop quondam, in his homely of
matrimony. Card. Pole. Mat. 5. ve. 19 Thomas. Agrippa.
Error, conditio, votum, cognatio, crimen,
Cultus, disparitas, vis, ordo, ligamen, honestas:
Si sit affinis, si forte coire nequibit.


Christ forbids to break any of the ten commandments.

The Pope says, that he may break the first and second, because that
only God is not too be prayed unto, but also saints: and that the Images
may be woorshipped, and the crucifix with the adoration of Latreia, as well as
the blessed Sacraments.

Christ loves his enemies.

Mat. 5. ve. 44. Dandalus. Duke of Uenyce.
The Pope persecuteth his, as he did Dandalus, who was afterward the Duke of
Venice: for he caused an iron chain to be locked about his neck, and him to
come coupled every day with a dog upon his knees, and so kneeling upon his
hands and knees, gathering crommes under his table, being spurned at with his
feet and others, as they did the dog. Thus did the Pope a long time, till
that he gave some part of his holiness to him, and absolved him.

Christ blessed all, and cursed none.

The Pope curses not only men, but also Aungelles, according to this place of
Paul to the Galathians, 1. verse. 8. If an Angel come and preach any other
Gospel then that which we preach, let him be accursed. Gundisalnus cont.
Number. 5. Gloss. did. 19. n^lli. and in cap. gener. de Ele. lib. 6. Did.
81.3.46. mult.


Christ restored men's lives, hands, and toungues.

The Pope cutte^h them of. For Manciuellus, a famous man, sitting upon a white
horse, made an Oration against the Pope, John. 11. ver. 37.43. Manciuellus.
before all the people, at the time of procession, proouing him too be
Antichriste. Wherefore, the Pope caused him to be apprehended and booth his
hands to be cut off. After he recovered, he made an other more vehement
against him: then he caused his tongue to be cut out of his head, and dyed
thereof. Hillir. in test. verita.


Christ is constant, and writes things certain, infallible, and agreeing one
with another.

The Pope is unconstant, writes untruths, false things, absurd,
unreasonable, and one contrary to an other. For, Bernardus. libinensis in the
year of Christ* 1555. marsil. patav. picus. mirandula. Phillip comi. molyn.
rosellus. Plat. Marcelli. Iulianus. Card. s. ang. li.
that which one affirms, an other denies, and that one approves, an other
condempneth.

Christ burned no man.

The Pope burned Hierom of Prage, and John Hus, a true prophet, in the year of
Christ, 1405.

Christ paid Trybute. Matthew 22. ver. 21.

The Pope refuses. Christ obtained mercy for his.

The Popes can find none (says Platina,) their sins be so abominable,
and the Popes holiness to be gone from them too the Emperor.

Christ cannot err: The Pope does.

Christ justifies us of his mere goodness and mercy:

The Pope, not without his pardons*

Christ destroyed Idolles, pulling them down. Act. 19. ve. 27.


The Popes erecte them, and through deceit, fayneth them too speak, and
woorshippeth them.

Christ is a faithful steward:

The Pope an unfaithful.

Christ exhorts to peace: The Pope to war.

Christ to virtue: The Pope to vice.

Christ does require no man's riches:

The Pope does require and rob like Agamemnon in Homere, Thimoboros, a
deuourer of the people, a Vertes, a Cataline, a thief, a poller, and a seller
of the holy Ghost. And if he be demanded why he does so, he answers that it
is lawful for him to increase his patrimony of the church by any means.

These with such like wrote Valla, a worshipful Senator of Rome, in the year
of Christ.1405. or therabout.

Luc. 10. ve. 21
Christ thanketh his Father that he has reveled the Gospel to his litel ones.

The Pope is thanked of the devil that by his means so many sowles come down
to hell.

H^^ler. in catal
This is contained in the Epistle of Lucifer too the Pope, and to the other of
the Spirituality about the year of Christ.1228.

The Church of Christ is holy Jerusalem:

The Popes is adulterous Babylon, and Sodomitical Rome. Gregorius
Hemispurgensis, a doctor of Law, and a Senator of Nor^^berge in the year of
Christ.1454.

Christ regards the soul of man more the^ all worldly riches:

The Pope cares more for ten shillings then a.10000. sowles.

Mat. 15. ve. 1
Christ abolisheth the commandments of men:

The Pope receives them.

The holy Ghost came down upon Christ in y^ likeness of Dove:

The Popish huly ghost came down upon John the.23. of that name after their
mass of the holy ghost in a council holden at Rome, in the likeness of an ill
favored and a prodigious Owl, and flied al about howling, The Popes holy Ghost.
sat upon a beam staring upon the Pope. What a thing is this said those holy
fathers, the holy ghost is present with us in the likeness of an Owl. And in
the next Session the Owl did the same till the the council was given over.
Clemangis Archedeacon of Baro in the year of Christ.1416.

Christ is the Savior of Sowles: The Pope a murderer. Brigitta in the year
of Christ.1370. she calls the Pope a disperser of Christ's flock, more
abominable then the Jews, crueller the^ Judah, vniuster then Pilate, worser
then Lucifer, that he turned the x. Commandments in this one Da pecuniam,
give me monye. It is written that she saw the Uirgin Mary say to her son
that Rome was a rich field, Brigitta.
and that Christ answered that it was rich, but rich with weeds, Zizanijs.

Christ says that whosoever comes to him shall never perish

The Pope says that whosoever comes to him in the year of Iubile, though he
die by the way as he goes, Ioh. 6. ve. 37* Hillir. in cato.
shall not perish, for he will command the Angels to carry his soul up into
Heaven without delay, and with all expedition. He grants also to every one
that comes to Rome to the Iubile, Souls out of purgatory.
power to choose three or four sowles at their own will, and fetch them out of
purgatory.

Christ says that there is but one God, Ma. 4. ve. 10.
and him only to be worshipped.

The Pope says ye the Sacrament of the Alter is God, and therefore to be
worshipped. John Mutzeger in the year of Christ.1384.

Christ is the Author of concord.

The Pope of discord. Nilus in the year of Christ.136^.

Christ wishes to all men felicity.

The Pope wished to them a poole or a bottomless pit.

This was the wish of Pope Martine the.4. of that name in the year of
Christ.1290.

Christ overcame and subdued the world by his doctrine: Nicolaus dr. ^atrach.
hillir.


The Pope by money, discord, battle, craft: and malice. Abbas Vrsp. in the
year of Christ.1199.

Christ teaches true doctrine:

The Pope heresy. Crantzius, lib. 8. ca. 8.

Christ breaks not his promise, Gene. 3. ve. 9.
nor condempneth any man before that he pleads his own case.

The Pope and his Legates burned John Hus, and Hierome of Prage against their
pronisse, and the Emperoures saufconductes in the year of Christ 141^.

Christ opens the way to the kingdom of Heaven: The Pope stops it, and
neither will enter himself, neither will suffer other to enter: VVicleffe in the
year of Christ.13^4. Bernerd Lutzeberge 2. Tom. council. in. Sessi. 8.
Constancienti. Polydor. Aug. lib. 19.

Christ and his word excommunicateth none without a great cause: The Pope and
his, for every trifle, for the priests Tithes, for a Pigge, for a Goose, for
Aples, and Pears. And therefore says Scotus, in the year of Christ, 1300.
desti. 18. stut. 4. men care not for his curse, it is despised and counted for
vile.

Christ left behind him, when he departed, no money.

The Pope, 25. thousand million of Ducates. Matthaeus Palmerius.

Christ is the true Image of his Father.

The Pope is an Idol, which has eyes and see not, ears and hear not, as
Robertus Gallus writes in the year of Christ, 1290.

Christ had no earthly possession. The Pope possesses all, which possession to
be given by Constantine: Marsilius Patauinus, denies: Valla confuteth it, and
Cusanus, and Cattalanus reprove it, in the year of christ, 1496.

matt. 20. ve. 26.
Christ will have no superiority in Bishops.

The Pope calls himself the chief of all. Here I subscribe the words of
Marsilius Patauinus, who was in the year of Christ, 1324.

All Bishops should be of equal authority, neither should the Pope have
any superiority above other Bishops, Marcili^s. Patauinus.
and much less above the Emperor, or other civil Magistrates, and
Governors: Summum iudicium debere penes esse verbum Dei: not only the
Spirituality to be called to the councelles, but also the Layetie, which are
learned and godly. The clergy and the Pope to be subjects to the Emperor.
The church to be the congregation of the faithful. Christ to be the head of
the church. Neither did appointe any other Uicare or pope: Bishops too be
elect of the church or clergy: priests to have wives: that Peter was never at
Rome. The popes Synagoge to be a Den of Robbers: the popes doctrine to carry
men to eternal damnation. Thus much Patauinus

Christ says, that the Kings rule the Gentyles: But it shall not be so
among you. Luc. 22. ve. 25.
The pope says, that neither King nor Emperor has any power, authority,
or jurisdiction, but of the pope, neither can be of any force, till they be
anointed, consecrated, and crowned by the Pope, who has full power, as well in
things temporal as spiritual. Thus writes Ludouicus the 4. Emperor of
that name confuting the said presumptuous arrogance of the Pope. John the 22.
of that name. Ludouicus.


Christ says that the sentence and judgment of Chaiphas and Pilate was
unjust.

The Pope says that his sentence, whither it be just or unjust must be
observed, reverenced, accepted, defenced, and feared. This error the said
Emperor refelleth with many reasons and authorities.

Christ says that his father has given unto him all power. Mat. ^8. ver. 18.
Hyllir.


The Pope says that there is none Superior to him. Non habet superiorem. The
same Ludouicus proves that the Pope may have a superior in earth if he offend
by a council, A noble Emperor
he may be deposed and corrected.

Christ deposed no Emperor.

The Popes did many, as John the 23. of that name deposed Ludoui^e in the year
of Christ 1314. he was excommunicated for an heretic, and Scismatike, he
warred with 3. Popes the space of 33 years, all the learned men in Europe were
with the Emperor against the Pope. Notwithstanding he cursed him, and
commanded al Priests, Bishops, Kings, and Princes, to rebel against him
in the year of Christ 1323.

Christ commands to bewar^ of such as come in long gowns, and Lambs
apparel. Mat. 7. ve. 15


The Pope admits none else to his orders, Helias Rubeus, in the year of
Christ 300. lib. 3.

Christ says that his church is every where, Ma. 18. ve. 20
wheresoever two or three be gathered in his name.

The Pope says that his is at Rome and of such as beeleeue in the Romish
church, Hillir.
all such as wrote against Waldensis are of this opinion. Jacob Riberia.

Christ his spirit in the Apostle wills all men, even every Prelate, and
Pope to obey the Emperors, and other Magistrates. Romans 13. ver. 1


The Pope answers that that Text counsels men too do so, but commands
not. C. Soli. te titu. de obedientia et Maioritate. Thus answered the Pope
Innocentius* the 3. Emperor Baldione Paldiomus in the year of Christ 1205.

Christ sought his own? The Pope other men's. Christ homely apparel and diett:
The Pope gorgeous, and sumtuous. Christ peace: The Pope debate. Christ equetie:
The Pope iniquetie. Petrus Blesensis writes thus and more in the year of
Christ.1153. Christ shedeth no man's blood: The Pope rather follows Romulus
in murdering his brothers, then Peter in feding his sheep. Adrianus the Pope
of that name, and John Saresburiensis in the year of Christ.1150. Ant. tit.
17. cap. 1.9. Molinaeus. 11.

There resorteth to Christ the poor in sprite, the simple of heart, the meek
e and all the faithful.

There resort to the Pope in the year of Iubile, proud prelates, auaritious
Archedeacons, covetous Curates, dotish Doctors, dronken Dunsies, monstrous
Monks, flattering Friars, nyce Nuns, curious Curtesans, thieves, bawdes,
brothels, adulterers, Idolaters, with all the rest of the wicked rabble.

I do not bring these Arguments collected out of the popish laws and writers,
for that they need any confutacion, but that men may learn with what stuff
and Trumperie they confirm their errors.

The Pope cannot Err.
Objection.
No man sins that is borne of God:

The Pope is borne of God:

Ergo the Pope sins not

The fiist proposition is proved out of the first of John verse.9.

The second I will prove by a Sillogisme in Barbara.

Every one that is holy is borne of God:

Phe Pope is not only holy, but also most holy.

Ergo every Pope is borne of God.

The first proposition is evident.

The second is proved by the Popes bulls which are more to be credited then
the Gospel, for the Pope may interpret the Gospel how he will, but no man may
Interpret the Popes Bulls.

I answer.
Every man sins.

The Pope is a man.

Ergo the Pope sins.

The first proposition is proved by the.14. Psalm of David. ver. 3. To. 3.
ver. 10.11.12.


There is none that does good, no not one.

I will prove by a Sillogisme in Barbara, the second proposition.

Every creature reasonable and mortal is a man:

Every Pope is a reasonable and mortal creature.

Ergo every Pope is a man.

The first proposition is proved by the deffinition of a man.

The second proposition is proved by Athanasius Creed, where he says that
Christ consists of a reasonable soul, and a humane flesh. And by the first
to the Cor. 15. chap. ver. 22.54. Romans 6. ver. the last. And Hebrews the.9.
ver. 27. whereby every man is proved too be mortal.

Objection.
He that can make God, is better then God:

The Pope can make God:

Ergo the Pope is better then God.

The Mayor is proved by this principle of Lodgike:

The cause efficient is better then the effect.

The second proposition is proved by this Silogisme:

That which a priest can do, the Pope can do:

The priest can make God:

Ergo the Pope can make God.

The Mayor of this Argument is proved by the same principle of Lodgike that the
other former Argument was.

The second proposition is proved by this Argument:

He that can make the Sacrament of the Alter can make God:

The Priest can make the Sacrament of the Altar.

Ergo a Priest can make God.

The Mayor proposition is proved by this place. Hoc est corpus meum, 1 Cor. 11.
ver. 24.
quoties cunque feceritis. etc.

The second proposition is proved by daily massing and by the words and deeds
of many a priest, who will not stick to say that they have made him an
hundredth times and no less.

I answer.
That consequently it follows by these Arguments of the Papists, that the
Pope is better then God, and also elder then either God or the world.

Objection.
He that can remitte sins is God:

The Pope can remitte sins:

Ergo the Pope is God.

The Mayor is in Luke the.5. verse.21.

The Minor is proved by this Argument.

He that can give the holy Ghost can remitte sins:

The Pope can give the holy Ghost:

Ergo the Pope can remitte sins.

The Mayor is in the.1. Thessalo. 4. ver. 8. in the which place it is said,
that God gives the holy Ghost, and as God can give the holy Ghost so can he
remitte sins by these words. Luc. 5. verse.21. Solus deus condonat peccata.

The Minor is proved by his orders given too priests, where he says.
Accipite Spiritum Sanctum.

I answer.
He that cannot give the holy Ghost is not God:

The Pope cannot give the holy Ghost:

Ergo the Pope is not God.

The Mayor is proved by an Argument Ex repugnantibus.

The Minor I prove thus. Romans 3. ver. 23.

No sinner can give the holy Ghost:

The Pope is a sinner.

Ergo the Pope cannot give the holy Ghost.

The Mayor is proved thus.

He that is not of God cannot give the holy Ghost:

No sinner is of God:

Ergo no sinner can give the holy ghost.

The minor is proved thus.

He that is not of God is of the Devil. he that is of the Devil, cannot
give the holy ghost.

Ergo he that is not of God cannot give the holy ghost.

The minor is proved in the 1. of John the 3. ca. ve. 8. and the first of
John. ver. 18.

Objection.
He that can forgive sins is God:

The Pope can forgive sins.

Ergo the Pope is God.

The first Proposition is proved by this text of Luke: chapter.5. ver. 21.
Only God forgiueth sins.

The.2. Proposition I will prove by an Argument, a minore ad maius.

He can forgive sins whose shoes can forgive sins:

The Popes shoes can forgive sins:

Ergo he can forgive sins.

I prove the minor by the Cannon Law, where it is written, De co^. A. c.
ecclesia. de priuil e. cum. olim de mayor. ac obed. c. illub.
that his shoes are of such authority, that if an excomunicated person kiss
them, his sins are forgeuen him.

I answer.
He that cannot forgive sins is not God:

The Pope cannot forgive sins:

Ergo the Pope is not God.

The first Proposition is proved by the former text of Luke chap. 5. verse 21.
Only God forgiueth sins.

The second Proposition I will prove by this Argument

Who is conceived in sin, and borne in sin:

Cannot forgive sin:

The Pope is conceived in sin, and borne in sin:

Ergo the Pope cannot forgive sin.

The Mayor is proved by the 21. verse of the 5. chapter of Luke.

The second Proposition is proved by the 51. psalm verse.5. Behold I was.
etc.

Objection.
He which can abolish Christ's doctrine, and establish his own is better then
Christ:

The Pope can abolish Christ Doctrine and establish his own:

Ergo the Pope is better then Christ.

The first proposition is of force of it self.

The Minor is proved by these places of the Cannon law. Did. 17. in gloss. de
transl* episcop. quando persona.

And also by this Sillogisme.

He whose doctrine does so far pass Christ's doctrine, as the kernel the
shell, the Son, the Moon, and light darkness, may abolishe Christ's and
establishe his own:

But the Popes doctrine does so far pass Christ's as the kernel the shell, the
Son the Moon, and light darkness:

Ergo the Pope may abolishe Christ's doctrine.

The first proposition is evident.

The second is proved by Guilielme de. S Amore in lib. de periculis
nouissimorum temporum ca. 8. and by Antilogia, and by Chancer in the Romant of
the Rose.

I answer.
He that does abolishe Christ's doctrine and establishe his own, is
Antechriste:

But the pope abolisheth Christ's doctrine and establishes his own

Ergo the Pope is Antechrist: and therefore not better the^ Christ.

The first proposition is proved by the 1. of John. 2. verse 24. and the ^. of
John. 4. verse.3.

The second proposition is proved by their own writings and preachinges, for
Friars which are the Popes tail in the year of our Lord 1355. preached
openly, and made also a book called Euangelium aeternum or Euangelium spiritus
sancti, wherein they endeavored to prove that Christ was not God, neither his
Gospel Everlasting: but should only continue 50. years and then theires
should take place, wherein was comprehended all superstition, Idolatry, as
praing to saints, Purgatory, masses, pilgramages etc. Guilielmi de. S. amore
in. lib. de. picul. nouis* temp. ca. 8. and by Antilogia* and Chancer in the
Romant of the Rose.

Objection.
He that is docter of both the laws I mean civil and common is better then
he that is docter of neither:

But the Pope is doctor of both, and Christ of neither.

Ergo the Pope is better then Christ.

The first proposition is proved by the degrees of both his doctorshippes.

The second is proved by the authority of Baldus in Codice. Who says that
he is doctor of both Laws in authority though not in knowledge.

I answer.
Some man that is doctor of neither Law is better then the Pope that is doctor
of both Laws:

But Christ was some man and doctor of neither Law.

Ergo Christ doctor of neither Law, is better than the Pope that is doctor of
both Laws.

I prove the Mayor by this Argument.

He that is lesser then Christ in knowledge, is not so good as Christ.

But the Pope though doctor of both Laws is lesser then Christ in knowledge.

Ergo the Pope is not so good as Christ.

The Mayor is proved, amaiore ad minus.

The Minor by this Sillogisme.

He that knows not all things is lesser then Christ in knowledge.

But the Pope knows not all things.

Ergo he is lesser then Christ in knowledge.

That Christ knows all I prove by this argument.

He that is God knows all things.

Christ is God:

Ergo he knows all things.

Objection.
He that is Judge both of quick and dead, is either God or as good as God:

The Pope is Judge both of quick and dead:

Ergo the Pope is either God or as good as God.

The assumption is proved in Bernerd Lutzenburge, a Friar of great learning in
the Scriptures, and in Extra. qui filij sunt legittimi. C. per venera. Ext de
sententia Excom. C. a nobis. et. 24. q. 2. Papa constitutus est iudex viuorum
et mortuorum.

I answer.
He that is to be judged in the last day, is not the Judge of the quick and
dead:

But the Pope is to be judged in the last day:

Ergo he is not the judge of the quick and dead.

Objection.
He that can prohibit matrimony is above Christ:

The Pope can prohibit matrimony.

Ergo the Pope is above Christ.

Protasis, is proved by Matthew the.^9. ver. 6.

Prochiphis or Chimma in extra vagant de conuersi.

Symperaga, is evident of the other, the Sillogisme is in Darij.

I answer.
He that prohibiteth Matrimony is an Infidele and has the spirit of error.

The Pope prohibiteth Matrimony:

Ergo the Pope is an Infidele and has the Spirit of error, and therefore
Antechrist.

The first proposition is proved by Paul the.1. Tim. cap. 4. verse 1.2.3.

The Sumption or assumption the Pope affirms in his Cannon Law as I have
alleged before, and the conclusion is manifest, and the Silogisme is in Darij.

Objection.
That which other men are the Pope is not:

Other men are sinners:

Ergo the Pope is none.

I answer.
That which other men are the Pope is not:

Other men are Christians:

Ergo the Pope is none.

An Interpretation of the place of Paul. 2. to the These. 2. which describes
Antechrist. I mean the Pope.
Except there come a departing first.
THEODORET calls this departing Antechrist, who shall seduce the world and
draw men from the truth: Who is the man of sin which usurps all the
authority of the devil, and the operation of whom is the child of perdition
because he destroys himself and others. He shall sit in the Temple of
God, which is men's minds, and shall sit the highest in all assembles,
counsels, and places, and show himself as a God, and shall call him the God.
Moasim, a strong, stout, and mighty God, some understand this departing too
be when the Roman Empire beegan too decay, in the time of the Emperor
Heraclius, when the Turks and Saracenes departed from the Roman Empire unto
Mahuemite, and followed the superstition, vaneties, and subtyle sect of the
great Turk. Augustinus confesses his ignorance in the understanding of this
place, Notwithstanding says he, some mean by Antechrist, the whole body of
sin, the whole malygnant Church, with their Captain Antechrist and so sit
in the Church, as though he were the only Church, and now ye know, what
withholdeth and what is the cause of his delay, and why that this pestilent
membre of Satan does not apeare, even the Romain Gmpire lets, for till it
beegin to deminishe, Lact. 7. c. 25.
he shall not utter himself by the mystery of iniquity, some understand
Nero, some Heresies, by him that witholdeth, some understand the Roman
Empire, as Ambrose and others as I said before: some the grace of God, and the
might of his spirit, some gods appointment and decree, who assigned Antechrists
time, but Theodoret understands it of the Gospel, which must be preached
over all the world, Christ's Religion published every where, adolatrie
vanquished, false doctrine detected, superstition abolished, and then shall
Antechrist appear. Christ shall subdue this Tyrant with the rod and teath
of his mouth: Esai. 11. verse.4. even by his word and by godly men expert in
his Law. The body of sin is Antechrist, false prophets, and false Christ's.
Math. 7. verse.15. cap. 24. verse.24. Thieves and robbers. John the 10.
verse.1. Antechrists kingdom consists in ambition, domination, arrogancy,
false doctrine, fables, visions, revelations, pardones, and such other
abominations. The abomination of desolotion is known, Mat. 24. v. 24 Mar.
13. ve. 6
by notes of Antechrist, false doctrine, in this host, and that host, and in
every Alter with his natural body: He is known by Tyranny, by all manner of
myscheife, he is the man of sin, for he does not only sin himself, but
also causes other to sin. For the Pope says that if he sell the whole
world, he sells but his own, or if he carry innumerable sort of souls to
hell with him, there may no man ask him why he does so. He is the child of
perdition, and man of sin, because that he is a man in deed, and in man's
nature, and takes upon him the operation of the devil: for God elected
Christ who in his humain nature should redeem us, and bring us to salvation,
even so does the deuel choose a very man, who should supplant, seduce, pervert,
and destroy, calling himself Christ and God, and aduouching the^ to be false
gods, whom before he reverenced as true gods. The Temple of GOD he calls
Christ's Church, and congregation, where he will usurp the highest seat and
place, boasting himself for God.

Antechrist shall neither be deuell, nor feende, but a very man, in whom shall
dwell whoie Satan bodily. Hiero^ in Daniel.
He sits in the Church of God, as God, he shall persecute the godly, change
the Laws of God, and eealt himself above GOD, and compel all men, all Laws,
all Regions to be subject to his authority. He shall feign chastetie, Hiero^
in Daniel.
and contynencie, to deceive men withal.

Gregorye the first of that name, calls him the forerunner of Antechrist, who
takes upon him to be an universal priest, Lib. 7. did. ^^* Epist. 30.
because in pride and presumption he prefers him self before others, but
this does the Pope. Therefore he is Antechrist.

Gregory calls him Antechrist who sends out his preachers to teach that
the Sabbath day or Sunday ought not to be labored upon, and to follow the
Jews in observing the rites of the law, Lib. 11. in did. 6. epist. 3.
and so cause the Sabbath to be reverenced: But the Pope does this: Ergo the
Pope is Antechriste.

After that John in his Revelation had described the first beast, Reave. 13. v
11.
which was the Roman Empire, to be a defacer of Christ, and a persecuter
of the Christians: he infers the second beast too come out of the earth,
souoring of earthly things: and having two horns as the Lamb of Christ had:
the one horn is the worldly kingdom of the Pope, which consists in
usurping. For he called himself a king, and not only a king, but also created
kings and Emperors and deposed them. The other horn is the priesthode of the
Pope. For he has authority in heaven and earth, and therefore has two keys,
the one for Heaven gates, the other for hell gates. Two swords, the one to
subdue the Emperors withal, the other to rule the Clergy. He and his give
the holy Ghost, and grace, and therefore in auriculer confession, in his
pardones, in making of priests. He speaks like a Dragon, Reu. 13. ve. 11.
even like the deuell, who seduced Adam and made him offend against all the
commandments. He does grant miracles, he makes fire too descend from
Heaven.

By fire is understood the holy Ghost, Reave. 13. v. 1^.
and the Pope promises to give the holy ghost in giving of orders, saying,
Receive ye the holy ghost.

Moreover there is no sin so horrible, no offense so grievous, which he will
not forgive for money. By Fire, may be understand his thundering boult of
Cursing and Excommunication, whereby he did strike the Monarchs, Princes, and
Kings of the earth. He that will not worship the Image of the beast which is
the dominion, prerogative, and authority of the Pope, shall be murdered by him
and his proctors.

The Image of the beast is his authority, ceremonies, candells, Sacraments,
Hosts, Wafecakes, Housling, Priests, Friars, Nonnes, Monks, Hermetes,
Religious men, Purgatory, Pardones, Penitentiaries, Curtesanes, Masses,
Dirges, Abbotts, Beads, Beaderos, Crosses, Coniurings, holy Bread, holy Water,
holy Salt, Palms, holy Blood of Hayles, prayers for the dead, Limbus patrum,
Limbus puerorum, praying to Saints, Superstition, Idolatry, Images, Idolles,
Pilgremages, Rosaries, Ladies Psalters, and Regine coelorum, Aue Maria stella,
Bulls, Extreme unction.

I will so plainly declare the nature of Antichrist and in such sort that you
shall understand that the Pope must needs be Antichrist. There were only
six Monarchies from the deluge to the end of the World. The first the
Assirians: the second, the Babylonians or the Chaldes: Dan. ^. vi Empires.
the third, the Medes or Persians: the fourth the Grecians or Macedonians: the
fifth, the Romans and Germans: the sixth, is the Pope and the Emperor, which
were divided out of the whole Romayne Empire, before it was diminished.

Daniel does not touch the Empire of the Assirians, for it was past before his
time, and this Image was seen at Babilone. What needed any Prophecy of a
thing that is past. Neither is there any Prophecy of a thing that is past,
but of a thing too come. And therefore says Daniel: God shall show to the
King things to come. The head of this Image signifies the Monarchy of the
Chaldes and Babylonians: The head of the Image.
The silver breast and arms the Medes or Persians: The Belly and Thighs of
brass the Gresians, or Macedonians: The Legs of Iron were the Romans, who
subdued all the world: The foot of Iron signifies the Pope, who breketh the
power of the Emperor as iron does ye clay, for the Pope had all Europe, at his
commandment, he crouned Emperoures, and he deposed them, he warred against
them and subdued them: he possessed Italy, and thrust the Emperor into
Germany. Let us declare how the Pope, who is signified by the feet of iron,
did subdue the Emperor, who was named by the foot of claye.

Epist. 30. ad Eng^ogum and lib. 6 Epist. 77.80. lib. 7 Epist. 196.
Gegory the first Pope of that name in the year of Christ.600. writes that it
had bin offered diverse times that the Pope of Rome might have called the
universal Bishop, but none of them would take it upon them, or use that word
and title. Notwithstanding the same Gregory inuehing against John the
Patriarcht of Constantinople, who would have been called the universal
Bishopp, signifies to the Emperor, Mauritius, and to his wife Augusta, that
Rome should challenge that honor and Superiority, and that it was iniquity to
deprive the successor of Peter of that honor, considering that it was said to
Peter, thou art Peter, Et super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Wherein
Gregory offended duble, first in misunderstanding, or rather perverting ye
place and words of Christ, meaning by ye rock Peter: Math. 16.
when as Christ is the rock, and Peter but a member derived from the rock, as
of Christ Christians: secondly that he gave occasion to his successoures to
challenge and aspire to that superiority and dignity. Diago. 805 Phoc^e.

Bonifatius. 3


Cursed Phocas in the year of Christ.605. killed the good Emperor Mauritius
with his wife, and children, and at the request of Boniface, made the seat of
Rome the chief seat of all churches, and that the Pope of Rome should be
preferred before all others. And although that Phocas a most damnable Emperor,
who killed his Master and Emperor Mauritius, gave this preminence to the pope
of Rome, notwithstanding he could not be elected without the assent of the
Emperor of Constantinople, and the Exarch of Italy, and of the people of Rome.
Constantinus, the 4. Emperor of that name, Co^stantinus the fourth Emperor.
Benedictus. 2 Pope.

Sabellicus. En 8. lib.

The Pope rules all.


granted to Benedictus, the second Pope of that name, in the year of
Christ.685. that the Pope might be elected without the assent of the Emperor
of Constantinople, or the Exarch of Itly, only by the Clergy, and people: And
in the year of Christ.1063. in a counsel at Mantua, where Berengarius was
compelled to recant his opinion of the Sacrament, it was decreed that the Pope
should be only elected of the Cardinals without assent of any others, now
began the Popes to do all, to rule all, and compel all Emperoures, Kings, and
Princes, to their orders, and to be subject to them. Gregory the 3. Pope of
that name about the year of Christ.695. resisted the Emperor of the east Leo
the.3. who had caused al manner of Images to be pulled down, and burned,
Gregory the third resisted the Emperor Leo. Sab.

En. 8. lib. 8 Entro. lib. 21. Ursp. in Leone plat.

Zachari* the Pope.


and them that would not do it, to suffer death. This Gregory resisted: this
excommunicated Leo: this caused the Images to be more worshipped then ever they
were.

Pope Zacharias in the year of Christ.743. caused the King of France, called
Chilpericus to be made a Monk, and placed one Pipin by the means of the
nobles of France, and made him king, who enriched the Pope. Pipinus Blond. 10.
Stephan the 2. pope.
Thus Zacherias the Pope, with his successor Stephen the second Pope of that
name, did pardon and absolve Pipinus with the rest of the nobility of France,
of their oath and obedience which they ought to ye king Chilpericus lately
deposed. This Stephen did first ordain that he and his successors should be born
of men's shoulders. polidor. 4. c. 16 Carolus Magius
Carolus magnus succeeded his son Pipinus, and in the year of Christ.800. was
created and crouned Emperor by Leo the third Pope of that name. Ludouicus
succeeded his Father Carolus in the empire of the west, Ludouicus.
and enriched the pope Paschalis and his successors exceadingly. For he with
his grandfather Pipinus, and his father Carolus gave to the Popes above.60.
Ylands, Uolater. lib. 3 Geogra.
Countries, Cities, shires, Towns, dominions and provinces, which are repeted
in Campanus and others. Otho mag.
Otho magnus the Emperor of the Germains, in the year of Christ 938. gave all
these that his predecessors had given to the pope for his souls health, for
his sons soul, and for his forefathers souls. After this time the pope took
upon him al worldly dominion and power, The Popes power.
also of heaven, hell, and purgatory. No man may judge the Pope, nor his
doings. Causa. 9. quest. 3. C. patet. The pope may judge all, and none the
Pope: Neither may any man dispute of his doings.17. quest. 4. c. si quis suade.
Did. 79. c. extremo. What if the Pope should corrupt many by his example? The
pope may not be controuled.
Pope Boniface answers this did. 40.4. si Papa. If the Pope shall carry
innumerable people by companies with him into hell, and there to be plagued for
ever, no man may reprove him: because that he that judges all, may be judged
of no man. In eadem did. c. 2. If the Pope be accused his predecessor is
sufficient. After Pipinus and Carolus the first Emperor of thatname, the Pope
ruled al, crowned Emperors, deposed them at his pleasure. In so much that John
the.12. Pope of that name, in the year of Christ.962. (which John was killed
taken in adultrie) gave this oath to Otho the first Emperor of the Germains,
Dest. 63. To the my Lord John Pope, I King Otho do promise thee and swear by
the Father, The Emperors oath to the Pope.
and the Son, and the holy Ghost, and the tree of the lively cross, and by
the reliquesof saints, that if I shall come to Rome I will exalt the Romish
church and her gouerner and 12. quest. 4. Clericus, Otho the 3
In the time of Otho the third Emperor of the Germains, it was decreed by
perlement that none of the stock and line of the Romans, should ever be
Emperor, but only some of the Germains. Gregory the.5 Pope of that name.
And therefore Gregory a Saxon the first Pope of that name, granted that the
Emperor should be elected by.v^j. electors, which were the Duke of Saxony,
County Palatine, Marchio Brandeburgensis: the bishop of Mense, Colonie, and
Treuers, Electors.
and the King of Boemia, as Arbiter, in the year of Christ.995. Here may you
see how that out of the Romain Empire, ye Garmains Empire and the Popes are
derived The Pope had the whole in effect and the Emperors were but at the
Popes pleasure. For the Pope had the marow and the Emperor the bones, the Pope
the corn, the Emperor the chaff: the Pope was the Sun, the Emperor the Moon,
who takes his light and might of the Pope. The Pope had Italy, Sardinia,
Sicilia, Naples, and in a manner al. The Emperor Germany, but alwais subject to
the Pope. Where it is in Daniel that they shall be joined together by man's seed,
it is meaned that they shall be as it were both one, but they shall not be
otherwise joined the^ iron can be with clay. Man's seed
By man's seed is meant that unfaithful knot of amity which was, and is between
the Emperor and the Pope, which was oftentimes, but mere dissimulatio^. For
we see that the Emperors were compelled for fear to obey the Pope, as in
treading of the Henry's, and Fredericks with Ludouique and others. How often did
Honorius, Gregory the.9. and Innocentius, take truce with Frederike the ij. and
ever brake their promis. This was Humanum semen, The pope r^utles in Paul is to
show him before king and Emperor and Christ.
and the Popes Empire, as I said before, which rose out of the Romain empire,
and began then to be reviled and made manifest when he took upon him to make
Emperors and depose them at his pleasure. Notwithstanding he wrought secretly
before in all the Popes in a manner. And that the Pope is Antechrist Paul
proves, To swords
because he sits in the Temple of God, and takes upon him to search men's
consiencis and for ye purpose he made auriculer confession, Crant. 3.8. c. 36.
Temple.
to know every man's thought. And therefore Boniface brought out two swods, on a
solemn feast day in the year of Christ.1030. whereby it is manifest that ye
pope is head both of ye spiritual and temporal sword, and dominion. The temple
wherein this knave ye pope sits and reigns, To sit.
is ye hole member of the^ yt bear ye name of christians though they be ye
church of Anti. who^ he governs, and rules for to sit in this place, is to
rule. Wherefore here you see that the Pope does invade the kingdom of Christ,
as Christ prophesied. They says he, meaning the Popes, shall come in my
name, and say, I am Christ. That is, I am king and head of the Church. How can
Paul call the Church of Christ, the church of Antichrist? How can the Temple of
God be called the Temple of Antichrist: If the Pope had called this Temple, the
Temple of Antichrist: all men would have abhorred him. But Paul calls it, as
the Pope does, the Temple of God, declaring that the Pope would call his
Sinogoge and malignant church by a glorius name, to delude ye people, as he
calls his doctrine Eua^geliu^ Sempiternum et Euangelius speritus sancti. And
the Sadduces call the^ selves rightuous men, Sadduces.
notwithstanding they were most unrighteous. And the Popes so altre their names
to deceue the people, Polyd.
for if he were Impius, they called him Pius: If nocent, Innocentius: If a
malefactor, Boniface: If unmerciful, Clement: and thus they called vice
virtue, and twined black into white. In like manner now the Jews call
themselves the people of God, who are not his people. The Pope usurps that
name, as he does in calling himself Christ's vice gerate, and that his
priests in confession sit in gods sceate. It may be objected that Mahumet is
Antechrist, Object. Mahumet.
whose story and life I have noted upon Daniel. I answer that he sits in
that Temple that calls it the Temple of God, but denies Christ, neither
does he secretly or openly call Christ his God, but only a prophet: Neither
comes he out of the Romain Empire, Pope.
but rose only of himself: neither sits he at Rome. Neither takes he
upon him to forgive sin. But the Pope seacretly calls himself, in that he
presumes to forgive sin, ergo the Pope. No man can forgive sin but God
only: the Pope presumes to forguiue sin, Math. 34. a false Christ.
ergo the Pope is he that sits in the Temple of God, boasting himself, and
triumph above all that is God, The Turk began in Arabia: the Pope at Rome.
The Pope is a false Christ, that is such one as that bosteth himself to have
the same authority that Christ had when he was in earth, that faineth himself
to do all that Christ can do, and more, as to make of injury, justice, of
nothing, something, to restore a defamed man to his name again, and such other
things like unto these. Neither is every evil Christian Antechrist, but he
only is Antichrist that fayneth himself to do all that christ can do, to be
his vicegerent in earth, to sit in his place. As of late there was one that
feigned himself king Edward and said that he was so, who was a false knave.
Neither is the Turk that Antichrist that usurps all that is God: but
worshipped of the Turks as a Saint: as of late men did worship the Uirgin
Mary and other Saints. Neycan the Jews or Turks be false christ's or
Antichrists when they do not feign them selves to worship Christ as the
son of God, he that refuses Christ, cannot, nor will not receive a feinned
Christ. Neither is he Antichrist, or a false christ that is an enemy of christ.
But he that usurps the power of christ, that makes himself equal with
christ, or above him in some points, and notwithstanding would seem to be a
christian in words, though he deny him in deeds. Is not he a false christ, a
feigned christ, a pseudo christ, that would seem to defend christ outwardly,
and yet peruerteth all his laws, detracteth them to serve his fantasy,
abrogateth them which he likech not, and makes new of his own, and dispenses
with the law of nature, with Peter, Paul, Christ and his gospel?

The Pope holds some part of every Heretic that has bin since the world
began.
WIth satan the subtle serpent he persuades Eve to eat of the fruit
forbidden. I mean he compels his church to eat the raw flesh and carnal
body, bones and soul of Christ in the sacrament, which is forbidden: to
receive his pardons, bulls, decrees and constitucions.

Matrimony condemned.
2 With the Adamians they denied and condemed marriages in priests, this did Leo
the.9. pope of that name in the year of christ 1050. Crantius lib. 4. ca. 43.
And pope Pascalis in the year of Christ 1100. John Til.

Lutz. in picar^o. stuehouses. A grip art 21

B^cca. in nouellis.


3 With the Adamites they use women and curtesans in common, which is declared
by their stuehouses, which are lawful for all men. For the divines of Louane
defend them as good, lawful, and necessary. Quoniam polluitur sacerdotium
matrimonio non meritricibus. For priesthode is polluted with matrimony, but not
with harlots. Minus est malum scortari quam nubere. It is lesser evil to go on
whorehunting, then to marry. Agrip. art. 22. et art. 16 vt habetur in c. si
concubina de sent. excom. et great. 34. d. dicentes, homini Christiano qui non
habet vxorem, loco vxoris liceat habere co^cubinam. A christian man that has
not a wife, Agrip. Art. 22 Mant. in Alphonso Paul.
it is lawful for him to have a concubine. Neither, say they do priests and
Monks abjure or forswear incontinencie, but marriage. Non abiuram
incontinentiam sed matrimonium. Sixtus the fourth pope of that name builded
stuehouses of both the kinds in the year of Christ.1474. O horrible Sodomie.
Eusebius. cap.
Paul the third pope of that name had registered five and forty thousand whores
that paid every month a pension or tribute to the pope, which did rise yearly
to forty thousand ducates. Mant. 2. fast.

Si pudor in villas, si non patiantur easdem
Et villae vomicas, vrbs est iam tota lupanar.
4 With the Ophites, who said that the serpent, which supplanted Eve, invented
the knowledge of good and evil. With Caim that killed his brother Abel. With
Judas that betrayed Christ, whom their adherents worship because that Judas did
well in betraying Christ, or else we could not have bin saved: The cross
no more say the papists we could be saved without the cross, and therefore we
worship it and make it a saint, and dedicate a day to it, and worship it with
the adoration of latria, lutz. cortes. in lib. 3. sent. did. 3. Th. aqui.

5 With the Pharisees, who separated themselves in apparel, Pha rises
and religion from others. And they observed the Sabbath day supersticiously,
as the papists do S. Sunday. Read an homily of matrimony.
They gave leave to a man to put away his wife for any cause, and the Pope
likewise for money will dispense, and allegeth at the least twelve causes, and
Johannes de turre creuata many mo. They gave to the temple rather then too
their parents, and so do the Papists.

6 The Saduces denied the immortality of the soul, Saduces no ly^^ to come.
and so did Pope Leo the tenth of that name, and the life to come. Bembus b.
The Saduces said that it was in our own will to do well or evil: the papists
that it cannot be proved by scripture that a man needs the grace of God to
do good. Occam writes this, Agrip. art. 2. Free will


7 The Esses, Manaches, Abelonians, and Agapetes, Essees works
refuse marriage, and to be saved by their own woorks, so do the Popes.

8 Thewdas was a rebel Act. 5. verse. 36. Rebels,
so were the most part of the Popes to their Emperors.

9 Simon Magus was a coniurer, and a nicromancer: so was Siluester the second.
Anno Do. 1002. John. 19. 1004. John 20. 1008. Sergius. 4. 1010. Benedict. 8.
1013. John. 21. 1024. Benedict. 9. 1040. ^e^roman^^
Siluester. 3. 1046. Gregory. 6. 1048. Gregory. 7. etc. Simon sold the holy
ghost: these the holy ghost, Christ, Heaven, Hell, Purgatory. Mantuan lib. call.
Venalia Romae.

Templa, sacerdotis, altara, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, Coelum est venale deusque.
10 The Ebionites deny that Christ was before the virgin Marie, the Papists do
the like, All went to Hell.
for they say that there were none saved, no not Adam, as did the Tatians, but
that all went to hell till Christ came and haried hell. Panth. Thomas, John de
tur. ^re, etc.

11 The Nicolaites would have men's wives, Nicolaites.
and adultery and fornication to be a thing indifferent: Fornicat^^n a t^i^g
indi^ferent
so do the popes, who say that single fornication is no sin, and licet habere
feminam semel in mense ad expurgandas renes, si non cast tamen caute, and
Sodomi^ too be diuinum opus, Ioh. a casa cardinal. Petrus Aratinus.

Images.
12 The Gnostiques had images of Homer, of Plato, of Aristotle, of Pythagoras
and such others, of Paul, and Marcellina, and placed these images besides
Christ's image, and worshipped them: and do not the papists worship the images
of Christ, Mary and John, cense them, kiss them, reverence them, offer to
them, kneel to them, say the Lords prayer, enjoined by their ghostly fathers,
which I have seen and done.

Matrimony.
13 With the Tatians they say that matrimony is as evil as whoredom.

Tert^ll. The pope forgiueth sinn^s.
14 Marcus and Psichicus a follower of Ualentinus, took upon him to forgive
sins, to give grace and the holy ghost: and does not the Pope the same?

Divorce.
15 The Montanistes and Pristilians gave liberty for men to forsake their
wives: and so do the Popes.

Marriage fills hell.
16 They say with Hi^rax that chastity fills heaven, and marriage hell.

17 They hold with the Audeans and Anthropomorphites, that God is of like shape
with men: and do not the Papists paint the father an old man with a long white
beard, and the holy ghost like a Dove.

Rome the Church.
18 The Donatistes said that the Church was no where but in Afrike, the Papists
at Rome, and only there where the Pope rules.

Fre will.
19 They defend free will with the Donatists, Pelagians, and Anabaptists.

20 With the Collyridians they woorship the virgin Mary, they offer to her,
they call her the queen of heaven.

Idolatry
21 They say with Montanus, Apelles, and Cataphriges, that Christ ascended
without a body: for they say that he is enclosed in a little round cake
inuisibly, and with Montanus they appoint fasting days.

Seuerus
22 Seuerus said that a woman was the woork of the devil, and the upper part of
man of God, but from the navel down of satan: and therefore they that mary to
fulfill the works of the devil. Pope Innocent 8. aduouched the like saying,
that they that were married could not please God. Qui in carne sunt Deo placere
non possunt.

23 Marcellus the Bishop of Ancira affirmed that the kingdom of Christ should
have an end. They de^ny Christ
Friars in Paris Preached in the year of Christ 1255. that Christ's Gospel
should then have an end, and the Popes should take place called sempiternum
Euangelium, and Christ's they compared to the shell, theirs to the kernel,
theirs to the sun, Christ's to the moon, theirs to light, Christ's to darkness.

24 With the Donatistes and circumcellions they burn books, yea they burn
sacred Bibles and persecute the readers thereof with fire and sweard.
Persecution.


25 The Pope like Gensericus, Honorius and Transmundus being Arians and Kings
of the Vandales persecuted the Christians. The Church of Christ never
persecuteth but is persecuted, the Popes church persecuteth, and was never
persecuted, Ergo it is not the church of Christ. Hillary

26 With Seuerus bishop of Antioch he curses al his aduersares.

27 With Anastasius the Emperor he worshippeth a Quaternitie the father, the
son, and the holy ghost, Cursinge
and Christ's body in the Sacrament.

28 John of Constantinople desiring to be called the universal Bishop is
condemned for an heretic, Supremus.
what then shall we call the Pope who will not only to be called the universal
Bishop, but also will be the head of the milittant and triumphant church, to
have rule in heaven over the Angels and archaungels, in hell over the damned
souls, and over the sely souls in purgatory.

29 The Pope Marcellinus was an Idolater.

30 Pope Anastatius was a Nestorian.

31 Pope Liberius an Arian.

32 Many of of ye Popes were murderers, ruffians, desperates, coniurers,
necromancers, warriers, perricides, blasphemers, Atheistes, Antichrists, etc.

Fredericus Imperator Innocentio Papae.
FAta monent, stellaeque docent, auiumque volatus,
totius subito malleus orbis ero.
Roma diu titubans longis erroribus acta,
corruet, et mundi desinet esse caput.
Innocentius Frederico.
Fata silent, stellaeque tacent, nil praedicat ales:
solius proprium nosce futura Dei.
Niteris in cassum nauem submergere Petri
fluctuat, at nunquam mergitur illa Ratis.
Fama refert, scriptura docet, peccata loquuntur,
quod tibi vita breuis, paena perennis erit.
Quod diuina manus potuit sensit Iulianus,
tu succedis ei, te te net ira dei.
Fre, fremit in mundo, de deprimit alta profundo,
ri, mala rimatur, cus, cuspide cuncta minatur.
Fredericus Innocentio.
Fata monent, stellaeque docent, auiumque volatus,
lapsurum te mox, ad stygis antra nigrae.
Non ratis est Petri, sed Christi, quae natat vndis,
fluctuat, at nusque mergitur illa ratis.
Fama refert, tua scripta docent, peccata nefanda
interitum ostendunt, exitiumque tuum.
trangulat Adrian um musc^, annon ira tonantis
cogitat et de te sumere supplicium?
Carcere suspendit sese Benedictus, et alter,
in stupro captus, saucius ense perit.
Siluestrum extinguit satan, sceleratior ipse,
ergo tuis factis praemia digna feras.
Innocuum te voce notas, cum sis nociturus
orbi terrarum, christianoque gregi.
Fredericus de integro.
Esses si membrum, non te caput orbis et vrbis
iactares, cum sis orbis, et vrbis on^is.
Nune membru^ non es, sed putre cadauer, et vlcus,
ense recidendum, ridiculumque caput.
A Deniele bdelygma nefa^que caputque malorum,
diceris a Paulo filius exitij.
Nos solum Christum nostru^, caput esse fatemur,
totius mundi te caput esse facis.
Si caput est vnum, quod Paulus dicit vbique,
tu veors balatro, dic mihi quale caput?
Corporis vnius caput vnum, si duo,, monstrum,
monstra paris, monachos, scorta, nefanda foues.
Est tua religio, stuprum, ira, superbia, caedes,
error, deliciae, fulmina, turpe lucrum.
Ex his ergo liquet, Christu^ te spernere, Christo
hostem esse inuisum, dedecorique deo.
Rex tandem veniet, coelo delapsus ab alto,
tum non defendent te, sacra, missa, cruces.
Non in sublimi surgentes vertice cri^tae,
Non diploma ponens, non tua sacra cohors.
Nec diadema triplex, nec seeds sanguine parta
nullus honos, solii purpura nulla tui.
Triginta nummis Christum vendebat Judas,
tu Christi vendis corpora plura tui.
Corpora tu vendis Christi paruo aere, polumque,
caelestis genios, sydera, iura, deos.
Innocentius Frederico.
Semper honos, nomenque meum laudesque manebu^t,
quae Christus condit, condere iura queo.
Illi succedo, sed plus me posse fatebor,
pellere te possum sede, quod ille nequit.
Ille nequit, quoniam Pilatum sede nequiuit,
pellere solus ego, solus in orb deus.
Est nostrum genus, eximijs spectabile factis,
Gregorius magnus, carmina mira canit.
Christo pulsanti, patuit vix ianua ditis,
sed mihi pulsanti mox patuere fores.
Namque ego Traianum tetri de faucibus orci,
extraxi, et matrem, dite fremente, meam.
Fredericus Innocentio.
Papa quid insanis toties? quid sanguine gaudes?
quid geris imbelli spicula tanta manu?
Quo vesane ruis? non te decet ira, nec arma:
sed pietatis opus, relligionis amor.
Tu similis colubro, quoties grauis ira, venenum
suscitat, et mota lumina bile rubent.
Sic furis, vt spumis ex ore cadentibus atrox
fulmineo quoties dente minatur aper.
Sic fremis, vt frendens, cum ferrea vincula mandit
Cerberus, et stygias murmr turbat aquas.
Tu fratres in bella vocas, in pignora patres,
arma mihi extorques, oppida, tecta, domos.
Fas et iura negas, homines, et numina fallis,
nec Iouis imperium, nec phlegetonta times.
Innocentius Frederico.
Quid metua^ phlegitonta, deu^ue aut numina coeli?
nec ditis noceat, nec Iouis ira mihi.
Est mihi tum barathri, tum coeli facta potestas,
caelestes genios, tartareosque voco.
Christus non potuit mentes deducere caelo
nec excire animas ex acheronte nigro.
Orci equidem possum cunctas lustrare cauernas,
Eruere ex herebi monstra nefanda specu.
Quod Deus est, ego sum, nec non mihi vendico plura
nam hinil ex nihilofas fabricare mihi
Iusticia ex iniusticia faceoque ^^eoque,
te possum solio pellere caesareo.
Omnia transformo, muto quadrata rotundis,
reges pello, creo, transfero regna, duces.
Nunc quis sum? o medius fidius, te sede mouebo,
ad barathrum trudam, praecipitemque dabo.
Absit si ratio, stat pro ratione ^^^ido,
quale meum numen lingua docere nequit.
Sum dominus caeli, terrae rex, rectorauerni,
prodidit et Paulus me ^uperare ^eum.
Nec diuus, nec homo sum: neuter at inter vtrumque
Ens sum, consistens ex homine atque (...)
At quid plura? meum numen formida^ olympus
me saenus Pluto, tartarieque canes.
Quos placet, efficio diuos, quos displicet, odi
atque ad tartareos precipitabo lacus.
Nemo mihi in terris agnatus, nemo propinquus.
prae me omnes sperno, ducoque pro nihilo.
Prostratis veniam digitis ego porrigo tensis,
quod si contectes, id mea sella potest.
Calceus expurgat culpas mortalibus aegris,
et caligae viduas vsque bear solens.
Sic quidam de Papa.
Papa stupor mundi, Deus est, numenque benignum
Europae fasces, orbis, et vrbis habet.
Atque Asiae decus, atque Africae splendour, barathrique,
Inmen, agit furias, imperioque premit.
Solus ab occasu dominari, solus ab ortu
debet, quaque notus, qua boreasque ruit.
Huius sanguineum fulmen formidat Olympus,
caelestes animi, caelicoleque timent.
Saturnus metuit ne se detrudere caelo
tentet Romani fertilis ira Iouis.
Ex erebo manes citat ad subsellia Romae,
quasque cupit furias, ex acheronte ciet:
Troianum e stigiis, inuito dite, lacunis
elicit, hoc Christum posse, negare licet.
Haec Christus potuit, dum vixit, fotre fatetur:
at nunc posse negat Papa, Petrique cohors.
Christus non potuit damnatos manibus vllam
largiri veniam, sed been Papa potest.
Dat veniam tostis flammatis ignibus orci,
ille dat eterni gaudia falsa poli.
Ille au^o vendit coelum, coelestia cessant,
numina tam magnum dinumerare bonum.
De Roma, meretrice Babilonica.
ROMA quid insanis? quid in impietate triumphas?
quid nectis frauds? stupraue faeda colis?
Concubitus vetitus cordi est, puerilis amorque,
impurus cultus, vana superstitio.
Dicitur illa quidem meretrix et adultera turpis,
agnos^it plures, quae vitiata, viros.
Illa vrbs non al^ter, coluit quae numina plura,
scortum est. Hoc Babylon, impia Roma facit.
Vrbs Romana potest meretrix Babylonia dici,
quae coluit, spreto numina plura, deo,
Illa deos coluit plures, simulachra, laresque,
quaest um diuitias, gaudia falsa dapes.
Pompas, uxuriam ventrem, puerosque, dolosque,
atque malos genios, stupra, venena lupas.
Papa fuit quondam meretrix, peperitque plataea.
quid queris testes? testis imago tibi.
Cuius imago tibi Romae stat conspicienda,
si dubitas, propter Roma petenda tibi.
Sin statuae minime fidas: confide, quod Abbas
Verspergensus ait famaque vera docet.
FINIS.

