THE PRESENT STATE OF ENGLAND, EXPRESSED IN THIS PARADOX, Our Fathers were very
rich with little,
And We poor with much.


Written by WALTER CARRY.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young for William Sheffard in Popes-head-Alley. Anno
Dom. 1626.

THE PRESENT STATE OF ENGLAND.
WHereas I intended to show the present state of England, by the exposition of
this Paradox; yet would I have none to think, that I intend to meddle or
speak of any matter of government thereof, Quia Iouem tangere periculosum: but
only to express the manners and conditions of the people, and to show the
difference of this present time, and of that which was 60. years since, when I
was (as it were) but a springing Cima of sixteen years old: Neither will I
therein use any long discourse, but with all possible brevity deliver only
this Pamphlet, as a glass, wherein men of this present age may see their
monstrous deformities; or as a Theme for wiser wits to play upon, setting
aside in effect whatsoever I shall write more than the words of the very
Paradox it self: for, Verbum sapienti sat est. The duty also which by the law
of God, and the law of Nature, I owe unto my native Soil, and the great
heart-sorrow I have to see the follies, misdemeanors, and ill behavior of
many of this time, has moved me now in my withered age, to leave these few
lines, as tokens of my love; with great hope, that if the same perhaps shall
come to the hands of our wise, religious, virtuous, learned, and most gracious
Sovereign King, the blessed peace of England, he will thereby be put in
mind, Scabra haec nostra dolare, that is, to make these our rugged ways
plain.

The exposition of the Paradox.
AS in all others, so in this Paradox, the words carry a strange sense, and
seem to import a mere contrariety and untruth: For (according to the word)
how can it be, that one having little, should be rich? and another much,
should be poor? Wherefore we must seek another, and more secret meaning;
knowing that every Paradox has both an outward and inward sense. The one (as I
may term it) superficicall, the other essential; the one left to the gazing
of fools, with admiration; the other to the wise, with deep consideration: The
one to the eye and outward appearance only, the other to the inward sense and
judgment. For my promised breuities sake (omitting many) I will speak only of
three things, with their appurtenances; wherein our then wise Fathers, did
greatly differ from us, now fools. These three which have turned things vpside
down, and strangely altered our estate, are suits of law, suits of apparel,
and drunkenness; which being well considered, with matters subsequent, it will
appear, that these three foul stains in our fair commonwealth, do
plainly lay open, and prove the inward truth of my Paradox: for, to speak
first in general; Our Fathers in apparel were very plain, drunkenness was
abhorred, and as it is a most base trade, so used only of the most base, and
some few of the very abject sort. They did not ambitiously strive to get that
which they could not compass, to borrow that which they could not repay,
neither to contend for every trifle in law, which at this day are causes of
infinite suits: but living quietly and neighbourly with that they had, they
were ever rich, able to give and lend freely. But now (on the contrary, our
rents being generally five times as much as our Fathers received for the same
land) the idle and senseless expenses of senseless drunkards, the outrageous
charge of suits in law, the monstrous prodigality in apparel, makes us
(seeming great and rich in outward show) to be full of care, trouble, ever
needy, and very beggarly: For, by these three means we strive to seem
kings, but contend indeed who shall be first beggars; so that the old Proverb
is in this age most truly verified; Stultorum plena sunt omnia, The world is
full of fools. Now of these three particularly; and first

Of Drunkenness.
THis most monstrous vice is thus defined. Ebrietas est priuatio motus recti
and intellectus, Drunkenness is the privation of orderly motion and
understanding. This definition agrees in part with that which Galen has, lib.
30. de locis affectis, of natural folly, which is, Stultitia est amissio
intellectus, Folly is the loss of understanding: and another says, it is
absentia intellectus, the absence or want of understanding: But I need not
stand much about the definition of drunkenness, or to show what it is: For
(with grief I speak it) the Tauernes, Alehoufes, and the very streets are
so full of drunkards, in all parts of this kingdom, that by the sight of them
it is better known what this detestable and odious vice is, than by any
definition whatsoever. God has made all things for man, has made him ruler
and governor over all; which office that he may the better perform, he has
given him reason (a most divine thing, and precious jewel) to govern his
actions, whereby he far excels all other creatures. This is well compared
to a Carpenters Rule: for without a Rule the Carpenter can never orderly
compose his work; but every part will be out of frame: so these drunkards
(having expelled reason, that most excellent rule) are in far worse case than
brute beasts; for they have neither reason nor nature to direct them, but show
themselves either fools or mad men, as they are formerly defined. I would to
God, they would consider how many murders have been, and daily are committed by
drunkards; so that some of them are killed and taken away in the midst of
their wickedness; others hanged, loosing lands and goods, to the overthrow of
their houses. This sin is (in a word) in it self damnable, and the very
pathway leading to all other wickedness whatsoever. Inter alia, hoc me
mirifice excruciat, quod Academiae nostrae morbo hoc pernicioso laborare
dicuntur: nam fontes si inficiantur, riui omnes non nisi aquam putidam praebere
poterint. But (still mindful of my promised brevity) I will only set down
notes (as it were) or short speeches of drunkards and drunkenness, and so take
my leave of that wherewith I was never acquainted.

I read of one brought up from his infancy in a wilderness, at last coming
to a city, and seeing a drunken man going up and down the streets, use
clamorous and outrageous words, far from reason, in his gate staggering, and
in all his actions foolish and rude, asked what creature that was, being so
like in shape to a man, and no man.

Another seeing one come drunk out of a Tavern, falling down in the street,
and vomiting up in great abundance the wine with which he had ouercharged his
stomach, said, Look, look, I will show you a strange sight; This man has in
this sort vomited many goodly Lordships, and great treasure, left him by his
father; and now he has neither wealth, nor wit, but is a beggar and a besotted
fool.

It is written, that one coming into a place where many were drunk, one of
them offered him a full cup; to whom he said, there was poison in it, or worse
than poison: for it has bereft you all of your wits and understanding. I will
none, I thank you.

One seeing a man extremely drunk, and still drinking excessiuely, said,
Alas, let him drink no more. To whom another answered, Let him drink still,
for he is good for nothing else; and it is not fit for a man to live, that is
good for nothing.

They that force others to drunkennes^^, are like stinking sinkes, which
receive all filthy and loathsome things, and therewith infect others.

One being asked, what he thought of a man often drunk, said, He is a piece
of ground good for nothing, which brings forth nothing but weeds.

A drunken man sleeping soundly, one said, It is pity he should ever wake; for
now he does no harm, but when he is awake he is ever speaking or doing
something that is naught.

I have heard, that in Spain if one be drunk, his oath in never after to be
taken before a Judge.

A Philosopher hearing one brag of his great drinking (as many do in these
days) said, my Mule does far excel thee in that virtue.

It were very fit that drunkards, having lands, should be made wards, of what
age soever: for they are not able to govern themselves nor their livings, more
than children.

Sentences of wise men, touching Drunkenness and Drunkards.
COmes ebrietatis paupertas, Beggarie is the companion of drunkenness.

Qui fiunt crebro ebrij, cit o senescunt, They that are often drunk, are
quickly old.

Nulla fides ebrio danda, nec huic negotium committendum, There is no trust to
be given to a drunkard, neither any business to be committed to him.

Ebrietas contentiosa, Drunkenness is full of quarrels.

Ebrietas somes libidinis, Drunkenness is fuel for filthy lust.

Ebriost Psittacorum more modo loquuntur, Drunkards speak but like Parrets.

Vino repletus, vinum habet, seipsum non habet, He that is full of wine, has
wine, himself he has not.

Ebrietas dulce venenum, Drunkenness is a pleasant poison.

Nescit ebrietas vel imperare, vel parere, Drunkenness knows neither to
govern, nor to be governed.

Vbiebrietas, ibi sola fortuna; vbi sola fortuna, ibi nulla sapientia
dominatur, Where drunkenness is, there only fortune; where only fortune is,
there no wisdom does bear rule.

Ebriosus semper in praecipiti stat, A drunkard stands always as it were in
a place ready to break his neck.

Ebrium noliconsulere, Never ask counsel of a drunkard.

Ebrietas non minor quam insania, sed breuior, Drunkenness is no less than
madness, but shorter.

So have you heard, what the wisest men long since have said of this filthy
vice, and the vicious followers of the same.

To conclude, I wish all drunkards to read this, every morning as soon as they
rise, that thereby they may be persuaded to reformation that day; and to
remember how greatly that beast-like and loathsome sin hurts the soul, the
body, the purse, and the name or reputation. It is in it self so odious and
detestable before God, and all civil men; that, as one saying, Lo, yonder is
a cruel Lion; which words cause a man presently to fly and shift away: so if
I had but named drunkenness, that only word should be a sufficient
persuasion for wise men to avoid the same. For the Lion is not so dangerous,
who kills only the body, as drunkenness which kills body and soul.

Of the excessive abuse in apparel.
THere are professors of a rare and strange art or science, who are named
Proportionaries; but seldom set to work. If you deliver one of these a bone
of your Grandfathers little finger, he will by that find the proportion of
all his bones, and tell you to an inch how tall a man your Grandfather was: So
I herein mind to use some of their skill; for seeing it is an infinite matter,
sigillatim to write of all the peevish, childish, and more than foolish costly
ornaments now used (especially being object to every man's sight) I will only
take the head with the neck, and by these, tell you what proportion all the
rest of the body holds, down to the lowest part of the foot. I saw a
complete Gentleman of late, whose Beuer-hat cost xxxvii.s. a feather xx.s. the
hatband iij.li. and his ten double Ruff iiij.li. thus the head and neck only
were furnished, and that but of one suite, for ix.li.xvii.s. Now taking the
proportion of the bravery for the rest of the body; the cloak lined with
velvet, daubed over with gold lace two fingers broad, the satin doublet and
hose in like sort decked, the silk stockings, with costly garters hanging
down to the small of the leg, the Spanish shoes with glittering roses, the
girdell and Steletto; I leave it to those that herein know more than I, and can
speak of greater bravery than this, to cast up the total sum: wherein also
(as an appurtenant) they may remember his Mistress suited at his charge, and cast
up both sums in one. But on the contrary, I observed but 60. years since,
generally a man full as good or better in ability than this complete, lusty
looking lad, whose hat and band cost but v.s. and his ruff but xii d. at the
most. So you see the difference of these sums; the one ix.li.xvii.s. the
other vi.s. Then after this proportion, the whole attire of the one, cost above
30. times as much as the attire of the other: forget not also that the one
lasts three times as long as the other; subject to change, as fashions
change. There is another appurtenant to this gilded folly; for if his Mistress
say it does not become him, or if the fashion change, that suit is presently
left off, and another bought. I will not forget, but touch a little the foolish
and costly fashion of changing fashions, noted especially, and objected against
our English nation; and in one only thing (I mean the hat) I will express
our prodigious folly in all the rest. Of late the broad brimmd hat came
suddenly in fashion, and put all other out of countenance and request; and
happy were they that could get them soonest, and be first seen in that
fashion: so that a computation being made, there is at the least 300000. li. or
much more, in England only bestowed in broad brimmd hats, within one year and
an half. As for others, either Beuer or Felts, they were on the sudden of no
reckoning at all: in so much, that my self (still continuing one fashion) I
bought a Beuer hat for v.s. which the year before could not be had under 30.
s. The like, or more may be said of the change from plain to double ruffes: But
if you will see the effect of these follies, and what lamentable estate it
brings many unto; go to the Kings bench-prison, to the Fleet, to the
Counters, and like places; where you shall find many that in golden glittering
bravery have shined like the Sun, but now (their patrimonies and all being
spent, and they in debt) their Sun is eclipsed, and they rest there in very
miserable case, be wailing their vain, and more than childish course of life;
and some of them call to mind how they have heard, that their forefathers (on
that living, which they have in lewd sort spent, and disinherited their family
of for ever) lived bountifully, quietly, pleasantly, and (as I may truly say)
like Kings in their little kingdoms: They seldom or never went to London,
they did not strive for greatness, they did not long for their neighbors
land, neither sold of their own, but (keeping good hospitality, and plainly
ever attired were very rich. Well, if the hat alone, and in so short a time
has put England to that charge, by change of fashion only: what has Lawnes,
Cambrickes, Silks, Sattins, Veluets, and the rest done, and change of fashion
in them? I will deliver you my opinion (out of my love to my Country, and
desire of reformation) and leave it to the correction of the wiser. The money
which is most superfluously bestowed in apparel in this little Island, is
thought able to maintain a Navy to command the sea-forces of all our
neighbors bordering on the narrow seas, of Spain, and of the Pirates, and all
others in the mediterranean sea. How far they further may show their force in
the sea leading to Constantinople, I will not take upon me to judge. Yet one
other effect these Peacockes feathers (in this gilded, not golden age)
works: The most part of the Gentry of this kingdom, are so far in the
Usurers books, by their ouerreaching heads to climb to greatness, and they
and their wives to exceed their neighbors in bravery and place, that they live
in continual care, and like fishes in nets, the more they strive to get out,
the faster they hang. I could bring many sentences of the wise and learned
against these vain, peevish, childish, thriftlesse, and painted fools, as I
did against drunkards; but I will only tell you an old tale, and so conclude
this part. A Kinght named Young, a man of an excellent mother wit, very
pleasant, and full of delightful and merry speech, was commended to our late
Soueraign, Queen Elizabeth, who caused him to be brought to her, took great
pleasure to talk with him, and amongst other things she asked him how he liked
a company of brave Ladies that were in her presence? He answered, as I like my
silver haired conies at home; the cases are far better than the bodies. These
our named Gallants are well compared to such conies, and are deceived much, to
think they better their reputation by their bravery: for many, even ordinary
Tailors in London, are in their Silks, Sattins, and Veluets, as well as they:
And in Italy every base ordinary blacksmith does exceed on the Sabbath day and
other holy days, or equal the brauest of them. I wish them therefore to
compare the sweet Country with the unsavory London, wherein they are most
resident, which is the cause of great expense, in bravery, in gaming, drinking,
resorting to plays, brothell houses, and many other great follies: and I dare
say, they shall find more true pleasure in one year, living like their
forefathers in the Country, than in twenty living in London.

Touching suits in Law.
HErein I must bear an even hand, and speak nothing that shall give just
cause of offense; yet verit as non culpanda.

In our law proceedings, I find (in my simple judgment, ever subject to the
correction of the wiser) sundry inconveniences. The first is, that although
they have in their law a Maxim, De minimis non curat lex, yet they admit every
trifling action for gain; even of such poor clients also, as have scarcely
bread to give their children: wherein oftentimes is more spent, than thrice the
value of that they strive for.

I heard of two men, who fell at variance about an hiue of bees, and went to
law, until he that had spent least, had spent 500. li.

I heard also of two brethren, who contended in Chancery for a chain of gold
worth 60. li. The elder (being Executor) kept the chain; the yonguer had
proof, that his father said often in his life time, that the chain should be
his: The suit proceeded, until they had spent above an 100. li. And on a day
being both at the Chancerie bar, they touched one another; and the elder
brother desired to speak with the yonguer, and said, Brother, you see how these
men feed on us, and we are as near an end of our cause, as when we first
began: come and dine with me, and I will give you the one half of the chain,
and keep the other, and so end this endless cause. And I pray you let us both
make much of this wit so dearly bought. Thus was this cause ended.

There was a Widow and a Gentleman that contended for a seat in the Church, at
the civil Law; and this Gentleman talking of his suit for his seat, protested
that it had cost him so great a sum, as that (for the credit of these Courts)
I am loath to name. One wondering thereat, he said, it was most true; and said
further, They have spun me at length like a twine thread: and named the number
of Courts he had been twisted in, and the strange number of chargeable
commissions which passed between them. Thus you see the old saying true; If you
go to law for a nut, the Lawyers will crack it, give each of you half the
shell, and chop up the kernel themselves.

There is a thing which long since happened in France, very memorable, touching
the endless causes in the civil law. A stranger having sold great store of
Merchandise there, and not paid, entered suit against his debtors, wherein he
spent more than his debts came unto: and thereupon greatly perplexed,
especially seeing no likelihood of an end of his suits or obtaining his debts;
he went to the King, and said, I have a great complaint against one in your
kingdom, and I humbly desire you to hear me patiently: The King said, tell
me against whom, I will very patiently and willingly hear thee. My Lord (said
he) it is against your self: Against me, said the King, how so? whatsoever it
be, speak it freely, and fear nothing: Whereupon the Merchant told him, that
he did suffer most intolerable, costly, and tedious courses in the proceedings
of Law in his kingdom (which is there only the civil Law) and such as I
think, will never have end as long as the Clients have money to give the
Lawyers; and told him withal, of all his proceedings. Well, said the wise
King, I will first see thee fully satisfied, and then reform this foul abuse:
And presently thereupon did take such excellent order for the quick and just
end of causes, that his subjects did name him, Pater patriae; and he was so
admired, and so heartily loved of them, as (I think) never King was before or
since.

I could speak further of two citizens of London, who fell out for the kicking
of a dog, and went so long to law, until their books could not be contained
in two bufhell bags. This cause thus standing without show of end, our late
gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth caused to be arbitrated. I could speak of
many more like vain and trifling suits, which, as little springs, first creep
out at the foot of an hill, and by long running grow to be great rivers: but
these shall suffice, Quia in infinitis instare, infinitum.

I have heard a very laudable order in Spain: There are appointed certain men
called Iusticers, which are dispersed over the whole kingdom; every one
limited to certain Parishes, in which he has authority to hear complaints of
misdemeanors, and trifling quarrels, and to punish offenders, either by fine
(whereof he has part, and the King the rest) or corporal punishment, as he
sees good; and to end also causes for trifling debts, and other matters (being
of no great moment) whatsoever, without suit: Whereas in England there are an
infinite number of suits tolerated for words, for the least blow, for cattle
breaking into ground, for trifling debts, and such like: so that if one have
but x.s. owing him, nay, v.s. or less, he cannot have it but by suit in law,
in some petty Court, where it will cost 30. or 40. s. charge of suit. But to
end this Chapter, I could wish that our Justices by commission, were authorized
to sit in several parts, to which they dwell nearest, and before any suit be
brought, the plaintiff should show his cause of complaint, and thereupon if it
were for title of much land, or matter of great moment, he should be suffered
to proceed in law; but if otherwise, they should determine it themselves, or
refer it to others, as (the persons and causes considered) they thought good,
and likewise to punish misdemeanors: which would breed great peace in this
land, and prevent the utter undoing of many.

A second inconvenience.
THis is the multiplicity of Atturnies at the common Law of Chancery,
vnder-clerks, and many petty-foggers, dwelling and dispersed over all this
kingdom, which may well be compared to such as stand with quaile-pipes, ever
calling the poor silly bird into the net.

I heard it credibly reported, that few years since, there were not above two
or three Atturnies in the I Will of Wight, and not many more causes or suits in
law; but now there is (said the reporter) at the least 60. and many more suits
in law. The reason he added, was this; If any be angry with his neighbor, he
has one of these ready and near at hand, to whom he opens his grief: who
is also as ready, presently to set him on for his own gain; telling him his
cause is clear, and he shall never wag his foot, but he will do all for
him, and fetch his adversary about well enough. On the contrary, the other has
one as ready to tell him, how well he will defend his cause. So these two
enter combat, and when both are weary, then neighbors end the cause: and to
that end (for the most part) come all suits of England. How much better then
were it, at the first to commit causes to neighbors? for no causes seldom
have so good end by law, as by neighbors: Iniquissima pax, iustissimo bello
anteferenda.

The third is motions made in the Courts, especially in the Chancery.
THere are some Counselors, who will in their motions report whatsoever their
client tells them, be it true or false; and these are well said to have voces
venales, that is, to be such as that for money you may have them tell what tale
you will. These also abuse the Courts, and cause diverse Orders to be made by
their false suggestions, which make suits very tedious, and more costly:
Insomuch that about Orders only, there is oftentimes more money and time
spent, than ought to be about the whole substance of the cause.

The fourth.
THis is the great fees which Counselors take, whereby the clients are much
impouerished: For they (not looking into their consciences, what they deserve,
or how hardly their client (perhaps poor) may spare it) take all that comes,
and are like gulfes without bottom, never full. And further, if you have a day
of trial, or hearing, and see your Councellor, although he be absent and do
you no good, yet he swalloweth your fee as good booty. There is a remedy by law
for excessive fees (as I have heard) but it takes no good effect.

The fifth.
THis is making long bills in the English Courts, full of matter impertinent,
from the fullness of their malice, to put the defendant to greater charge.
These men are often in like sort requited, and beaten with their own rods:
wherefore I compare them to one that will put out one of his own eyes, to do
his enemy the like harm: I wish that such a man may pay well for his folly to
his enemy.

The sixth.
THis is especially in the English Courts also, where the vnder-clerkes with
their large margents, with their great distance between their lines, with
protraction of words, and with their many dashes and slashes put in places of
words, lay their greediness open to the whole world: and I have heard many
say, that they are as men void of all conscience, not caring how they get
money, so they have it; and that with as good a conscience they may take a purse
by the high way, but not with so little danger, and that is all the difference.
I did see an answer to a bill of 40. of their sheets, which coppied out, was
brought to 6. sheets, in which copy there was very sufficient margent left,
and good difference between the lines. Hereby every man may see how infinitely
by the abuse of petty-clerks, (the Court of Chancery swelling, and ready to
burst with causes, the Star Chamber and the rest) the whole kingdom is robbed
as it were: For that copy which should have cost but 4. s. cost 4. nobles.
There was one presented our late worthy Lady and Queen, Elizabeth, with a piece
of paper no bigger than a penny, whereon was written the Pater noster, the
Creed, and a prayer for her. Now I wish that all such Clerks should be
apprentices awhile to such a Scribe; for so falling from one extreme to
another, they may be brought to a mean: But as for the higher Clerks and
officers, they would feign have this foul and unconscionable fault amended,
because it makes nothing for their profit.

The seventh.
THis last that I will speak of, but not the last, yet least by many, is
touching Interrogatories and examinations of witnesses. There are many that set
down vain and frivolous Interrogatories, nothing at all to the matter in
question, and thereupon cause many to be examined, whose testimony makes
nothing to any purpose, neither is ever read or heard, but only causes long,
tedious, needless, and costly books, to the grieuance and excessive charge of
the subject. Thus have I (as it were) only nominated seven inconveniences, to
persuade men to peace, and to end at home such quarrels as arise, without
great vexation of mind, without great trouble of body, in riding, and running,
and without excessive expenses. All which, together with neglect of all
business, do necessarily follow suits and controversies in Law: Ictus
piscator dixit. As for many others which are greater, and whereof the last
Parliament began to speak, with intent to reform the same, I will say nothing.
But these seven motes I desire to be picked out of their long gowns.

So have I briefly (without our newborn inkepot terms) delivered to the view
of the world, my Paradox and exposition thereof, with hope to persuade some of
the wiser sort to avoid drunkenness, excess in apparel, and controversies
in law, with matters subsequent; which are three of the most common, costly,
and offensive evils now reigning: That by their example, others may learn to
live a civil, plain, quiet, and contented life, whereby seeming poor, they
shall be rich; whereas others bestowing much in feasting and drunkenness,
brauing it out with a glorious outside only, and painted apparel, living in
controversy, and sparing no large fees, or great bribes to overcome their
adversaries, seem only to be rich, but are indeed very beggarly. Wherefore I
conclude as I begun, Our Fathers were rich with little, and we beggars with
much: For we use our much ill, and they used their little well.

FINIS.

