THE VOYAGE of the wandering Knight.

Devised by John Carthenie, a Frenchman: and translated out of French into
English, by William Goodyear of South-hampton Merchant.

A WORK VVORTHIE OF READING, And dedicated to the Right worshipful Sir
Frauncis Drake, Knight.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the xxvij. of May. 1581.

To the right worshipful Sir Frauncis Drake, Knight, happy success in all his
attempts, and due reward for the same.
THE COMMON COURSE OF MAN'S life (most venterous and no less worshipful
Knight) and their daily dealings do manifestlye declare, how variable they be,
how wandering, how wavering, how uncertain and insolent, if Fortune or rather
God (to speak Christian like) by blessing them as abundantly, so
extraordinarily: and raising them, Tanquam e puluere and luto, advance them to
promotion. And no meruell though this be incident to the manners of men, seeing
that nature her self in this point offends. For what is he, unless he be
mortified, that is not naturally of an aspiring mind: imitating heerin the
property of the Iuie, which never cease climing by degrees, Donec ipsam
summitatem attigerit, till it be come to the very top.

This fault being general, and as general so hateful, in the judgment
specially of the wise, might seem so much the more tolerable, if that men
placed in preeminence, and sitting like Hills, ouerlooking the Valleys below,
with their high calling and stately authority, had agreeable hearts. But
some, notwithstanding their state be singular, and indeed such, as that they
may sit down, take their ease, and say, Hic terminus esto, do carry so base a
mind, as that if I should compare them to Aesops Cock, preferring a barlie
corn before a precious pearl, I should not do amiss. There is none but by
diligent observation, may see this to be an undoubted truth.

In the taxing of which English, and outlandish fault, (for it is as common as
the world is wide) I should show my self no cunning Archer, to ouershoote the
mark of your deserved commendation. For although you have had Fortune holding
the basin, whiles you washed your hands, and cast the best chance of the Dice:
yet for all that, such is your contentment, you hoist not up the lofty sail
of self-love, to swell with the wind of vainglory, as vaunting of any exploit
which you have achieved, Per tot Cyclopea saxa, per mundi scopulos, Scyllam,
vastamque Charybdim. But as you went out, so you are come home, familiar with
your friend, courteous to your acquaintance, remembering all, forgetting none,
still of one mind, will and affection, the prosperous event of your dangerous
voyage notwithstanding.

Some one, having passed a Sea of six days sailing, (or less, if less might
be supposed) is so far in love with himself, and so indiscreetly doteth over
his own doings, at his return, that he makes his travel ordinary table
talk, aggravating the matter so mo^strously, as if he had endured the very
labors of old Hercules. Another, Et terris iactatus and alto, having seen
the mighty works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, and as it were
measured with a pair of Compasses (be it spoken without offense) the globe of
the whole world, Post multa discrimina rerum, arriueth in his native soil
meruailously blessed from above, and yet discovers not the multitude of
dangers, or rather deaths, wherewith he has encountered. Which of these judge
you deserves the trumpets plausible sound?

I cannot therefore sufficiently wonder at the equality of your worships
mind, which, notwithstanding so many tempests of perturbations, and sharp
surges of inward motions, continues calm. And it does me not a little good,
first to see you so fortunate: and secondly, though that were enough to make
you insolent and disdainful, the credit which you have gotten (deserved no
doubt) even with the very best, that yet you contemn not the company, the
acquaintance, the familiarity, and conference even of such, as by many degrees
are your inferiors.

This among other considerations of your courteous disposition and friendly
nature, being a mirror in a Gentleman in this our proud and arrogant age, like
a right Loadstone drew me an iron lump, having in my hands a notable work,
entitled, The voyage of the wandering knight, to overrun the same according
to my superficial skill and slender knowledge, to polish and burnish it, to
restore and make it perfect in some such lims, whereon it seemed to halt, that
it might with so much the more grace Proripere in publicum, and in hominum
manus innolare, for their larger delight: and in deed to procure the printing
and publishing thereof, that well disposed people might thereby reap some
benefit.

Which work so perfected and brought into a reasonable good form, as my little
lerning and less lesure gave me leave, I am bold upon the request of the
Translator, being absent, to make dedicatory unto your worship, and have added
this Epistle of mine own, as a testimony of the unfeigned affection and hearty
goodwill which I bear you (without presumption be it spoken:) not doubting how
it shall be received, seeing the former presentation thereof was so well liked.
Beseeching God to bless you, and the good Lady your wife, and all yours one
with an other: to prosper your proceedings, to further all your affairs: and
that as hitherto you have had Virtue your forerunner, and Fortune your
follower, so you may have them still even to your lives end, Vt magis atque
magis tua gloria crescat: and that after you have sailed even to the very
straights of death, which no mortal man can avoid, you may arrive in the port
of peace, I mean Abraham's bosom, eue^ the kingdom of heaven, the appointed
haven for all true Christian Nauigators.

Your worships most humble to command, Robert Norman.

THE TABLE.
THe contents of the first part of this present book. Fol. 1.
The vvandring Knight declares his intent, and foolish enterprise, vvishing
and supposing in this world to find true felicity. chap. 1. fol. 1. The
vvandring Knight declares unto dame Folly his gouernes, what is his intent.
Cpap. 2. fol. 3. Folly and Evil Will, prouides the Knight of apparel,
armor, and horse. cap. 3. fol 6. Folly apparaileth and armeth the vvandring
knight. chap. 4. fol. 7. Folly upon the way shows the knight many of her
ancient procedings, and how many great and noble personages she had
governed. chap. 5. fol. 11. The vvandring knight finding two ways, and
doubtful whether of them to take, there chanced to come to him Virtue and
Voluptuousness, either of them offering to conduct and guide the knight on the
way. chap. 6. fol. 29 The vvandring knight by the counsel of Folly, left
Lady Virtue, and followed Voluptuousness, which lead him to the Pallaice of
vvorldly felicity. chap. 7. fol. 33 How the wandering knight was received, and
welcomed to the pallaice of vvorldly felicity. chap. 8 fol. 36 Voluptuousness
shows the vvandring knight some part of the Pallaice, and after brought him
to dinner. chap. 9. fol. 37. Dinner being done, Voluptuousness shows the
vvandring knight the rest of the pallaice of vvorldly felicity, with the
superscription of the tovvres thereof, and by the Author is declared the evil
fruit of certain notorious sins. chap. 10. fol. 40. The situation or
standing of the pallaice of vvorldly felicity. chap. 11. fol. 46. The Author
declares how the vvandring knight, and such like, voluptuous livers in the
world, transgress the x. commandments of Almighty God, under written.
chap. 12. fol. 48. The knight vv(...)t for to recreate himself, and vievved
the Warrens and Forests which were about the pallaice of vvorldly felicity,
anon he savve it sink sodeinly into the earth, and perceived himself in the
mire to the saddle skirts. chap. 13. fol. 50. The Author cries out bitterly
against worldlings, and their felicity. chap 14. fol. 53.
The second part of the voyage of the vvandring knight. fol. 58.
GODS grace draws the knight out of the filth of sin, wherein he stuck
fast. chap 1. fol. 58. Gods grace shows hell unto the knight, with all the
voluptuous company, that he savve in the pallaice of vvorldly felicity. chap
2. fol. 61. The knight declares how he entered into the school of Repentance,
and of his enterteinment there. chap. 3. fol. 64. How true Repentance begins
in us, and how the knights conscience acccused him, with the pains he had
deserved. chap. 4. fo. 67 By commandment of Gods grace, Remembrance read to me
the goodness of God, with his promises made to repentaunt sinners. chap. 5.
fol. 70. A Sermon which Understanding the good Hermit made unto the knight,
upon the history of Mary Magdalene. chap. 6. fol. 75. The knight having
received the holy Communion, heard the Sermon, and ended dinner, mounted into a
chariot of Triumph, and was by Gods grace carried to the pallaice of Virtue.
chap. 7 fo. 82.
The third part of the voyage of the wandering knight. fol. 86.
THE knight declares the great good solace and pleasure, which he found in
the pallaice of Lady Virtue. chap. 1. fol. 86. The description of virtue. chap.
2. fol. 90. The description of Faith, and how we ought to believe in God for
our salvation. chap. 3. fol. 93. The description of Hope, and how we ought to
hope in Almighty God. chap. 4. fol. 97 The description of Love or Charity,
and how we ought to love God and our neighbor. chap. 5. fol. 101. The
effects and praises of Love or Charity. chap. 6. fol. 106. The description of
the four moral virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperaunce. cap. 7
fol. 109 How Faith from the top of her tower, shows unto the knight the
city of heaven. chap. 8 fol. 114 The desire that the knight had to come to
heaven, and how Gods grace brought Perseverance. chap. 9. fol. 116. Good
Understanding shows the knight how to keep Perseueraunce alvvaies with
him. chap. 10. fol. 118 The Protestation that Good Understanding taught the
knight to make every day* to avoid temptations, that he ought to humble
himself before God, and what he should ask in his prayer. chap. 11. fo. 121
The Authors peroration or conclusion, to the devout Readers or herers. chap.
12. fol. 128.
FINIS.
Gentle Reader, thou shall find in fol. 7. the 6. line, shamefastness for
shamelessness: and in fol. 24. the 20. line, Jacob for Ioab. And in fol. 93.
the 35. line. things apparent, for things not apparent. These faults amended in
the Reading, I suppose there remain no more.

F For Countries cause who takes toil,
R Regarding neither life nor lim,
A Adventures to receive the foil,
V Valor had need to rest in him.
N Neglect he may not seasons fit,
C Covet he must to do the best,
E Ever he warreth with his wit,
S Seldom he sleeps in quiet rest.
D Dischargd thou have thy duty well,
R Remember God that guided thee:
A Ambitiously do not excel,
K Keep thee in compass of degree:
E Each one will say what he does see.
THE FIRST PART OF the Voyage of the wandering Knight.
THE VVANDRING KNIGHT DECLARES his intent and foolish enterprise, wishing and
supposing in this world to find true felicity. The first Chapter.
MANY HISTORIOGRAPHERS both Poets and Orators, as well profane as divine, have
by writing notified diverse persons, with their voyages and adventures. First,
Justin and Diodore of Sicilie have made mention of the Argonautes voyage by
Sea: that is to say, of Jason and his alies, Castor, Pollux, Hercules and other
Peers, to the Isle of Colchos, to win the golden Fliece, which a great Dragon
kept. Also Homer a Greek Poet, writ in verse the wandering and Sea voyage of
Ulysses and his companions, at their return from the Troyan wars. After him,
Virgil, a most eloquent Latin Poet, set down in verse the voyage of Aeneas in
Italy, with his fortunes after the subversion of Troy.

Now if we come to the sacred Histories, we shall find first how Moses wrote
of the Children of Israel, their going out of Egypt into the Land of promise,
and of the xlij. Mantions that they made in the Desert, for ye space of forty
years. And how the four Evangelists likewise most faithfully have written of
the holy peregrination of the blessed Son of God, our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who took upon him our frail and human nature. The self same
Savior has set down a Parable of the voluptuous voyage of the prodigal
Child, and his return. Saint Luke very notably and sincerely has delivered
in writing, the painful and holy perigrination of that great vessel of
election Saint Paul, together with the great travel he took to preach the
Gospel, and the faith of Jesus Christ, to all the Gentiles.

And now (by Gods grace) I mean to declare mine own voyage and adventures, much
like to that of the prodigal child, who left his fathers house, and ranged
into strange countries, wasting all his goods, living licentiously, but after
he knew his lewdness, he returned back to his father, of whom he was very
lovingly received. So I by great Folly counseled, in absenting my self far
away, (not only in body, but also in mind) from God my Father and Creator,
have wasted and consumed all the goods which this same my God and father had
bountifully bestowed upon me, in following the vain pleasures of this life.
But in the end, I being inspired with Divine grace, acknowledged mine
offenses, and leaving the dark Region of sin and vanity, through the aid
and conduction of the divine grace, am returned to mine eternal father, humbly
requiring pardon and mercy: who of his unspeakable mercy, has lovingly
received me. But how all this has been done, I will declare all unto you,
praieng you patiently to give me the hearing, and attentively consider my talk,
and well to note the whole, from ye beginning to the end.

After I had passed in all folly and lasciviousness three weeks of the years
of mine age: that is to say, my Infancy, childs age, and youth, which make
together xxj. years: I entered into the age of a young man, which is the fourth
week of my age, which is between xxij. and xxiiij. years. At xxv. I was
minded to make a voyage by my foolish industry to seek where in this world I
might find true felicity and happiness, which seemed to my sottish sense, an
easy matter, being young, strong, wild, hardy and courageously disposed. Me
thought in my mind to live in the world without felicity, was a life worse
then death. But alas, being plunged in the deep darkness of ignorance. I
considered not that true felicity was the gift of God from above, and cannot
be atteined without his help.

Being robbed of reason, I thought it might come easily of my self, without
the help of others: so that then I sought true felicity, where she is not,
was not, nor ever shall be: as in riches, worldly pleasure, strength, honor,
and delights of the flesh. But I was in so thinking, as very a fool as he, who
hops with anglyng lines, to take fishes in the Air, or with Hounds to hunt
the Hare in the Occean sea. Were it not think you, a great folly so to think?
Even the like is it, to think that true felycitie is to be found here in this
wretched world. And for so much as in perfect felicity is comprehended all
goodness, and that this world (as says S. John) is addicted and given to all
evil, and subject to hunger, thirst, heat, cold, diseases, calamities,
pride, ambition, covetousness, and voluptuousness, it is evident that those
which here be living, supposing here to find true felicity, are worse then
fools, and void of right reason.

True felicity is not without goodness and virtue, which comes from God
above. If it be so, why then is it not a most wicked and presumptuous opinion
to think that by a man's own industry he is able to possess and enjoy the
fair lot of true felicity. Therefore every one that thinks in this world,
he may come to perfect felicity and true blessedness, shall find in fine as
I found, for felicity, vanity: for good, evil.

THE VVANDRING KNIGHT Declares unto Dame Folly his Gouernesse, what is his
intent. The second Chapter.
INtending to take my journey, I considered that it was necessary to use
counsel therein, knowing that whatsoever is done without advise cannot have
good success: as contrariwise, a matter discreetely attempted, is luckely
ended. Then dwelt with me a damzell which ruled my house, whose proper name was
Folly, ye only enemy to wisdom. For every thing yt hates ye one, loves ye
other. There is as much difference between the^, as is between white and
black, hot and cold, moist and dry, light and darkness, God and the Devil:
all which be contraries, and can not be in one body together. Wisdom
gouernes the good, Folly the evil: Wisdom makes the evil good, when they
yield themselves to be her subjects: Folly makes the good evil, when they
place themselves under her protection: Wisdom draws men from hell, and
brings them to heaven: Folly fetches Angels from heaven to dwell in hell.

I do not term that Wisdom to know the vij. liberal Sciences, the
qualities of the Stars and Planets, but I count him wise that has the true
knowledge of God. For, as says Saint Cyril, Wisdom is that true
understanding, by the which the sovereign good, namely God, is seen, known
and loved, with a chaste love and pure affection. Folly, is very ignorance, and
false worshipping of God. Wisdom makes fools, wise, and Folly makes wise
men fools. Tell me I pray you, can there be greater wisdom then to serve God
with a pure faith, and to observe and keep his holy law obediently? And
contrariwise, can there be greater Folly then to commit sin, and to disobey
God, by transgressing his Commandments? It is not possible. For whosoever
commits sin, hurts himself, and runs headlong to hell, which is a point
of very great folly. Therefore all those that faithfully serve God, and keep
his holy Commandments, are wise and governed by Wisdom: and all those that
transgress the Commandments of God, are fools, and fettered to Follye, as
slaves and Uassalls.

When I wandered in wanton ways, I wrought my will, esteeming my self wise,
but I proved a flat fool. Thus fostered by Folly, to whom I unfolded my
intent, which was to take upon me a voyage to find felicity and blessedness,
I requested her counsel, who without regard whether it were profitable for me
or no, did not only like of the matter, but also forced me forwards, and
with flattering phrase commended my enterprise.

And to encourage me therein, she began to exalt my device, to commend my
industry and wit, to praise my strength, to advance my virtue, to blaze my
knowledge, to decipher my beauty, and to extol all my qualities, saying, that
I was a second Solomon, to have in my head such noble cogitations.

Heerevpon she promised to be my guide, and vowed, not to go from me in all
my voyage, affirming that she had sundry seasons made the like journey, and
that I should assure my self shortly to see the Pallaice of true felicity. My
son (quoth she) I would not have thee think, that any evil or guile can
have place in my heart. Thus comforted, or rather emboldened, I thought my
self most happy to have such a gouernesse, so wise, so grave, and so expert,
for very joy whereof, my heart tickled within me. But alas wretch that I
was, my desire was always after contrary things: for I rejected whatsoever
tended to my health: insomuch that to me, sour seemed sweet: black seemed
white, evil seemed good, Folly seemed wisdom, light seemed darkness: And
follye had so sore bewitched me, that I neglected to do the good I should have
done: And I was too willing to play the part I should not have played.

It is true that the wise man spoke (saying. Pro. 11. Eccle. 32.
) There is health where many does give counsel, and he that takes good advise
and counsel before, shall not repent him after. But it is forbidden to take
counsel of fools: For that they love but what they like. There is an old
Proverb, Such as my Counsailour is, such must needs be my counsel. It were
against reason that a fool should give good counsel: For this is, even as if
Rivers should run against the Hill. Nothing can be compared to good
counsel, neither can any thing be worse then evil counsel: by the which the
world is troubled, Realms molested, Princes defaced, Kings killed, Empires
altered, Towns taken, Cities sacked, Laws abolished, Justice generally
corrupted, divine mysteries profaned, mingled with mischief, and confounded:
the true knowledge of God is forgotten, all reverence to superiors neglected,
shamefastness, sobriety, faith, hope, charity, and all other virtues
defaced: all manner of wars both foreign and civil, attempted: O grief, O
plague, O cruel monster. Now to our purpose.

FOLLY AND EVIL WILL PROVIDED the Knight apparel, armor, and horses. The
third Chapter.
FOrasmuch as men oftentimes do alter their intents, Folly was busy and
earnest to force me forward in the prosecuting my purpose, persuading me to put
my self on the way, and saying that such good meanings and enterprises should
presently and without nay be put in execution, for fear of inconveniences that
might ensue: and that to mean a matter without doing it, was a reproach to
any person. Whereto I answered, that I would proceed, whatsoever followed
therevppon: but my thought it was necessary to have company, and other
provision, as apparel, horses and armor fit for such a voyage. My son
(quoth she) I will take charge upon me, whereunto trust: cast all care from
thee, let nothing torment thee, be of good cheer, sleep at thy ease, refuse
no rest: for I will within few days, bring thee all such necessaries as thou
shall need: and seeing thou have submitted thy self to me, I will not fail
thee. Being glad of those words, I rerefreed the whole matter to her
discreation, and took my case.

Then Folly was acquainted with an armourer named Evil Will, whose company
she daily frequented. This armourer was not always occupied in forging
armours: but also oftentimes he made shirts, hosen, doublets, and meddled in all
matters that his friend Follye appointed him to do. To this armourer, Follye
declared all my purpose, and he at her request made me a shirt of
lasciviousness, a doublet of lewd desire, hosen of vain pleasures, armor of
ignorauncie, a corselet of inconstancy, vanbraces of arrogancy, gauntlets of
idleness, a gorget of lycorousnesse, a helmet of lightness, a bucklar of
shamelessnesse, a quilt cap of vainglory, a girdle of intemperaunce, a
swoorde of rerebellion, and a lawnce, named hope of long life. Then Pride
prepared me a galloping horse, called Temeritie.

All these wicked weapons, with this prodigal apparel, and dishonest armor,
Evil Will prepared me, at Follies request. And what better service can he
do, seeinge he is deprived of truth and verity? For, as good will is the
worker of all goodness, so is evil will of wickedness. Jesus Christ (who
cannot fail) says in the Gospel. Mat. 12. Luke. 6.
That of the abundaunce of the heart the mouth speaks: the good man of the
good treasure of his heart, delivers out good things: but the evil man
clean contrary. For out of a sack can nothing come, but such as is in it:
and out of a cofer of precious pearls: we must not look for colebrands.

And therefore surely, seeinge, I have Evil will to my Tailer, and Folly to
my gouernesse, how can I do other then evil?

FOLLY APPARAILETH AND ARmeth the wandering Knight. The fourth Chapter.
WHiles Folly my Gouernesse, and Evil will my Armourer, prepared my appapell,
and other provision, I forgot not to cast all care behind me, as Folly
commanded For when I was a child, I did eat always of the best meat, drank
of the delicatest drink. I slept when I listed, I lay as soft as silk, I
past my time in pleasures, trusting to my gouernesse Folly, in all my affairs.
After I passed three days in pleasure, upon a morning, being in my golden
sleep, Dame Folly came to my beds side, accompanied with evil will, and with
them they brought all my necessaries. When they saw me asleep in my soft
bed, at that time of the day, tossing my self every way wantonly, they
said, What pretty one, are you yet in bed? It is late, arise. Ah my sweet
friend (quoth I) I have followed your advice, I have cast all care away, and
taken mine ease in mine Inn: but I wonder how you are so soon returned.

What man (quoth Follye) know not you how diligent I am in mine affairs? I
never rest till all things be brought about, that I once take in hand. Then
she put on me my shirt of lasciviousness, (most agreeable to my wanton will:)
and then all my delight was to be delicatelye handeled, pompeouslye apparailed,
and soft lodged. After that, on went my doublet of lewd desires, always
enemy to the good spirit: then my hosen of vain pleasures, tide together with
points of delights. When I was full of lewd desires, I took pleasure in
nothing but vanity: and as my desires were dampnable, so were my pleasures
dangerous.

Then as I was (making me ready) Follye commanded the Clarke of my kitchen,
called ill government, to prepare me my breakfast, of light and delicate
meats, in doing whereof my Cook was more cunnning then ever Cicero was
elloquent in speaking. And thus as Folly and I were merrily discoursing
together, spending time till breakfast, I took occasion to ask of what age
she was, and also what iestes and fine feats she had, what people she had
governed, and how she ruled them. She said that question was asked and
answered long ago. But as we rid on the way, she would declare all, in the
mean time she said, that she was above five thousand years old. How can
that be (quoth I) you do not seem to be forty year old. Yes (quoth she)
thou must understand, that I was borne at the present hour that the world was
made, and have ever since stood in strength, always in health, and never
sick. I shall never seem old, though I live till domes day. Fools dye, but
(Follye) never dies. Having ever been in force, I forceablye do reign, in
every corner of the world, and do govern as well Princes, as poor people.

Now to the purpose, after washing in sweet waters, in came my breakfast, so
sumptuous, that Partriges were esteemed palterie for Pages, Phesauntes for
common folk. Breakfast finished, on went mine armor: but being once
apparailed and armed, I cared not for my souls health. I had no desire to
hear the word of God, no fear to follow his commandments, or to do any
thing fit for a Christian, toward his salvation. I did what I would, I
said what I pleased. And after that I was covered with my steel coat of
ignorauncie, and my corcelet of inconstancy, I presentlye became inconstaunt
and variable, oftentimes altering my intent, not for better, but for worse, out
of one ill, into an other: I never ceased to acquaint my self now with one
sin, then with an other: doing nothing that seemed good or honest. For such
is the nature of sin, that unless it be soon subdued, it will draw unto
it an other sin: as witnesses Saint Paul in his first Chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans.

Then Follye put on my vanbraces of arrogancye, which made me become careless
and presumptious, taking things in hand, far passing my capacity, strength,
and ability, and not fearing to adventure that which was above my reach, but
being armed with arrogancye, up went my curled hair, I advanced my self
ignorantlye above others: then on went my gorget of gluttonye and
lycorousnesse, the breeders of all fleshlye sins, and chieflye of lecherye.
For when the bellye is full with lycorous meats and drinks, it warmes and
heates the other members exceedinglye, which by and by wrestle and strive
against the good spirit. But if the bellye were brideled from gluttonye, those
rebellious members would be subdued, as says the Comicall Poet, Sine Cerere
and Baccho, Friget Venus. That is to say.

From Wine and good cheer, thy belly restrain,
And lust of the flesh small heat will contain.
Upon all this, Folly put me on an other armor, called Vain glory, which is
of such a property, that the greater it grew, the less I perceived it: then
on went my girdle of intemperauncie, which did let loose the bridle of
lechery, and all other fleshlye affections. To it was tied my sword of
rebellion: so that then I rebelled against God, his holy commandments, and
all Magistrates and superiors. But if I had brideled my boldness,
reprehending my self, my desires and affections, and had rested in reason,
without rebellinge, then had I served God, and obeyed my betters, with all
duetifull reverence. Dame Folly disguised me with the helment of wantonness,
upon the top whereof was put a Pecockes tail: so that then I might not
suffer any check, for any fault, but might and did maintain my opinion
against all men, giving place to none whatsoever, learned, or in authority.

After my gauntlettes of idleness were once on my hands, I greatly gloried
of the gifts which were in me, vauntinge my self to be more rich, more
wise, more strong, more hardye, more gracious, and in all respects better
then I was. Many times I boasted of mine imperfections, as of Drunkenness,
Lechery, and such like. After on went my bucklar of shamelessness, which
being about my shoulders, I blushed not to commit any vilanye: I lead the
life of an Infidel, rather then a Christian. Unshamfullye I despised both God
and man, nothing regardinge mine own honor, renown, or salvation.

Then I mounted upon Temeritie my horse, with a Lawnce in my hand, called
Hope of long life. O deceiptfull Lawnce, more rotten then a Reed. How many
proper youths have trusted unto thee, hopinge to have been safe and assured,
and were deadlye deceived.

This Lawnce once being entered in me, I interteined all vices, it ever
hindered me from embracing repentance, persuading me in this manner. Thou art
young, make merry whiles thou may, for when thou art old, all play and
pastime will be past: then it will be time enough for thee to repent. Being
thus governed by Follye I thought neither of God, nor the Devil, of life, nor
death, of heaven nor hell: but lived at my pleasure, doing what I delyghted
in. At last Folly apparailed her self lightlye, with a Cloak of feathers, and
mounted upon a Iennet, and opening her feathers and wings with the wind,
away she flewe, and I also at a wild adventure, set the spurs to my
horse, and away we went both. Thus you see that Follye is my guide, Temeritie
my horse. Now, the first that shall repent this voyage must needs be my
self, as you may euidentlye judge and gather before hand.

FOLLY UPON THE WAY SHOWS THE wandering Knight, many of her ancient
proceedings, and how many great and noble personages she had governed. The fifth
Chapter.
AFter we were so far passed upon our way, that we had lost the sight of my
house, I called to my remembrance the promise which Dame Follye had made me
in the morninge, namelye, that she would tell me of her exploytes past, and
what people she had governed. And thus with flattering frase I began. My
good Mistres, my loving Lady, my heart, my joy, my life, my lust, my
council, my hope, my sovereign good, I desire thee most earnestlye (if it
please thee) to let me understand thine ancient proceedinges, and to
rehearse what people thou have governed, how they were ruled, lead, conducted,
and counseled.

Mine exploites (quoth Follye) are innumerable. Ten days are not enough to
repeat half of them. Nevertheless to accomplish thy request, and to ease the
tediousness of the way, I will tell thee of the most principallest. First the
world and I came together, and because I found no man in the world, I
ascended up into heaven, and there assaulted the excellentest Angel of all the
whole company, called ( Lucifer) who at my present arrival, enterteyned and
received me for his gouernesse, and so did many mo of his coequalls. By my
counsel he advanced himself to be fellow mate with God, for the which
presumption both he and his were thrust out of heaven, and thrown headlong
into hell. That was the first of mine exploites.

Shortly after God made man, and of his ribbe fationed woman, these two were
husband and wife, with them both I had much a do, because they were full of
wisdom and reason. I used the help and subtlety of a Serpent, to tempt the
woman, being the weaker, who with his deceiptefull words, won her to eat
of the apple, which God forbadde to be eaten. But after she had eaten it, in
the presence of her husband, (because he feared her sadness) he did also
eat, to fulfill her desire and lust: wherein they both committed great
follye, for the which they were deprived of innocence, of GODS grace and
glory, yea, they were banished the place (appointed by GOD for them to dwell
in) and made (with all their posterity) subject to eternal death, it was my
second principal exployt.

Then began my reign in the world, where I governed a number of fools. I
governed Cain the first borne, both of his father and mother: by my counsel he
killed his good brother Abel the innocent. I governed the greatest Gyaunts that
ever were of the seed of man, as the daughters of Cain, and the sons of
Seth, I made them trust in their own strength, not only touching feats of
war, but I caused them also to contemn the word of God, and the knowledge of
the same: I persuaded them to use their liberty, and to live according to
their lusts, in lechery, and all other abomination, without regard of the
uprightness of nature, honesty, or the fear of God.

When Noe had preched forty years space of ye last destruction of the world,
these obstinate Gyaunts being nusseled in all wickednsse of life, detestably
turned all his admonitions and sermons to mockery: Whereat God was wroth, and
sent a great flood, which drowned all living creatures, saving Noah and his
three sons, Sem, Cham Iapheth, and their wives. Genesis ^^
Then I thought to have lost my reign in the world, but in short space they
increased wonderfully. Then I counseled them to build an high Tower, which
might reach as high as heaven, that in despite of God, they might save
themselves, if again he meant to drown the world. But God confounded their
device: and where before all the world spoke in one language, he divided them,
so that the Tower remained unfinished, for the builders understood not each
others speech.

Then the posterities of Noah, were dispersed throughout the world, and I
reigned amongst them every where, counselling many Nations to forsake the
knowledge of God, and to worship the host of heaven, as the Sun, the Moon,
the Stars, the Planets, the Fire, the Water, the Air, the Earth, and to make
Idols, and honor them, in the likeness of men, of beasts and birds, and to
worship them, so that the true knowledge of God should be proper but unto one
people, descended from the loins of Abraham, and they are the Jews.

Then I demanded of Folly, how Idolatry entered ye world, and where she took
place first. My son (quoth she) understand, ye Idolatry has be^ brought into ye
world by my means: The beginning of Idolatry.
For Idolatry took her first original and beginning in Chaldea in ye city of
Babilo^, and in ye region or country of ye Assyrians, in ye reign of Ninus ye
third king, which was ye son of Bell, Bell of Nemroth, Ne^roth of Chus, Ninus the
son of Bell, and third king of Babilo^.
Chus of Cham, Cham of Noah: so ye Ninus ye third king of Babylon, was ye first
man yt did ordein temples, and set up Altars to sacrifice upon, unto his father
Bell, and to Juno his mother. First he fashioned their standing Images, and set
the^ in ye midst of ye city of Babylon, and that was ye first beginning of
Idolatry: other neighbors and nations did as much: the Egyptians made ye like
by Osiris, surnamed Jupiter, the true son of Cham and of Rhea. The same Osiris,
after his death was esteemed of ye Egyptians for his virtue to be a God, so yt
the matter by my counsel (quod Folly) turned to Idolatry. For they offered
sacrifice unto him, and honored him in form of an Ox or a Calfe: Exo. 32.
ye like also did ye children of Israel in the desert to their Idol, which
afterward was named Serapis.

But as yet France and Germany were not infected with Idolatry, howbeit I did
mine endeavor to make it more universal, and ceased not, til yt shortly after
this pestilence had taken root. For ye above named Ninus son of Bell king of
Babylon, married Semiramis (yt wonderful woman) who (as it is written) devised,
yt all ye male children should be gelded: of her body begat he one son, named
Ninus ye second: and by another wife, he had another son called Trabeta, who by
right of succession should have enjoyed ye crown of Babylon, but yt his mother
in law kept him from it, and took ye government and rule unto her self, and
kept it in ye behalf of her young son Ninus. Trabeta then fering his
stepmother, fled from Babylon, and after long travail he arrived in France,
Trabeta vva^dred a long time like a vagabond from country to country.
not far from the river of Rhene, where he founded a city, and called it
Treues, which is yet a very ancient city. At that time was Gallia Belgica and
all the country about it, which we call Low Almaine, first infected and
poisoned with Idolatry, which was 1947. years before the incarnation of Jesus
Christ. There Trabeta) by my counsel) made ye picture of his grandfather Bell ye
son of Nemroth ye great Giant, and first Saturn of ye Babilonians to be
worshipped in ye city of Treues. But afterward Bauo, who founded ye city
Belges, otherwise called Bauoy in Hainot, had taken by force ye city of
Treues, and victoriously brought to Bauoy, all ye tresure of Treues, and their
Idols, wherewith also he brought his own Idols from Phrigia.

By this means the error of Idolatry was more authorized. For by my counsel
he built with ye spoils of his conquest 7. marvelous, and mighty temples in
his city, which had vii. doors, according to ye seven planets, they had also
a thousand towers, every one an hundredth cubits high, and xviii. foot broad.
As for other nations, they were even no other then ye Babilonians, the
Egyptians, the Phrigians, the French men and the Germans: for ye good
Patriarch Noah, otherwise called Ianus, having dwelt in Italy 82. years, and
being 959. years old.350. years (or there about) after ye flood he dyed, before
ye incarnation.1967. years. This good man was lamented and bewailed through all
ye world generally, but chiefly of ye Italians, then called Lanigenes, and of
the Armenians, over whom he first reigned. These people presently after they
knew of Noah's death, they honored him as a holy man. For in those days al holy
men were counted Gods, as it is often mentioned in the holy scripture, Ego dixi
Dij estis, and filij excelsi omnes, that is, I have said ye are Gods, and ye
all are children of the most high. And, which is more: they made him temples
and alters, as now a days Idolaters do unto ye saints of heaven, I (quoth
Folly) made ye simple people assure themselves, that the soul was removed into
some of ye heavenly bodies, for ye which cause they called heaven ye Sun, and
the seed of the world, the father of Gods, ye greater and lesser, ye God of
peace, justice, and holiness, ye driuer away of evil things, and the preserver
of good things. Again, they called his successors, Ianus, Geminus,
Quadrifrons, Enotrius, Ogiges, Vertumnus, Jupiter, Optimus, Maximus. The^ I
persuaded ye people to offer sacrifice unto him, as unto god, by which deed
they became al Idolaters, for if they had esteemed the^ no better the^ holy
me^, they had not sinned in that, for in deed he was a holy man. Mark what
Austen says in the tenth book of the City of God: It is not lawful (says
he) to offer any sacrifice to any Saint, be it Man or Angel, but only to God.
After the destruction of Troy, Aeneas came into Italy, bringing with him his
own Idols, and the Gods of Troy: heerevppon Idolatry took force, and
increased more and more. I think (quod Folly) that this which I have told
thee already may suffice to declare, how Idolarie entered the world first. Thou
have heard also, how I governed Angels and Nations. Now thou shall understand
how I have ruled and ordered particular persons.

After the flood, I first ruled Cham, Noah's son, who being wholly given to
the Magical Art, obtained and had the name of Zorastes. He hated his father,
because he loved his other brother better then him. In revenge whereof upon a
day he found his father Noah drunk, lieng fast a sleep upon the ground,
unhonestly he discovered his fathers priuities: and (by my counsel) he
presumed to touch those his secret parts, and inchaunted them by his Magical
Art, so that ever after for want of ability, Berosus.
he could not join issue with any woman, to beget children. His Father being
angry thereat, abandoned him for a season. After that, he became the first King
and Saturn of Egypt, insomuch as the holy Scriptures calls Cham the first
King of Egypt.

Again, by my counsel he trained up his people, according to his own nature,
in all villainy and filthiness, openly affirming that men might lawfully use
and have to do with their own mothers, daughters, and sisters, as was the
custom before the flood, and also to commit many other unlawful deeds, which
I am ashamed to declare: by the which doctrine, natural virginity was
oftentimes violently assaulted and ravished. Then my friend Cham went into
Italy, and usurped the realm to himself. And whereas other Princes of his
lynage in Germany, Spain and France gave good examples to their subjects,
instructing them in good and godly laws: he contrariwise, spoiled all the
youths in Italy, corrupting them with all kinds of vices, as usury, theft,
murder, poisoning and inchauntment, whereof he himself was the first
inuentour, as all Historiographers hold opinion. But when his good father Noah
understood of it, he came into Italy, and hunted him from thence.

If I should write all the evil deeds of Cham, it would be a weighty piece
of work, and the matter would seem monstrous. But at the last he conveyed
himself over among Bractiens, a people inhabiting toward the Indians, where
by his inchauntment, the people became his subjects, and he reigned over them
with great force and power. Yet at the last, he was vanquished and slain in
battle, by Ninus king of Babylon, which descended of his race, by his son
Chus. Thus (quod Folly) I lost my friend Cham, surnamed Zorastes, Saturn of
Egypt, the common enemy of God and man, and one of the most perverse and
vntowardest Tyrants, that ever was in the world.

I governed Bell the second king of Babylon, and his son Ninus: into whose
heads I put a disordinate raging, so that they desired to live alone in the
world. And to bring this to pass, I counseled them to change and cut off the
golden age, which would have all things common, peaceable, and in quiet.
Hereunto they armed themselves by all possible means, undertaking to spoil
Sabatius Saga, surnamed Saturn, King and Patriarch of Armenia, so made and
ordained by his grandfather Noah. The same Sabatius was son to Chus, and
brother to Nemroth, whom Moses called Sabatha in Hebrew, which in Latin is
Saturnus.

Then the said Sabatius king of Armenia, having hardly escaped the hands of Bell
and Ninus, he went for refuge to his Grandfather Noah into Italy, and made Noah
king and Patriarch of the Aborigenes, and founded him a City on the other side
of Tiber, which he named Saturnia: As Virgil declares in a Passage, where he
says thus: Primus ab aethereo, venit Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Iouis fugiens, and regnis exsul ademptis.
That is to say. Saturn the first from heaven did fly,
For fear of Jove's artillery.
He lost his rule and regiment,
And lead his life in banishment.


For Bell the son of Nemroth, was surnamed Jupiter. And it is not likely to be
true that some says, that the same Saturn that was chased away by Jupiter,
was Nemroth the king of Crete: but the Bible says, that he was king of
Babylon, which was far distant from the Isle of Crete. In those days, they
termed the chief man in every house, Saturn: their sons Jupiter or Jove's:
their daughters Iunoes, and their nephews, Hercules: so that we find in
ancient Records, many people named Saturnes, Jove's, and Hercules.

But to my purpose (quod Folly) the above named Ninus (by my counsel) after
the death of his father Bell, caused his Picture and standing Image to be made,
commanding every manner of person, to do homage unto the Idols of his
father and mother, and to adore them with divine worship: and so he was as you
have heard, the first inuentor of Idolatry. I governed Tiphon the son of
Cham, in whom all his fathers vices abounded. He maliciously envied the
prosperity of his brother Osiris, surnamed Jupiter the just, who was a great
persecutor of tyrants. It angered me (quod Folly) that so honest a man lived.
Then I caused Typhon with other Giants to murder Osiris, insomuch that Typhon
cut him in xxvj. pieces, and bestowed them upon other Giants that helped him to
work his feate. But the good Hercules of Lybia, the son of Osiris with the
help of his other brethren, in foughten field kilde Typhon the Giant, and
the other Tyraunts, which consented to his Fathers death.

I governed (quod Folly) one Jupiter king of Crete, which country is now
called Candie. But forasmuch as ye Greek liars, and other writers both Latin
and French, to enlarge their lies and dreams, attribute that unto this
Jupiter, oftentimes, which appertain not unto him, I would have you mark
well, that in those days, ye kings children and fathers of families were called
Jupiter and Iouis, notwithstanding there are three of that name renowned, as we
find in Histories. The first was Osiris the nephew of Noah, the son of Cham:
who was no less good then his father was evil. That Jupiter begat great
Hercules of Lybia: who was King of Spain, France and Italy. This great
Hercules was like unto his father, a great persecutor of Tyraunts through-out
all the world. He begat of Araxa, the young Tuscus, King of Tuscane, and Italy.

This Tuscus begat Altirus Blascon, of whom was begotten Camboblascon, which
was (as some say) surnamed the second Jupiter, and worshipped in the world. Now
this Camboblascon surnamed Jupiter, begat upon Electra the daughter of Atlas,
surnamed Italus (of whom yet Italy bears the name) Iasius and Dardanus. This
the lyeng Grecians, and many other triflers, attribute unto Jupiter of Crete:
which matter is in controversy, and may be denied. For Dardanus after he had
killed his brother Iasius by envy and treason, he fled into the Isle of
Samos, and from thence into Phrigia, where he founded a City called Dardania,
where he begat a son called Erictonius, and of him lineally descended Tros,
who gave the City Dardania the name of Troy.

This same Tros had three children, Illius, Assaracus, and Ganimedes, which
Ganimedes was taken by Tantalus, the king of high Phrygia, and sold unto
Jupiter of Crete, to be abused like a Sodomit: which argues that he begat not
Dardanus the great grandfather of Ganimedes. The first Jupiter then you may
perceive, was Osiris, Nephew to Noah: whom Moses named Mesraim. The second
Camboblascon, king of Italy, which some say also had been king of Athens and of
Arcadie: but I think that Jupiter of Arcadie, who begat Lacedemon, is some
other beside Camboblascon. Howsoever the case stands, certain it is, that
Jupiter, Jove's, Osiris, and Camboblascon, were contraries.

The third Jupiter renowned in the world, was King of the Isle of Crete: who
bare in his Scutchin and Coate-Armour, an Eagle: but in his manners he was
altogether given to Folly. For he deflowred Uirgins, he ravished wives, abused
young children, and committed all kind of villainy that was possible, either
to be spoken or done. He committed adultery with Alcmena the wife of
Amphitrio, of whom he begat little Hercules of Greece: he did the like with
Laeda the wife of Tindarus, of whom also he begat fair Helen. I loath to tell
what deflowrings and rapes, he offered and thrust upon diverse particular
maidens, and fair young children. But notwithstanding his vile life (quod
Folly) by my means the rude people made him a God, and many false liars have
attributed unto him, the noble deeds of the good Patriarch Noah, and his
Nephew Osiris, surnamed Jupiter the just.

Moreover, they did not only offer sacrifice unto him, but also gave him the
title and name of Most excellent good, whereas indeed he was most evil: for he
was an incestuous and Sodomitical person, and a common enemy to chastity and
honesty, insomuch that people openly in their stage-plaies, counterfetted,
sung and descanted upon the filthy lecheries and other villainies which he used,
affirming that such Anticques and Pageaunts were most fit and agreeable unto
him. By means whereof, all his subjects gave themselves to the same, saying,
that it was as fit for them so to live, as for their great God Jupiter. I
governed little Hercules of Greece, otherwise called Alceus, the bastard son
unto the same Jupiter, whom he had by Alcmena, the wife of Amphitrio. Unto this
same Hercules, the lieng Greeks full of vain eloquence give the name and
title of great Hercules of Lybia, which is most false. For that Hercules of
Greece, was the first Pyrate that ever roued on the Seas, and abounded with all
vice, following the steps of his Father Jupiter the adulterer, in all respects:
and as he lived, even so he died.

For being mad (says Seneca) he slew his wife and children, and afterward
burned himself. But a little before his death he made Philoctetes swear, yt he
would never disclose his death, nor ye manner how he had bestowed himself:
which thing he did of a vain, arrogant, proud, and ambitious mind, even to
this end, that the people might report and believe that the Gods had drawn him
up to heaven inuisibly: but it chanced not as he desired. Yet notwithstanding
(quoth Folly) I persuaded the lienge Greeks that it was so, and made them
worship him as a God.

I governed fair Paris, king Priams son, whose surname was Alexander. At the
first he made no account of me, but leading a contemplative life, he followed
the love of Pallas, the Goddess of wisdom, mine adversary: but when Juno,
Pallas, and Venus, were at strife for the golden Ball, which was thrown
amongst them (with condition that the fairest of them should have it) they
committed the matter to the judgment of Paris, surnamed Alexander: who was
upon the point to give sentence in the behalf of Pallas, mine enemy: but by
my persuasion, afterward he gave it unto Venus, my good friend, and of old
acquaintance: then for recompense of his foolish judgment, I counseled him
to go to Greece, where he ravished fair Helen. Heerevpon the Greeks in a
great and mad rage prepared all their force against the Troyans, and after ten
years siege against their City, they took Ilion, and put king Priam to
death, insomuch that the whole Realm was defaced.

In that wars were killed many Princes and noble knights, as Hector,
Achilles, and Paris also was slain by Philoctetes (the companion of the less
Hercules,) in a combat fought hand to hand. The weapons which they used were
Bows and forked Arrows, wherewith Philoctetes wounded Paris in three places.
First in his left hand, secondly, in his right eye, thirdly, in both his legs,
which were fastened with the stroke together. Being thus wounded, the Troyans
carried him into their City, where shortly after he dyed.

I governed (quoth Folly) fair Helen the bastard daughter of the third Jupiter
of Greece, begotten of Laeda the wife of Tindarus, which Helen by my counsel,
went from her husband Menelaus, and suffered her self to be ravished of a young
lecherous Troyan named Paris, surnamed Alexander, the son of king Priam. She
brought blood and death to Troy, in steed of dowry. For by her occasion
Troy was destroyed, and Priam with the most part of his children killed. And
to the end, that her adulterous mate Paris or Alexander, should not leave her,
and go to his own lawful wife Pegasis Enone, she bewitched him with certain
drinks, wherein she was her crafts Mistres: which trick when one does use, he
is in such case that he forgets all things past, and all sorrows present. When
she was thus arrived at Troy, the good man her husband Menalaus, with
Ulysses, and other Greek ambassadors, came to fetch her away: and king
Primamus commanded that she should be brought into his presence, offering unto
her franklye with loud voice, that she should (if she thought good) freely and
with full liberty depart again into Greece, with all her retinue, people, and
pelf. Whereunto she answered, in the hearing of her husband and king Priam,
with the rest of his counsel, and commons, that she was not disposed to retire
to her country, wishing also that her husband Menelaus, that good man, might
go to God, for she was none of his wife, neither would she have to do with
him: and that she came not to Troy against her will, neither did she esteem of
his marriage.

To conclude, at length Troy by treason was taken, and raunsackt.xviii. years
after she had been from her husband, and all that space had lived in lechery
with two adulterers, she grew to agreement, and made peace with her husband
Menelaus. But when she waxed old, she looked in a Glass, and seeing her face
far from fair, she fell in a loud laughter, and flouted at the fools that
fought ten years together, for the love of a thing that faded so soon away,
but when her husband Menelaus was dead, two chief men of ye city of Sparta,
named Nicostratus, and Megapentus, men of great authority, hunted Helen out of
ye city and realm of Lacedemonia, without appointing unto her any place or
provision to keep her. Upon which banishment she came to Rhods, to her ancient
companion and friend, queen Polypo, which was also then widow, by reason of ye
death of her husband Tlepolemus, who was slain before Troy. And when she was
at Rhods, queen Polypo used her very well, but the young gentlewomen her
waiting maids, hated her deadly: for yt she was the cause yt their king
Tlepolimus was killed: insomuch yt upon a day they conspired together against
her, and gat her into a garden, where then fastening a rope obout her neck,
hung her upon a tree and strangled her to death. This was ye miserable end of
Helen, who being dead (quoth Folly) I put into ye heads of ye blind people, yt
she was a Goddess, by reason of her incomperable beauty. For which
consideration, they being, not only Idolatrously and heretically, but also
dampnably deceived, built her a marvelous costly and stately temple, and named
her, with great devotion, The Goddess of beauty, and devised many falls
miracles and lies, ye which for breuity I let pass. I governed (quod Folly)
Pharao Amenophis, and Pharao Bocchoris, both kings of Aegipt: Exo. 1.
who by my counsel caused al ye male children of ye Jews to be drowned, which
people ye first Pharao held in marvelous subjection. As for ye second, I
instructed him so well, yt he would not suffer ye children of Israel to depart
out of his land, but in ye end, being scourged by God, Exo. 14.
he was constrained to let them go, and when they were gone, I gave him
counsel, in reueng, to pursue them with all his chivalry and power of Egypt,
which thing he did: but ye tyrant and al his company were drowned in ye red sea.
I governed Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, counselling them not to obey the
commandment of Moses, Nu. 16.
whom God had ordained chief governor over the children of Israel, but
Chore, in offering Insence contrary to his office, was atteinted, and 500.
more of his faction with him. And for the rebellion of Dathan and Abiron, the
earth opened, insomuch that they their wives, children, and goods, were all
swallowed up alive. I governed Saul, the first king of Israel. 1. Kin.
21.26.31.
At the beginning of his reign, he was good and godly, but at last I
enchanted him, so that he caused many of Gods Prophets to be killed, insomuch
ye in one day he put to death.85. I counseled him to persecute good David, and
to ask counsel of witches and sorcerers, contrary to Gods law. Then at the
last, being forsaken of God, he was vanquished with the Philistines, and with
his own hands slew himself upon the mount of Gelboa.

I was also so bold as to enter into king David's house, and by my counsel I
made him commit adultery with Bersaba the wife of Vrias. And notwithstanding
that Vrias was his faithful servant, and good counselor, yet I gave him
counsel to kill Vrias, 2. Ki^ 1.12
by means whereof his sin might he covered in marrieng of his wife. For the
which offense the Prophet Nathan disclosed me, so that my further meaning
brake of, and ever after I was banished his house. I Also governed his son
Absalon, who after he had killed his brother Amon, made war with his Father,
and drove him to Jerusalem, being nothing ashamed to enter the houses of all
his Fathers concubines, Kin. 13.11
and to lie with them: but an Oak did execute justice upon that wicked child:
for when he thought to escape with his Moile, the tree caught him fast by the
hair of his head, till Jacob came with a Lawunce and killed him.

I also governed Roboam king Salomons son, who unreasonably grieved and
oppressed his people with taxes, and imposts: insomuch that when they requested
to have it somewhat eased, he did not only deny their petitions, but also
gave them discourteous language, followinge the counsel of his young wanton
Gentlemen, 4. Kin. 12.
rather then the wise admonitions of his grave counsailours, by which means he
lost the tenth part of his Realm.

I governed the great Queen Iezabel, by whose advise king Achab her husband
worshipped the Idol, 3. Kin. 18 21.
Bale, and caused good Naboth to be killed. She persecuted the Prophets of God,
and made many of them to be put to death. She sought by all means to
dispatch good Elias, but as her life was evil, so was her death shamfull. For
she falling from a high window, was ouertroden with horses feet, and eaten up
of dogs.

I governed Sardanapalus, the last king of the Assirians, who regarded not the
government of his Realm, but lived altogether in delights. He used to paint
his face, and to apparel himself in woman's apparel, he exercised himself in
all kinds of vilanie and filthiness, insomuch that when he saw that he was
forsaken of the greatest part of his people, yt he had very evil luck in
battle against his enemies, and stood upon no ground free from danger of
death. It chanced one day, that being in the tower of Babylon, he set it on
fire, and there burned himself and all that ever he had. I governed Cambises
king of Persia, the son of good king Cirus, who by my counsel was given to
gluttony and drunkenness, with other vises, not beseeming a Prince. Upon a
time Praxaspes, one of his most excellent counsailours, seeing him immoderatly
bibbing, reverently told him that it was not Prince like: whereat the king was
wroth, and commanded him to send for his youngest son, who being brought,
Ca^bices caused Praxaspes to tie him to a tree, saying: If I can hit the
heart of thy son with my arrow out of my long bow, is it the feate of a man
that is drunk? So Cambices shot, and cloue the child's heart in sunder, showed
it unto the father, with a warning to take heed how to judge his liege Lord,
drunk. Then I made him marry his own natural sister, and to kill his own
brother. It fortuned upon a day, that as the king and the Queen his sister
were at the Table, for his pastime and recreation sake, he had a young Lion let
loose, and a mighty mastiefe or band dog that the king kept. These two
fought so long till at last the dog was like to have the worst. Within the
sight of this game, an other mastiefe was tied in a chain, both bred of one
bitch, this band dog, brake his chain in have, and came to help his
fellow, insomuch that these two dogs overcame and kilde the Lion. The king
liked well of the love and loialtie of these two Dogs, but the Queen beeinge
moved thereat, began to weep tenderlye. Which when Cambises saw, he asked
the cause of her sorrow, to whose demand the Queen answered in this sort.

It is otherwise happened to my brother, then to this Dog that was to weak for
the Lion. For thou being his own brother, have not showed the like love and
faithfulness unto him, as this band-dog has done to his mate, for thou have
caused thy brother to be slain.

The king being sore displeased and full of indignation at her answer,
commanded, yt the queen should be had away by and by out of his sight, and
put to death: the which was done. But as that king came one day out of Egypt,
riding on horseback, his sword by hap fell out of the scabbard, and he fell
likewise upon ye point of it, and was thrust through the body, and died. I
governed (quoth Folly) one Catilin a Roman, a very seditious fellow, who
conspired to kill all the Senators of Rome, but he was put besides his purpose,
by reason that one Cicero opened it, and he with all his conspirators were
killed in battle. I governed (quoth Folly) Herod and Herodias, to accomplish
their lechery, I coupled them in marriage, albeit she was his brother Philips
wife, which unlawful marriage Saint John reprehending and finding fault with
all, for so doing, had his head cut off. I governed Pilate, Annas, and
Caiphas, in Jerusalem, with many Doctors, Priests, Scribes and Pharisees: I
counseled them to crucify Christ, between two thieves, as if he had been a
sower of sedition: which being done, I thought then that I had won all the
world, but when I saw yt upon the third day after he arose again contrary to
my reckoning, I lost a great number of clients and subjects, who hearing ye
Apostles preach, quite abandoned and gave me over.

I governed Nero, the sixth Emperor of Rome, who at ye beginning of his reign
was good and virtuous, but after he had possessed the Empire five years, he
became most evil and wicked, and was given to lechery and filthiness. This
man was a murderer, he slew his wife, his mother, and diverse other honest
persons, of which number Seneca was one: he was the first persecutour of the
Christians, and put many good men to death, as for example, Saint Peter and S.
Paul, with other. But this tyrant being upon a time unguarded, and wanting
about him his lieftenants and Chaptaines of war, the Senators and states of
Rome sought means to punish him: for anger whereof he killed himself, and the
soldiers that were sent to seek him, found him dead in the field.

I governed Antonine Bassian Caracalla, the nineteetenth Emperor of Rome, who
by my counsel killed his brother Geta: besides that, he married his
stepmother, and desired Pompinion (the great Lawier) to excuse his murder. Who
answered him, That he was not so willing to excuse a murderer, as he was to
disclose him: the Emperor unworthy of so good an answer, kilde the Lawier.

I governed Varius Heliogabilus, the.xxi. Emperor of Rome, who by my counsel
lived so disorderedly, that he left behind him no memory of honest life, but
infamy and shame. This man's own soldiers slew him, and threw him into a ditch,
and because his body would not sink to the bottom, they dragged him out
again with a hook, and hurled him into the river of Tiber. I governed (quoth
Folly) Julian Apostata, the.xxxix. Emperor of Rome, who in his thought was so
wise, and well given, that he was made Reader in the Church of Nicomedia. This
man travailed to Athens, where he studied Philosophy, but he staide not long
in that good purpose, for by the counsel of me. Folly, he renounced the
Christian faith, and became a revolt and an Idolater. I persuaded him to
persecute the christians, least they should increase seven for one: I moved
him also by my subtle device, to root and weed them out quite, which thing he
meant to do, but he was kilde within two years after, being slain in
Persia, and yielding up his evil spirit, he lifted up his bloody hand to
heaven, in contempt and despite of Jesus Christ, making this out-crie. Now, O
Galilean, thou have the victory.

I governed the false Prophet Mahomet, and counseled him to make a book, to
entitle it Alcaron, and to expound things in the holy Scriptures carnallye:
which he did, and that law is yet continued, in the greatest parts of the
world. I governed Messaline, an Empress, the noblest whore in the world,
who being but newly married to Claudius, fifth Emperor of Rome (an old
gentleman) when she found by proof that her husband was insufficient and
unable to satifie her lecherous desires, by my (counsel) oftentimes she
disguised her self into men's apparel, and went to the common Stews, whereas
she abused her body with a great number, returning back no better then a
bitch, and vaunted that she had vanquished and gone beyond all the whoores in
the house of bawderie.

When the wandering knight had heard these wonderful discourses uttered by
(Folly) and having in him some sparkle of reason and inclination of nature, he
thought himself foolish if it were not in him to judge of deeds so mischeuous
and ill. And being no longer able to keep silence, he brake his mind to Folly
finding great fault with this insatiable Empress, insomuch yt he cried out with
a loud voice, and said: Fic, fic, fic, filthy bitch and vilde whore, worthy to
be tied to a tree, stark naked, and delivered to greedy dogs and ravening
birds, to be devoured. The^ I asked Folly, what was ye end of this wicked
woman, who told me yt the Emperor put her to death, because she was not
content with her lawful hausband, but married an other man, whose name was
Silius. Whereunto I assented, saying, yt it was a good deed, for there need no
more* but three such detestable filths in all France, to spoil ye whole
realm. This tale of Folly, touching her deeds and exploits, her devises and
practices, her prouocatio^s and counsels, as it being long and strange, I am
not able to repeat as it was spoken: but have nakedly recorded so much as
rests in my remembrance, which thing I have the rather done, to the end that
all devout Christian readers might willingly learn, and thoroughly know, what
great wickedness they commit, in following the evil counsel of dame Folly.
Every one ought to forsake her, for yt the end of such as be ruled by her
precepts, tread in her paths, and dau^se after her pipe, is proved by
experience to be dangerous, deadly, and dampnable. But now let us return to
our voyage, and former matter.

THE VVANDRING KNIGHT FINDING TWO ways, and doubtful whether of them to
take: there chanced to come unto him Virtue and Voluptuousness, either of
them offering to conduct and guide the Knight on his way. The sixth Chapter.
SO long lasted the talk of Folly, that we had worn out the way well, and
the Sun went low. In the end we came into a straight, where we found two
ways, one lay on the left hand, which was fair, broad, and entering into a
goodly green Meddow: the other on the right hand, which was narrow, rockie and
full of Mountains. Being then in a perplexity, and doubtful which of those
ways I might take, Folly told me, that the way on the left hand was best and
fairest, and Temeritie my horse, kept a flinging to go that way, so that I had
much ado to rain him in. Then said I to Folly, that I feared least the
green grassie way would lead us into some ditch and quagmire, where we should
stick fast. Besides that, I was more then half discouraged with her tales
which she had told me: and though I in heart hated them, yet notwithstanding
custom caused me to use them, not being able to do otherwise, without Gods
grace. Heerevpon I was resolved to take the way that lay on the left hand,
Folly keeping me company.

But as we were thus talking together, I espied two Ladies coming toward the
place where we stood, (which made me very glad) One of these Ladies rode upon
a white horse, and went in a gown of costly colors, bravely imbrodered with
needle work, in the which border, the three Divine, and the four Moral
virtues were written. This Lady was very beautiful, and she seemed naturally
to be fraught with godly graces and gifts, she had a neat body, a sweet
countenance, a modest gesture: her face was not painted, she was always very
courteous, she pretended authority and reverence without flattery, she was
not sour nor grim, but lovely and amiable. The other Lady rode upon a rats
colored horse, and went in a chaungeable colored gown, garnished with gold,
and excessive cost: she wore about her neck a chain of gold, with rich
Jewels tied unto it: her fingers were decked with ring upon ring: she seemed to
have been delicately brought up, her face was beautiful, but I suspected she
was painted: her looks were wanton and unconstant, and she rolled her eyes
every way.

This Lady came unto me before the other, and after salutations, I asked her,
which of the two ways I should take, to find perfect felicity. She
answered me saying: My son, if thou will follow me, I will bring thee a
short and pleasant way through a green Meddow. Be not doubtful, for I will
lodge thee this night in the Pallaice of Felicity: into the which when thou
art entered and placed, thou need not think upon any thing, but what may
best please thy mind and procure thy delight: As fine fare, dancing, singing,
soft lodging, Ladies love, laughing, hunting, hawking, fishing, fowling,
riding, running, shooting, bowling, rich array, and all things also that can be
devised to please thy fantasy: all which pleasures, I will provide thee with a
thousand more. For it is in me to bestow such things upon them that take me for
their Mistress.

With these words I was bewitched, and longed to see this pleasant Pallaice,
not mistrusting that she was any other than she said and seemed to be. And
being desirous to learn her name, I began thus: my good Lady, may it not
offend you, if I ask your name? My son (quod she) such as follow me, and have
had experience of my goodness, call me Felicity, and that deservedly and of
good right. For I am indeed, the Empress of ye Pallaice of worldly pleasures,
whether I will bring thee before night, if thou will follow me. There be some
enemies of mine, that nick name me, and spitefully miscal me, by false and
cou^terfet terms, saying, that I am named, Malice, Vanity, Vice and
Voluptuousness. But give thou no ear unto them, for they speak upon envy,
hatred, and evil will.

Then approached the other Lady, which (after salutation done) uttered these
words unto me: Reason required, that I should have spoken first, but this
painted Pecocke, named Wicked Voluptuousness, puts forth her self to speak
before me always, and to take the tale out of my mouth: Take heed of her, for
doubtless her communication corrupts and infecteth, even the very best
livers, with the poison of her error. Now I see thou art of good inclination,
and ready to weigh thy paths in the balance, willing to walk as well ye good
way as the bad. And seeing thy mind wauoreth, apply thy self unto Virtue,
continually, shorten the sorrow of thy soul, water thy will with wisdom,
adventure not thy present precious age to be boldened in ambition and
vain-glorie, detest the danger of insatiable Covetousness, let not thy liking
be laid upon licentious love, avoid and shake off idleness, by using thy self
to honest exercises, fly Worldly Felicity, arm thy self against ye dart of
Cupid, lest at length he overcome thee, open thine ears of understanding, and
follow my counsel. I am not ye vile, villainous, vain, mischievous, subtle,
deceitful and lieng Lady Voluptuousness, but I am ye assured and safe way yt
leads to Perfect Felicity. And though I am narrow and painful to pass, yet
if thou will follow me, I will make thee merry, and guide thee in ye very way,
which God has ordained to lead unto true blessedness. For my son, thou must
understand this, yt almighty God does not bestow upon men perfect joy and
souereign goodness, unless they labor to atchieue it. If therefore thou think
always to pass thy time in pleasure, and followest thine affection, doing all
whatsoever seems delectable to thy foolish fa^tasie, and supposest ye way to
find Felicity, thou art far wide, and greatly abused. For, He that will have
honny, must make much of Bees. If thou desire Felicity, so lead thy life yt
God of his goodness may vouchsafe to give it thee. Cleanse thy heart and empty
it of evil thoughts, be firm in faith, establish thy soul with sou^dnes and
sincerity, be not deceived with damnable doctrine, nor led astray by wrong
opinions. This that I tell thee, cannot be done without labor, neither can any
profitable or good thing, be obtained without pains taking. Thou see how
Shepherds, Seamen, and all Artificers, if they grow in wealth, it is by
labor and travel.

Were the Husbandman any better than a fool, if he should hope in Harurst to
reap Corn of his ground, where he has sowed no seed, when season served?
Even so is that man meruailously misinformed, that thinks to atchieue perfect
felicity, or to reap true blessedness, having not first fallowed his field
with Virtue, Good deeds, Faith, Hope and Charity, which is the High way to
Heaven. The Husbandman doungeth his ground, sows his seed, grafteth his
trees, tarreth his sheep, and leads his life in labor, hoping to enjoy the
fruit, the grass, the grain, the wool, and generally all the profit: the
expectation and full account whereof, makes him to take pains with pleasure.
Even so, if thou will be content painfully to walk this way, without regard
either of Rocks or Mountains, doubt not to find true felicity.

Having heard this long and wise admonition, and marking the Lady well, I could
not be quiet till I knew her name. Wherefore I said, Madame (without offense
be it spoken) I pray you what is your name? She answered, saying: My son, I
am great with God, I am acquainted with ye Saints, I am all in all with
Angels, I am much esteemed of good men. Without me nothing is done in heaven,
and without me no good thing can be done on Earth. I am commonly called,
Felicity, Wisdom and Virtue. I govern good Kings, Princes and People: I
rule Prelates and Ecclesiastical persons: I stop the mouth of false Prophets
and erroneous teachers: I hinder their Heresies, and stay their wicked
proceedings. I govern householders and their families in good order. I am a
companion with the lovers of learning. I am a husband to all chaste wives,
widows, and virtuous virgins. I reward my friends in prosperity, with
holiness: and in adversity with kindly consolation. I minister unto them
food, raiment, lodging, strength, patience, and all things necessary, and
whether it be little or much, they take it in good part. Contrariwise, the
friends of Voluptuosnesse are never satisfied, although they have too much.

My friends had rather sing Psalms, then vain songs: they had rather fast,
then be drunk: they had rather pray then curse: they rise early, and go to
bed late: they have care of the Commonwealth: Faith counsels them, Hope
assisteth them, Charity inflameth them, Wisdom governs them, Justice
guides them: and I do and will enrich and encourage them, that all the world
shall have them in admiration, honor, and reverence. Yea, though their bodies
die, yet their fame shall live, for others example: and their souls shall
remain immortal, like unto the state of Angels. Contrariwise, he that
leads his life in Voluptuousness, Ambition, Filthiness, Uncleanness, or
Evil Conversation, if he be not sorry for his sinfulness, and repent him of
his time lewdly spent, that man's death is damnable, and his shameful report
shall never die, no more then that of Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus, Herod,
Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, and such like. Therefore my son, leave
Voluptuousness, if thou meanest to find true felicity and perfect
blessedness

THE VVANDRING KNIGHT BY THE Council of Folly, left Lady Virtue, and followed
Voluptuousness, which led him to the Pallaice of worldly Felicity. The
seventh Chapter.
WHen I had heard both these Ladies tell their tales, I was more amazed then
ever I was before, insomuch yt I wist not which to take for my guide. But alas
(poor perplexed pilgrim) if I had had but the wit of a Wodcocke, and not
wauered in mind, I had followed Virtue and left Voluptuousness. But being
amidst mine amaze, I requested my Gouernesse Folly, to teach me quickly which
of these two Ladies I were best to follow, for the finding of true felicity.
No sooner had I spoken the word, but suddenly she cast out this language,
saying, that Virtue was an Hypocrite, and that her way was painful to pass.
But (says she) if thou follow Voluptuousness, thou see her way is fair,
sweet, green and pleasant.

If thou follow Virtue, thou submittest thy self to cold, heat, hunger,
thirst, travel, pain and werinesse: thou must rise early, and go to bed late:
stand in fear, weep, take care, live in sorrow: and yet in doubt to have
Felicity at last. If thou offend her never so little in word or deed, she
will leave thee, for she is too severe, even in small trifling matters.
Whatsoever she says to thee now, she will deny when she has thee among the
Rocks and Mountains: she will leave thee alone among wild beasts, to lead
thy life in the Wilderness. Wherefore I advise thee believe her not, and
follow her not. But let us take this fair large way on the left hand, through
which the greatest part of people do pass, and at night we will lodge in the
Pallaice of Felicity. And this I tell thee, that if thou chance to mislike of
thine enterteinment there, within a day or two thou may return, for the way
is but short, and then (if thou think it good) thou may climb over the
Mountains, and ride through the way on the right hand.

These delicate devises of my friend Folly, dashed quite the aduertisements of
Virtue, whom (with thanksgiving) I bid farewell, desiring her not to be
offended in that I did not follow her over the Mountains. Then Lady
Voluptuousness led the way, my horse Temeritie trod his trace, Folly followed
fast at my heels, Virtue viewed us very well, and came sadly behind me, even
like one that mourned after a dead corse borne to be buried, crieng with a
loud voice: Ah thou arrant Ass, leave Voluptuousness, for she will lead
thee to death and destruction. The counsel of thy friend Folly is devilish,
she daily deceiues such as follows her, her felicity is false. The language
of Voluptuousness, is a mere charm, with which she uses to bewitch her
children.

Notwithstanding this exclamation and rebuke, I went on my way, and could not
away with her Christian counsel: which when she saw, she gave me a furious
farewell, saying: O monstrous man, O bedlam beast, O fool unfortunate, O
idiotly Idol, O shadow of a man: Thou have no more sense or reason then a Ass,
thou showest thy self to be shameless, in thus framing thy fancy to follow
Voluptuousness, and to forsake Virtue. Will thou embrace worldly wealth,
rather then heavenly grace? Did thou desire the tree before the fruit? I see
thou art fowlly abused. He that leaves Virtue, and follows Voluptuousness,
is subject to Satan. Remember O thou wretch, what Solomon says: For that I
have cried, and thou have refused to come after me, I stayed till the morrow,
but thou vnderstoodest not, but doubtedst my council, and would not receive
my correction, therefore I laugh at thy destruction, but when thine evil hap
and trouble comes, then thou seek me, in the morning, when thou shall not
find me, because thou have hated knowledge, and have not received the fear of
God, nor obeyed my counsel, but despisedst my correction.

Which words uttered unto me by the mouth of Wisdom, might suffice to
withdraw me from my foolish enterprise. But she preached to a post, and Folly
whom I followed, did mock and deride her, all the while.

HOW THE VVANDRING KNIGHT WAS received and welcomed to the Pallaice of
Worldly Felicity. The eight Chapter.
AFter we had passed certain degrees on our way, with unwonted joy,
Voluptuousness laid her hands on my head, and gave me her best blessing, I
letting her alone (as one to whom I ought duty). Then uttered she unto me
certain sweet words, which inchaunted me. For presently I lost my senses,
esteeming all well that she said or did. After we had spent in sport two hours
of the time, the Sun began to set, and so I espied the Pallaice of Worldly
Felicite, whereat I was not a little glad. For it seemed to me very pleasant,
and my thought I smelt daineties, whereas indeed, all was very witchcraft.
When we were within a Crossebow shot of the Pallaice, Voluptuousness hoopt and
halowd, whereat came out a legion of Ladies, pompeously apparailed, among whom
were these next named: Lust, Prodigality, Lechery, Wantonness, Carelessness,
Bravery, Lasciviousness, Ambition, Drunkenness, Licorishnesse and such like.

Being dismounted from of my horse, Folly took off my Helmet, and my face
being bare, all the Ladies kissed me, and bad me welcome: which enterteinment
agreed well with my foolish fancy. Then Prodigality and Ambition led me by the
hands, Lasciviousness and other Ladies lead the way before, Bravery and the
rest followed after. Thus we entered into the Pallaice of worldly pleasure, the
gate whereof was great and high, built upon Marble stone, and always stood
wide open, day and night, Winter and Summer: whereat I meruailed much. Then
Voluptuousness told me ye reason with these words: I always keep open house,
for as many as will, and at what hour soever any do come to me, by night or by
day, they are welcome, and I will receive them royally. Then Voluptuousness
lead me into a great and sumptuous hall, hanged with cloth of Arace, and full
of torches burning round about. There Lust unarmed me, and Bravery gave me a
night gown, of Crimosin Uellet, lined with Martine skins. Within a little
while after the table was covered, in came the fine cates, and to supper we go.

This done, Lady Voluptiousnesse put me in the gorgeoust place, and there sat
on either side of me, Licorousnesse and Drunkenness, there the rest of the
Ladies sat down in their degrees: but Voluptuousnes sat right against me,
who courteously carved me of the delicatest meat. Our waiters were young
Gentlemen, very bravely apparailed: our service was sumptuous, our meats were
well seasoned, and handsomely handled: our Cooks were cleanelye, our Butlers
bountiful: our seruitours very singular: our music was excellent, our
Singers were sweet: and every Officer exceeded in delicateness. There was
fine feeding, pleasant parling, continual quaffing, insomuch that half
drunk and whole drunk was a goodly game: ribauldrie was our recreation, and
as for knauerie it was canuast to the proof. When supper was ended, Lady
Wantonness came unto me and asked me if I would dance: and Lady Lust likewise
asking me whether I would lie alone, or have a bedfellowe. I made answer,
that I was weary, by reason of my journey, and so desired to go to bed. Then
Lasciviousness brought me to my chamber, where she lodged me in sweet
sheets, a soft bed, Curtens of Tissue, and all things costly and excellent. In
conclusion, Laly Voluptuousness took her leave, promising in the morning to
show me the rest of the palace of worldly felicity, whereof I dreamed all
night, my head was so full of toys.

VOLVPTVOVSNESSE SHOWS THE VVANdring knight some part of the pallaice, and
after brought him to dinner. The ninth Chapter.
IN the morning when ye Sun beams brightly adorned ye chamber where I lay, and
perced ye galla^t glass windows of costly crystal, Lasciuiousnes came unto
me, and bad me good morrow, asking me if I would rise. Whereto I answered, yea,
and did so with speed, now whiles I was trimming my self, in came Licorousnes,
and her sister Dronkennes, who had prepared my breakfast: anon after came in
lady Voluptuousness accompanied with Lust, Lechery, and all ye rest: she was
apparailed more like a goddess then a queen. Al these kissed me sweetly, and
sat down with me to breakfast: which being ended, Ambition put upon my back ye
cape of curiosity, wherwt presently I became so curious as could be, in all
things, saving goodness. The^ I desired Voluptuousnes to show me ye rest of ye
pallaice, according to her promise, so we walked together, into a goodly great
chamber, hanged about with cloth of gold, beset with pearls. This chamber was
paued with Marble black and white, ye pillars were Jasper, ye roof was Iuory,
laid on with gold, and ye staiers were Alabaster. In this chamber also was a
sumptuous chair of estate, wherein most magnificently sat a Prince, having on
his head an imperial crown of gold, beset with precious pearls, and in his hand a
scepter roial. He was besides yt, very richly araied, accompanied with many
nobles, pompeously apparelled. This prince I reverenced, and he likewise
saluted me, giving commandment yt I should be most singularly and excelle^tly
used. So we went from thence, and being abroad I asked lady Voluptuousness
what prince ye same was: who said, yt he was ye Prince of this Pallaice (even
my father) ye only giver and bestower of felicity, the which I believed to be
true, til I found in deed yt it was Lucifer ye father of filthiness, the
graund-father of gluttony, ye prince of pride, ye Emperor of iniquity, and
the Lord of lewdnes, a ruler of ye world, and one yt had nothing to do in
heaven, but in earth, among a sort of wicked worldlings, and devilish people.
This Lucifer arroga^tly chalengeth unto himself yt he has power to give glory,
honor, and riches, to who^ he lists, as ye scripture witnesses, wherefore
worldlings do serve him as his subjects. From thence went we to ye tresurie
house, where we saw cofers full of coin and jewels, which was kept by lady
Fortune (as Voluptuousness said) and she bestowed al ye treasure upon such as
ye king commanded. From thence we went up into a great gallerie, where we saw
three cabinits, ye first full of fine woollen, the second of pure silks, ye
third of fair white linen: this place Pomp had in keeping. From thence we
went to ye perfuming house, which differed nothing from an Apothecaries shop.
For there I found all things yt might move a man's appetite, or stir up his
delight. There were colors to paint proud women, perfumes and ointme^ts to
make their bodies soft and sweet, and this place was kept by Lasciuiousnes.
The^ we went unto ye goodly large vaughts, where wine of no kind wanted there,
and was dame Dronkennes her kingdom. From thence I was lead to the kitchins,
where all things were kept in order by Licorousnes, whose rule lay in ye place.
From thence to an other great room, where we saw a sort of young sweet faced
boys: Voluptuousness told me they were Ganimedes and Endimio. From thence
she had me up to a place yt was builded very round in compass: which place was
marvelous bright and lightsome, by reason of the great glass windows of
crystal. This served them in steed of a temple, for they had none other. Here
we saw a great number of fine delicate dames, exceeding amiable and beautiful:
amongst all, one excelled, whose name I asked, and Voluptuousness showed me
yt it was lady Venus, who^ al liscentious lovers do like notably well, and honor
her as a goddess. By her sat a blind-boy, who with his bow and arrows shot at
adue^tures, and hot my heart: by and by came down dame Venus, and she plucked it
out, reviving me with comfortable words and wonderful persuasions. And although
ye arrow was quickly taken out, and might seem to do no harm: yet I think
the head thereof was poisoned, for it has made so deep a wound, as is very
infectious, and scarce curable, unless with some special plasters. This same
Cupid governs al lecherus lovers of what age soever they be or degree,
witnesses daily experience: he is naked and past shame, not caring who looks
upon him, his blindness represents the folly of such as run headlong after
lewd love, setting their feathers in the wind, without respect of any after
clap. His bow and arrows do signify the folly of fools, which offer
themselves to be his Butte, and stands still while he does shoot and hit
them. His wings signify the wavering mind of such as he hits, who are quiet
in no place or time. For who is more mutable, vain, light, inconstant, and
variable, then the fleshly lover. Some says yt this Cupid has a torch burning
in his hand, meaning hereby, that he burns to the heart, all them that he
touches. All this dispatched, Voluptuousness and I went to dinner* and she
promised me when we had dined, to show me the rest of the pallaice.

DINNER BEING DONE, VOLVPTVOVNESSE shows the wandering knght, the rest of the
Pallaice of worldly felicity, with the description of the Towers thereof. And
by the Author is declared the evil fruit of certain notorious sins. The
tenth Chapter.
THis chanced in the pleasant month of May, when love and lust is most in
force: so it was determined that we should sup in goodly gardens, not in
banketting houses, although they were wonderful fine, but in arbours
ouergrowne with sweet Eglentine, Rose trees, and Uines, fair and clear
fountains of cold water running by, and fragrant herbs and flowers, casting
a comfortable sent. The little pretty birds did sing round about us, as well in
cages, as on trees, and bushes. There was plaieng, piping, singing, dancing,
leaping, embracing and kissing: finally, each lover with his lady was merry,
and to be brief, every one did what liked him best, and thought themselves
happy to find such felicity. But all my desire was to see the rest of the
palace: wherefore I charged Lady Voluptuousness with her promise, which
took effect, insomuch that we went all along, to a certain place where I saw
the very secret lodgings of Voluptuousness. But what they were, for fear of
offending the reverent reader, I mean not to rehearse, then we went from
Gallerie to Gallerie, from office to office, from chamber to chamber, where I
saw every place furnished with so rich moueables, and of such choice, as
nothing might be wished more.

Amongst all these rooms, one chamber exceeded in largnesse and workmanship,
for costlye caruing, and in all other respects. There I found a very brave bed,
gorgeously trimmed, insomuch that I commended the same highly. Then
Lasciviousness said, that she had charge of that chamber, and if I listed to
lie there that night I should. Lust also promised to bring lady Venus to lie
with me, I hearing this, my thought I felt the wound that Cupid gave me, as
fresh as at ye first. Then went we about the walls, which were all of Iette,
thick and strong. Upon these walls were built seven towers, like unto
steeples, and every tower had his owner. In the first lodged Pride, in the
second Envy, in the third Wrath, in the fourth Gluttony, in the fifth
Lechery, in the sixth Covetousness, and in the seventh Sloth. My purpose was
to go into them all, one after an other. And as I entered into the tower of
Pride, which was the first, I spide written this Posie over the Porch, PRIDE IS
THE PRINCE AND ROOT OF ALL SINS. For as a king is accompanied with a great
train of Seruitours, even so has Pride a sort of sins for her subjects,
over whom she reigns Princelike. Again, as Kings keep and hold their own
aright, even so does Pride behave her self toward the proud. It is a
singular sign of a great reprobate and castaway, when a man lives long in
Pride. For this same displeases God more then all other vices: as humility
pleases him more then all other virtues And because the proud aduau^ce
themselves above all other, the devil deals with them accordingly. For as
the Crow when he is not able to crack a hard Walnut with his bill, sets his
flight aloft right over some great stone, and letting it fall, breaks the
same, and then alighteth to eat the kirnell: even so plaieth the Devil with
the proud, for first he aduanceth the^ aloft, and brings them to promotion in
this world, but when they are in the top of their happiness, and think upon
no danger, then even then, comes the devil, and he throws them down
headlonge with a mischief, in-to hell.

The difference between the humble and the proud, may be known by that of
corn and chafe. For as chafe being light, is puffed up aloft with the wind,
and is sodeinly consumed, whereas contrariwise good corn lieng low, is gathered
from the ground, laid up in garniers, and esteemed of every body: even so it
falls out with the pride of the proud, and the humility of the humble. Unto
pride do apperteine these vices following, namely: Arrogancy, Presumption,
Wrath, Contempt, Heresy, Hypocrisy, Disobedience, Vainglory, Ambition, and
such like.

In the second tower lodged Envy, over whose entry door this devise was
written: A FIREBRAND OF HELL AND THE DEVILS DARLING. Now Envy is a sadness
and heuinesse of heart, for an others prosperity. This sin has souereintie in
ye bad, as Charity in ye good. Charity is a badge of salvation, Envy of
damnation. The envious man differs not from the devil in any degree, they are
partners in gain and in loss. If ye devil reap profit by doing evil, the
envious man will be sure to follow his trade, for lucre sake. And as the
envious man grudgeth at an others profit and good name: so does he delight in
an others loss and ill report. There cannot be a fowler and more cruel sin
then Envy: for she always tormenteth and vexes her fosterer, I mean the
envious, in whom she dwells. He that seeks to get good by others evil,
never amends in that mind. And he yt planteth his pleasure upon an others
pain, shall have such fruit, as he yt grafs figs upon thorns, or would make
fire to burn by pouring water thereon. Envy is a disease hard to be healed,
because it lies hidden in ye heart, where the Physician cannot come to cure it.
There belongs unto this vice, Backbiting, Treason, Disdain, and others.

In the third tower dwelt Wrath, over whose Porch this Posie was written, THE
VERY MVRTHERER OF HOLY LOVE. For as holy love prepares ye conscience to dwell
with God, so does Wrath prepare it to dwell with the devil. Wrath takes away
ye hearing of reason. The wrathful man will hear the counsel of none. There is
nothing resembles the Image of God more then man, being in perfect love. For
God will be there where unity is kept, where people be at peace, and where
countries be quiet: which cannot be in a wrathful wretch. A wrathful man is
like unto one possessed with ye devil, who is ever tormented until he has
vomited him out. Wrath makes men fight, wrath causes blasphemy, by wrath the
devil conquereth countries, wrath is like a musled dog. For when he cannot
bite, yet with snarling he makes others go together by the ears. And as the
Fisherman troubles the water because ye fish should not see his nets: even
so the Devil by wrath troubles man, to the end he should not understand
nor perceive his own destruction. To the wrathful man belongs, inflaming of
the heart, indignation, disorder, blasphemy, contention, rankor, reuengement,
murder, and such like.

In the fourth tower dwelt Covetousness, whose Posie is this, IDOLATRY AND A
BOTTOMLESS GOVLFE ARE INSATIABLE. The covetous man is forsaken of God, for he
loves his gain better then God: he had rather loose God then goods. For little
triflles that touch his profit, he swears and lies, which is a thing most
damnable. The Faith, Hope, and Charity, which he should have toward God,
Covetousness turns it to riches. The covetous man's heart is all upon his
goods, and not upon God: for where the heart is, there is also a man's love.
The covetous man offends in evil gettinge, in evil using, and in evil
louinge his goods. The covetous man is governed by the Devil, hazardinge his
soul to eternal torment, for the lewd love of temporal toys. And as the
Mouse is caught in the trappe, whilst she hops to get the Bait: even so
is the covetous man by the devil, in hunting after riches. The covetous man is
like unto a hog, whose life does little good to any man, but rather great
harm, by reason of the noisomensse and filthy stink, which that nastie beast
procures: but when the Butcher has killed him, the^ he yields profit,
because he nourishes, etc. Even so the covetous man whiles he lives, does
good to none, but rather damnifies his neighbors, marie when Gods
slaughter-man ( Death, I mean) comes, and destroieth him, then those that
live, fares the better. The covetous man is like unto a band dog, that feeds
upon carrion, and will admit no companion to take part with him, but eating all
alone, and filling his guts till he burst, he dies, and the fowls of the
air devour him. The covetous man hoordeth up his goods, and suffers the
needy to starve. The covetous man croweth over the poor, the devil croweth
over him. And upon Covetousness attend these monsters, Usury, Simonie,
Fraud, Perjury, and all Sacrilege, Deceit, Extortion, Oppression, and the
devil.

In the fifth tower dwelt Guttony, over whose portall this posie was written.
VENEMOVS WINE, AND DEADLY DAINTIES. Truth it is, that yt the throat is the
gate of the body, you know yt when an enemy would win a castle, if he once get
in at the gate, he makes no doubt of winning the hold: even so the devil, when
he has entered in at the throat, it is no question but he will win both the
head and body. Now, his custom is to enter with many sins, of whom
Gluttony is the mother. For the drunkard and immoderate feeder, consents to
all vice. Therefore it is requisite to set a good porter to keep ye throat,
least the devil get in. For as a man may lead his horse when he has him by the
bridle: even so may the devil rule a man, having once gotten hold of his
mouth by gluttony, yea, he then possesses him wholly. The servant being corn
fed, oftentimes rebelleth against his Master: eue^ so ye body having received
excess, and more the^ enough, is apt to rebel against the spirit. Gluttony
kills more then the sword of the enemy, it makes many die sooner then they
should by nature. Excessive eating and drinking corrupts the body, and
ingendreth diseases. By Gluttony men be franked, as Capons are crammed. A
Glutton is worse than a Hog that feeds filthely: and yet the Hog is like
his sire, of whom he takes his manners, and does but his kind. They yt make
Tauernes their Temples, are like a Hog wallowing in ye mire. For as the filthy
hog tumbleth in mire and dirt, even so do gluttons and dronkards oftentimes
wallow in damnable Drunkenness and Gluttony. Upon this foul sin, other
sins do depend, as namely Greediness of meat, Devouring, Daintiness,
Excess, Dullness of feeling, Foolish mirth, Uaine babbling, Ribaudrie and
bodily beastliness.

In the sixth Tower lived Lechery, whose Posie was: A COMMON AND FILTHY WHORE,
DEFILES BOTH BODY AND SOVLE For the filthiness of a Harlot corrupts a man
within and without. Of all sins, this sin of Lechery is the pleasantest to
the Devil, because it hurts both body and soul and because he was never
touched with it, being a spirit, and no body. Were not the Merchant a flat
fool to make any bargain, knowing before that he shall repent it after? Even
so the Lechourer takes much pains, he spendes his goods to accomplish his
desire: but afterward he repents both his pains, his cost and his purchase:
nevertheless, with that repentance he is not forgiven of God, unless a full
purpose and resolute intent of amendment ensue and follow thervppon. The
Lechourer in his life is three ways tormented: first with the heat of the
harlot, secondly with the pain of his hurt, and thirdly with the worm of his
own conscience. He burns in concupiscence, he stinkes with infamy, his
conscience accuses him for his offense. Lechery is a ditche, wherein the
Devil hurles other sins. To behold a woman wantonly, is a great alluring to
Lechery: so that good were it, not to look upon her at all: but much better
not to touch or meddle with her carnally. Six other sins wait upon
Lechery, to wit: Fornication, Adultery, Sacrilege, Incest, Buggerie and Rape.

In the vij. Tower dwelt Sloth, whose posie was this, A SLOTHFVLL HVSWIFE AND
ALWAYS SLEEPING. Sloth is a heaviness of heart, and an hatred at spiritual
goodness, whereby a man is made negligent in serving of God, either by good words
proceeding from ye mouth, or good works issuing from ye heart: both which God
himself wills. It is most fit to acknowledge a creator and an encreaser of
that good and goodness which we do daily receive: as also to confess our selves
sinners, and God the forgiuer. But as people are dull to do good deeds, so are
they swift to commit sin. Many evils grow by Sloth, whereof two be
perilous, and Sloth her self confesses no less: namely, to neglect a
converting unto Christ, and a carelessness of confessing sin. Whereby it
comes to pass, that oftentimes many depart this life, not confessing
themselves to have offended God, neither yet converting or turning unto him: in
doing whereof they hazard both body and soul. It is a hard thing for one to
die well, that always lived ill. In this Tower of Sloth, are fifteen several
lodges or cabbins: in the first lies Lukewarmnesse, in the second
Lasciviousness, in the third Drowsiness, in the fourth Carelessness of
himself and his health: in the fifth, Delaieng the time to do good, in the
sixth Rechlesnesse, in the seventh Dastardlines, in ye eight Vndeuoutnes, in ye
ninth Heuinesse of heart, or hatred to serve God, in ye tenth Wearines of life,
in the eleventh Desperation, in ye twelfth, Vnstaiednes, in ye thirteenth
Vnconsta^cie, in ye xiiii. Murmuring, and in ye xv Vnpatience. And thus much of
ye vij. Towers built upon ye wall, and the dwellers in ye same. It remains now
to say somewhat of the standing of this Pallaice: which we intend to do in few
words.

THE SCITVATION OR STANDING of the Pallaice of worldly Felicity. The xi.
Chapter.
THis pallaice was situated or built in a pleasant valley, upon ye foot of a
high mountain, environed with hills on every side, whereby it was not only
defended from force of tempests, which way soever the winds blewe, but the
very hills themselves, were very sightly and serviceable. For on the one side
was a goodly vineyard, wherein grew grapes of sundry sorts: on ye other side it
yielded great quantity of grain: another side were proper woods, which yielded
great store of good timber and trees, wherein bred all manner of brave birds. On
another side were warre^s and conniborowes, full of hares and connies: in another
place also was a galla^t park, where was no want of Dear red or falow. Beyond
these hills were goodly forests, full of gentlemanly game for hunting. In ye
valley where ye Pallaice stood, was a marvelous fair green meddow, through ye
midst whereof ran a river of fine fresh water, upon ye brims whereof on both
sides al alo^g grew apple trees, pear trees, plum trees, Olive trees, elder
trees, Oak trees, elm trees, and such like. Fast by ye goodly bank also grew
many young hasil trees, full of nuts at ye time of ye year, and by ye again
such store of walnut trees, as pass to be spoken, besides many po^ds full of
fish, and excellent orchards of al kinds of fruit, and goodly garde^s also of
sweet flowers. The river was not with out great store of water fowls, and as for
ye wood, there bred in it hawks, herns, pelica^s, phesants, cranes, wodcocks,
bitters, kites, crows, cormerants, turtles, woodquists, eagles, to be short,
al kind of birds possible, as might be perceived by feathers, which fell from
the^ to ye ground, in pruning themselves. What should I speak of pigin houses,
and of secret banketting places fine and delicate? why it were but folly: beside
all this you must think yt there were tennis courts, and other places for pastime,
ye walls thereof were very high, insomuch yt it would have made one amazed and
dizzie to look down from ye top. There was also a marvelous mote and fearful
to behold, ye bridge whereof was not broad, and called Desperation, ye passage
over being a long narrow plank, so yt if one trod never so little awrie, he fell
in, with hazard never to be recovered? The stables were full of goodly horses, as
hobies, Ienets, bard horses, geldings, hacnies, mules, camils, and colts. The
ke^nels full of dogs, as grehou^ds, otterhou^ds, harehou^ds, spaniels for land
and water, mastiues for bull, bear and bore. We supt in a ba^ketting house,
and our supper excelled al ye fare yt ever I saw: lady Venus kept me company,
and I was dulled with ye su^ptuous service yt I had. All my delight was to
behold Lady Venus, who sat over against me, insomuch yt at last
Voluptuousness overcame me. Supper being ended, in came stage-plaiers,
daunsers, mascars, mummers, and many sports, which we use daily in feasting.
Now when I waxed weary, I took my leave of the company, with good night: and
then was I brought to the brauest chamber in all the Pallaice, Lady Venus and
her waighting maids tending upon me. But every one departed, after I was in
bed, saving only Venus the Goddess of Love, with whom I lay all night.

THE AVTHOR DECLARES HOW THE wandering Knight, and such like voluptuous livers
in the world, transgress the x. Commandments of Almighty God, under written.
The xij. Chapter.
SO long as the Knight continued in this pestilent Pallaice of worldly desire,
following his own fantasy, by vain Voluptuousnes enticed, he did no other
thing but play the fool, dance, leap, sing, eat, drink, hawke, hunt,
fish, foul, haunt whores, and such like, (as did the prodigal son) and led
a dissolute life, for the space of eleven days. Which signifies a marvelous
mystery, and unfortunate. For the number eleven, by the opinion of Christian
Doctors and Philosophers, is a wicked and unlucky number, for that the number
of x. signifies the x. Commandments of God: and the number xi. which is one
more, prophecieth and foretells the transgressing of them. Wherefore the
Knight having remained xi. days in that Pallaice, grievously transgressed the
will of God, letting loose the bridle to his lewd affections, without refraining
any of them. If you note well the premises, and see into the sequel, you shall
find, that such as live after the order of that Pallaice of worldly Felicity,
being given to follow the pomp and pride of the world, with the plesures and
voluptuousness of the same, and seem willing to lead that life without
purpose of change, nay rather, triumphing and reioicing therein: I say, and I
say truly, that such are transgressors of Gods Laws. Contrariwise, such as
account themselves here to be but Pilgrims, and fix their affection on the
other world, where royally reigns Jesus Christ, reputing this life an exile,
and desiring to be delivered out of it, to the end they may enter in at the
Pallaice of the heavenly King, shall enjoy the fullness and happiness thereof.

As this world yeeldes a great deal of temporal goods and transitory honor,
so does it also make an end of them Now those that have used these gifts to ye
glory of God, are Gods people. Contrariwise those that have used them
voluptuously, are vessels of the Devil, and transgressors of the laws of
God, as may appear by the x. Commandments, which I have set down for that
purpose. Wherein all worldlings may perceive, that by living voluptuously, they
grievously transgress Gods laws, to their own destruction. And as the x.
Commandments were written in two tables: even so are they divided into two
parts. The first comprehendes three, concerning the love of GOD. The second
seven touching the love of our neighbor. And therefore who so leads his life
worldling like, and fixes his felicity in Voluptuousness, is doubtless a
vessel of the Devil: and loves not God, nor his neighbor, because he
transgresses the law of God, which follows in due and convenient order.

I Am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods but me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the father upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, vi. days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do: but the vij. day is the Saboth of the Lord
thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son and thy
daughter, thy man servant thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the stranger that
is within thy gates: for in six days, the Lord made heaven and earth, the Sea
and all that therein is, and rested the vii. day, wherefore the Lord blessed ye
vii. day, and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

This is the law of God, by which you may perceive, that such as live in the
Pallaice of worldly Uoluptuousnesse, are transgressors of the same
Contrariwise, such as seek for heavenly Felicity* are Gods beloved, and they
shall have the possession thereof. Now harken what happened unto the Knight,
having lived xi. days in the Pallaice of vain and worldly felicity.

THE KNIGHT WENT FORTH TO RECREate himself, and viewed the warrens and
forests, which were about the Pallaice of worldly felicity: Anon, he saw it
sink suddenly into the earth, and perceived himself fast in the mire, up to
the saddle skirts. The xiij. Chapter.
AFter I had soiourned xi. days in the Pallaice, transgressing Gods
commandments, and leading a beastly life: I desired to ride into the forests
therabouts, not intending to give over voluptuous life, but for my pleasure,
because I was weary of making good cheer. For although worldlings delight to
eat, drink, dance, leap, sing, ride, run, and such like: yet
notwithstanding they cannot continue in this trade of life, without
entermingling it with some recreation. Wherefore they often leave by that
constraint, their pastimes, though they intend to return thereto again. They
do not utterly abandon the^, but break off for a season, to procure them
better appetite. I then being weary was willing to see the warrens and other
pleasures, which when my gouernesse Folly understood, she told the tale to Lady
Voluptuousness, and the consented to hunt or hawke with me, whereof I was
right glad. The^ I apparailed my self in hunters guise, taking in steed of my
helmet, a hat full of feathers, for mine armor, a horn: and I lept upon
Temeritie my horse. Voluptuousnes had a hobbie, Folly a Ienet, and the other
Ladies every one of them a Palfray. There came the huntsmen with greahounds and
mastiues, whooping hallowing and galloping altogether, some one way* some
another. The dogs were at a beck, up starts ye hare the cry was heavenly to
hear. But in the midst of al our pastime, I chanced to breath my horse, and
turning toward the Pallaice of worldly felicity, suddenly I saw it sink into
the earth, and every body therein. But what lamentable outcries they made, you
yt have reason, are to judge. Then did there rise amongst us a whirlwinde with an
earthquake, which set us al asu^der, insomuch yt I and my horse, sunk in mire
up to ye middle: only remained with me all this while, my mistres Folly. This
earthquake yielded such an air of brimstone, yt the like has not ben felt.
The^ I perceived yt I was far from ye pleasant pallaice, gardens, orchards, and
vineyards of Voluptuousnes, but rather in a beastly bog sticking fast: and
nothing near me, but serpents, snakes, adders, toads, and venomous worms.
Such was my perplexity in this case, that I fell in despair, being not able to
speak one word, I was so sore amassed.

But when I came again to my senses, revived from death to life, and found my
self in that beastly bog, I tare my hair, I rent my clothes, I wept, I waild,
I howld, I cride, I wrong my hands, I stroke my breast, I scratcht my face, I
bit mine arms, and spoke thus. O wretch, O Ass, O miserable soul, O caitiue,
O fondlyng. Where is now thy Pallaice of worldly felicity? Where are now thy
brave chambers hanged with cloth of Arisse? Where are now thy gallant Gardens,
thy Orchardes, thy Meddowes, thy Corne-fields, thy Cofers of coin, thy Ladies
of Love, thy Hawks, thy Hounds, thy Horses, thy Oxen, thy servant, thy soft
beds, thy good cheer, thy wines, thy Music, thy pleasures, and all the
things which thou have abused? Alas wicked wretch, how have thou been deceived?
Thou thoughtest thou had been in the Pallaice of true Felicity, and for
Felicity thou find Vanity. Thou have been wickedly inchaunted, thus to
find evil in steed of good. Here withal I turned my self toward Folly,
and railed at her, saying: O cursed, cruel, and deceiptfull beast, O monstrous
mocker of mankind: O filthy bawd: O venomous Uiper: Is this the good hap I
should have? Is this the place of felicity whether thou should bring me?

Cursed be the day that ever I saw thee, Cursed be the day that ever I heard
thee, Cursed be the day that ever I believed thee, Cursed be the day that
ever I followed thee. Is it even so, that thus thou gouernest, even beastly and
damnably? Is it even so, that thus thou leadest people, even to perdition?
Where is the felicity thou promisedst me? Where is the good hap I should have
by thee? It is chanced to me even as I doubted by ye way, when thou
discoursedst thy filthy feats, beginnings and proceedings: howbeit, thine
enchantments and thy flattery caused me to keep thee company, when full
feign God wot, I would have been rid of thee. But such was mine arrogant
ignorance, and ignorant arrogancy, that I followed thy dangerous counsel.

When I had thus scowlded and took on, the lewd lossell lowdly laughed me to
scorn. Whereat being in rage, I offered to draw my sword, but it would not
be: then I spurred my horse, but he would not lift up his legs.
Notwithstanding all this, I carried the mind still I might get out: not having
help, even by my own strength and industry. But be you sure of this, that
after a man is once sunk in sin, and drowned in fleshly voluptuousness, he
shall stick fast and not be able to recover himself, unless he have the help
of Gods grace, which he of his goodness give us all, Amen.

THE AUTHOR CRIES OVT BITTERLY against worldlings and their felicity. The
xiiij. Chapter.
O Wicked worldling, O traitor, O liar, O dampnable deceiuer, armed with
filthy frawd, and cursed craftiness, having a face like a man, but a tail
like a Dragon, who with thy pestilent prating, promisest that, which thou
neither wilt nor can perform: to wit, peace, rest, assurance, blessing, and
felicity. Whereas contrariwise, thou show thy self, vain, cruel, unquiet,
uncertain, cursed, and desperate. And because thou would bestow thy
poisons and not be perceived, thou couerest it over with a little honnie of
delight. O foolish worldlings, and lovers of Voluptuousness, why suffer you
your selves to be so fowlye abused? Why fly you not from her, since you know
she is dampnable? Why do you believe a liar? Why do you follow a deceiuer?
Why become you acquainted with such a murderer? Why do you not purge your
understandings of erroneous opinions? Why consider you not what the world is,
with a perfect judgment? If you did all this, you should find your selves out
of the way. For worldly goods, voluptuousness, and pleasure, are mingled
rather with sour things, then with sweet.

In following Voluptuousness, you are not happy, but unhappy: John. 1.
not wise, but flat fools. Saint John says. All that is in the world is
concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and concupiscence of
pride. The world and all her concupiscences shall pass: but he that does the
will of the Lord shall continue eternally. Harken you foolish worldlings,
harken you vessels of Voluptuousness. This teaches you assuredly wherein
consists all your Felicity, and how it is damnable. Consider S. John's
words, That the world shall pass, and the concupisce^ce of the same. What
meneth he by ye world, nothing else but as S. Austen says, All worldlings and
lovers of Voluptuousnes, which prefer visible things before invisible, ye flesh
before the spirit, Satan before Jesus Christ* even as commonly we call a house
good or bad, according to the usage of the^ yt dwell in it. The eye, the flesh,
and ye pomp of life, is the worldlings felicity, yt is their heaven. If all
goodness come of God (as most true it is) and that concupiscence of the eye, of
the flesh, and the pride or pomp of life comes of the devil, are not they
deceived yt thinks it good, or fix their affection to follow it? I could say,
there is a gnawing conscience to torment the worldlings. I could say yt the
voluptuous man has the wrath of God hanging over his head. I could say
eternal death is reserved for his reward. After excessive eating and drinking
comes surfets, agues, headache, loss of wit, dropsies, loss of appetite,
griping in ye guts, palsies, weakening of ye body, infamy, and shame. Now to
Venory, wherein ye voluptuous man takes such pleasure, as in nothing more.
First, what pains, what sorows, what torments and anguish, has the lewd lover,
before he can compass his desire? Their desire cannot be achieved without
loss. For we see that lechery and gluttony breeds poverty, which is a
very heavy burden. But I imagine it costeth nothing, as oftentimes it
chances, moving such as be rich: yet notwithstanding they feel even what
follows, namely, loss of body and soul. Touching the sin of lechery, a man
therein is like unto a beast. For in his blind delight he is deprived of
reason, and therefore ye deed declares it self to be damnable. This sin
brings her reward in this world, as dropsies, palsies, leprosies, gowtes,
burnings, botches, and French pox, which is ye very worst, the commonnest, ye
loathsomest, and the most infectious disease of al: besides yt, banishment from
al honest company, decay of strength, and loss of good name and fame. Do you
count him a happy man which spends his days in dro^kennesse and lechery,
having here so many hels. Abstinence or forbearance does not warn the^ to
take heed thereof, though it be their only medicine. Now touching concupiscence
of ye eyes, whereby covetousness and desire of riches is understood: First,
though gold and silver be but carth, what vexation has the covetous man to
atchiue it? He saileth over tempestuous seas, he climbeth over monstrous
mou^tains, he diggeth deep into ye bowels of the earth, he suffers hunger,
thirst, cold, heat, and a thousand mischiefs. One is drowned, another killed,
the third robbed, and he yt has obtained his purpose lives in fear to lose
it: the covetous man suspects every body. It is not cofers full of coin, yt can
make men happy. Our Savior terms it trash and thorns, because it pricks ye
heart, and corrupts both body and soul. S. Paul says, He that wishes wealth
in the world, falls into temptation. Is not Judas an example, who in a case
of covetousness hanged himself. Now to concupiscence of pride. He yt has
honor, authority, might, estimation, and dignity in the world, thinks he
is happy: but such are laden with unhappiness. For what pains, labor and
vexation endures ye ambitious man, before he can come to dignity, honor, and
authority? And when he has it with all these vexations, he is not sure how
long he shall enjoy it. We see oftentimes Fortune turns her wheel, and that
the ambitious end their lives with infamye. Take an example of Priamus king of
Troy, who flourished in friends and riches, honor and might, kindred and
children: did not he and his offspring, ye greatest part of them, die most
miserably: as for ye rest, they became seruitudes, and were at length killed in
Troy.

Croesus king of the Lydians, as rich and mighty as he was, after he had
reigned.xv. years, he was vanquished by king Cirus, lost his realm, was
carried away captive, and led all ye rest of his life like a slave.

Dionysius the cowardly king of Sicil, was hunted out of his realm, and became
so poor, that he kept a School in Corinthe, and by teaching little children,
he got his living, very poorly God wot, and beggarly.

Mithridates king of Pontus, a rich and mighty Prince, he subdued.xxii.
Nations, wherein (some say) all languages were spoken, yet he for all that,
after he had wearied the world with wars, was forsaken of his own people,
pursued by his own son, and overcome by subtlety: insomuch that he was glad
to desire a French man to kill him, who did so, and that was his end

Valerianus the great Emperor of Rome, even he that persecuted the Christians,
and did much mischief, was taken by his enemy the king of Persia, who against
the law of arms, made him lie down whiles he troad on his back to leap on
his horse.

Baiasethes, the fourth king of the Turks, was vanquished by Tamerlanes, a
Tartarian, and king of Scithia, who kept him in a cage like a beast, and with a
golden chain led him like a Spaniell throughout all the army: yea, he was
glad to feed under Tamerlanes table like a dog. And therefore let this be a
conclusion, that honor, authority and dignity, is no heritage.

Moreover, what labors, travails, vexations, and perils do Princes pass
through, even at this present, to maintain themselves in their estates? What
wars and slaughters have been committed, partly to get and partly to keep
rule and regiment? whereby you may perceive, that worldly felicity is full of
ficklenes. Ambitious worldlings cannot play with their pleasures, if they have
not first passed some of these vexations. In youth men run their race without
regard of conscience, but when age comes on, and nothing left for lust, when
white hairs, a walking staff or crutch, a pair of spectacles, Cotton put in
the ears: when none of these things can help him, then must he endeavor the
gnawing of conscience, which Voluptuousness kept hidden, a long time.
Whatsoever is pleasant to youth, the same is unpleasant to age. And what
comfort may an old man conceive, when he can think upon no time of his
youth, that was well spent and virtuously bestowed?

What discomfort is it, when conscience accuses the old man of his young years
wickedly wasted? But as the elect line in hope, so do the reprobate in
despair. He that follows Voluptuousness is Gods enemy. For Saint James
says, He that loves the world hates God. James. 4
You may well think that sin is hated of God, when he suffered his only
son to dye upon the Altar of the cross, for this end, that sin should
not be unpunished. And why was it, but because the sins of Adam increased,
as generations multiplied. The evil rich man that lived at his lust, was
tormented in hell, with fire and thirst, in whom the words of our Savior
Christ are verified, saying. Woe unto you that now laugh, for you shall lament
and weep. Luke. 6.
Go you foolish worldlings* therefore, and you vain voluptuous persons, vaunt
your selves happy in following your fleshlye appetites. When for such
pleasures you shall suffer torments, not in this world, but in the world to
come, you will sing a new note.

But now to our knight whom we left in the mire, and deep ditch of sin. I
refer you to the Psalms of David, and chiefly to the.36.68.72.143. and
there you shall find the truth, that worldly Felicity is no other thing,
then vanity, dreams, and mere abuses: and also that worldlinges are accursed
and unhappy. Wherefore I beseech you in the name of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to use the goods of the world, as Pilgrims use their lodgings,
and such fare as they find in their voyage: that is, not to set your heart upon
them, nor so to love them, yt nothing be left for the Lord. For as the knight
saw the Pallaice of worldly felicity sink sodeinly, with all her people, and
pomp: even so shall, it happen unto all voluptuous worldlings, at the dreadful
day of judgment, unless they return from their wicked wai^s, for sake sin,
embrace a new life, and serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness.

Wherefore let us bridle our affections, refrain our own peasures, repent
with true sorrow of heart, attend, wait, and hope for the mercy of God, by the
intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that he may make us happy
possessors of true and everlasting felicity, to whom be all honor and glory,
world without end.

Thus much for the first part of the wandering Knights voyage.
THE SECOND PART OF THE VOYage of the wandering Knight.
GODS GRACE DRAWS THE KNIGHT out of the filth of sin wherein he stuck
fast. The first Chapter.
I Have declared in ye first part of my voyage, how being governed by Folly, in
conte^ning virtue and following Voluptuousnes, I entered into ye pallaice of
false felicity, there resting my self for a certain season, and tra^gressing
all the commandments of God, in leading a dissolute and worldly life, thinking
that by living so I might be happy, whereas indeed I was unhappy. And why?
because yt in steed of felicity I found vanity. For as I thought to recreate my
self in hunting, I saw ye pallaice of Voluptuousness sink and come to utter
confusion, and my self also plu^ged into ye pit of sin, even up to ye saddle.
It is an easy matter for a man of himself to fall into hell, but it is
impossible for him to get out again, unless by ye help of Gods grace. I term
him to be in hell, who lives in continual wickedness, committing sin, with
delight. For if he die in ye estate, hell is his reward, but in his life if he
repent, there is hope of salvation. For by Gods grace he may be comforted and
delivered. Therefore man of himself falls into perdition, but without Gods grace
he cannot rise up again. God therefore seeing his creature given to all
vanity, lead with ambition of worldly honor, and not ceasing his sinful life,
oftentimes sends adversity, diseases, dishonors, and confusion in ye world, to
make him humble, and to open ye eyes of reason, which Voluptuousnes had shut up,
whereby he may come to ye knowledge of his sins, and confess ye same to God.
All this is figured in ye Gospel, where our Lord Jesus raised ye widows child,
which was carried out of ye city of Naim, to be buried: he commanded ye
bearers to stay, and having touched the Cofin of ye corpse, with a loud voice he
said, Young man arise, and straight way the dead body rose up and spoke: Which
done, ye Lord delivered him to his sorrowful mother. This mourning mother
mystically represents ye Church, lamenting for her dead children, to wit,
wicked worldlings and voluptuous christians, which are worse the^ dead corses.
The widows child represents souls dead in sin. The Cofin represents ye
natural body, wherein lies the sinful soul. The four bearers which carry
the dead soul to hell, represent hope of long life, custom of sinning,
delaieng of repentance, and contempt of Gods word. Nevertheless, when our Lord
will raise to life this dead soul, he commands ye bearers to stay,
afterward touches ye body, sending upon sinners adversity, diseases, and
misfortunes. But all yt suffice not, unless ye Lord say unto ye soul, Soul I
say unto thee, Arise. Do not we see oftentimes, people visited with
afflictions, murmr against God, cursing him yt has afflicted them? These by
impatie^cie being unable to arise of themselves, is it not necessary, that God
say to the soul, Arise, there is no difference between his saying and doing.
For what he says, he does. And therefore if the Lord say once, Arise to the
soul, she rises, and then he diliuereth her to her mother the Church, which
was sorrowful for her sins. In like manner God to raise me from my sins,
sends me adversity, to ye end I should acknowledge mine iniquity, and with
humility turn unto him, which I cannot do without his heavenly grace, much
less atchiue true felicity and blessedness, unless he help. Then was I
warned by the scourges of God, that living worldling like, and following
Voluptuousness I was not happy, but unhappy, being full of filthiness and
infection, tumbling in the mire of all iniquity, from the which I could not
withdraw my self, for that the eyes of reason were closed up by
Voluptuousness, which afterward were opened by Gods grace. To see the pitious
estate wherein I was, and the understanding which Folly had darkened, made me the
wofullest wretch in the world: nevertheless, when I was whipped with adversity,
I perceived my knowledge somewhat cleared and lightened, so yt I found in
conscience that I had not accustomed my self greatly to honest things. And
when I saw the sequel, that there was no retiring of my self without Gods
grace, I lifted my eyes to heaven, and wringing my hands all ashamed and
confounded, I lamented with a loud voice and humbling my self before the face
of my God, whom I had grievously offended, I made my moan, saying.

O Lord God Father and maker of all things, I am not worthy to lift up mine
eyes toward thee, nor to ask pardon for the infinite sins, wherein I
confess my self guilty. Nevertheless O God of all goodness and father of
mercy, I beseech thee not to punish me in thy great rage, nor to condemn me
among the reprobate: I acknowledge my evil, and crave pardon for my misdeeds,
my former life displeases me greatly, and my heart quaketh for fear of thy
judgments. O God forsake not thy creature which is a sinner, but aid and
assist me with thy heavenly grace, whereof if I may taste the virtue, I shall need
none other succor: O grant this for the glory of thy great name, and in thy
name, for the love of thy dear son Jesus Christ, who with thee and the holy
Ghost be all honor and power for ever and ever, Amen.

As I was thus praieng with a willing mind, shedding tears, striking my
breast, conceiving grief and sorrow for my sins, sodeinly I saw a Lady
descending from heaven down, setting her self before me fast by the bog, where
I stuck fast. This lady was of a marvelous majesty, and wonderful courteous:
she appeared to me in a garment of white Satin, a cloak of blew damask,
imbrodered with gold and pearls. Her face shined like the Sun, so yt with much
a do I did behold her, I was much amazed at such a sodein vision, and knew not
at the first what she was, yet I took heart a grace, supposing some help sent
me from heaven, to draw me out of the bog wherein I lay. In the end with all
reverence I made my petition unto her, saying: O good and gracious Lady,
whatsoever thou be, I most humbly beseech thee if thou can, that it would
please thee to help me out of this beastly bog of filthy infection. For nothing
is near me but venomous serpents and noisome vermin. In the name of God
therefore I crave thy help. To ye which my request she answered: O fool and
abused beast, thou see now what reward Voluptuousnes yields thee for
following her. If thou had believed my daughter, thou had not been in this
misery.

Then I asked her who was that daughter of hirs, she answered saying, the
sweet Gentlewoman that admonished thee a xi. days past, to leave
Voluptuousnes, and to follow her: whom because thou beleeuedst not, but
neglectedst her counsel, thou lie in this unhappiness. By this speech of
hirs, I knew she was Gods grace, and the mother of Virtue. Then fell I on my
knees, and weeping, thus I said: O dear Lady my cursed counselor Folly drew
me from thy daughter, and I most unhappy wretch believed her: which deed of
mine grieves me greatly, and now I cry thee mercy, most humbly desiring thee
of thy clemency, to deliver me out of this filthy infectio^, and I promise
and vow unto thee (henceforth) to follow thee. For although I deserve damnation
for my misdeeds, yet thou being by nature merciful, wilt spare me. Gods grace
hearing this my lamentation, of her benignity stretched forth a golden rod,
and commanded me to lay my hands upon it: which when I did, I rise from my
saddle, and so was set out of the bog, where I left Temeritie my horse, and
Folly my gouernesse, to fish for frogs. Thus you see that Gods grace draws us
from sin, and iustifies us freely, without any merit of ours: howbeit not
without an inward heart-griefe and sorrow for sin, which is a special gift
of Gods grace, and no work of man's corrupt nature.

GODS GRACE SHEVVEH HELL UNTO THE Knight, with all the voluptuous company,
that he saw in thee. Pallaice of Worldly Felicity. The second Chapter.
WHen I was out of the bog, humbly on my knees I gave thanks to Gods grace,
for her goodness, being assured, that he to whom God does good, is not worthy
thereof, if he be not thankful. Then Gods grace, marched before me, saying
that I should follow her, yt which I did. For doubtless our free will guides
not Gods grace, but Gods grace guides our free will. Then I followed her all
to be dagled, until we came where I had seen the Pallaice of worldly
felicity in greatest glory, turned into a deep dungeon of darkness, boiling
with consuming fire, from whence came a vilde vapor and stinking smoke of
burning brimstone, over the which we must pass by a little long planke, whereat
I was so afeard, that the hairs of my head st(...) an end. Then with
sorrowful sighs I beseeched Gods grace to tell me, what was ye sight which we
saw. (quod she) This is ye place of thy voluptuous pallaice, with all thy
alyes, amongst whom thou wast maintained. Mark well, if I had not been thy
help, and showed thee mercy, thou had been plagued with them. Think with
thy self, if the place be pleasant or no. Thou see how the Devil handles
those that be here with torments. This is the great King Lucifer, whom thou
supposedst to have seen, accompanied with so many Nobles and Peers in the
pallaice of counterfaite felicity. These be they that frye in the furnaice,
here is the reward of such as serve him.

Then we saw a great bed of iron, red hot, wherein lay a naked woman, whom a
great Dragon embraced, plaieng with his tail between her legs, with two ugly
Serpents winding about her thighs, and eating her privy members. This
miserable woman lamenting, cried alowd, with terrible noise. This (quod Gods
grace) is the brave bed wherein thou laist, and this woman is the Goddess of
love, which kept thee company. Would thou be glad now to serve her? To the
which I said, no. Thou see quod she, this is the end of all voluptuous livers
and wicked worldlings. Ask them now where their goods be, their pleasures, and
their voluptuousnes? Alas Lady (quod I) for fear I dare not. Then with a loud
voice she began, perticularly asking the question, and saying: O cursed
outcasts of God, and wretched worldlings, where are now your fair chambers
hanged with silk tapestrie, your soft beds, your great riches, your costly
cubbards of plate, your pearls and precious stones, your money, your goodly
gardens, your dogs of all sorts, your birds, your horses, your brave apparel,
your delicate wines, your change of meats, your sweet waters, your pages and
servant: your Cooks and Butlers, your Ladies of the lake, and such like? O
vnhappie-people, ye chance is well changed. In steed of your gluttony you
suffer hunger, in steed of your drunkenness you suffer thirst, for your sweet
swellings, you suffer sower savors, in steed of your lecherous lovers, you
are accompanied with tormenting devils, and for your former pastimes, you
endure terrible punishments. When Gods grace had thus spoken, that cursed
company cried alowde: Woe be to the hour that ever we were borne: the Justice
of God, O the heavy Justice of God, has deseruedlye punished us.

This being past, Gods grace told me, that we must over that way,
notwithstanding the planke was narrow and long. Then I, though I were afeard,
followed her, she going before me for my safety. But I had not gone three
steps, but I saw Cerberus the Dog of hell with his three heads, yelping and
gaping to devour me: at which sight all amassed, my feet slipped, and straight
he had me by the heels to tear me. Then I cried to Gods grace for help, who
looking back, espied me in danger: and hearing me cry, Succor, succor, she
took me up, and in a moment delivered me out of yt dungeon. Then I remembered
what David said: Si diceba^, Motus est pes meus, misericordia tua Domine
adiuuabit me: When I said, My feet slipped, thy mercy O Lord did help me up.
Now when Gods grace carried me in her arms, I fered my filthiness would hurt her
rich array: but I found it contrary. For her precious apparaile was nothing
spotted, and mine being foul, became fair, which made me much to marvel.
Then said Gods grace, My son like as the Sun shines into the Diars dye-fat,
and yet retourneth forth unspotted: even so do I, without blotting my self,
enter into thy sinful soul, and in a moment do make it clean.

Then over the monstrous mountains and ragged Rocks away we walked, till we
came to a cross way, where Virtue wished me to follow her, whose saiengs when I
called to mind, it made me weep bitterly for my sins and follies past. But
when Gods grace perceived me to be weary, and anoyed with the smells that I
found in the loathsome lake, for pity she took me in her arms, and at the
last she showed me the school of Repentance,, whether I must go, before I
could enter into true Felicity.

THE KNIGHT DECLARES HOW HE Entered into the School of Repentance, and of
his enterteinment there. The third Chapter.
WHen we approached to the School of Repentance, which was built upon a high
Hill environed with a Moate named Hun(...): Gods grace called, and out came
Lady Repentance in plain apparel, having next her naked skin a smock of
hair cloth, and upon the same a gown of sackcloth, girded together with a
great leather girdle, and a kercher of course canuasse upon her head. With her
also came two waiting maids, named Sorrow for sin, and Confession of sin,
both apparailed like their Lady: the first seemed very sorrowful and sad,
and the second was bashful and shamefast, and hung down her head. Then Gods
grace spoke to Repentance, and presenting me unto her, said: Here is a
Knight which I have brought to thy School, that he might forget the evil
which he has learned abroad, and to be instructed in the good, which he never
yet knew. And being received into the school of Repentance, I learned to live
well, and forgot all the evil which I was taught in times past. And whereas
before I learned to leap, dance, eat, drink, play, haunt whores, and to do
all villainy and mischief, now I learned a new lesson, namely: to kneel, to
mourn, to fast, to pray, and to live well: flat contrary to all that I used in
the Pallaice of worldly felicity. Then Repentance said to Gods grace, that my
hatte full of feathers, and all things else about me, must be put off, and cast
away. Then at the commandment of Gods grace, Repentance began to take off
these toys, and first she hurled my hat of hautinesse into the dungeon, then
off went my girdle of intemperance, whereunto was tied my sword of rebellion,
which being broken in pieces, with my coat of vaineglory, my hosen of lewd
delight, and my dublet of ill desires, all were thrown into the lake, and
there remained only with me my shirt of lasciviousness, the which also she
would have plucked over mine ears: but I entreated her earnestly not to leave me
naked. So I was for a while excused, but not altogether: for said Repentance,
except thou cast of all the apparel of the old man, thou can not come to my
School. Then Repentance said unto me: Son, thou must enter in at this
straight hole, whereout I came. But when I complained and said, that it was
impossible, because my head would not in, she said there was no other way nor
entrance into her school. Then I called to mind what our Lord said in the
Gospel of Matthew, The way is straight, which leads to everlasting life, and
very few walk that way. Mat. 7.


Now as I stood wondering at the narrow hole, I saw an old Serpent enter in,
who for lack of room, left his skin behind him, and presently returned
all renewed, and young. Whereat as I meruailed, Gods grace told me, saying,
Thus thou must do: for in entering the School of Repentance, thou must leave
thy old skin behind thee, and afterward thou shall return a new man. This
is it which ye Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 4.
saying: Put off the old man according to the first co^uersatio^, corrupted
with ill thoughts, and put on the new man, which is to be created according to
God, in justice and holiness of truth. The old man is the affection of sin,
and the former evil life, which is left behind in the school of
Repentance, and the new man is the good life, which is newly begun in holiness
and truth. As Gods grace was thus teaching me, I saw an old Eagle, heavy eied
and thick fethered, fluttring aloft. This Eagle falling down, diued three
times into a fair fountain therabouts, and presently returned young and
lusty, which miracle made me marvel more then yt of the Serpent. Then said
Gods grace, Like as this Eagle is returned from the fountain of water, young
and lusty: even so shall thou after thou art come to Christ with sorrow for
thy sin, and confession of the same, which if thou do, thou shall receive
thy first innocence, which I gave thee in thy Baptism.

Then Gods grace entered into the School of Repentance before me, saying: I
will draw thee in, for it is none but I that shows sinners the way to
Repentance. With yt she plucked me in, and forthwith I became an enemy to
sin. Now therefore let no man glorify himself, seeing it is Gods grace that
goes before man's will, and that by it man is made good. Then I entering in
after, and being a little way in, the passage waxed wider, Gods grace plucking
me in by the head, and Repentance thrusting at my feet. So then in passing in
at the narrow place, I left lasciuiousnes my shirt behind me, torn in pieces,
which she hurled into the dungeon, and all my body was scratched. This does
Repentance prepare her scholar, for if any by mouth does confess his former
sins, not having inward sorrow and hart-griefe for offending God, and good
intent and full purpose to amend his life, he is greatly abused. For thinking
to have Gods blessing, he shall be sure of curssing.

But to my purpose, Repentance put on my naked body, such apparel as she her
self did wear, which when I saw, I thought upon the Apostles, not that I
thought my self as good as they, but hoping to come (by Gods grace) to the
place where they are, I was well content to do as they did.

HOW TRVE REPENTAVNCE BEgins in us, and how the Knights conscience accused
him: with the pains he had deserved. The fourth Chapter.
IT is true that Repentance (as it ought) cannot be done without special
grace from GOD. For the heart of sinful men cannot change their disordinate
life, nor turn from their offenses, nor prepare themselves to GOD, without the
singular operation of Gods grace.

The Doctors dispute daily, whether true Repentance takes her beginning at
love or at fear. Repentance comes by love and fear.
This question cannot be decided in few words: but to be short, I say it may
begin at both. For true Repentance being a work of God, he may begin it
as he list. But when it comes from love, it is not ordinary or common, but
marvelous. Look upon the conversion of Saint Paul, of S. Matthew, and the
Thief.

But ordinarily ^o GOD begins Repentance in us by fear, as in the third
Book of the Kings, Act. 9. Luc. 23. 3. King. 19
when he commanded Helias to come out of his cave to remain in the Mount
before the Lord, and a mighty strong wind passed by, that rent the high hills
and ragged Rocks before the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind. After
that came an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake.

After that came a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire. After that came a
soft sound, wherein the Lord was.

In such sort God sendes to sinners, a wind of terror, to break the mighty
Mountain of pride, and the heart more hard then the rock. After that comes
the troubling of the soul, after that comes the conscience, grudging the heart
of the sinner, and accusing him of his evil life: but yet the Lord is not
there with his quickening Grace. Nevertheless these be forerunners to prepare
the way of the Lord. For when the perverse will of man is mortified by servile
fear, and led almost to hell, after comes the sweet sound of Gods grace,
which reuiueth the soul, saying: Lazarus come forth. This is the voice that
gives consolation, at the hearing whereof we may be bold to depart in peace,
with assurance of remission of our sins. But it seems that Repentance began
first (in the Knight) at love, and that miraculously: for he being in the filth
of his sin, suddenly by Gods providence confessed his folly, and loathing his
lewd life, he required help and succor of Gods grace, who presently assisted
him and brought him out of the sink of sin. But this manner of conversion is
not ordinarily used.

There are indeed certain forerunners to the justifying of sinners, which
prepare the way to Gods reviving or quickening grace, and offers unto God a
renewed spirit, and a pure and upright heart: which manner of conversion, godly
people only do use. And hereof means the Knight to speak, purposing also
to show how it digresseth from Gods grace. When Repentance had thus apparailed
me, with hair and sackcloth, I was set upon a stool, and then Gods grace
appeared unto me, with two women, and one man which was a preacher. Now one of
the women held in her right hand a sharp pricking iron rod, called the gnawing
of ye conscience) and in her left hand she had a red book, whereat I was
afraid. For as she beheld me, my thought she threatened me. The other woman
was courteous mild and gentle, holding in her right hand a book of gold,
covered with pearls, and she was called Remembrance.

Gods grace placed Conscience on my left hand, and Remembrance on my right
hand, the Preacher, Repentance, and her Damselles about me, and then commanded
Conscience to open the red book, which when I perceived and saw the words
written with blood, declaring all my offenses, with torments unto them
belonging, for my following of Folly, I was amazed and became speachlesse. Then
Conscience with her iron rod touched me, pricked me, yea, pierced my heart, and
cried aloud unto me, saying: Behold thou wretch, view this book, and thou
shall see how thou have lived, even against God, and contrary to right and
reason. Thou have been a proud, arrogant, ambitious, spiteful at others
prosperity, a prolonger of time, wrathful, a backbiter, injurious,
traitorous, hateful, covetous of gold, more then of God, gluttonous, wanton,
shameless, a stews haunter, given to all vices, and have transgressed all the
commandments of God, leading a loathsome life, denieng God, swearing and
blaspheming his name, an heinous offender, a false witness bearer, a liar, a
desirer of other men's goods, disobedient to parents, cursing them and wishing
their death. Furthermore, thou have had neither faith nor hope in God, but
rather in the force, riches, honor, and friendship of thy kindred, with their
authority. I cannot reckon up the rest of thy sins, for they are
vncountable. Uerie little care have thou had of Christ's merits, or of thy own
souls health, but always yielding to Voluptuousness, filthiness, and iniquity.

When Conscience had thus accused me, sorrow for sin fell bitterly a weeping,
and oftentimes stroke her breast. Then Conscience showed me what torments I had
deserved, for following voluptuous affections, and for loving them better then
God. Thou ought said she, to burn in hell fire that never quenches, and to
be nipped with torments both of body and soul, for ever more. Thy laughinges
shall be turned to weeping, thy joy to sorrow, thy songs to cries, yea, what
pains can be named, but thou art like perpetually to suffer the^, without hope
of redemption? For this is the due reward of worldly Felicity, and following
Folly. Bethink thee now, and tell me if it be in thy power to rid thee from
these greeuaunces? Hearing my conscience thus speak, my thought I saw hell
open to swallowe me up, and with sorrowful sadness I fell to the ground,
before Gods grace, speachlesse: but she had compassion upon me, and bad me
rise, the which I did, though half in despair, and to recomfort me, she
opned the book which Remembrance held in her hand.

BY COMMAVNDEMENT OF GODS GRACE, Remembrance read to me the goodness of God,
with his promises made to repentaunt sinners. The fifth Chapter.
AFter Remembrance had opened her book, I perceived the letters were of gold
and Azure, containing the great, goodness and infinite mercy of God, to
repentaunt sinners, with fair promises annexed thereunto* Then at commandment
of Gods grace, Remembrance read out of that book unto me in this manner. S.
Paul writing to the Romans, says, Where sin has abounded, grace has
more abounded. He that mistrusteth the mercy of God, mistrusteth God to be
merciful, and in so doing, he does God great injury. For he denies God to
be Love, Truth, and Power, wherein consists all the hope of poor sinners.
For of his great love, he sent his only son to take man's nature upon him in
the world, that in the same he might suffer death upon the Cross, for the
remission of sins. Consequently he promised for the love of his son,
remission and pardon to all poor sinners, so often as they require it in
faith, with a heavy and sorrowful heart. Now God is as true of his promises,
as he is of power able to perform the^. And as he is of power, so will he do
whatsoever pleases him. God will pardon sinners their sins? Who then can let
him from doing it? To whom God pleases, or has promised to pardon their
sins, he forgiueth. The truth hereof is written in plain words, and showed
by examples in many places of the holy Scripture, as well in ye old testament
as ye new. First Esaias says, It is I my self, Esaias. 45.
It is I my self that does blotte out thine iniquities for mine own love
sake, and I will not have thy sins in remembrance, For the love of me (says
he) and not for the love of thee, meaning my goodness and mercy, and not for
the love of thy merits. As if he said to all sinners in this sort, If thou
think yt I pardon thy sins for thy merits sake, thou art deceived and
wallowest in despair: no no, but for my mercy and infinite goodness I remit and
forgive. Thou have no cause to despair, for ye least part of my mercy
exceeds all thy sins. In an other place he says by the same Prophet. Turn
your selves unto me all the earth, and you shall be saved, for I am God, and
there is none other besides me. What is the meaning of these words, I am God,
any thing else but that God is good and merciful? If it be impossible but he
should be God, it is impossible but he should be good and merciful.

The same Prophet, speaks unto every one of us, saying, Let the Infidel
leave his way, Esaias. 35*
and the unjust man his thoughts, let them turn to the Lord, and he will have
pity upon him, for he is ready to forgive. By his Prophet Jeremy, he says to
the people of Israel, that he was wroth for their Idolatry, and many other
sins: nevertheless he said. Turn Israel thou Rebel, unto me thy Lord, and
I will not turn my face from thee, or as the Hebrew text says, I will not lay
mine ire upon thee, for I am (says the Lord) holy and gentle, and keep not
mine anger forever. By the Prophet Ezechiel he sath, If the evil man repent
him of his sins, Ezechi. 18
and keep my commaundemants, doing righteously, he shall live and not dye,
neither will I have his former offenses any more in remembrance. Do you
think (says the LORD) that I delight in the death of a sinner, nay rather
that he should turn from his wickedness and live. Repent you then and you
shall live. The Prophet David said, That from morning till night Israel hoped
in the Lord. What does this signify, but that the faithful from their
nativity and birth, until their very death, have hope in the Lord.

There is mercy in the Lord, and great redemption attends upon him. Joel. 2.
In Joel it is written, Turn your selves unto the Lord, with all your heart,
in fasting, praieng, weeping, sorrow, tearing your hearts and not your
garments, so shall you be turned unto the Lord your God, for he is full of
clemency, mercy, and great grace, slow to ire, and ready to forgive: or (as
the Hebrewe text says) such a one as repents him of evil: that is to say, is
loath to execute the punishment upon sinners, which he has denounced and
threatened. Micheas the Prophet says. What God is there like unto thee,
Micheas. 7
which take away iniquities, and forgiuest sins, for the rest of thine
heritage sake. He keeps not his ire for ever, but of his compassion and mercy
will have pity upon us. He will put out our iniquities, and throw all our sins
into the bottom of the sea. What sinner is there, that hearing these words,
has so heavy a heart as to despair, seeing that God is more ready to
forgive, then the sinner to ask forgiveness?

Now let us come to the new Testament, to try if there be not testimonies to
the same effect. The son of God which is the infallyble truth, John 3.
spoke this to Nicodemus. God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten son, to the end that whosoever believed in him should be saved,
and not perish, but have everlasting life. God sent not his son into the
world to condemn the world, but to the end the world should be saved by him.
To the Scribes and Pharesies which murmured because he did eat and drink among
Publicans and sinners. Christ said, Those that be whole need not the
Physician, but such as be sick. Again, I came not (says the Lord) to call
the just, but sinners to repentance. Not as a Judge, but as a Physician. For
such as languish in their sins, came I into the world, not that they should
remain sinners, but to turn them from their sins, that being penitent,
they might be made righteous. Likewise he told the Pharesies, Luke. 15.
That the Angels in heaven do more rejoice in one penitent sinner, then
in.99. just persons which needs no repentance. God (says Saint Paul) spared
not his only son for us, Romans ^.
but that he should rather die, then we be unpardoned.

If God spared not his only son to dye for sinners, what thing is more
worthy and precious unto him, that he should refuse them. And therefore the
same Apostle speaking of Jesus Christ says thus, We have not an high priest
which cannot have compassion of our infirmities, Heb 4.
but such a one as in all points was tempted as well as we, sin excepted, Let
us go then boldly to the seat of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find
grace, in time convenient. If I should rehearse all the places of the Scripture,
to this effect, the time would fail me. Thus we see the^ none has cause to
distrust ye goodness of God, or to despair of the greatness of his sins,
seeing that God has made so many fair promises to pardon the penitent sinner,
Chron. 33.
there be many examples in the old and new testament, of the performance of
Gods promises, as namely to David, who committed both adultrie and murder, he,
even he, by sorrowing for his offenses, and crieng Peccaui, obtained mercy, and
pardon of all his wickedness.

Manasses the son of Ezechias restored the false worship of God, which his
father had defaced, and of an evil zeal to infidelity, he himself offered
up his own children in fire for sacrifice. He persecuted the Prophets, and slew
innumerable innocents: amongst all which he caused the Prophet Esaias to be sawne
in pieces. In the end he was taken by the enemies, and lead captive to Babylon.
But when he was in his extremity, he acknowledged his offenses, and asked
forgiveness of God, of whom he was received into favor, and restored to his
kingdom again. The people of Niniue whom God threatened by ye Prophet Jonas,
utterly to destroy for ye multitude for their sins, they repented and praid:
and so God forgave them. The Samaritane also and the Cananite, Luke 7
notwithstanding their horrible sins, when they asked God mercy, he forgave
them. Matthew, Zachee, and diverse other publicans, John. 4.
upon their repentance were received into favor. Peter yt denied his Master
three times, and gave himself to the devil if he knew him, when he wept
bitterly for his sins, he was received into mercy. The thief also upon the
cross, being at point of death, eue^ this fellow, who lived upon nothing but
robbery, and manslaughter all his life time, acknowledged his heinous sins,
asking pardon, and God forgave him: yea, he obtained more then he required. For
Christ said unto him, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. This is Gods
property, even to give of his liberality more then men do or can ask. S.
Paul was a blasphemer and a persecutor of Gods church, Act. 9. Tim. 1.
and yet he received mercy. God has set down such persons as examples for
sinners, to ye end they should not doubt of his mercy: and to teach them yt he
does not pardon offenses for ye merits of ye sinners, which are stark naught,
even when they are best, but for his mercies sake which is above all his works.
For so to imagine of men's merits is destruction: if any thing be ascribed unto
merits, then for ye merits of his son Jesus Christ, and for his bitter passion
sake. Let this be the conclusion, that albeit ye sinner has committed as many
sins as there be drops of water in the sea, or sands on the sea shore: yet he
has no cause to despair. For though they be never so monstrous and manifold:
yet the mercy of God does infinitely exceed them. For his mercy consumes them
sooner then the fierce fire does burn up the dry Toe. Psalm. 93.


When I heard lady Remembrance read these words, I took heart at grass, and
recited a place written in ye Psalms of David, According to the multitude of
the griefs and sorrows of my heart, Psalm. 93.
thy consolations have refreshed my soul. And then falling on my knees,
holding up my hands, with sorrowful countenance, and confidence of heart,
resting wholly upon the mercies and promises of God, and the merits of our Lord
and savior Jesus Christ. I most humbly desired pardon for my sins, at the
hands of Gods grace. Upon which unfeigned confession of mine offenses and heart
grief, handmaids of perfect Repentance, and forerunners to the purpose. I
received by the means of Gods grace, the benefit of the death and passion of
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost
be all honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

A SERMON WHICH UNDERSTANDING THE good Hermit made unto the knight, upon the
History of Marie Magdalene. The sixth Chapter.
IN the name of ye father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen. The great
goodness and unspeakable mercy which has been used in all ages and times, of our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ toward all poor sinners, are in many places of
the Gospel made manifest, and clearly notified: but chiefly in ye vii. of Luke.
Wherein mention is made of a sinful woman, lewd of life, and ill of name,
contemned, despised, and abhorred of men, whom sweet Jesus, did not only
receive to favor, but also by inward and secret inspiration drew her to
repentance, how and in what sort, hear and understand. The Gospel says, yt
there was a Pharesie furnished with false faith, and misled with a vain opinion
of holiness: he was a great doctor of law, and a renowned Iusticiarie,
howbeit weak in faith, and yet very high minded. When our savior had one day
preached and instructed the people by his divine and holy doctrine, exhorting
poor sinners to turn to God by repentance, and uttering many parables and
similitudes: as the prodigal child, the lost sheep, and such like, what else
does he declare and signify, but yt he is inclined to compassion, ready to
have mercy, and to receive into favor all repentant sinners. The proud
Pharesie prayed him to come into his house and to dine with him. The good Lord
which had taken upon him man's nature, and was borne for ye salvation of all,
denied not this proud fellows request, neither refused to enter into his house,
although he was ambitious, but down at ye table sat ye son of God, made man,
for ye salvation of men. He was conversant among men, he did eat and drink
with men, he offered himself a helper to every one, showing unto al his
goodness, without exception of any. Now he being set at ye table, there came one
unto him in shape like a woman, but in courage a man, who by the brute of the
whole City, was counted a great sinner, and very il reported of ye world, and
such a one indeed as every body mocked and pointed at with their fingers. But
yet in the sight of God she was in great honor, not because she was an heinous
sinner, but because she was predestined and elected of God from ye beginning,
to reign with him in his heavenly kingdom.

This woman hearing by report, the renown of our redeemer, and that he showed
himself sweet and bountiful to all sinners, defending them against the
malicious slanders and mocks of the proud and arrogant Pharesies, and
promising to every one that believed in him the kingdom of heaven: this woman
was inspired both outwardly and inwardly by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
to see and hear him preach. The^ did she by outward speech express, how she
was inwardly affected and moved in mind, and seeing her soul sore sick and
diseased, her heart full of iniquity and sin, her conscience defiled with
all kind of vice, her self frustrate and void of all hope of health, and
devising how to recover this malady, adressed her self to seek him, who is
the only Surgeon of all sick souls: she sought for grace at the Well of
mercy, and though she was a shameful sinner, yet she was received of him
which came into the world to save sinners. She came not pompeously araied, nor
yet came with a train, she came alone, and not empty handed: For she brought
with her a box full of most precious ointment, of a sweet smell, representing
the Faith, Hope, and Charity, lodged in her heart.

What could this be but the sweet smell of virtue? For what represented the
box of Alabaster stone, but holy faith founded upon the true cornerd stone,
Jesus Christ, wherein is conserved all virtues, and without which it is
impossible to please God. Came she alone, being accompanied with Faith, Hope, and
Charity, Humility and Repe^ta^ce. She entered ye house uncalled, where was her
physician, and putting a part al shame, which leads to perdition, together
with the mockes of the proud Pharesies, which sat at the table, she craved
comfort and health for her sick soul, acknowledging her grief, and yt being
certain he to whom she came, had power to help her. Unto this physician she
could not have come without faith, she was not so bold and hardy as to look Jesus
in ye face, but fell at his feet upon her knees, lamentably: weeping and with
the floude of her tears washing his feet, and wiping and drieng them with her
hairie looks. Then she kissed them, and with her precious ointment, she
anointed them.

All this while her voice was not heard, but her heart spoke unto the true
Son of God, saying: I have no need to declare with my tongue my inward
griefs, or to express the cause of my coming hither, seeing thou know ye
secrets of the heart. Unto thee I come, O Christ, for remission of my sins,
offering to thee my sorrowful heart for sacrifice. Surely this woman's working,
well waied, gives evidence; that she was right heartely sorry, for her
offenses. For her Crystal eyes, and her fair face, which was wont to be
painted with costly colors for the adourning of her beauty, to allure
licentious lovers, and so like voluptuous worldlings, is now turned into
tears. Her body which before time was given to delights, is now afflicted with
fasting: her laughing, is turned to weeping: and as her first life, was wholly
bent to please the world, so now it is more vehemently and earnestly disposed
to please God.

With her fair flaxen hair which she was wont to keep daintely, she has
dried our Saviors feet: her sweet lips, wherewith she used to kiss her
lovers, have kissed his feet: her odoriferous ointment, wherewith she
beautified her face, in wantonness, has anointed our Saviors feet. Now all
this was a sure sign of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and thus you see how we
ought to repent. Surely, we should do according to S. Paul's doctrine, yt Every
member, which has consented to commit iniquity, should be offered unto the
Lord, Romans 6.
as instruments of righteousness to receive sanctification. As for example, to
make the matter more manifest. Have thou been a dronkard? Become now sober.
Have thou ben a glutton? Now fast. Have thou been proud? Be now humble. Have
thou been covetous? Now give alms. Have thou ben wrathful? Be now gentle.
Have thou been envious? Be now charitable. Have thou been traitorous? Be now
faithful. Have thou been lecherous? Be now chaste. Have thou been blasphemous?
Be now fearful to speak any thing but truth. And so consequently to every
vilde vice, lay a meet medicine, which may serve for thy sickness, and expel
the poison of sin.

But now let us see, what may be thought and judged of this Pharesie, who so
sawcely besought our Lord and Savior to come into his house. Surely he seemed
as he was, a vainglorious Hypocrite. For when he saw the woeful woman fallen at
the feet of our Savior, with her tears washing them, with her hair wiping
them, with her mouth kissing them, and with her precious ointment anointing
them, he blamed not only her, in his heart: but also our Lord for suffering
her. Then ye Lord took the sick woman, healed her of her sickness, in ye
presence of this proud Pharesie, and with held physic from him, whose heart was
wounded to ye death, with the dart of vainglory. Then he showed himself
frantic, and as one that had lost his understanding, not knowing his grief,
nor what medicine would do him good. But what said he in his foolish heart? If
this man (quod he) were a Prophet, he would know quickly what woman this is
that touched him, for she is a great sinner.

This Pharesie is of the race of the vainglorious, of whom the Prophet Esaias
speaks in their person, saying: Come not near me, for I am clean: or as
another translation says. Get thee hence, Esa. 61.
meddle not with me, for I am holier then thou. Even so surely it is not
unlike if the woman had come near the Pharesie, he would have used these
words, and have said, Stand back and touch me not, for I am holy, but thou art
a known and a heinous sinner. Certainelye, true righteousness and holiness
has compassion upon poor sinners, whereas on the contrary, false
righteousness and hypocrisy has them in hatred and disdain. But let us
lysten, with what sentence this fond Pharesie was convinced and proved by our
Savior, to be worse then this sinful woman, The Lord then to show that he
was not only a Prophet, but also the Lord and God of Prophets, answered the
thought of this proud Pharesie: saying, Simon I have some thing to tell thee.
Then said he, speak on Master.

A Creditour (quoth the Lord) had two Debtors, whereof the one ought him
500. pence, the other but 50. now they both having nothing to pay, the creditor
forgiues them the debt. Now tell me which of those debtours loves the
creditour most, Simon said, I think he to whom most was forgiven. Jesus
answered, thou have rightly spoken.

Our Lord in propounding this question, desired also to heal this Pharesie.
For if he had denied it, Jesus would have eaten none of his meat. These two
debtours were Simon and the sinful woman. The sinful woman not only by the
judgment of the standers by, but also by her own confession, acknowledged her
self more indebted than Simon, and Simon less indebted then she, because he
thought himself to have less sinned then ye woman: yea, he reputed himself
righteous in respect of her. The creditour is our Lord God, who lendes and
gives us his gifts both temporal and spiritual to interest, disburssing to
one five talents, to another two, and to another one. Now then is signified by
the judgment of Simon, that the woman was most in debt to God, unto whom he
forgave most. And because she loved God better then Simon did, she deserved
again of him to be better beloved, in that she did more good service to God,
then Simon did, notwithstanding his meat.

Wherefore the Lord valued the love and good will of this woman, and preferred
it before Simons, reprehending him of his arrogancy, and saying, Do thou
see this woman whom thou iudgest more in debt then thy self? I entered into thy
house, and thou have not given me water to wash my feet, but she has washed
them with tears, and wipt them with her hair, though water was easier to be
found the^ tears. Thou have not kissed my mouth, but she has kissed my feet. Thou
have not anointed my head with common oil, but she has anointed my feet with
fine ointment.

So that by these signs thou see, that she loves me better then thou do.
Therefore I tell thee that many sins are forgiven her, because she loved
much. For to him is least forgiven, that has least loved.

The Lord said this, to beat down the proud opinion of the fond Pharisie,
not that he was but little forgiven: but because Simon might know that he
thought so. For truly, who so commits most sins, he is most indebted to
God: and so likewise of him that least offended. To conclude, both the less
and the great stand in need of Gods grace, unto whom they cannot come of their
own strength and virtue. And as the greatest sinner refers to God the
remission of his sins: even so ought the iustest man to do also. For there
is no sin which one man commits, but an other would commit the like, if
God who made man without sin, did not keep him from sin, as witnesses
Saint Austen. But perchance one will say: I have not committed Adultery as
this man has. To whom I answer. Thou have not had such occasion ministered
as he has had: and he has not had the grace to avoid it, as thou have had. It
was Gods doing, and no will of thine, if thou have had no occasion nor
convenient time, nor fit opportunity, to fall into that sin.

Suppose thou have had occasion offered, with opportunity and all things fit,
and yet have refrained. Well, it is God then that has guided and governed
thee, that thou should not do it. Acknowledge then the grace of God, as thou
art bound, because thou have not committed such a sin. For as he who has
committed most sins, is most indebted to God: even so is he who never sinned,
Gods debtor. For were not the grace of God his guide, he would do ill enough.
Now to our purpose.

After the Lord had convinced the Pharesie of his proud opinion, to comfort the
sorrowful woman lyeng at his feet, he said thus: Woman, thy sins are forgiven
thee. O ioifull voice, O happy woman, that art worthy to hear the Son of
God speak to thee, and unto forgive thee thy sins. But those comfortable
words of the Lord, greatly offended the proud Pharisees at the feast, who
turned them to blasphemy, saying: What fellow is this that also forgiueth
sins? It is apparent enough that he is a blasphemer, for to pardon and
forgive sins, belongs only to God.

No doubt our Lord Jesus Christ was taken to be a very poor man, of him that
requested him to dinner, and to those which were at the table. It was known
that man could not forgive sins, but they believed not that Jesus Christ was
God: and therefore say they, What fellow is this that forgiueth sins? These
feasters were sick of a deadly disease, which they neither knew, nor yet the
remedy to heal and do them good. Is it not a madness that such as are sick
should fall a laughing at them that are sound and in good health? So did the
Pharesies laugh at Jesus Christ, and the woman, who were not sick: or if she
were sick, she acknowledged her sickness, and sought help of the Physician.
It is most true, that a man cannot forgive sins: but this woman, which believed
that Christ could forgive sins, believed also that he was God, and therefore
able to forgive sins.

But why did not our Savior Christ answer these murmuring Pharesies, and
say: I am the Son of God, when they asked the question saying: What fellow
is this that forgiueth sins? No, he let them murmr, and turned himself
toward the woman, and said: Thy faith has saved thee, depart in peace. Though
she heard him say unto the Pharesies, these men murmr, and esteem of me as
it pleases them: nevertheless be thou assured that thy faith has saved thee,
and therefore depart in peace, and enjoy full rest and tranquillity of
conscience, justified by a lively faith, and fulfilled with love. Let all sick
souls, that are laden with sins, if they will be healed, let them (I say)
come in faith and assured hope to the true Physician of souls, which is Jesus
Christ, let them confess their offenses with sorrow and weeping, let them wipe
the feet of our Lord, with their hair, and they shall be restored, made
whole, and recover their health.

Let your superfluous riches be given among the poor, and not spent in
feasting, dronkennes, and pompeous apparaile. And after that the sinner with
great love and liberality has thought upon the poor, speaking to them with
great gentleness, helping them in their need, as well with good counsel, as
with alms deeds: and living as the rule of Gods word requires, in holiness
and righteousness, he shall be sure to receive peace and quietness of
conscience, and be reconciled to God the father, for the merits of his dear
Son Jesus Christ his death and passion, to whom be all honor and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

THE KNIGHT HAVING RECEIVED THE holy Communion, heard the sermon, and ended
dinner, mounted into a chariot of triumph, and was (by Gods grace) carried to
the Pallaice of Virtue. The vij. Chapter.
IT cannot be known how much consolation I took by the Sermon of the good
Hermit, wherefore I was desirous to know his name, the which I asked of Lady
Memory, who told me that it was good Understanding. Then I received the holy
Communion, which being ended, and thanks given to God, I meant to salute and
gratify him. But before we went to receive the holy Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, I remembered the great love of our
Lord which humbly took upon him our frail and weak nature, for our sakes
became accursed, and suffered most bitter death upon the Cross, to deliver us
out of the bondage of sin, hell, and eternal death, and to bring us to
everlasting life. I remembered also the love which he showed unto me in drawing
me out of the sink of sin, wherein I was plunged over head and ears: so
that I was not only drawn from my unspeakable sins, but also made a
Communicant of the mystery of his divine majesty by faith. And to the end it
might please him to give me grace to receive it aright, I prayed unto him on
this wise.

O sweet Jesus and loving Redeemer, I yield thee thanks for thy unspeakable
love, by the which thou have purged me from the filth of sin, and plucked me
by thy grace, out of the dark dungeon of death. Behold, I reconcile my self
unto thee, most heartely beseeching thee, that thou would vouchsafe (amongst
the great number of thy benefits) of thy great liberality, to give me grace
to be a faithful pertaker of thy precious body and blood, represented unto me
under the visible form of bread and wine. O immortal King, I am not worthy, I
confess, of so great a benefit: yet I beseech thee, as thou do make the
unworthy worthy, and the sinners just: so make me worthy to receive this
holy, blessed and heavenly Sacrament, to my souls health. Feed, my sinful
soul, O Lord, with thy spiritual body, and let thy blood revive and quicken
my spirit. O make me (by thy grace dailye increasing in me) a member of thy
mystical body, that I may be included within the covenant and blessing
which thou made with thy Saints and Apostles, in thy last Supper:
communicating unto them the holy Sacrament of thy body and blood: and
consequently, that I may be of the number of them, which according to their
vow and promise made in Baptism, do live in faith, and by thy grace are
received into the company of Saints. Amen.

This Prayer being ended, with all reverence and devotion I received the holy
Sacrament, and that being ended, we went from the Chapple into a great hall,
where I met the good Hermit Understanding, whom when I had saluted, and he me,
I thanked him for his good Sermon. Then as we were talking, Gods grace said
unto me, Sir Knight, I give thee for thy Governor this good Hermit
Understanding, believe his counsel, and do what he commands thee. Then I
remembered my old Gouernesse Folly, whom I left in the bog, amongst serpents
and toads. So I was very glad of my Governor, and gave thanks to Gods grace:
who from the table gave me drugs to eat, and repeating unto me a place,
written in the.80. Psalm of David, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
Then having swallowed yt which she gave me, Psa. 80.
I forgot the world, and made no reckoning of any thing therein. For all my
desire was in have to see ye pallaice of true Felicity. I desired death to be
with Christ in Heaven. Dinner being done, the gates of Repentance were opened,
which were narrow: contrariwise as it appears in the first Book, that the
entrance into the Pallaice of Voluptuousness, was wide, large and great, but
the end thereof was desperation and destruction: as on the other side, the
entering into the Pallaice of Repentance, is straight and narrow, but the end
thereof is eternal life. For Repentance (as Saint Paul says) leads the
repepentant to everlasting salvation. 2. Cor. 7.


When the gates were open, I mounted up into a Chariot of Iuorie, having golden
wheels, and two white horses with wings, drawing the same. Gods grace gate up
first, and with her hand helped me up, then followed the good Hermit
Understanding, then Memory, Conscience, and Repentance, but Gods grace
governed all, who touching the horses with her rod, they mounted up over the
Mountains which are above the earth. So we passed through the region of the
air, where inhabiteth all the wicked spirits, which watches to annoye such
as would mount up into Heaven. And though I was greatly aghast heereat, yet my
trust was in Gods grace, under whose wings I hid my self. I trusted not in my
Conscience, for all it was at peace: nor to Repentance, nor to Understanding:
but to Gods grace only: who safelye shrouded me under her wings, as the
Hen does her Chickens against the coming of the Kite.

Then she commanded the wicked enemies to get them hence, and they forthwith
fled away, cryeng alowde, Now have we lost our knight: Lo he is mounted up to
the pallaice of virtue, in despite of us all. How is he escaped (quod one,)
under the wings of Gods grace, (quoth an other) from whence all we cannot fetch
him. Being past this brunt, I heartely thanked Gods grace of her goodness,
and on the sodeine I saw upon the top of a mountain a goodly pallaice. Now
for that love engenders familyaritie, and familyaritie breeds boldness: I
asked Gods grace what place it was, and she told me it was the pallaice of
Virtue. It was so high that it reached even to heaven, and about it were seven
fair Towers of Alabaster. In the first dwelt Faith: in the second Hope: in the
third Charity: in the fourth Wisdom: in the fifth, Justice: in the sixth,
Fortitude: and in the seventh Temperaunce.

In the first Tower Gods grace showed me Faith, which waited for our coming,
near adjoining unto whom I might perceive the Pallaice of true Felicity.
With that I desired Lady Memory to put me in mind in the morning, of going
to see that gallaunt city. Whiles we were thus devising, our Chariot arrived
at the Court, where Lady Virtue with her daughters, Faith, Hope, Charity,
Wisdom, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperaunce, dwelt. At the first sight I
knew it was the same Lady Virtue, which before time had so well admonished me,
and I gave no ear unto her. Then reverently upon my keenes lamenting, I cried
her mercy, for contemning her counsel, and following Voluptuousnes. Wherewith
she made me arise, and in token that she took in good part my recantation,
she sweetly kissed me, and bad me welcome. So with great joy accompanied with
Gods grace, true Understanding, quiet Conscience, and unfeigned Repentance, I
entered into the pallaice of Lady Virtue. And thus ends the second part of my
voyage.

Thus far the second part of the wandering Knights voyage
THE THIRD PART OF the voyage of the wandering Knight.
THE KNIGHT DECLARES THE GREAT good, the solace, and the pleasures, which he
found in the Pallaice of Lady Virtue. The first Chapter.
IF I HAD A THOVSANDE tongues, to tell the truth of all the goods and
pleasures, which I found in the pallaice of Virtue: and if I should live a
thousand years, to report this matter, al were too little, in every point to
decipher it. For it consists not in Angelical knowledge, much less in man's
wit, wholly to comprehend so notable a mystery, none knows it but he who has
proved it. You may be sure, that there are not, as in the pallaice of worldly
pleasure, Chambers hanged about with silk Tapestry, and every corner
sumptuously and superfluously adorned: no, no: but there were histories of the
old and new Testament to view and mark. I found not there cofers full of gold
and silver, cuberds of plate, presses of silk, all manner of mercery ware,
neither dainty dishes, delicate drinks, bawdie songs, wanton music, ye lady
of love, her son Cupid, nor any thing yt worldlings embrace: but I found a
thing far surpassing all that is in the world.

This good, this joyful, this comfortable, this unspeakable, this
incomprehensible thing, cannot be named worthily enough: but of good and bad he
is called ( God) even he who is ye only sovereign good above al things,
reasonable, and unreasonable. Peradventure you will say, This is strange news,
yt you sir knight should see God, in the pallaice of Virtue. How How is it
strange, seeing he is every where, not only in heaven but also in earth,
and in hell. Truly I confess yt God is every where, but I deny him to dwell
every where, and yet I know that by his power and invisible presence he is
every where, though not every where by the fullness of his greatness, and his
gifts: it follows then that he dwells not every where. I pray you what
profits it the dampened, that he is in hell, by his power, justice, and
vengeance? Surely by such presence of God they have no joy, no consolation,
no benefit, nor felicity, for that all are curssed, in whom GOD dwells not
by his grace, whatsoever they be, be they kings, Princes, or Popes, who have
all other riches and delights in the world.

But all they yt have the grace of God are happy, at leastwise in hope, though
they live even in a loathsome prison, and are poorer then Lazarus, which
desired to be refreshed with the crumbs that fell from the evil rich man's
table. Now, when we pray to God, we say not: Our Father which art every
where, but Our Father which art in heaven: and that is the place where God
gives the enioyeng and possessing of himself to his elect, and that is their
dwelling, prepared by the grace of God: That is it that God spoke of by the
Prophet Esaie, saying: Heaven is my seat, Esaias. 66.
and earth is my foote-stoole. Forasmuch, says God, as I dwell in mine elect
by grace, I will tumble at my feet those that love Voluptuousness, rather then
their maker. In the book of Wisdom, it is written: That the seat of
wisdom is the soul of the just: God is Wisdom, Wis. 7.
and the just soul his seat. God is in every place where he dwells, but
he dwells not in every place where he is. This is most true, though
marvelous, for the evil are always where GOD is, but yet God dwells not in
them.

Wheresoever the wicked, are they cannot hide themselves from GOD, and yet they
are not dwellers with GOD, nor GOD a dweller with them. They are where GOD is:
as the blind man in the light of the Sun. The light is not in him, because
he has not the use of it. But the good are always with God, and God dwells
in them as in his temple. Saint Paul says, That the Temple of God is holy.
And therefore if you live as he commaundes you, Cor. 3.
you are his Temple: and God himself says, I will be in them, I will walk
amongst them, I will be their God, Cor. 6.
and they shall be my people. Now therefore you see, that although God be
every where by his power, yet he dwells no where, but where he is by grace.
It is plain, that where virtue is, there God dwells. Tell me what
displeasure can the soul have, where God inhabiteth by grace, which is the
only consolation of all reasonable creatures.

Is it possible yt any man can find in heaven or in earth such sovereign
good, as is in God, who is the most excellentest and chiefest good, and the
true joy of all reasonable creatures? How can that body fail of any
goodness, which has God by his grace resting in his heart, who is the only
author of all goodness, and the giver of all true joy, and perfect felicity?

But some will say that they see good people in the world oftentimes, suffer
misery, deprived of their goods, and put by the pleasures of this world, which
appears in the sadness of their countenaunces: for they seem to be
conceived with sorrow, and as it were, to labor and travail in heaviness, as a
woman in childbirth. I confess it to be so, but yet if you say that they are
not furnished with all good and true joy and felicity, you err greatly. For
the sovereign good which is God, dwells in the just soul evermore: although
foolish worldlings say in their hearts and thoughts, Can it be, that those
miserable men, which are afflicted with poverty or imprisonment, have more
possession of true felycitie, then we that wallowe in wealth, and are without
want of any worldly pleasures? But they consider not that true joy consists
in the soul. But be ye sure that as the soul is the most precioust part of
the body: even so ought the goodness of the soul, to be greater then the
goodness of the body. The joy of the just and righteous is more inward then
outward, for all his goodness is in the soul: as the joy of the wanton
worldling is outwardlye in the body.

The just man suffers outward extremities, but yet inwardly he has more joy
then the voluptuous man. And though the just man being always afflicted,
makes show of sadness all his life time, yet at the hour of death their joy
and consolation appears with hope of eternal life: whereas contrariwise the
worldling goes his way with grudging and despair. The just man esteems
gold and silver to be colored earth: worldly wealth, and voluptuous feeding,
to be famine and filth: honor, dignity, and delight, to be smoke, which the
air consumes sodeinly: to be short, he makes all the world no better then an
exile: and although his body be detained here for a season, yet all his
thoughts, cares, desires and meditations, are conversant among the orders of
holy Angels, and the happy assembly of Saints in heaven, singing Psalms and
praises incessantlye. So that whatsoever we esteem evil in this world, God
turns it to good. For he makes us rejoice in tribulatio^s, taking them for
medicines to purge our corruptions, and not accompting our persecutors as our
enemies: but rather as helpers to salvation.

The just man esteems simple fare sufficing nature better, then abundance of
delicates, and excessive drunkenness or gluttony. They take more pleasure in
kneeling, praieng, and fasting, then worldlinges do in dancing and singing
wanton songs. Finally, all yt they do or suffer, God turns it to good. And
therefore S. Paul says, That all things turn to the good of those that love
God: The eye never sees, the ear never hears, the heart of man never
understands the great goodness and the joy that God brings into the body,
when he comes by grace to dwell in it only he that has had experience once,
knows it. Worldlings do wonder to see the just man weep and lament, to
suffer tribulations, and to be deprived of all worldly pleasure: they esteem
the goods of this world to be ye true felicity: much like unto a blind man,
taking upon him to judge of colors. For they compare false felicity and
worldly wealth, with heavenly riches and perfect happiness, whereas indeed
they are but shadows. Nothing displeases the elect more then sin, and that
which leads to sin: nothing pleases the elect but God, and that which
leads to God.

As concerning the soul, no man can deny, if he hate sin, and love virtue,
but that he had rather loose all that is in the world, then loose virtue, and
suffer all manner of torments, then to commit sin: he had rather descend
into hell with virtue, then mount up into heaven with sin. For where virtue
is, there is quietness: Contrariwise, where sin is, there can be no rest.
Let every one therefore labor to loose worldly happiness, if he mean to
atchieue virtue, wherein consists so much goodness.

But many make no account to come thither, and so care not for loving virtue,
because indeed they know not virtue. Wherefore Understanding describes her,
and her seven daughters, namely: Faith, Hope, Charity, Wisdom, Justice,
Fortitude, and Temperaunce, in manner and form following.

THE DESCRIPTION OF VERTVE. The second Chapter.
Virtue according to the definition of S. Austen, in his second book of
Free Will, the.18. chapter, Is a good quality of the soul, whereby a man lives
rightly, and commits none evil, which thing indeed is the only work of God
in men. By the soul he understands in this place the superior part of the
mind or soul, wherein consists reason, judgment, and will. The inferior
part we call Sense, which is common to man and beast. Now this called in
Latin Men's, is not a part of the soul sensitive, which is the inferior part:
but it is that part of the soul, where reason and understanding do sit, which
is the superior part. By the soul then we do mean the Freewill of man,
which is nothing else as Philosophers say, but the frank judgment of the mind
and will. For when we say Freewill, we utter and pronounce two words, namely
(Free) and (Will.) It is termed (Free) because that freely and without
constraint, the will works his feats at liberty. And it is called Free will,
because of the judgment of the soul, therefore Free will is in the superior
part of the soul, for thereby we differ from brute beasts, who have a sense as
well as we, but no judgment of Free will. Now, when we say that virtue is a
good quality of the soul, that is to say, of Free will. For virtue qualifies
(Free Will) disposes and prepares it to do and will well, neither of which
cannot be done, without the aid and grace of God.

The second part of the definition is, Whereby a man lives rightly. But no man
lives rightly unless he live justly, no man lives justly without virtue: Ergo no
man lives rightly without virtue. Who so lives rightly lives well: and who so
lives well, if he continue in so doing, atchiueth true felicity. It follows
then, yt by virtue we atchiue true felicity: for virtue prepares Free will,
which is corrupt and depraved, and therefore unapt either for well willing or
well doing: but the grace of God reserving it by virtue, it is made capable of
perfect blessedness.

The third part of ye definition is, And commits none evil. Wherein is
comprehended the excellency of virtue and great goodness, by the which none can
do il. Men may abuse al ye goods, al ye arts and sciences in the world, as
indeed very often they are ill used, as with money, wine, and women: but by
virtue they be never abused: who uses virtue, he does ye works of virtue. Who
so uses ye deeds of virtue, he does well: and if by virtue none does ill, thou
ought rather to loose all yt is in the world, then to lose virtue, seeing,
she excels in goodness all things in the world.

The fourth part of the definition is, Which thing indeed is the only work of
God in man* Virtue the^ is a work of God in us, as witnesses S. Austen, upon
yt sentence which is spoken in the 118. Psalm: I have done judgment and
justice. Justice (says he) is a great virtue of the soul, coming (...) more
then he saw, for he saw a man, and he believed that the same man was God
also, which he saw not: for he said, Thou art my God, and my Lord. In this
consists the merit of faith, when a man at ye commandment of God believes
that thing which he sees not. To believe (says Saint Austen) is to think
upon a thing, with consent to that thought: as when thou think the Son of
God was borne of a Uirgin, and had took man's nature upon him, and consentest
to ye thought, it is properly called belief. This thought may come often by
seeing, and often by hearing.

And therefore Saint Paul says, that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the word of God. He understands that by hearing, Romans 10.
Faith comes into the mind and thought, if we consent thereunto. For we may
behold a Preacher, without consenting to that he says, because men do not
always believe what the Preacher speaks, for yt the consent wherein
consists the perfection of Faith, comes of the mere gift of God, and not
from seeing nor hearing, but from the light of grace speking in the soul of
the believer, believing the principal truth, which is God, and working in him a
consent and agreement with that principal and souereign trurh above al other
things. So that Faith is a foundation immovable, both of believers, and of
truth, by the which Faith, when it is joined with Charity, our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the only foundation of true blessedness, dwells in the
hearts of the believers, and so long as Faith is in man, he shall be sure not to
perish, but Faith without Charity is no foundation, because such Faith is
vain and unprofitable.

Faith then joined with Love or Charity belongs to good Christians: and Faith
without Love belongs to evil Christians. It is necessary therefore, that we
note the difference in these three saiengs or speeches, namely: To believe a
God, to believe of God, and to believe in God,

To believe of God, is to believe that all is true which God says, and so
believe the evil Christians as well as the good: unless they be Heretics.

To believe a God, is to believe that he is the only true and almighty God,
and so the Devils do believe, as well as the evil Christians. But to believe
in God, is to love God, and to trust in God, and in believing to join thy
self to God, by love and obedience, incorporating thee with his members, that
is to say, his Church.

This Faith justifies and makes righteous the sinner, and this Faith being
knit with Love and with Charity begins to do good deeds, which cannot be
done without Love. The Faith which evil Christians have, is indeed a qualytie
of freewill, but it is not knit with Love and Charity, which is the bond of
perfection, and the life of Faith, as Faith is the life of the soul. And yet
such an unshapen Faith being naked and void of Charity, may be termed a gift
of God: for that the evil man may have some gift of God: but that cannot
properly be called Virtue, because that by Virtue, we learn to live rightly:
and for that the Devils and evil Christians do live wickedly, it is a sign
that the faith which they have is dead, and therefore is not properly Virtue,
nor yet a work of Virtue. If thou will then have thy Faith to be good and
wholesome, it must have four properties, that is to say, it must be plain and
simple, it must be whole and sound, it must be constant and immovable, it must
be quick and lively. Touching the first, that it must be plain and simple,
that teaches thee thus much in effect, that thou must believe the word of God
plainly and simply, and whatsoever is therein contained, without enquiring or
searching in Gods mystical matters by human reasons: but simply believing in
thy heart, that every thing contained in the holy Bible is most true. Secondly,
thy Faith must be whole and sound: that is to say, thou must not take part
with heretics, or lean to the erroneous opinions of the enemies of Gods
truth: for this is no good or wholesome Faith. And therefore for a testimony
of thy Faith, be not ashamed to make open confession in the congregation of thy
belief, saying with ye fellowship and communion of Saints, I believe in the
holy Trinity. and as ye holy Church founded by Christ, whereof he is ye head
has taught me, so do I frame my faith^ Thirdly, it must be constant and
immovable, that is to say, without doubting for any reason of man's brain that
seems contrary, nor for any temptation, promises or threatenings, either of
torment or of death. And let not the obstinacy of such as inchaunt with the
vain pleasures of this life, although they live most joyfully, allure thee to
lean to their opinion, which is flat heresy. For that is a work of Satan's,
who wholly possesses them, and can transfigure and change himself into an
Angel of light to deceive the simple and innocent, whom God permits to be
tempted for the trial of their constancy. Not that he is ignorant of the
issue* but because he would have it appear to others, that he crowns us with
his glory, for our constancy and perseueraunce.

This is clearly set down by Moses in the xiij. of Deuteronomie, and by Saint
Peter in his second Epistle and second Chapter, and by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ in the 24. of Matthew. And though we live in the latter times, when
many sects and errors do abound, and virtue and truth in many places does
fail: Yet let us listen what our Lord and Savior says: Whosoever believes to
the end shall be saved. Fourthly and lastly, thy Faith must be quick and
lively, that is to say, it must be linked with Love and Charity, which is the
life of Faith, as the soul is the life of the body. And therefore abuse not
thy self, as some do, saying: I have Faith, and I shall be saved whatsoever
chance. No, no: assure thy self, that if thy Faith be not quickened with Love
and Charity, it is nothing worth, and therefore unable to atchieue true
blessedndsse: as S. Paul well notes in the first Epistle the xiij. chapter to
the Corinths. Even so, when our Lord in the Gospel attributes salvation unto
Faith, and S Paul justification: this is to be understood of an holy lively
and Evangelical Faith, working with Love and Charity.

Likewise, our Lord and Savior, says in the Gospel, that, He which
believes, and will be baptized, shall be saved: this is meant of such a
Faith, as Love quickens, and Charity reuiueth. The holy Scripture in many
places expresses: that None shall be saved, unless he observe and keep the
Commandments of God. Now, none can keep the Commandments without Love and
Charity, Ergo none can be saved without Love and Charity. The sum and
effect of all is this, that whosoever renounceth sin and wickedness,
imbraceth a quick and lively Faith, and lives in Love and Charity, he cannot
perish: but shall find in the end true, perfect, and everlasting Felicity, in
the kingdom of Heaven.

THE DESCRIPTION OF HOPE, and how we ought to hope in almighty God. The fourth
Chapter.
NOw (sir Knight) know this that Hope is a virtue, whereby both goods
spiritual and eternal are hoped for. And as Faith is of things not seen, so
is Hope also. For Saint Paul says, Hope that is seen is no Hope, Romans ^.
because we have possession of it already. It is common to Faith and Hope, to
be of things unseen: and yet Hope is distinguished from Faith, not only by
name, but also by reason. For by Faith we believe as well evil things as good,
that is to say, Heaven and Hell. We believe that Adultery is a very wicked
sin, we believe also Charity is a very good thing: all these things good and
bad we believe, but we hope only for good things, and not for bad. Again,
Faith is of things past, present, and to come: For we believe the death of
Jesus Christ, which is past: we believe also that at this present he sits at
the right hand of God the Father in Heaven, and we believe that Christ shall
come to judge the quick and the dead.

But under correction, I think that Hope is of things present, as when I hope
that I am in GODS favor: and of things past, as when I hope my sins be
forgiven me: and of things to come, as when I hope to have eternal life.

This is true that Faith has an eye generallye unto that, which is spoken in
holy Scripture, believing that all the promises, without exception, which God
made, shall be accomplished, without descending to particular or special
persons: but Hope applies unto her self those same promises, waiting and
hoping for the accomplishment of that which God has promised. And therefore it
is requisite for assured salvation, that thou believe thou shall be saved, and
but to hope so is sufficient. For Faith of and in it self imports an
infallible assurance and certainty of things, as when we firmly believe all
the Articles of our true and Christian Faith, and all things contained in the
holy Scriptures, to be more certain than man is man: but the hoping of it is
not so requisite. For if we have a firm affiaunce in the goodness of God
touching our salvation, and doubt not a whitte of the remission of our sins,
it is enough.

There be two degrees in Hope, which are two contrary extremities. The one being
the most highest is most perfect and infailable assurance of eternal
blessedness. The other being the basest and lowest is to despair of
salvation. Between these two extremities consists Hope. But the more yt a
man approaches to the highest extremity, which is an infaileable assurance of
eternal life, and the more he recoileth from the basest and lowest extremity,
which is desperation the more perfect is he in Hope. It suffices the hoping
man, that believes and loves God, that he have a firm affiaunce and
confidence, that God of his good grace will give him, whatsoever he has
promised unto his elect, hoping that he is of their number. So it is
necessarily requisite, that we have a perfect and an infaileable certainty of
our salvation.

Now, for that in the definition of Hope, it is said, that by her we look and
hope for the spiritual and eternal goodness: it is to be noted, that Hope
has two objects, the first and the principal, is God himself, and the
perfect inioying of his presence. The other, is all the necessary means, to
come unto the clear seeing and inioying of God: and these means are, the
remission of our sins, justification, the help of Gods grace, Faith unfeigned,
and charitable deeds, agreeablenes unto God. Now all that we hope for, we
ought with prayer devoutly to crave of God, as his Kingdom, the remission of
our sins, justification, increase of grace and virtue, deeds of Faith and
Charity.

But concerning goods temporal: forasmuch as we may use them well and ill,
they may be said to hinder the salvation of man, rather then to further it.
And therefore the good Christian ought not to ask them nor to covet the^
excessiuely: indeed so much as will necessarily serve him for sustenaunce in
this life, he may lawfully ask. And here by the way, it is a lesson worthy
the learning, namely: that it is necessary for us to do good works, because
it has plesed God to enrich us with goods, which goods ought well to be
employed. Now unto him properly belongs the merits of the works which he
works in us. For all our good works are the gifts of God: howbeit, he does
not deny us his grace, whereby we consent to do the good works, which he
only moves in us.

And therefore every one ought to the uttermost that he is able, to do good
works, considering yt they come from God* who is the Author of all good woorks,
and without who^ we are not able to think so much as one good thought, much
less do a good deed. For otherwise to hope in doing ill to go to heaven,
without good works springing from a firm Faith, is no Hope, but a flat
presumption. And therefore thou ought to enforce thy self to do good works,
hoping that thou and thy works may be acceptable unto God: nevertheless thou
must not in any case trust upon thy merits or good works, but altogether upon
the infinite love and goodness of God, For otherwise thou fallest into that
curse, which the Prophet speaks of, Iere. 17.
saying: Curssed is the man, that trusts in man: and contrariwise, happy is
the man that trusts in God. We ought always to do well, to delight in well
doing, and to hope in the goodness of God, that he will give us that which he
has promised. But this Hope ought to be firm, and as an Anchor constantly to
hold thy conscience, that by the floatings of temptations it move not.

But some will ask, by what testimony or witness, can the conscience rest
assured of remission of sins, of Gods adoption, and of heavenly blessedness,
I answer. Saint John says, 1. John. 3.
There be three things that give witness in earth, that is to say, the
Spirit, Water, and Blood. These three testify unto the spirit of the
believing man, that Christ is the infallible truth, who fulfilleth in the
believing man the whole sum of his promises.

The first witness then that assures man in Hope, is the precious blood of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which was shed for the remission of our
sins. The second witness is the water of Baptism, by the which also our
sins are forgiven. But these two witnesses put not the conscience in full and
perfect Hope and assurance. And therefore there must be annexed unto them a
third, which third is, Romans 8.
The holy Spirit, which bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
sons and heirs of God. Who so has not this witness, he cannot be assured
of his salvation. The works of the holy Spirit in man, bears witness of
the presence of that Spirit in man.

If thou ask me what those works are, I answer thee, that they are these
and such like that follow, namelye: Sorrow for sins, Hatred of all things
which displeases GOD, and are contrary to his Commandments, taking pleasure
to read and hear Gods word, mourning for thy imperfections, and little Faith,
Hope, and Charity: an affection, desire, intent, and purpose to love God above
all things, and to do thy endeavor to fulfill his commandments. But all
these things springs not from the corrupt nature of man, unless his mind and
heart be moistened with the dew of Gods grace: without the which we feel not in
our selves any good affections, nor desire to do good works, which are signs of
ye presence of ye holy ghost in us. Wherefore we ought with great sighings and
groans to pray unto God, and to beseech him most humbly, that it would please
him of his unspeakable pity to send us his holy spirit, which may assure us
of the redemption of our sins: to vouchsafe his heavenly adoption, and the
enioyeng of everlasting blessedness. And thus much concerning Hope, now let us
speak of Love, or Charity.

THE DESCRIPTION OF LOVE OR OF Charity, and how we ought to love God and our
neighbor. The fifth Chapter.
Charity is a virtue, by the which God is loved for the love of himself: and
our neighbor, for the love of God, or in God. It is said in the first part of
this definition, that Charity is a virtue. Let us see how? Certainly Charity
is the excellentest virtue that is, even the mother and nurse of all the rest.
For he that has not Charity, has nothing in him to obtain everlasting life.
This Charity is given when the holy spirit is given. For the holy spirit being
resident in the soul, makes us to love God for the love of himself, and our
neighbor, for the love of God. To love God for the love of himself, is to
love him for his own sake, and because he is God. And that is to be done three
ways, that is to say, to love God above all things entirely, above all things
orderly, above all things preciouslye. We will declare these three ways of
louinge GOD the more plainlye, that every one may know how to love God.

To love God entirely, is to have a good will to God; and to rejoice greatly
that he is such a one as he is. But for the better understanding hereof, it
shall not be amiss to show what it is to love. To love is nothing else, but to
wish well to every body, as when I love a man, I wish as well to him as to
himself. Now there are two manners of love, one is called a covetous love, as
when a man loves any thing for his own profits sake, or his particular honor:
and in such sort men love their horses, their victualles, and all other
worldly necessaries. The other love is called the love of friendship, or of
good will, as when one loves a thing for the love of it self, without respect
of particular honor, or profit: as when I see a man wise and virtuous, I take
pleasure in him, and wish that the virtues which are in him, may not only
be continued but also increased in him, and this do I beeinge to him well
affectionated, and louinge him with delyghtes.

There is not in GOD any good that is not like himself. For his might, his
wisdom, his justice, his mercy, his riches and his goodness are heavenly,
as he himself is, who is all wise, all just, all merciful, all rich, and
almightye. So that we love God above all things entirely, when we rejoice and
be glad that he is as he is, without regarding our proper profit or honor.

Thou ought not to love GOD with a covetous love, that is to say, thou must
not love GOD only because he gives thee all things profitable for thee: for
in so doing thou love thy self better then thou love God. If thou love
GOD rightlye, he will reward thee greatly, but this love must be single, and
it must be pure, and not depending upon an other thing: For who so loves God
for gain, loves him, but as his horse in whom he delyghtes, because he
serves his turn. GOD ought to be loved louinglye, without respect of
particular profit. But thou may ask me a question, May I not love God to
this end, and under this condition, that he may give me heaven: which is the
sovereign good and principallest thing that man can wish for after this
life. The Doctors say ( No.) If we consider well of the thing beloved, which
is GOD: For in so doing thou love thy self better then thou love GOD.
Thou may come to heaven by this means, as namely, by keeping his
commandments, by giving alms, and by doing other good deeds, and yet give
God his due and single love. Now these things are not Charity it self, but
the works of Charity. We say then that God ought to be loved in doing good
deeds, and in keeping his commandments, but this love ought to be entyre,
without respect of profit or reward.

To love GOD orderlye above all things, is to refer thy self and all thy
goods to GOD: so that all which thou love, wishest, do, and leauest
undone, thou ought to love, to wish, to do, and leave undone, for the love
of GOD and his glory. Thus referringe all to the honor and glory of GOD,
thou love GOD above all things orderly: and accomplishest as much as in thee
lies. What is written in Deutronomie and in Saint Mathewe, where it is said.
Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength. For what other thing is it to love GOD with all thine
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, but to refer all
things to GOD and to his glory, all our thoughts, all our words, all our
works, all our ways, all our purposes, and all our intents.

To love God therefore above all things orderly, is to refer to God and his
glory our selves, and all that is within and without us, which we cannot well
do, if our thoughts, if our words, if our works, and our ways be not good
and acceptable unto God.

To love God preciously, is to love him so dearly and so much to esteem of
him, yt for no cause thou would loose him, nor his love: but wish rather to
loose thy goods, thy lands, thy lims, thy life, and the love of all the world.
This indeed is to love God lovingly, when without respect of profit, we
refer to God and his glory all that we have, our hearts, our hands, our
lips, to praise and magnify him, and to set forth the greatness of his
divine majesty, and omnipotency. To love God then for the love of himself,
is to love God because he is good. And he that loves God in this sort, shall
be sure never to miscarrie or perish.

Do love thy neighbor it is required that thou do it in God, or for the love
of God. Now thou must understand that every man is thy neighbor, when either
thou to them, or they to thee can show mercy, or relieve by succor and help.
So that every reasonable creature is thy neighbor, whersoeuer he dwell in the
world. Thus are the Saints in heaven thy neighbors, by whose example thou art
helped and taught to live godly, wherefore thou ought to love them and all
mankind, for the love of God, or in God. Thou ought to love thy neighbor,
because he is good, or because he should be good: then thou love him indeed
for the love of God: every man which is a sinner thou ought to love, not
because he is a sinner, but because he is a man, for the love of God.

Thou ought to love in the sinful man that which he hates, and to hate
that which he loves. The sinful man loves sin, filthynesse, and iniquity,
which thou ought to hate: The sinful man hates his soul, and the purity
of nature, which thou ought to love. For sin is against nature, it
defiles nature, it oppresses nature, yea, it quenches nature, and he that
commits sin kills his own soul, and corrupts nature.

Thou ought then to love the soul and the nature of the sinner, but not his
sin. And when thou give alms to a sinner, being in need, thou ought
not to do it because he is a sinner: but because he is a man of the same nature
which thou art, some be thy friends, and some thine enemies.

Thy friends thou ought love, in God: least loving them otherwise, thou
should offend God.

Thy enemies thou ought to love, for the love of God, as if he offend thee
by word or deed, and does repent him, and asks thee forgiveness, thou
ought for the love of God to forgive him with all thy heart, and to receive
him into true friendship and familiarity.

Again, if thy enemy be obstinate, and will not cease to persecute and trouble
thee: although thou can not presentlye forgive him, yet thou ought not to
hate him, but rather to do him good, and to be ready always to pardon him,
and then chiefly when he shall require it. Yea, thou ought to do him what
good thou can in his need.

By that which we have spoken already, it appears that thou ought to love
all men living, both good and badde, friends, and foes, no worse then thy
self. Our Lord and Savior had an eye to the love of our neighbor, when he
said in the 7. of Matthew, All things that thou would thy neighbor should
do unto thee, do thou the like to him. Whosoever then does to his neighbor,
as he would his neighbor should do to him, loves his neighbor as himself. But
this is to be understood according to God and reason. For if one offering to
pleasure thee, bring thee a Wench to lie with thee, or lend thee a sword to
fight and kill an other, as reason should instruct thee to refuse such offers:
so the love according to GOD should teach thee obedience: and they both ought
to be rule of thy life, and the lights to guide thee in dark places.

Thus far have we declared in as much breuitye as we could, how a man
ought to love GOD and his neighbor. Now intend we to show the effects and due
praises of Love or Charity.

THE EFFECTS AND PRAISES of Love or Charity. The sixth Chapter.
NO tongue in the world can tell for truth, all the excellencye of the
effects and praises of Charity. For first of all she makes men the children
of GOD, and heirs of heaven, according to that saying of Saint John. Behold
what Love or Charity the Father has showed unto us, 1. John. 3.
to make us the children of GOD. Saint Paul also says, That all those which
be led by the spirit of GOD, are the children of GOD. Romans 8.
For you have not received the spirit of bondage, to fear any more. But you
have received the spirit of adoption, by which we cry Abba Father, and that
same spirit, which is the spirit of Love or Charity, bears witness with
our spirit, That we be the children and heirs of God, and coaheires with
Christ. Can we desire a thing more excellent, then to be the children of
GOD, and heirs of heaven? What dignity is that to boast off? Such as have a
feelinge of the love of GOD in their hearts, have bolde-nesse and courage
enough, though the world contemn them. For this is certain, that they whom
the world hates, are not the children of the world, but the children of GOD:
as contrariwise, such as the world loves, they indeed are the children of
the world, and consequently the children of the Devil.

Secondlye, Charity works the cause in us that GOD dwells in us. Who
dwells in Charity, says Saint John, dwells in GOD, 1. John. ^.
and GOD in him. Our Lord likewise says, If any man love me he will keep my
commandments, John. 14
and my Father will love him, and we will come and dwell with him. Can we
desire a more rich, a more bountiful, or a more lyberall host then he? Is it
like that so loving an host will suffer the soul to want? Will he ask money
for his expenses, No, he comes not to dwell with us, to consume that we
have, but to increase our riches, and to make our store greater.

Thirdly, Charity makes our goods, be they little, or be they much,
acceptable unto God, it makes a man contemn the world, it makes a man to
rejoice in temptations, afflictions, and tribulations. When Charity enters
into the soul, she comes accompanied with all other goodness: yea, she
knittes us to GOD, and unites us with him. Love or Charity makes men of one
mind, and one will. Love or Charity makes men reform their manners, and to
draw near unto God. Love or Charity makes men consider of things present
and visible, as if they were not. Love makes a pure and clean heart, which
may contemplate and behold heavenly things. By Love the goods of this world
are well ordered, and by Love* the goods of this world are contemned, and by
Love the secrets of God are revealed. Saint John says, That God is Charity,
whereby no doubt, he means the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost, the
three persons in trinity, God the father is Charity, God the son is
Charity, and God the holy Ghost is Charity. This Love or Charity requires
in the same such likely things, namely, Love and Charity, by the which, as by
some spiritual affinity, thou art joined unto God, which Love also boldly
comes unto God, and familiarly speaks with him, without any doubt or fear.

He that loves not shall loose his life: but he that loves, always lyfteth
his eyes to GOD, whom he loves, whom he desires, on whom he museth, in
whom he is refreshed, and by whom he is preserved, such a loving, devout,
and relygious soul, does so singe, so say, so read, so dispose all his
business, and so circumspectly foreseeth all things, as if GOD were ever
present with him, as doubtless in spirit he is. The man in whose soul the
love of GOD is lodged, so prays, as if God were personallye present with him.

The love of ( Charity) awaketh ye soul, when she is a sleep, it puts him in
mind of his salvation, it softeneth and moysteneth the heart, Love or Charity
sets the cold heart on fire, Love makes the froward soul gentle. Love
chaseth away sin, Love keeps the affections of flesh and, blood under,
Love amendeth lewd men's manners, Love renews the spirit, Love brideleth
the light motions of wanton youth, all this works Love or Charity where she
is present.

Contrariwise, where Love or Charity is absent, there the soul does languysh
and waxes cold: even as a Chaldron of water does, when the fire is taken from
under it, and raked abroad. Charity is the only thing whereby the soul
boldlye approaches unto GOD: constantlye cleaves unto him, famyliarlye
speaks with him, and in all affairs asks counsel of him.

The Soul that loves GOD, cannot but think and talk of GOD, insomuch that
he hates all ungodly things. Who so will know GOD, must love GOD, the more
that one loves God the more he grows in the knowledge of God. To Read, to
write, and to Study of God, yields no true knowledge of God without Love. In
vain do we read, in vain do we talk, in vain do we preach, in vain do
we pray to GOD, if we do not love God.

The love of God engendereth the love of thine own soul, and makes it
attentive always to God. God loves to be beloved again: and when he loves,
he requires nothing but love: happy therefore is he that loves God.

The soul which loves God, rejects all his affections, being attentively
given to his love. The soul that loves, has no fear: the soul that loves
not, is ever in fear. The soul that loves, is carried by promises and drawn
by desires unto heaven: the soul that has in it the presence of Gods love, is
tickeled with joy, and with rauishings leapeth up to heaven, having by
contemplation exceeding great ioyfulnesse. Love breeds familiarity with God,
familiarity breeds boldness with God, boldness breeds the taste of God,
and taste breeds an hunger after God. If I should declare all the
excellency of Love or Charity, the time would fail me: and mine ability in
that behalf would not suffice. But let this stand for a conclusion, that the
soul which is touched with the love of God, cannot desire any thing contrary
to God: but ever after it has received any taste of sin, it cries out and
says with the Prophet, O Lord God, like as the Heart desires the fountains of
water: Psa. 41.
even so long I after thee. Well then sir Knight, lift up thy soul, and
remember the great Love and Charity of God, and his manifold benefits
bestowed upon thee, that by them thy heart being enlightened, thou may
increase and go forward day by day, in doing good works, to the glorifieng
of God, who delights in the same, according as it is said: Let your light so
shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify God in
Heaven. Thus much touching these three spiritual Uertues: now come we to the
four moral.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUR Moral Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and
Temperance. The vij. Chapter.
BY these four Moral virtues man lives well and orderly in this mortal
life. Saint Hierome says, that the Christian man, by these iiij. lives well in
this mortality, and by them after death, comes to everlasting life. Prudence
knows the good we should do, and the evil we should leave. Justice does
good. Temperance leaves the evil. Fortitude is constant, without loosing
courage in adversity, or waxing proud in prosperity. Prudence disposes man,
and teaches him how to approach unto God, Fortitude and Temperance how to
govern himself, Justice how to use his neighbor. These are the four things
which Satan shoots at, to destroy the soul. By Prudence, which is the rule
of right reason, we govern our selves wisely, we order our affairs
discreetly, doing nothing but right and reason.

In Prudence consists reason, knowledge, foresight, aptness to teach and
give good counsel. A prudent man knows before hand the end of his counsel.
Plato says, that Prudence is the Duchess of all moral virtues, showing us
how we should understand and use the rest. For as Faith informs us, and
tells us what we should hope after, and what we ought to love: even so
Prudence instructs and teaches us, how we should use Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance. Aristotle says, that it is impossible but a prudent man should be
good. If he mean Moral goodness, it is most true: for a wise man does
nothing but that which is lawful. But yet without Love or Charity, Prudence
is a virtue no more meritorious then Faith without Love and Charity. But if
the prudent man love God with all his heart, it is impossible but he should do
good, and consequently be good.

Justice is a virtue used in two sorts, sometimes it is a general virtue, and
comprehends in her self all virtue: as the man that lives well and justly, is
therefore called, good, virtuous and just. Otherwise it is understood a
particular virtue, called Justice distributive, yielding to every one that
which unto him belongs. This virtue Justice distributive is convenient for
all men, and principally for Emperors, Kings, Princes, and such as have the
administration and government of Commonwealths: to the end that they may
yield to every one their right, defending ye innocent, and punishing the
offender: honoring ye good, and abasing the evil: doing Justice and right
according to equity, as well to little as great and to poor as rich. Many
have Justice painted in their houses, and yet have injury and wrongful dea^^^g
lodged in their hearts. Many a one have Christ in their mouth, but ye devil in
their mind. To conclude therefore, he yt will be acceptable to god, he must be
just in word, upright in deed, and undefiled in thought.

Fortitude is a virtue, unto the which belongs a magnificent courage, not
fearing any thing but unlawful actions. He yt has this virtue, keeps
himself constant in adversity, and waxes not proud in prosperity. Fortitude
gives a man magnanimity, constancy, hope, assurance, sufferaunce, patience
and perseverance. With this virtue ye Martirs of all degrees and ages were
endued, grounded upon a firm. Faith, co^te^ning ye world, and setting light by
ye threatenings and torments of tyrants, embracing death, rather the^ to deny
Christ. Gods Prophets were armed with Fortitude, who without flattery
reprehended ye kings of Israel and Judah, of their sins and false worship of
God, and feared not their furies. The Apostles of Jesus Christ, were armed with
Fortitude, who feared not to control ye wisdom of ye wise, and vanquish such
as were in high places, yt they might with contented minds carry ye yoke of
Christ. This did they not by their bodily strength nor yet with man's power or
warlike weapons, but with divine doctrine: not desiring to kill any one, but to
die themselves. It is a great worlds wonder, yt so few poor simple souls,
unarmed* unlearned, and having no human pollice, should vanquish the wisdom
of the world, confound earthly policy and strength, and subdue Kings, and
bring them in obedience to the faith and knowledge of Christ: reuoking the
people from false religion and adoration of Devils* who tyrannously reigned
and bare sway, certain the (...) of years in the world.

With this virtue of Fortitude, Kings and mighty men ought to be armed, not
doubting any danger for ye defense of the faith of Jesus Christ: but being of
one and the same mind with the holy Martirs of God. With this Virtue ought
Preachers and Teachers to be armed, worthily defending the word of God, against
all Heretics and enemies of the same, not doubting the fear or the
threatenings of persecutors whatsouer. But you must understand, that Fortitude
is not a dealer in the committing of unlawful deeds: as to beat, hurt, or
kill thy brother, unless it be justly done in thine own defense, or for thy
Countries cause: otherwise it is mere malice and madness of mind. Moreover
such as extraordinarily and desperately dispatch themselves, as wretches weary
of life, they do it not by fortitude, but by the temptation of the Devil, who
is permitted by Gods sufferaunce, to tempt some, even to the making away of
themselves. Such people are weak hearted and not valyant: for valyantnesse,
which is Fortitude, is not named notable, unless it be in lawful actions and
deeds, as in the defense of thine own person, thy Prince, thy Country, or the
faith of Jesus Christ, for the which to suffer death, is excellent Fortitude.

Temperance (says Saint Austen) is an affection to refrain the appetite,
whereunto a man is excessiuely inclined. Temperance has rule and dominion over
pleasures and delights, refusing to meddle in any thing, which can not be done
without offending God: and not falling in any excess whatsoever, wherein a
man may pass the rule of reason. To live in Temperance, is to order and
dispose every thing, according to the right use whereto it was appointed.

These four virtues have four vices clean contrary unto them, by the which
vices, the virtues are corrupted and destroyed. Prudence by Folly, Justice by
Covetousness, Fortitude by Pride, and Temperance by Incontinence, defaced.
These four vices are signified by ye four plagues which consumed and spoiled
the goods of Job, namely: The Sabees, the Chaldees, the force of fire, and the
violence of a vehement wind. The Sabees of Folly made havoc of Prudence
Oxen. The Chaldees of Pride led away the Camils of Fortitude. The fire of
Lechery, made wast of Temperaunce sheep. And the boisterous wind of
Covetousness, overthrew the houses or the precepts of Justice. These four
virtues likewise are devoured of their adversary vices, according as the
Prophet Joel complains against the wicked Jews, Joel. 1.
under four notable things deciphering the four vices opposite and against ye
four virtues before named. These four things are the Caterpiller, the
Grasshopper, the Locust, and the Blasting: all which four things being bent to
wastfulnesse, left nothing unspoiled, whiles they put in use the force of
their inclination. By the Caterpiller is meant vain and foolish bragging, which
destroieth the virtue of Prudence. By the Grasshopper is meant the vice of
Pride, which destroieth the virtue of Fortitude. By the Locust is meant the
vice of Covetousness, which destroieth the virtue of Justice. And by Blasting
is meant the vice of Lechery, which destroieth the virtue of Temperance: so
that Foolish bragging destroieth the virtue of Wisdom. Pride corrupts the
estate of Strength. Avarice deuoures the virtue of Justice. Lechery spoyleth
the title of Temperance.

Now therefore sir Knight, I wish thee to refrain from these insatiable vices,
least thou loose the enjoying of these four notable Moral virtues. Thou
know what comfort, and good company thou had in the Pallaice of Virtue:
there thou saw God, Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude,
Temperance, and all the goodness which might come to the reasonable soul in this
present life: as for the sweetness, the joy, the pleasure, consolation, and
goodness, which these virtues do bring them unto, which has embraced and loved
them, none knows, but who has had experience.

HOW FAITH FROM THE TOP OF HER Tower, shows unto the Knight the City of
Heaven. The viij. Chapter.
AFter good Understanding had delivered out these good words, I was ravished
in my mind, I felt not my self, I lost my taste, I forced neither for meat
nor drink, and most of all I meruailed that night approached not: because many
hours were consumed. Being in that maze, Virtue told me that in her Pallaice
never came night, and that darkness had nothing to do where she dwelt. Then
Memory put me in mind what Gods grace told me by the way: saying that by the
works of Faith, which are the fruits of the same I might perceive and see the
City of Heaven, wherein is comprehended the true and blessed Felicity. Then
Faith led me to her Tower, and all the other virtues kept us company. For Faith
properly is not without Hope, nor Hope without Charity, and therefore they must
go altogether. And though these virtues have distinct and several properties:
yet they join hands and are never asunder. S. Hierome says that Abraham was
furnished with Faith, Job with Fortitude and Patience, David with Humility,
and so consequently of other holy men recorded in Scripture.

Then Faith from her high Tower, showed me a high hill, whereon was builded a
marvelous sumptuous City, and she told me it was the City of Heaven,
wherein is comprehended true blessedness, and perfect felicity. In that City
I saw never a Temple, which made me marvel, until that Faith told me, that
the Lord God almighty was the Temple of that City. There needs no shining of
Sun, nor brightness of Moon, nor glittering of stars, to give them light, for
the almighty God is their true light himself. None enters into this City,
but such as are written in the book of life. Furthermore Faith told me that
there was no discord, no adversity, no sin, no reproach, no iniquity, no
fear, no sorrow, no shame, no tumult, no darkness, no pain, no mistrust, no
violence, no unquietness, no ill, no grudging, finally, nothing that favored of
mortality: but there was concord, prosperity, perfection, unity, love,
gladness, quietness, staidness, charity, sure rest, perpetual felicity,
and everlasting joy in God, with eternal life and happiness.

There was mirth without sadness, rest without labor, gain without loss,
health without pain, abundance without want, life without death, cleanness
without corruption, happiness without hinderaunce. In this City God is seen
face to face, there is the endless light shining, the Saints always singing,
blessed souls rejoicing and ever beholding God, yet still coveting to see him
without dullness of desire. The Citizens of this City of heaven are coheires
of the eternal Deity, the Father, Son and holy Ghost. They are made
incorruptible and immortal, according to the promise of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, saying. Father those that thou have given me, I will that they
be with me where I am, that they may see my brightness. John. 17.


What can I say more, in this City is one King, without death, and without
change: without beginning and without ending. In this City there is no night,
there is no limitation or term of time, but continual day most brightly
shining. For in this City dwells the Father of lights, even God himself,
whose brightness no darkness can ouershadow. The Citizens of this City are
most blessed and fortunate: For they are pertakers of unspeakable grace, of
unmeasurable happiness, of endless joy, and of such perfection as thereunto
there can be added no more. Unto this place shall the just be advanced: as for
the wicked, their portion is in the Lake boiling with fire and brimstone. But
to proceed in our purpose.

THE DESIRE THAT THE KNIGHT had to come to heaven, and how Gods grace brought
Perseverance. The ix. Chapter.
Having seen from the Tower of Faith, the City of heaven, and heard (by her)
the manner of it, I was ravished of my wit, and esteemed nothing at all of the
world. For I felt not my self, my thought I was walking in Heaven. Heerevpon I
desired Faith, that I might remain still in her Tower, the which willingly she
granted me, insomuch that I was never weary out of her Tower window to behold
heaven: yea, the more I beheld it, the more beautiful it seemed. In the end,
I was loath to live in this world, and desired death, that I might the sooner
see the city of Heaven, and have the sight and inioying of Christ my Redeemer.
Then kneeling by my self all alone, I made this prayer saying.

O how happy is the soul, that is out of this earthly prison, and rests in
heaven most ioifully, seeing his Savior face to face. That soul is without
fear and affliction. O how happy is the soul, which is in the company of
Angels, and holy Saints, singing praises unto the highest: Such a soul surely
is lade^ with abundance of joy. O happy society of citizens, O happy company
of Saints, which lamented in their mortal life, but now reign with God
immortally, O sweet Jesus, let me come to thy pleasant City, where thy Citizens
see thee daily, to their great delight. O let me come there where nothing is
troublesome to hear or understand: what melody hear they without ending? And,
how happy were I, if I might hear the songs, or be admitted to sing a song of
David in thy holy hill of Sion. O that I being the least of thy servants, may by
thy grace, put off my fleshly burden, and come to thy happy City, to accompany
the holy and happy assembly of Saints, to see the glory of my Creator, and to
behold his amiable Majesty.

That I may be made meet for this so great a blessing, grant I beseech thee O
gracious God, that I never look back upon this shadow or valley of tears,
that I remember not the false plesures of this wicked world, that I esteem
not this corruptible and evil life. O how can we (here) be happy where the
Devil always assalts us? Where the world flatters us? Where the soul is
blinded? And where al men sin? After which great evils death does follow, as
the very end of al vain pleasures, and then they are esteemed as if they had
never ben. What recompense may be made unto thee (O GOD) which give us
consolation in the midst of all our extremities, (by the wonderful
visitation of thy divine grace)? Behold me miserable wretch, filled with
sadness, wherein I consider my sins when I fear thy judgment, when I
think on the hour of death, when I remember the pains of hell, when I am
ignorant what punishment I deserve, when I know not where nor in what estate I
shall end my days. In all these things and many other I appeal to thy
gracious goodness, knowing that thou art ready to give me consolation against
all these sorrows. Thou liftest up my soul (full of anguish) above all
mountains, thou make me receive thy great Love, Charity, and goodness, by
the which thou recreatest my heavy spirit, and reioysest my sad heart, in
revealing unto me thy heavenly delights.

This prayer ended, I utterly forgot all my miseries, and rested my soul upon
the anchor of Hope. Then as I was kneeling, Gods grace appeared unto me,
accompanied with an other Lady which I had not seen before. And after I had
given her thanks for all her benefits, she delivered me this Lady named
Perseueraunce, to continue with me, charging me to keep her ever with me, if I
meant to be a Citizen of heaven. For (said she) all other virtues without her
are as nothing, to win heaven. For it is written, Mat. 24.
Who so perseuers unto the end shall be saved. And therefore if thou will be
saved, thou must continue. Hereof we have many examples in the holy
Scripture, but I will touch twain and no more.

When Saul was first created King of Israel, he was as lowly and as humble,
as the child of one year old: but he continued not above two years in this
his goodness. For after he had put Perseueraunce away, he became evil, and
grew to be a cruel tyrant: insomuch that he slew many of the Lords
Priests, and persecuted good David. But what was his end? He was vanquished
of his enemies, and being given over of God, he killed himself upon the
mount Gelboe. Again touching the same matter, Judas at the first when God made
him an Apostle, was good and duetifull, but when he had put Perseueraunce away,
he became a thief, and by covetousness, he betrayed and sold his Master
Christ. But what was his end? He was forsaken of God, became a reprobate, fell
into desperation, and with an accusing conscience sore charginge him with the
heinousness of his offense, with a halter he hanged himself.

When I heard Perseueraune say so, for fear least the like should befall to
me, I desired my counsailour Good understanding, to show me the means how I
might keep Perseueraunce always with me, that in so doing, I might not be
deprived of the glorious City of Heaven. To which request of mine the good
Hermit Understanding, tendering the safety of my soul: and having a careful
regard to all mine endeauours, did yield, and spoke to me in manner and form
following.

GOOD UNDERSTANDING SHOWS the Knight how to keep Perseueraunce always with
him. The tenth Chapter.
MY son, the last point of thy souls health, (quoth Good understanding,) is
to learn and know how to tarry where thou art now, without going back, which
if thou desire, then must Perseuera^ce never leave thee, for if she forsake
thee once, then must thou needs loose the pleasure of lady Virtues pallaice,
wherein thou art now. From whence if thou go back, thou shall be sure to loose
her and the joys of heaven. Thou must therefore remain constant in thy good
mind, without wavering, the which to do, thou must by devout and continual
prayer, faithfully crave help of Gods grace, without ye which no man can
continue in goodness. And to accomplish all this, thou must remember three
things: the first is, thy life past: the second, thy life present, and the
third thy life to come. These three considerations will encourage thee to stay
where thou art, and as it were with a bridle will keep thee from recoiling.

1 Think what thou have done and seen before time, in following Folly, how
thou liuedst vain and worldling like, yielding to every vain concupiscence
and lust, whereby thou did fall into the filth of sin, did indaunger
both thy body and thy soul, and had thy conscience accusing thee. Oh where
had thou ben, if Gods grace had not taken compassion upon thee? Where be
the worldlinges that would not be sorry for their sins? Where are they become?
Are they not condemned to everlasting torments in hell fire? Oh think then
that sin does greatly offend God: think what punishment God has ordained
for sin, which makes man an enimye to God, and a friend to the devil: think
that sin has deprived thee of thy first innocence and virtue, making thee
meat for hell hounds, amongst whom thou had been numbered and counted, if
God of his grace had not pitied thee.

2 Think that at this present time thou art in Gods favor, by the means of
his grace, who has made thee a child of God, and an heir of heaven by hope,
so that now thy conscience is quiet. Think what good consolations thou have
received by devout praieng: think what spiritual instructions Gods grace has
given to thee: think all the pleasures of the world are mingled with sorows:
think that thou shall have no hurt, if thou remain where thou art, for thou
art in Gods keepinge: think that this world shall pass away with all the
pompes and pleasures of the same: think that thy present state is the
high-waie to heaven, and so shall thou keep Perseueraunce.

3 Thirdly think that the just judgment of God is to come: which is to the
good to give Heaven, and to the evil Hell. Think thou must dye, and that at
thy death thou shall not receive so good consolation as thou have had of Virtue
and Gods grace, in whose wholesome counsels and admonishments thou ought to
persevere to the end. Think that at thy death thou must leave behind thee,
wife, children, goods, and money. Whether thou do good or evil, think that
thou must go to a region unknown, and to a place where thou have never been:
and if thou be found to have dyed in sin, without repentance, the Devils
will attend to take thy cursed body, and thy dampened soul, and will carry
both into the dungeon of darkness, there to feel eternal torments. But if
thou be found with Perseverance, in the Pallaice of Virtue, millions of
Angels will go before thee, and with great joy will bring thee to Heaven.

O think upon the just judgment of God to come, when every one shall be judged
according to his deeds. For God favors neither king nor kaiser, prince, nor
people, high nor low, rich, nor poor, without respect of person, he will crown
the good, and condemn the evil, at that day of dome, when we must appear
personally without excuse or exception before him. Then every one must be his
own attorney, when the just Judge at that day will show himself terrible to the
perverse, which have followed Voluptuousness, and have not heartely repented,
nor retired from the filthy puddle of their sins. But will be gentle, just, and
good, unto those yt have been sorry for their offenses. O think what torments
the unrepentant shall suffer both in body and soul, perpetually: whereas all
such as have perseuered in goodness to ye end, shall receive joy, and the
fullness of God and of heaven. In ^uch sort to persevere in goodness to the end,
do thine utter endeavor, and thou shall see that God will be ready with his
grace to bless and to arm with constancy in thy Christian purpose.

A PROTESTATION WHICH GOOD Understanding taught the Knight to make every day
for the avoiding of temptations, and how he ought to humble himself before
God, and what he should ask in his prayer. The xj. Chapter.
MY son always I wish thee to keep Perseverance with thee, by whom thou
may avoid temptations, which would induce thee to sin, and force thee to
forsake the true Faith, and also to transgress the holy commandments of
almighty God. This to avoid, I wish thee eueryday to repeat the promises
which thou have made to God in thy Baptism, which follow thus in effect.

O most high, most excellent, and most holy Trinity, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, I protest that I will live and dye in the true Catholic and Apostolic
Faith: and will keep thy Holy commandments, which heretofore I have
transgressed. Wherefore I am sorye and do heartelye repent me for the breach
of them, and in token whereof I make my confession, saying.

I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost. Borne of
the virgin Marie. Suffered under Ponce Pilate. Was crucified, dead and buried.
He descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead. He ascended
into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, the Father almighty. From
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The communion of Saints. The forgiveness of
sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life everlasting, Amen.

Then say, Lord God give me grace most heartely I beseech thee, without
doubting, to confess and believe all the Articles of this my Christian Faith,
and in the fame to persevere to the end. And so rehearse the ten
Commandments of almighty God, which are these.

THe same which God spoke in the xx. chap. of Exodus, saying: I am the Lord thy
God which have brought thee out of the land of Aegipt, out of the house of
bondage.

1 Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graue^ Image, nor the liknesse of any
thing that is in heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord
thy God, am a ielous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in the^ that love me and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do. But the seventh day is the saboth of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy man-serua^t, and thy maid-seruant, thy cattle, and thy stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultrie.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Then considering the tenor of that which thou have said, crave grace at Gods
hands to walk after his will, using the same prayer which Christ taught thee,
and saying.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive the^ that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil.

Besides all this, thou must also most heartely humble thy self before God,
acknowledging thy self a sinner, and that thou can do nothing yt is
righteous: but if there be any goodness in thee, either of nature or of Gods
grace, thou must freely confess that all comes from above. Repute not thy
self better then another, but rather the least of all. If any despise thee,
mock thee, or iniure thee, suffer it not only patiently, but also willingly
and gladly, even for the love of God. For the scaling ladder of heaven is
humility, and a full denieng of thy self in all worldly causes. Think not well
of thy self for any thing that thou do, have done, or may do: but if
thou have any goodness in thy body, or in thy soul, be not ashamed to confess
that it is not thine, because it comes not from thee but of God: from him whom
indeed it proceeds.

If thou humble not thy self, there is no hope of thy souls health. For to
this effect our Lord said, Mat. 18.
If you be not converted and made as little children, you shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. And S. Barnard says, Who so will be humble must be
content to be despised of the world, he desires not to be renowned: for this
is no point of humility. Commit thy self therefore to God, and put thy will
to his: taking at his hands all adversities patiently, all tribulations, all
afflictions, all diseases, all persecutions, yea, and death it self, not only
contentedly, but also willingly: acknowledging that God sendes nothing to the
faithful, but goodness, and all for their souls health. Wherefore thou must
often pray to God and say. Lord God, give me whatsoever thou will, do with me
always what thou will. And when at any time thou find thy self as it were
left of God, void of devotion, or destitute of consolation, whether it be
inwardlye or outwardlye, be not discouraged for it, neither think that God
has forgotten thee, but heartelye humble thy self before God, accounting thee
unworthy of consolation, and putting all thy confidence in God, as in one that
knows how to save his elect. If thou receive any blessing inwardly, as
wisdom, or any other gift, exalt not thy self in pride, neither discommend
others yt have not received of God such grace: but use that which thou have to
Gods glory. Again, if thou see thy neighbors fall, take heed thou hate him
not, judge him not, and condemn him not, but think that God permits thee to
see his offense for thy profit. Imagine thou wast never touched with ye crime:
well, it is much, but yet thou have been culpable in some other as bad, or else
worse: upon this examinatin reform thy self, suppose thou art in no fault,
thou must not therefore esteem thy self better the^ he yt is in fault, knowing
thou art of such a nature as he is, and made of ye same stuff yt he is, and
therefore notwithstanding thy supposition, a sinner, and offender, as well as
he: so yt both need amending. Be thou sure, that if God had provided no better
for thee then thy self deserved, thou had committed the like offense, or else
greater: and thank God that he has kept thee so, and pray for him yt does
amiss, and is not yet converted When thou see a sinner openly led to his
last end to lose his life by law, know yt thou sta^dest a sinner before god as
well as he, although before the world thou be esteemed better. The life and
death of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, is a glass for all faithful
Christians to look in. Wherefore with a good devotion lead thou an holy life
by his example, take pains to follow his humility, his sobriety, his
chastity, his goondnesse, his charity, his patience, his compassion, and all
his other virtues. There is no school wherein a Christian may so well learn
to live well, as in the contemplation of Christ's life and conversation: thou
must oftentimes think on thy last end, as death, judgment, hell, and heaven:
persevere in prayer and in goodness to the death, so thou shall please God, and
not be loath to dye. Remember the end (says ye wise) and thou shall never sin:
thou must often pray devoutly to God, and when thou will so do, Eccle. 7
thou must draw thy self from all affairs. For prayer is a lifting up of the
heart to God, and a private speech or communication of the soul with God, If it
be so, were there any reason that a man should withdraw his cogitations from
God, or rather all outward business put apart, with all reverence to submit thy
soul before him. All this notwithstanding it is not forbidden in all our
affairs to pray and sing psalms to Gods glory, and oftentimes with tears to
say the Lords prayer, or any other prayer to that effect. And here by the
way thou must understand, that the longest prayer is not most profitablest,
because of the multitude of cogitations and thoughts rising in the mind.
Besides that, they must be devout, for the prayers which are done with
devotion, with love and humility of the heart, does profit most, as for all
other prayers, they are vain and to no purpose.

If thou pronounce but three words as the Publican did, saying: God be
merciful to me a sinner: Luc. 18. Mat. 17
or as the Chananite said, O son of David, have mercy upon me, it is enough.
Again, be not curious of thy tongue, or fine in speaking: it suffices, that
thy heart speaks within thee, and thy tongue though but bleatingly, if
unfeignedly, it is well: as we read of Moses and Anne Samuels mother. Ezo. 1. 1.
Kin. 1.
True it is and no less fit, that both tongue and heart should praise God,
and therefore be circumspect in thy prayers, lest thou be reproved as our Lord
reproved some saying, You know not what you ask. In the first part of thy
Prayer, Mat. 20
thou ask Gods Kingdom, (according to Gods doctrine) and also his Justice.
Then thou ask in thy prayer, that God be known, honored, and glorified of
all: Mat. 5.
that his will be done in all, and accomplished in all, as well of men in Earth,
as of Angels in Heaven. Thou ask increase of Faith, Hope and Charity,
remission of sins, the grace of God and his glory.

Worldly goods superfluously thou ought not to ask, but necessarily to
live, and with a measure for thy bodily health, and for the succor of the
needy. If thou be sick, poor, or in adversity, thou may ask health,
riches or prosperity: so it be done to Gods glory. But if thine afflictions
do more advance Gods glory, then thy prosperity does, yielding thy will to
GODS will, thou ought to ask patience, and say with a meek heart, Lord
thy will be done and not mine. Evermore have the fear of GOD before thine
eyes, iudgeing and condempning thy self for thy sin, and thou shall not be
judged nor condemned of God. Let no sin so reign in thee, as to deprive
thee of Gods grace, and to tumble thee to eternal death. Better it is to dye
in trouble without sin, then to live in prosperity in sin, and better it
is to loose thy life for Gods cause, then to live at ease, and loose God and
thy life too.

If thy senses be inclined to sin, be not dismayed: for there is a God, to whom
if thou pray, will, by the power of his grace, suppress that inclination.
Wherefore take courage when thou art tempted, ask for help at God, saying: O
God make speed to save me, O Lord make have to help me: Lord God leave me not
but be my help, O thou Lord God of my health. Do what thou can to resist the
Devil, and he shall go from thee: approach to God by Faith, and he will draw
near unto us by his spirit. If the Devil assault thee, defy him: and make
thy moan to our Savior (saying) Lord help me, and he will help thee. Do
thou thine endeavor, and assure thy self, that God will make thee strong, he
will aid thee, he will ease thee, and in the end will set thee free from all
vexations, placing thee in the heaven of heavens, the portion and inheritance
of his servant. To this God, and to Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, be all
glory, honor and praise, worlds without end. Amen.

THE AVTHORS PERORATION OR Conclusion, to the devout readers or hearers. The
xij. Chahter. The xij. Chapter.
I Thank almighty God of his goodness, that I am come to the end of the
voyage of the wandering Knight: by the which thou may understand, that in
following Folly and vain. Voluptuousness, he forsook God, to the prejudice
and hurt of his soul, yea, to the danger of everlasting damnation. Here thou
may learn that al voluptuous worldlings are the very subjects of Satan, and
that earthly goods and worldly pleasure, shall quickly consume. Thou art taught
likewise what great clemency God used to him, drawing him by his Grace, from
the sink of sin, wherein he was sunk: how he was led to the place of
Repentance, and from thence to the Pallaice of Virtue, where by Gods grace he
is now, and what goodness he has found there, thou have heard at large. The
Lord grant us to land where he is landed, even in the land of promise,
promised to the Elect.

And now to conclude, I beseech your good courtesies, that if any thing in this
my labor mislike you, interpret the same to the best, and to lay nothing to my
charge in the way of presumption: but commending my good meaning and allowing
my will, not to contemn, but to speak well, and esteem of this my work, and
to use it for thy benefit and edification, for the which end I made and
compiled the same.

And now I exhort you all (in Christian love and charity, that if by Gods
grace you be resident in Virtues Pallaice, to persevere and continue there to
the end, humbling your selves before God and always trusting unto his
goodness, not unto your own strength or merits: acknowledging also Gods
grace, by the which you are as you are, and of whom you have, that you have.
Let all your confidence be in his mercy and in his goodness.

Furthermore, if any feel and perceive himself out of Virtues Pallaice, by
means of worldly vanities, let him consider the great peril he is in, and
speedely turn to repentance, with a contrite and sorrowful heart, requiring
pardon of God, and trusting wholly to the merits and passion of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Let him not be ashamed to acknowledge his sins, which
if he do, he shall find at Gods hands grace and mercy. And now I beseech our
Lord God to give us all grace, to do according unto that which here is spoken
(for otherwise of our selves it is not possible) that leading a life acceptable
and agreeable unto his holy will, we may in the end after the voyage which we
have to pass in this world, see and enjoy, possess and have the full
fruition of that glorious City of Paradise, where true blessedness and
perfect felicity dwells, even in the habitation of God almighty, unto whom
be all honor, glory, power and dominion, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
GLORY TO GOD.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East.


