THE LIFE, CONFESSION, AND HEARTY REPENTANCE OF Francis Cartwright, Gentleman;
For his bloody Sin in killing of one Master STORR, Master of Arts, and
Minister of Market Rason in Lincolnshire. Written with his own hand.

PSALM. 51. 14. Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God, thou that art the God
of my health: and my tongue shall sing of thy Righteousness. LONDON, Printed
for Nathaniell Butter. 1621.

Francis Cartwrights PVBLIQVE REPENTANCE FOR HIS BLOVDIE SIN.
THree special Motives, besides the suggestion of the Spirit of God in my own
soul privately, have enforced me to this public declaring my self.

First, because my Acts have bin committed before the face of Heaven, and in
the eye of the World, I cannot think, but I am bound in conscience to give
satisfaction to the offended world; that it may be as well a witness of my
serious and most humble repentance, as it has bin a Spectator of those crimes
which have justly vpbrayded my condemnation before the Tribunals both of God
and Man. Verily, me thinks, I am like a Leper in the Congregation, whom every
one will shun, nay, who is bound to say to others; Come not near me, for I
am unclean. Every eye that looks on me is a Dart to wound me with the
remembrance of mine own guiltiness, every finger does or may point at me, as
a man forlorn of men. So unclean, so despicable shall I remain, till I
publish and proclaim my uncleanness. Surely, there will be no rest in my
bones by reason of my sin, until I have doubled the confession of my sin.
I owe a duty of submission, not only to God himself, whose deepest curse I
have deserved, but also to his Church and people, whom I have grievously
scandalized. Nay, I owe a reparation to my own lost credit. Has some deed of
mine been in the fowlest colors blazed to the world in print? So may,
perhaps, my printed Contrition redeem my reputation from those obloquies it is
almost buried in, as well as my near dead soul has internally received a new
life from the merciful breath of God, inspiring into it all compunction and
just sorrow that may prevent his eternal Judgment.

Secondly, that since I have been deeply branded with shame of the world
outwardly, and with the terrors of God, and scourge of conscience inwardly, my
example may be a dreadful thunderclap of warning and affright to all,
presuming and perseuering Sinners, whom the hand of God will surely find out,
and deeply wound with the Darts of his vengeance.

Lastly, and chiefly, that by this Discourse of mine, the world may see the
power and goodness of the Almighty, that has not forsaken me when I fled from
him and my self, but has even then powered on me the freshest Balm of his
mercies, when the wounds of my soul festered and stunke most, giving me leave
to surfeit on sin, that I might loathe it; to dye my hands in blood, that I
might seek the blood of Christ to purify me; and to wallow in sensuality
and security, that my true repentance at last might lodge me safe in the
repose of a quiet conscience. Let it not therefore seem tedious to thee,
charitable and compassionate Reader, to survey my Anatomy thus by my self
disected, of which I will not leave one small vein or sinew undiscovered; but
from my first, to this day, truly and ingeniously without extenuating
partiality, lest so I should seem to cherish, not abandon mine own
corruption; I will relate how miserable I have made my self in what I have
been, how much recollected and revived I am, in what I now am; and how happy I
hope to be, in what I resolve to persevere in, till the consummation of my
wretched life.

First, my youth and morning of my days was clouded with a stubborn and
headstrong disobedience to my Parents, the first and worst note of a desperate
and obstinate sinner; to whom I so much forgot my own duty, that all their
indulgence to me, I valued as their duties; their Councels were diseases to my
courses, their Monitions were irksome to my ears, because enemies of my ryots,
and their gentle chastizements the Contradictors of my lasciuiousnes; so that
even then before I knew what it was to be, I had made my self nothing, and
which is worse insensible of any thing; their cares still followed me, and
still my stubbornness fled from them, to heap the hotter coals upon my head.
Little did I regard that which most behooued me to learn and practice: The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Prou. 1. 7, 8, 9.
but Fools despise instruction. My son hear the instruction of thy Father,
and forsake not the Law of thy Mother: For they shall be an ornament unto thy
head and chains about thy neck.

Upon this foundation of my disobedience, the Devil began to build a Mansion
for himself to inhabit, and so grew my soul a Cage of unclean Birds,
wherein many foul sins were bred, and grew to such strength, that I was
mastered by them: One Impiety begat another, yet still I thought my self not
sufficiently flesht in wickedness, till I defaced the Image of God, first in
my own soul, by hatred and reuengefull malice; then in another body, by
homicide. O frightfull remembrance! O the deep sting, O the dismal sound of
this crying sin! Wretched man that I am. Was it not heinous enough for me to
kill a man, but I must by my fury be put on such a one, whose Coat and
quality added many degrees to the foulness of the Murder; a Minister of
Gods Word, mine own Pastor and Watchman of my soul, Master William Storr,
Master in Arts, who being a zealous detester of my lewd courses, and both in
private and public using sharp reprehensions to me and of me, did thereby
kindle in me an hatred, not of mine own lewdness, but of his person? I might
perhaps by way of extenuation say, that had he used greater words and milder
reprehensions to me, he might by Gods blessing have plucked me out of the snare
of Satan, and so had prevented this shortning his own days by my hand. I
might say that my distemper was enraged by his unseasonable corrosiues, which
might perhaps have been allayed and cured by gentle Balmes. But I utterly
disauow all abating any part of my crime: I stand forth here to accuse, to
arraigne, and to condemn my self, not to use defenses or mitigations, much
less like to our first parents to put off my fault, and lay it upon others:
Nay, I dare not so much as catch at Fig-leaues to cover my own shame. I
proclayme my worst deformities, that others seeing them and hating them, may
now pity my person* and comfort my soul.

Being thus enraged against him, and resolving to execute some notable revenge
upon him; I did not (as the Searcher of all hearts witnesses with me) intend
more to him then some slight wounding, as the manner I took him in may in some
sort witness: the place being public in the sight of many, my self unready,
and unprovided for my own safety by flight, which I should have ordered my
coursefor, had my intent been murtherous.

But here it pleased God in his just judgment, for my hardness of heart and
contempt of his Word and Commandments, to give over my hand to wound deeper
then my heart intended. Woe is me, my heart bleedeth to think, how deep my
Sword pierced. The enemy of Mankind was a Murderer from the beginning, he gat
such dominion over me, that he made my Sword and hand his Servants, and so made
me like unto himself, a bloody Manslayer. So must I needs acknowledge my
self, because my heart, though not before so intending, yet as principal is
guilty of that which my hand did in the heat of fury. True it is, and alas,
woe is me for it, I gave him diverse wounds, whereof within eight days he
dyed, yielding up that soul which justly craved for vengeance upon me for
disseuering it from the body. This done, I retired and saved my self by
flight withal conueniencie I could, and with a resolution to recover Scotland,
after many dangerous escapes I attained to Barwicke; where I was for the fact
apprehended; and from thence (though it were a Garrison observed with all
strictness) I made a strange escape, and thence ouer-land I went toward
Plimmouth, in which passage, though I avoided all the way-layings to prevent
me, at Warwick I was questioned in susspition of a Robbery, but for that my
innocence could not be frighted, though still the guilt of the other fact
pursued me, but neither so retired or safe was I, that my being freed from the
hand of Justice, could either free my body from Gods Judgment, or my mind
from fearing it, carrying ever with me a distressed conscience, that like a
troubed Sea tossed me to and fro, yet never so left by Gods mercy, that I had
not ever a true and sensible feeling of what I had done, though my distractions
directed me not a course which way to redeem my self; the horror of my fact
and despair fighting against me on the one side, my viewing and considering
of Gods mercies opposing that on the other, till thus in the following dangers
and calamities of my life, which after I shall show, God has by threatening me
with unheard dangers, always following me, and yet never hurting, as if his
Providence would not leave one hour of mine to such security, as might make
me presume that he had forgotten to punish me, longer then I remembered to be
mindful of my sins, and renew my Repentance for them.

My self, with my load of sin and guiltiness, being thus then from
Dartmouth, shipped in a Vessel bound for Saint Malo^s in France, Almighty God
knowing the corruption of my nature, lest I should forget his power and my
self, in this seeming safety of mine, commanded the Winds and Seas to war
against our poor Bark, which provoked a more fearful tempest within me, then
could be threatened without, though we spent our main Mast by the board; for
then I began to remember that excellent saying of the Psalmist, Whither shall I
go from thy spirit? Psalm. 139. 7, ^.
or whither shall I fly from thy presence? Let me take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea* yet thither shall thine
hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me, etc.

Then much more then before, my conscience waked my sleeping soul, and the
wounds I had made were bleeding before me; in this danger God vouchsafed us
his mercy, and set us safe on shore in the I Will of Garnsey; there should I
again have been examined (as usually Passengers are) to give account what I
was, and whither I would, and so in likelihood should have bin discovered. But
this I shifted off by getting into a small Boat: and so unknown, I passed
from Garnsey into France, to the Roades, and so to Roane, where I lived about
six months; being at length exposed to as much misery, as perplexity could
lay on a friendlesse Stranger in an unknown Land. These sufferings still
brought me home to my self, and nearer to God, in the true acknowledgement of
my vild fact; and his mercy in the extremest wrack of my want; see the
Providence of God my still Preserver. Three ships of the States came to Calice
to receive money, lent by the States to the French King; with whom like a
restless man, being at that present relieved with money by my Father, I shipped
my self, and from Rotterdam I came to Delphe, where Sir Francis Vere
entertained me a Gentleman of his Company; during my abode in that service, I
received continual sollicitings for my amendment, repentance, and comfort from
one Master Trigg of Longledenham in Lincolnshire a godly Preacher, whose daily
Letters quickened and seconded that good work the Lord had already begun in
me. My Father had by this time, being the year 1603. procured my Pardon, and
sent for me home, for which I was no sooner shipped; but still observe how God
followed me with mercy, and threatening judgment; lest my pardon from my
Prince, should make me careless of his better forgiveness, and negligent in
the begging it. The Seas must again swell as angry to bear my sins, and as
if all these dangers of Rocks and Seas had bin to little, our Tempest beaten
Vessel must be chased by a Dunkarker Man of War, so that their was no hope
left to save us from these dangers, but his Omnipotent hand, which safely from
all these delivered me once again on English ground.

Scarce was I entertained at home, but least still I should nestle my self in
a secure slumber, another affliction arose to endanger me. The wife of the
slain sueth an Appeal against me, notwithstanding my Pardon, against which
her Plea, by reason of some error in the form of it, I obtained a defense or
defeat, called, Ne recipiatur: yet after this was, my Pardon questioned at the
Bench of Assise for about five years together, the Judges of that Circuit
still binding me over, and refusing to give allowance to it: Which I
acknowledge (though it were Summum lus against me) yet that it was very
honorably and Iudge-like done of them, in so notorious a Crime as mine. As
also his Majesty himself, by whose extraordinary grace I enjoy my breath, was
in point of Justice very willing that some defect, if possible, might have
been found in my pardon, and so should I have undergone the just stroke of the
Law: which not only others, but even my self wondered how I could escape. Thus
the terrors of deserved death were still knocking at the doors of my ears
and heart.

In all which troubled time, new prouocations were daily offered me, whereby I
was in danger to draw more blood upon me, or make my self incapable of my
pardon; all which things God suffered me to be temped with, but not to fall
into, in the mean while, my Father was taken away from my troubles, and out of
this World, I resolved to have gone again out of this Land; in which time I
hoped with my earnest Repentance, to obtain forgiveness from my God, and a
new acceptance at my return into the bosom of my offended Country: but the
Appeal being crossed, and finding my Pardon firm, I altered that
determination, and prayed to God to bless me with a Wife, with whom I might in
an honest life wear out my days, and retire my self to God and the settling
of my conscience. To this end I solicited a Gentlewoman, in which suite of
mine, many dangers laid siege to me, and by the most means that ever man did;
I escaped the depriving of my life, by four men which assaulted me with
Halberts, and grievously wounded me; running me through the body, and giving
me grievous wounds.

How just, O Lord, had it been that I, by whose hand the life of a man was
spilt, should have been made a due Sacrifice though not to Justice, which if I
escaped, vet to revenge, which I deserved: Yet though left for dead by this
assault, it pleased God to preserve my life: I hope to my further repentance,
and his better service.

This done, my Pardon yet wanted allowance by Sir Peter Warberton, who enforced
me publicly to submit my self to the Church, and so in the Convocation house
before my Lords Grace of Canterbury, and the rest of the Reverend Bishops and
Clergy in the Parliament time; I did acknowldge my fault, and gave testimony
of my Contrition and Repentance, and made a true profession of my Religion; and
then the said worthy Judge and Judge Wamsley, gave allowance to my Pardon.

Thus freed from the external punishment of the Law, and my mind thereby the
better settled for my inward content; I bestowed my self in Marriage, in which
God gave me the blessing of a Father in my Posterity, and thus retired my
civil life, woue me again into the opinion of my Country, and conversation
of the Ministry, from which, before my Fact had justly excommunicated me;
Master Doctor Hook, now Archdeacon of York, then entertayning me a Soiourner
in his house, with my Wife and Family; he and other Ministers of those parts
affording me their conference, comforts and society. Yet lest my past troubles
and vexations of body and mind, should foolishly make me hope; that I had
made an ample satisfaction to God and the World, the Omnipotent Power had
destined a new trial for me; and in the midst of my seeming peace, I must be
exposed to a War almost as fearful as the first, as if by doing new
mischiefs, I should only be made capable of satisfying for the old, or by
losing my self again, I should thus be found the second time my first
Repentance insufficiently perfected.

My occasions drawing me to Grantham, unhappily, I encountered with one Master
Riggs, a man urged by his own rashness (as I conceive it) to seek his own
fall by my hand, that I being made the lucklesse instrument of his death, might
then truly see that God was not at atonement with my soul for the first,
when he permitted me to be a Destroyer of a second: unmoved by any occasion of
mine, grossly, and strangely, three or four several times he heaped injuries
upon me, beyond the temper of any humane sufferance, unless, in those with
whom the Spirit of God had more residence then yet it had with me, nor
satisfied with this but he must needs pursue me, though avoiding him and in my
way home assaulted me with his Sword, of whom I received hurts; but in
conclusion, by me he fell; his wound being dressed, the Surgeons warranted life,
but the work of the Lord is beyond the imagination of likelihood, or the
frail apprehension of weak man: It was otherwise for my greater punishment
determined by him: but on the assurance of his Dressers; I was bayled, and when
the news of his death came unlooked for, I was persuaded to fly, which for
these two causes I utterly refused. First, and principally, I knew and had
before tried that I could not fly from the wrath of God, though I were covered
with Mountains, or hid in the Caves of the Earth; and therefore rather desired
(if so it pleased him to accept of my poor life as a Sacrifice for the blood I
had spilt) willingly, and patiently to lay my self on the block of death.
Secondly, my Wife and innocent Children, must needs have been by my flight
exposed to all ill sufferings for my guilt; my Wife widdowed and comfortless;
my Children Fatherless and destitute, and my estate which my stay might save
for them thus confiscated. For these causes, was I apprehended, and in a moment
ravished from all I delighted in, having nothing left to feed on but my
Despair, had not God sent me inward comfort, no companion, but miserable and
afflicted thoughts, no house to dwell in but a Prison and no Comforter; (I mean
outward) but Iobes, the skorne and reproach of all my Frinds, and Acquaintance.
In this miserable Exigent, I arraigned my soul, which still had nothing to
plead, but guilty, a hopeless Plea; so that had not my still preserving God,
who though I forsook him, never yet forsook me, sent me infinite comforts
and assurances by two daily visiting godly Ministers, Master Buddle, and Master
Atkinson, I should there I fear, have proved my own Executioner, and have
dyed despayring. By their good means, I began with a lively faith to lay
hold on the merits of Christ, and rest my weary, sick and staggering soul
upon his Cross.

Master Buddle never leaving me, the time of Imprisonment and Irons. For which
the Lord give to him, and all my just and merciful Friends, mercy to his and
their houses, as Paul prayed for Onesiphorus who was not ashamed of my chains,
and never left me till he had removed from me a desperate opinion I was
falling into, that God hated me from the beginning, every thing being so
cross to me from my birth, in which he satisfied me, that it was for sin:
and that God hated none but for sin, of which, if I repented, and truly
turned to God, I should find God his favor toward me, and that these
afflictions would be good for me.

New troubles yet (behold) assailed me, and now the Lord began to visit me
every way as in my self, so in what was nearest and dearest unto me, my only
Child for whose means of living, I had exposed my self to the stroke of
death, was touched by the angry hand of God (hopeless of recovery) his
wretched Mother weeping, the Bell tolling, his Grave prepared, and which was a
doubler of my torment, my self like a condemned Gally Slave, led in Irons to
see his departure. The grieuousnesse of this spectacle struck a sudden
amazement into me, and then I began earnestly, and faithfully to beseech God
not to lay my sins on the head of my innocent Child, but to turn his
merciful face toward him, howsoever his divine Justice intended to dispose of
me; My gracious God heard me, and past and beyond all earthly hope and mean;
in an instant restored him to health.

Now the time of my trial for Master Riggs came, where though my Judge was
severe in respect of my past life; and not trusting the vnder-Sherife, did
himself choose out a Jury of men of the better fashion to judge upon me
without partiality, yet upon the Evidence of my avoiding him, I was not found
guilty of Murder, charged upon me in the Indictment, but of an inferior
degree. At which time being adjudged without bail to suffer a years
imprisonment, I felt again the hand of God upon me by visiting my said Son
in a strange manner, that all men might take this for a terrible note of his
Judgment, and rather then accidental or natural disease, he was crippled
and taken lame in all his limbs, and deformed in all proportion, as if the
Lord had in him figured the lamenesse and deformity of his Fathers soul.
About 4. years this continued on him and then God in his good time restored
him to perfect health and ability of body, leaving me this use of all his
Judgments which have threatened me and mine, that like an Indulgent Father ^e
has still shaken the Rod over me, but not laid it on me; that I might fear
to offend him because I see his power; and love and seek him because I taste
his mercies.

My freedom at the years end, purchased I had not, yet in all these
sufferings buried the old man so much in me, as that there remained not to much
of him in my corruption, (notwithstanding all these extremes) most of my
Estate I sold to satisfy such engagements as my troubles had pawned me in, the
surplus of which, I dedicated not (I confess) that pious way I ought either in
settling my then unsettled self in any honest Calling, or converting my left
stock to good employment, but borrowing too much liberty from Gods mercy, I
gave my self to my Pleasures, which I called lawful Recreations, though in
themselves not unlawful, being moderately used, yet surely very much
unbeseeming such a Penitent as I was, or ought to have been; and as if this
had bin nothing, I went far further; and put my money out to Usury; for
which, my Curse was to be utterly cheated of the most of it, because God in his
infinite goodness saw, that whilst I had any thing left to feed my vanities
withal, I could not be made wholly and fully his.

Thus having disposed my self of all ways and power to live and maintain my
Family here, I began to lay this to my self, that God had deservedly and
justly taken from me all that I was Master of, and to praise him for so gentle
a chastizement, and that now it lay upon me by inuocating his blessing, and
endeavoring my self in any course (how difficult soever) to leave something by
my labors purchased for my Wife and Children, since my sins had made them
destitute, never despayring, but that it might please God to preserve me, and
fully to provide for me; to this intent I was an earnest Suitor about the
Court, to some Acquaintance of my wives; only for employment, foreign or
domestical, such as their discretions should Judge me fit for* In this
Court-hope, I languisht long, till my necessities strained my patience, every
course failing me, on which I built. At last no way was left me, but to ship
my self for Argeares in the last Fleet; depending still on the mercy of God,
and resolving to serve faithfully and resolutely in all such actions my
Commander should impose on me.

In a Ship called the Vaunt-gard, Vice Admiral of the Fleet, I was appointed
by the General to the Command of Sir Richard Hawkins, a Gentleman, from whom
I received noble respect, and worthy favors; yet God that would not yet
possess me of any certain quiet either in Friends or Fortunes, though my
resolution were fixed to all Conformity, and my desires wholly dedicated to the
redeeming my lost Credit with some good Action, still exagitated my Companions
with secret heart-burnings against me, and for the Lord was angry with me, to
whom could I be acceptable; he being at war with me, from whence should I
expect peace, these my enemies, by daily prouokings on purpose to tempt me so
far that my fury might forfeit my life, and make me forget my self and God:
that had not my wise Captain prevented it, by giving me leave to depart home,
I am afraid, I had confiscated my life to Marshall Law, and heapt more blood
upon my sinne-drenched Soul. Thus was I deprived of all the comforts I
resolved of, and forced thus to return home, rather as it may be thought with
an addition of shame, then Garland of Honor; for God knew how good soever to
my self this course seemed, it was not fit for me, neither was the time of my
peace yet come.

In a Ship called the Marigold of London, I was by my Captain provided for to
come home, when in the very Road of Malaga, in the face of the Fleet, and
beginning of our Voyage we had like to have perished, had not the Lord again
extended his mercy. Two other English Ships hoysing sail with us, our Ship
was foul of another Ship which lay at Anchor in the Road, and when she should
have looffed, she fell the contrary way, as seeming unwilling to venture her
self at Sea with so heavy a burden as I was charged with; the Sea was
exceeding high, nor could the ship work, being ever foul of one Ship or
another, and in spite of all art and labor could be by the Mariners employed
she would to shore, as if she desired to spew me out of her sick bowels; and
had she not in midst of all these dangers by the letting fall of an Anchor
been stopped, she had ineuitably split upon a Rock that was then menacing
her. Away were our Companions gone to Sea, and we thus left, then began I to
fear, least the Seamen should lay all this mis-aduenture on me, and prayed
fervently that the Lord would not that way punish me, but for his mercy sake
deliver us. With much labor and more fear, at length we put to Sea, where we
had not long been, but on this side the Straites of Gibiralter, when we were
almost past fear; still the Judgment of God pursued me, lest I should forget:
Five Turks men of War bore up with us; and like the fear of these, the Sea
had none; to resist we were unable, though we addressed our selves for fight,
and to be taken Slaves to Infidels and Vassals, to the common enemies of
Christ, oh what can cruelty more devise to punish with; or the trembling heart
of dejected man more fear to suffer under! Yet from this gaping mischief the
Lord provided an unexpected delivery, for those which are by nature the
deuourers of men, proved our Deliuerers. Two Lions we had aboard us, which
they knew sent from Argears a Present to our King, for which cause in all
likelihood they left us without spoiling, that present intimating a League of
Amity betwixt our Nation and their Town; this I applied to my soul, and
confessed the wonderful Works of God.

Parted thus from the Turks, all the rest of our time at Sea till we made
Land, was for the most part frighted with all the hideous fears that salt
Region is full of, so that I suspected my self still, and applied all to mine
own heart, as well the dangers as deliverances; assuring my self, that such
judgments could follownone but me, and such redemptions none but such the
Lord had reserved for some good Work.

At Deal I landed, and in my way to Chatham, as I was hastily coming out of
the hired Coach which I came in; my Sword suddenly fell out with the point up,
nor could I stop my self: but violently with all my weight I fell upon it; yet
the Lord turned the harm from me, and betwixt my arm and body it slided: of
which escape, then and now I make this use; that though I had escaped the
threatenings of the Seas, the fury of the Turks; my self had that about me
the Lord could destroy me with, in my greatest security, which had I perished
in, would have proved the fearefullest of all that ever threatened. That I by
whose unhappy Sword, two before had fallen, should now after the Law was
appeased, and all my recited dangers escaped, be exposed to an exemplary and
wretched end upon my own Weapon, for in the unlikeliest means, more horror
still aggrauates the judgment.

Francis

Francis Cartwrights RESOLVTION AND RELIGION.
THus my Life has been an heavy burden to me, continually pressing me
down. And although in my youth, I was truly taught the true and sound
Religion, how to fear, honor and serve God; in so much that I durst not
presume to run wilfully into sin, or to live and continue in sin without
Repentance: Yet so far at length the subtilties of Satan, the allurements and
pleasures of the World, mine own natural frailties, and my want of Temperance
and Judgment prevailed and ouer-mastered me; that I presumed of the name of
Faith, and of Gods Mercies toward me, and gloried in mine own estate and
condition while I compared my self with some others, whom I perceived so much
to neglect God, as that they only used Policy, and made Religion only a
Cloak; and I blind and miserable wretch so presumptuously thrust my self on
Gods mercies, without regard to Gods Laws.

So from hence have proceeded all other evils and mischiefs which have
befallen me. Hence it is that I have so fearfully fallen, and so grievously
and haynously sinned against God, committing these outrageous sins which I
would not have committed for the saving of my life, and for the expiating and
ransoming of which, after that I had acted and committed them, I would
willingly have given my life, if it could have been accepted for a
satisfaction. And God, for these my sins, giving me over; I wasted my Estate
by Suites, not abating mine expenses as my Estate wasted: whereby I see plainly
that Gods heavy and dreadful hand has haunted and pursued me not only for my
cruel and bloody sin committed upon Master Storr, but also for my other
sins and transgressions which I have committed, sometimes presuming too much,
and sometimes despayring of Gods mercy. So that now being as it were, brought
to the stake, and as a miserable distressed man put upon the Rack; I am
inwardly forced to make confession of my sins, open profession of my desires,
purposes and resolutions, and give account of my Religion before Almighty God
and the World.

I do see and observe Gods fearful Judgments upon all notorious Sinners
from Adam until this present Age, not only testified and recorded in the holy
Scriptures and in profane Histories, as for example upon Cain, Saul,
Achitophel, Judas, Herod, and cruel Nero, and such like; but even also daily
executed before our eyes, as upon Varney, Dansecar, Percie, Catesby, Wright,
and all such Murderers, Traitors, Pirates, Thieves, and unjust persons.

Sir Francis Varney an Englishman borne, and living here in Sensuality until
he had spent his Estate, went to Sea, and became Pirate. And falling in at
Argears, and there for some small time remaining, he fell in love with a Whore
or Prostitute, but she being subtle, would not incline to him without
marriage; nor marry unless he would forsake his profession of Christ and
turn Turk. He enraged with Lust after this Whore (became Turk) and
presently married her, which he no sooner had done, but a Dog, which Dog
before waited on him and loved him; assaulted and fell upon him suddenly, most
Lion or Tygre-like, as though he would instantly have devoured him: but being
rescued, yet the Dog in that rage tore the Calves of his legs. And yet a
further judgment fell upon this Varney, for (albeit the Turks for some small
time, gave him command and office) in the end they cashiered him, and being
taken by the Spaniard, judged him to the Galleys, where he wrought as a Slave,
until he dyed most miserably.

Danseker a Dutchman being a Pirate at Argears, though he turned not Turk, yet
he was as it is reported, murdered by them of Argears privately.

An Heathenish Pagan, Infidel, or Atheist, I am not: Neither am I of the
Romish Religion, though (I confess) there are many carnal reasons which do
persuade me to embrace and put in practice some of their Opinions and
Doctrines, as praying to Saints; because I hold my self unworthy to pray to
God Almighty, Purgatory that I might have an end of torment, and not remain
under eternal wrath and Vengeance in Hell: Merit or satisfaction by Fryerly
austeritie.

For such as I whose conscience is burdened, are held fit to be new molded
and tutored in their Monasteries, and set upon strange and hideous Exploits,
for redemption of themselves, and good of that Church. Besides, I have had many
favors and courtesies from some noble and zealous persons of that Religion, the
loss of which I do willingly sustain for this mine open profession. Yea,
being by Gods heavy judgments plunged into the depth of extremities, I have
been beholding to some of the learned among them, and can now, if my
conscience would suffer me, be entertained among them, either into their
Cloisters, or for the Wars; and be esteemed and sufficiently relieved with
necessaries: whereas I am now neglected by mine own Nation, who all seem to
verify in me that saying of DAVID, God has forsaken him, pursue and take him.
And though all this be come upon me, yet, I profess, I do not incline to
believe the Romish Doctrines of the Mass, Transubstantiation, Merit,
Justification by Works, and such like. I acknowledge that all the glory of
our salvation is due to God, who works all in all. And to our Lord Jesus
Christ we owe all the thanks, who by his own sufferings, and with his most
precious blood has satisfied the Law, pacified Gods wrath, paid our debt and
ransom, and cancelled the bond.

And if they of mine own Religion here in this Church of England should
utterly refuse me, forsake and cast me off, yet will I still hold this
opinion, and thus reverently esteem, think, and speak of this Church and
Religion, and will choose rather to live in concontinuall penury, then to be of
another mind: For I am sure, this Religion is that which is taught in Gods
holy Word, and therefore I must needs believe it; As for the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, I could never find comfort in it, only in that which they deny
to Laymen, that is, the reading of the Scriptures do I find true ground of
consolation.

True it is, that simple and unstable men may abuse their reading of the
Scriptures unto error, and by Gods gracious promises therein recorded, may
take occasion to presume and trust too much to their own Faith and Gods
Mercies: But this ought not to make us disclayme or to neglect the daily
reading of Gods sacred Word; for there is no means like to this so powerful,
to keep men from committing of sin; nor after sin committed, to uphold
them from falling into final Desperation.

For my part, I have desired as much as any Sinner that ever was, the content
of this Worlds base sinful Pleasures, Riot, Vainglory, Revenge, Excess in
Prodigality, and the like: But these crosses and calamities befalling me. The
reading of the Scriptures accompanied with the sweet Conference and Comfortable
Letters of merciful learned men, who have dealt with me those ways in
England, and by writing to me into the Low Countries, (among whom I cannot omit
to name with reverence and thankful acknowledgement, Master Trigg, Master
Buddle, Master Crashaw, and of late at Lambith, Master Doctor Goad* and Master
Doctor Featly, etc. unto whom I have sued as the woman did to Christ, even for
Crummes falling from our Saviors Table) have most powerfully opened mine eyes,
and enlightened mine heart and soul to see, seele, and taste Gods Judgments
and Mercies, mine own sins and transgressions, the peace of conscience, the
difference of Sinners penitent and impenitent. Cain, Saul, Achitophel, and
Judas, their despair; and the confession and repentance of David, Peter, and
the rest of Gods Saints.

Seeing David that great anointed King and all the renowned Servants of God,
have confessed their blood guiltiness and other foul sins, and have
repented of them, and openly exclaymed against them: Shall I a wretch not
worthy to be named among the meanest of all dejected Sinners, think it a shame
to me, and blush to confess my sins, and openly to publish my grief and
repentance? Especially (seeing) now all the World; Learned Men, Gods
Messengers, Friends, Enemies, the Troubles and Miseries which I have sustained,
the peace and torment of Conscience which I have felt, do provoke me, teach
me, drive me to confess my sins and offenses, offending and transgressing
the Laws of God.

I here (therefore) in bitterness of soul, confess my faults, and cry out
against all my sins committed from my birth to this present, from Master
Storr his blood; to every hurt and wrong which I have done to any, in deed,
word, or thought: not only for my cruelty and revenge done to men, but for
that I have since also thought it lawful to defend my self with Sword,
contrary to the Laws of God, when I might perhaps better have done it by other
means.

It wounds me to think of my blasphemous oaths uttered in passion and
distemper. My disobedience to my Parents, my excess, my drinking of healthes,
my prodigality: yea, my eating and drinking of more then to suffice nature,
and my feeding of Horses, and Dogs with man's food, such as many good
Christians wanted; expecting of the blessing for my faith without works, and
for believing without living of a sanctified life, or truly following of a
lawful calling; my open and secret sins, my many motions to sin, and too
much yielding to Satan's subtilties and mine own imperfections, vain and light
disposition, pronenesse to Anger, Pleasure, Distrust, Despair, my presumption
when God showed any miraculous deliverance, or any mercy to my soul, body or
estate.

All these are as a terrible Army of so many deadly foes, and like so many
Swords and Spears entering into my heart and soul. When I consider with my
self mine own uncertain condition, how when I have thought my self safe and
sure, I have found immediately that I have been most uncertain and in
greatest danger; and when in greatest danger, by Gods help and power most
secure; how in every pleasure and calamity I have found a bait, and in every
bait an hook; and that though for the space of ten years last, I have had a
resolution not to sin with purpose; but rater to dye: yet by mine own
weakness and wilfulness in passion, I have fallen into so innumerable and so
abominable sins, and have as it were trampled under foot the blood of the Son
of God, and returned like the Dog to his vomit, and like the Swine to the
mire, by my continual falling; repenting from the bottom of my heart, for all
and every sin which I have committed from my birth, to this moment.

And upon the knees of my heart, do with such humble desire and affection, as
the difference requires between the Mighty and Almighty Commander of
Heaven, Earth, and Sea; and me one of the greatest Sinners in the World, a
wretched vile worm of no reputation: yea, with as seruent and vehement
importunity as ever any Thief did crave pardon, or child mercy and
forgiveness, do I beg and sue for pardon of God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the seer of the secrets of all hearts, for his mercies sake, whose
mercies are over all his works, whose mercy preuayleth and rejoices against
his justice, and whose loving kindness lasts for ever.

Upon his promises made unto us in his holy word, do I build all my hope and
confidence, even such as these following: viz. That though our sins be as
Crimson or Scarlet, he will make them white as Snow, Esaias 1. 1^.
or Wool. That at what time soever a Sinner does repent, he will put out all
his iniquites; that if they would turn from their wickedness, and do
righteousness, they shall not dye but live, That he has Balm of Gilead to
heal the weak and sick. Also upon these promises of our Lord Jesus, God
equal with his Father, who says, Come unto me all ye that travel and be
heavy Mat. 25.
laden, and I will ease you, etc. His disgraces, reproaches, troubles, tears,
sighs, groans, thorns, skornes, whipping, spitting upon, beating, stripes,
sweating, nayling, hanging, wounding, bleeding out his heartbloud, Passion,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension are so many Salues and Medicines to cure my
bleeding soul. His blood speaks better things then the blood of ABEL, and
the cry thereof overcomes the voice of Master Stors blood, and of all other
my loud crying sins which call to Heaven for vengeance. And therefore with
this his blood which has satisfied for all temporal and eternal punishments,
do I come sprinkled before God, and for the price and satisfaction made by
this blood, do I cry for mercy, mercy, and earnestly desire grace to live
hereafter an holy and righteous life. I am a Christian and a penitent Sinner:
how can I despair or doubt of salvation, knowing Gods infinite Mercy and
Truth? that he is not only a God of Mercy ready to pardon but also a God of
Truth, who will truly fulfill his word and promise of pardon; upon men's true
Repentance, as of justice in punishing them, who persist in sins committed.
Why should I be afraid to touch the hemme of my Saviors garment; seeing his
promises are made unto me, his satisfaction for me, and for such Sinners as I
am, he did undergo all his sufferings, from the prick of the Thorn to the
wound with the Spear; from his first groan, to his last act of passion, his
grave and burial to his Resurrection and Ascension into Glory? Me, thinks,
those blessed words of the Apostle are spoken not only to me, but of me;
Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am the chief. Can
I repenting doubt? Can I being a Christian be so base as to be ashamed to
confess the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. Can I have more content, or aim
at more then to be a Christian Convert and a true Penitent, seeing there is no
higher honor in the world to be aimed at, no glory comparable to be a true
Christian? Can disgrace, poverty, calamity, height, or depth, life or death,
sin or the Devil daunt me? They cannot, they cannot, for I find God a light
to me in the midst of darkness, and a refreshing comfort in all calamities.
In so much that when I am in the deepest despair for my sins, in the
greatest agonies and horrors of conscience and most bitter passions, thinking
with my self what an Estate I once had, and how poor I am now? How I was
valued, now despised, how they who esteemed me living in sin, do now refuse
me repenting of my sin.

What great cause of discomfort it is to me, that I cannot nor am able to have
the breeding, or to enjoy the sight of my Children being Infants, for whom I
would suffer death, having no refuge but to be a Soldier or serve: yet still
even when I am thus dejected, and cast down as low as sin, misery, and the
Devil can cast me down: I do not let go my hold, but do cleave to God and
am vpholden by him continually.

When it is manifest that none of these things can tempt and allure me either
to remove my Religion which I profess, or to forsake my Lord Jesus Christ whom
I should forsake and forgo, if I should resolve to live in Theft, Piracie or
any other sin: That I have time to publish this I am fully satisfied my soul
is at rest: I am less careful of my life a thousand times, not desperately
but humbly yielding my self to God; if I starve, perish, dye by the Sword, be
taken captive by the Turk, and live a most miserable Slave all my days: Yea,
come woeful life or shameful death I will trust in God though he kill me, and
will never fly from him.

And here (I profess) and protest before God and the World, that as I have
dishonored God, stained my self with blood in a most vile and abominable
manner, and defiled the honor of Religion to the great scandal and offense of
many: So I do now with all my heart desire, if I may be thought worthy, and
have a due calling thereunto, to stand with my Sword in my hand, and to expose
my self to the greatest dangers in the World; in the most bloody Battles,
Fire or Sword, where God may show extraordinary Mercy or Judgment, in the
defense of the Gospel and of true Christian Religion. And as I have basely
slain a Minister of Gods Word, so in defense of the men of God, the faithful
Ministers of his Word in this Church of England, I may in any breach or danger
interpose my self even between them and death, and defy and withstand all
their Enemies, or any other ways yield my self to Gods Judgments, Trials,
Corrections, and Directions, in a Vocation how low and mean soever, and never
turn Capuchine, or take upon me any Popish and Superstitious Vow and
profession of austeritie which is a fit refuge for Cowards, Cains and Iudasses.

Though my sins are innumerable and abominable which still hang fast on me, and
cleave as rust unto my corrupt nature: yet I have the Balm of Gilead, the
blood of Jesus Christ; the mercy of God, and the Divine Power of Heaven to
counteruaile them all. Yea, I have many marks and tokens of Gods grace given
to me, and of his mercy showed toward me which do much refresh my soul.

As first, that I ask and sue for mercy at no other power, but at the hand of
God for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and so in the right way to the Fountain
of Life.

Secondly, That I find great content and comfort in wrestling against flesh and
blood, and all mine own corruptions, and in maintayning to the Devils face my
Religion, Faith, Hope, Repentance.

Thirdly, That I hold my certain and resolute determination, as an armor
against his fiery Darts, and do still lay fast and sure hold on our Lord Jesus
Christ, hoping to persevere and hold out to the end.

Fourthly, That I have peace of conscience more then the World is worth, which
if I never had tasted nor known but were as an Heathen or Turk, I should with
the World (holding that for blood, vengeance must haunt without Redemption, and
so being frighted with Furies unknown and endless) grow desperate, and like
Varney and Dansekar, dye with bloody content in revenge, or prosecute till
death Piracie or Theft, to mitigate my endless tormenting miseries, and to
leave my Children an Estate, though never so unjustly got.

Fifthly, That I cannot be brought to deny Christ, or to doubt that there is a
Christ, nor be pulled from believing in Christ, and hope to be saved through
him, by the Devil, nor all my sins, if I had all the sins in the World
upon me.

Sixthly, That I am delivered from the danger and infection of the Romish
Religion. For if I were of that Religion, I would attempt any sinful course,
as Theft or Piracie to relieve my wants in hope of Pardon, Penance or
Purgatory, (for no punishment should terrify me, let it be whatsoever it
could be, even Purgatory it self, so it might have end I would willingly
endure it, if so be it might procure me pardon, and under that condition grant
me liberty to sin) I should with them of that Religion hold that Justice
must be satisfied necessarily upon Sinners in this World, and that by our own
bodily sufferings, sin must be expiated, and there is no avoiding it. And so
I would seek by voluntary earthly punishment in this life to satisfy Justice,
by turning Pilgrim or Capuchine.

Yea, I am assured that our Lord Jesus has satisfied for all punishments of
vengeance both temporal and eternal, though I have endured or should
hereafter undergo all miseries and calamities, and even a most bitter and
painful death, yet I do not account them any satisfaction or expiation, my
blood cannot satisfy for blood; I may if God should so dispose, have a bloody
end, as a just reward of my sin, I cannot deny it: but what can satisfy to
justify? Surely none of mine own miserable calamities can make any part of
satisfaction, that is a thing which I utterly disclayme; only the blood and
satisfaction of Jesus Christ is that on which I do lay hold and rely by Faith
for Justification.

Yet because not only the Majesty of God has been deeply offended by my
heinous transgressions, but also his Church greatly scandalized, and the minds
of my grave Fathers and dear Brethren in Christ no less deeply wounded in
their compassion for him that dyed by my hand, then himself was in his passion
and bodily dissolution, whose many wounds bleed a fresh in my eyes and memory:
I profess my self ready and willing to endure whatsoever other humiliation
this blessed Church has or shall impose upon me, for the further assurance of
my satisfaction to her, which may in some sort suite with the depth of my
offense against her and her Children.

Verily as I abhor Popish satisfaction, derogating from the merits of Christ's
blood, so I with others more learned then my self; wish that the ancient
Discipline of the Primitive sincere Church were more thoroughly revived in every
scandalous crime by public confession, submission and satisfaction to the
Christian Congregation. Wherein my self desire as much to go beyond others in
my humiliation, as I have exceeded all in my presumptuous transgressions. With
offensive, but penitent Ecebolius, in the Ecclesiastical History, I say of my
self; Cast me out, tread upon me for unsavory Salt.

FINIS.

