A PLAIN AND COMPENDIOUS EXPOSITION OF CHRIST'S Sermon in the Mount: Contained
in the 5. 6. 7. Chapters of Saint MATTHEW.

Being the substance of sundry SERMONS By JOHN CARTER Minister at BELSTEAD
near Ipswych:

MATTHEW 17. 5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear ye
him.

LONDON, Printed by W. S. for Samuel Man dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Swanne. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr. WILLIAM BORLACE the elder of Bockmore-hall in the
County of Buckingham, Knight; AND Mistress HELLEN BACON of Shrubland-hall in
the County of Suffolk, Widow, Grace and peace be multiplied.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
Having now, in appearance, well ncere served my time, and hoping shortly to
put off this my Tabernacle, my desire is to leave some memorial of my poor
labors to my dearly beloved Parishioners, and all other well affected people.
That after my decease (if it be the will of God) they they may have the main
documents of the truth, which is according to godliness, heretofore taught by
word of mouth, always in remembrance. Concerning the subject or matter of this
Treatise, since our Lord and Master, Christ Jesus himself, goes before me in
the whole, and I do but follow him from step to step, as a plain, and (I
trust) faithful interpreter of his mind, it challenges, of right, audience,
attention, and absolute obedience at all hands, as being in it self most
sacred and complete: whereof that of Christ elsewhere may justly be taken up,
This do, and live. For it contains a plain and perfect pathway to Heaven;
as the conelusion of this Sermon does undeniably demonstrate, wherein the
hearers and doers of these his words are pronounced immovable, as being built
upon the rock. The method or order, used by this great Prophet, is in like
manner most admirable, though (in my poor opinion) not so well observed by
interpreters. This also I have endeavored to unfold* referring every document
to the proper place; which (as I take it) helps not a little to the
understanding and bearing in mind of the whole Sermon. But if any thing be
performed by me in t^is Work, and my decrepit old age, worth your travails
in reading, I had rather that you should find it, then my self relate it;
wherefore I desist. Only give me leave (I pray you) to request two things of
your Worships; especially of you, good Sir William, so much conversant in
learned Writers of all kinds (which requests also I make to all other, who
shall venture their pains and time upon this Treatise) first, that you would
not expect any excellency of words, or intising speech of man's wisdom, which
the Apostle 1. Cor. 1. 17. and 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
so vehemently disclaymeth upon most strong Reasons, and our Lord Christ
looks not after here, or in any other his teachings, but delivers the
plain and simple truth, in all holy plainenessc and simplicity, nothing at
all careful to please men's fancies by curious phrases and figures of speech,
strange and farrefetcht conceits, or various mixture of humane Literature, for
ostentation sake: mine unfeigned endeavor has been to follow him herein also
from step to step, making the exposition as suitable, as I could, to the Sermon
it self. My second suite is, that you would be pleased not to judge of the
whole Work by some parts and passages of it, especially in the beginning of it
(which perhaps will hardly satisfy the judicious Reader) but to show me this
favor, if you make a beginning, to take the pains at your leisure, to read
all: I dare promise nothing, yet my hope is, that, so doing, your labor (as
the Apostle speaks in a higher case) shall not be altogether in vain in the
Lord. Thus craving pardon for my boldness in presuming to dedicate these weak
papers unto you, I humbly take my leave; entreating God Almighty so to be with
you by his grace and Spirit, that you may grow every day more and more like
unto your worthy Mothers (your Fathers I knew not so well;) I mean those two
famous Sisters of blessed memory, Mistress Elizabeth Barret of Bray, and Mistress
Anne Borlace of little Marlow, both Widows indeed: whom Envy it self cannot
deny to have shined as Lights in their times, for the practice of pure and
undefiled Religion. Whom also if you continue to imitate, and to be inheritours
of their great virtues, as you are of their great estates, you shall leave your
names as a blessing to your Posterity, as they have done theirs to you.

Your ancient poor friend, and petitioner to God for you and yours, IO. CARTER.

THE WISE BVILDER, OR CHRIST'S Sermon in the Mount expounded.
MATTHEW. 7. 24, 25, 26, 27. 24. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of
mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, that built his house
upon a rock:

25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.

26. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall
be likened to a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:

27. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.


IN these four Verses is contained the conclusion of Christ's most notable
Sermon upon the Mount, which is faithfully recorded by this our Evangelist
Saint Matthew, (one of the Penmen of the Holy Ghost) in the fifth, sixth, and
seventh Chapters of his holy Gospel. This worthy conclusion seems to be
inferred upon his doctrine going immediately before, concerning the dreadful
doom of all workers of iniquity, pronounced in three several sentences to
this effect, Seeing Verse 19.
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire; And again, Seeing Verse 21.
Not every one, that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; And lastly, Seeing Verse 23.
I will then profess unto many (famously known, and taken forth, among men,
for their eminent and extraordinary gifts) I never knew you, Depart from me
ye workers of iniquity; THEREFORE whosoever hears these sayings of mine,
and does them (so 2. Tim. 2. 21.
purging himself from these, as a vessel unto honor sanctified, and meet
for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good work) I will liken him unto
a wiseman, etc. Contrariwise, Every one that hears these sayings of mine, and
does them not (but Psalm. 125. 5.
turns aside to his own crooked ways, with those workers of iniquity) he
shall be likened to a foolish man, etc,

His aim and scope here, is, to set before our eyes the Image and picture of
the good and evil hearer, expressed to the quick, under the similitude of the
wise builder, verse 24. 25. First, by his actions, truly religious; he joins
practice to his hearing, turning the word into work, Romans 6. 17.
Obeying from the heart (as the Apostle testifies of the Romans) that form
of doctrine, whereunto he is delivered, or whereby he is (as it were) new
minted, or molded. So far forth that (as the same Apostle teaches in the
same Romans 12. 2.
Epistle) he is now no more conformed to this world, but transformed, by the
renewing, not of his manners alone, but of his very mind, that he may prove
by his own daily practice and experience (which is the best Commentary, of all
other.) What is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of GOD, reueiled in
his Word, and more particularly in this most wise and holy Sermon. This
effectual hearing and doing will clearly demonstrate a man to be that good
ground, commended in the Parable of the Sower, because Luke 8. 15:
having heard the Word with an houest and good heart, he keeps it, and
brings forth fruit with patience; not suffering himself to be beaten from
it by any troubles or vexations, which accompany either mortification of sin,
or persecution for righteousness. And (which is a most notable branch of
practice, without which, all comes to nothing) he is not ashamed, but
counts it his glory, upon just rebukes, to suffer himself to be reclaymed
from whatsoever error in his judgment, or aberration in his life. Prou. 9. 8.
Rebuke a wiseman, and he will love thee; give admonition (as our Lord Christ
does many in this Sermon) to the wise, and he will be wiser, says the most
wise Teacher. And again, Prou. 28 12.
As an eare-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprouer
upon an obedient ear. He rejoices no less in such reproves, then people,
especially children, do in their earings, and rich ornaments. Yea, how weak
soever the reproouer be, and how great soever the party reproved, yet he
will be ready, with right noble David, to break forth and say, 1. Sam. 25.
32:
Blessed be the Lord God, which sent thee this day to me, and blessed be thine
advice, and blessed be thou. Give me such an one, and I will say that he is a
good hearer indeed: of whom, that of the Psalmist may truly be taken up, Psalm.
87. 3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee. For Christ Jesus, the only begotten Son
of God, and Lord of glory, pronounces (and that with great earnestness) him
to be Luke 8. 21.
his brother, sister, and mother: to be blessed, Ibid. 11. 28.
rather then the womb, that bare him, and the pappes which he sucked.

Secondly, the good hearer is described by his property, which is wisdom; he
likeneth him to a wiseman. This property every one is most liquorish of,
taking after their great grandmother Eve; who though she were made wise
enough, if she could have seen it, yet would needs sing a note above Ela, and
be made wiser by the counsel of the old Cheater, the Devil, speaking in the
Serpent: whereby it came to pass, that instead of attayning to an higher pitch
of knowledge, to be like unto God, as he bare her in hand, she lost that
which she had, and plunged herself, withal her miserable posterity, into
extreme folly and vanity, ending in utter perdition. Here our Lord and Master
(being most wise, and even wisdom it self, and Luke 19. 10.
coming also to seek and to save that which was lost) prescribes unto us the
only antidote or sovereign remedy against this deadly poison, to wit, the
constant hearing and doing of these his fayings. So Moses, the servant of the
Lord, most divinely taught the people of Israel, Hear (says he) Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
and do these statutes and indgements, which the Lord my God has commanded,
for this is your wisdom and understanding. And David found the truth hereof by
most sweet and comfortable experience (as every one, that takes his course,
shall) Psalm. 119. ver. 98, 99, 100.
Thou (says he) through thy Commandments have made me wiser then mine
enemies, for they (meaning those commandments) are ever with me. I have more
understanding, then all my Teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. I
have understood more, then the ancients, because I kept thy precepts. Observe
in this worthy example, how they we^e always with him; he set them before the
eyes of his mind; they were his meditation; he kept them in practice, and so
became passing wise: which he here humbly acknowledges to the praise and
glory of God, and for our instruction, and incitation to take the like course,
in hope and certain expectation of the like success in a degree suitable to
our holy endeavors.

But we are further to understand, that by comparing this Text with Luke 6. 47.
where our Savior Christ shuts up his Sermon with this very conclusion, we
shall find, wherein the life and excellency of his wisdom consists; not in
resting upon the righteousness of the Law, or of works; much less upon the
traditions of men, or upon moral and civil virtues: but in digging deep, and
laying the foundation on a rock; which is, when we labor with all our might
to come to the true knowledge of our selves, how sinful and damnable we are by
nature, through the right understanding of the Law of God: to come also to the
sound and saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, crucified for our sins, through
the right understanding of the Gospel. So far forth, that being driven by
the Law, spiritually understood to JESUS CHRIST, we fall down at his feet (as
it were) and, from the very bottom of our hearts, cry with the poor Publican,
Luke 18. 13.
Lord be merciful to me a sinner; and withal, so receive our Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST in his holy Gospel, by a true and lively faith, that we can, and
do, in all truth, with Thomas the Apostle, break forth and say, Ioh. 20 28.
Thou art my Lord and my God. This is indeed to dig deep, and to lay the
foundation on a rock. For 1. Cor. 3. 11.
none other foundation can any man lay, save Jesus Christ; because Act. 13 38.
39
through him alone is preached the forgiveness of sins: and by him, all that
believe, are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified
by the law of Moses; much less then by any traditions or devises of man's
brain. The foundation being thus laid, there must follow a contibuilding
upon, until the house or Temple be perfected. Of the material Temple it was
said, Forty and six years was this Temple in building: but for us, coming
to Christ by faith, as 1. Pet 2. 4, 5.
to a living stone; to be built up a spiritual house, it requires unweariable
labor and pains all our life long. That See for all this
giving 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
all diligence, we may ad to our faith (whereby the fountion was laid) virtue,
or an honest and good heart and life joined with courage and resolution for the
purpose; and to virtue, knowledge; meaning daily increase of knowledge, and
careful use of all good means to that end; and to knowledge, temperance, or
Christian moderation and sobriety in the use of all outward things, as meat,
drink, apparel, riches, honor, and such like: not suffering our hearts to
be surcharged with surfeiting, drunkenness, worldly cares, pride of life, or
any thing of that nature: and to temperance, patience in bearing meekely
whatsoever injuries or insolences of our adversaries, or infirmities of our
brethren, and Fellow Christians: and to patience, godliness, endeavoring
unfeignedly to grow every day more conscionable in all our dealings with men,
and especially more devout worshippers of God, then other: yea striving, what
in us is, to double our devotions in prayer, exercise of the word and
Sacraments, due sanctification of the name of God, and of his holy Sabbaths,
meditation, conference, and all such like duties: and to godliness,
brotherly-kindnesse, being (as the Apostle Romans 12. 10.
teaches) kindly or naturally affect^oned, to love one another with brotherly
love; In honor, preferring one another; not slothful to do service
(mutually), distributing to the necessities of the Saints; given to
hospitality; ready according to the will of God, 1. John 3. 16.
to lay down our very lives for the brethren, after the example of Christ
Jesus: And to brotherly kindness, charity, extending it self to do good unto
all, friends, foes, Christians, aliens, being the Lady and Princess of all
those graces, whereby we do service one to another, and (as it were) the
mother of the maids, directing and moderating all the gifts of God, internal,
or external, to the best good of all, especially of the household of faith, all
self-love set apart. Thus to be exercised always, upon all occasions, is
rightly to build upon the foundation, to make our own calling and election
(the highest favors bestowed upon mankind) sure, and to be indeed wise
Christians.

In the third place, the good hearer is described by his outward condition: he
is liable to most grievous afflictions and persecutions, which by divine
ordination, usually follow the hearer and doer of these sayings, for his Hebr.
12. 5, 6.
correction, probation, and purgation from the most dangerous humor of pride
and haughtiness especially. As also that the Lord CHRIST his 2. Co. 12. 7, 8, 9
strength may be made perfect in the weakness of his Saints. This troublesome
condition of the people of God is signified here by the descending of the
rain, swelling of the floods, and blustering of the winds, whereof he
afterward gave his disciples warning in plain terms, In Ioh. 16. 33.
the world (says he) you shall have affliction, but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world. The experience of all ages makes good that general
proposition of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3. 12.
yea, and all, that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, shall suffer persecution.
The reason is apparent, and given by CHRIST himself, Ioh. 15. 19.
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of this world, therefore the world
hates you. Whosoever puts not this into his accounts, when he gives his
name unto CHRIST, let him know that he takes a wrong plough by the end; as we
are plainly and peremptorily taught by our Lord, and blessed Savior himself,
Luke 14. 27, 28.

Fourthly, and lastly, the good hearer is described by the fruit, event, or
success, which is his stabilitie and perseverance in the greatest storms,
when the Devil and World have done their worst; It fell not (says the Text)
for it was founded upon the rock. The good hearer is (as we heard) founded
upon CHRIST JESUS, and the promises of God (which all 2. Cor. 1 20.
in him are yea, and in him Amen) apprehended by Faith, and confessed with the
mouth, so that the gates of Hell cannot prevail against him, as we see, Matthew.
16. 16, 17, 18. Romans 10. 9, 10, 11. This is therefore justly placed among
Salomon's prouerbiall speeches, Prou. 10. 28.
As the whirlewind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an
everlasting foundation. Questionless, nothing is more sickle and vanishing,
then the irreligious rout, seem they never so well rooted and flourishing; I
have (says Psalm. 37, 35. 37. 39.
the Psalmist) seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a
green Bay Tree, yet he passed away and lo he was not. But mark the perfect
man, and behold the upright, for (howsoever he seem to be exposed to all
dangers and miseries) the end of that man is peace, or happiness: And no
marvel, since their salvation is of the Lord; he is their strength in the time
of trouble; They Prou. 14. 32.
have also hope, and a sure refuge, even in their death. To conclude this point
concerning the good hearer; As a house, well built upon a rock, may be, and
is commonly shaken, but falls not: so the hearer and doer of these sayings,
well built upon the rock CHRIST JESUS, through Gal. 5. 6.
faith, that works by love, may be, and is diverse times fearfully shaken,
by reason of hard persecution and temptations, but fall he cannot fully and
finally.

The evil hearer is described, Verse 26. 27. by the contraries to all the
former: First, he joins not practice to his hearing, but is like unto him,
James 1. 24.
that beholds his natural face in a glass, and going away straightway
forgets what manner of man he was. As if it were all Religion, and not
rather the greatest irreligion, to hear and not to do. To simple ignorance
this barren hearing adds gross contempt of the divine Majesty, whose sacred
sayings a^e by this means set at naught, and cast behind men, as altogether
unworthy to be followed.

Secondly, the evil hearer is described by his property: for he ranketh all
such among stark Fools, who hear, and do not what they hear; how
sharpe-sighted, and politic soever they be in worldly things. For whereunto
may they be better compared then to patients, dangerously and (with out the
Physicians help) desperately sick, that make none other use of their learned,
and well experienced Physicians counsel, but only to hear it, letting the
practice go, at their uttermost peril? Or according to this present
similit^de, what can be devised more foolish, then for a man to lay out his
whole estate, and time, upon a building without a foundation, which cannot but
prove a castle of come-downe, before it be long? Not without cause does the
Prophet Jeremy break forth into this vehement exclamation. Ier. 8 8. 9.
How say ye, that we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us? Lo, they
hauereiected the Law of the Lord (in respect of hearing and doing) and what
wisdom is in them? meaning, no wisdom at all in Gods account, what reckoning
soever vain men make of it.

Thirdly, the evil hearer is described by that, which outwardly befalls him,
what turnings of devices soever he uses, howsoever he would be content* to
fell away CHRIST JESUS, his Lord, that bought him, together with his Kingdom
(as Esau did his birthright) to purchase his worldly peace, and further his
own ends: yet is he to expect, that God at one time, or other, will, by
strong and strange trials, bring him also to the Touchstone, and make it
appear, That all is not gold that shines. He will winnow and weigh him to
make his lightness manifest to all the World. Thus much he would have us to
understand by the coming of the rain, floods, winds, and beating upon that
house.

Fourthly, the contrary event of hearing, and not doing, is propounded and
aggrauated, The House fell, and the fall was great. Destruction shall be to
all workers of iniquity, yea (as we heard before) every tree that bears not
good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the sire; though they never
heard any one syllable of the Word of God: but it shall come with a witness,
in a most high and fearful degree, upon all reiecters, or neglecters of holy
doctrine, especially of the most glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, How Heb. 2.
3.
shall they escape (says the Apostle) if they neglect so great salvation?
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us, by
them that heard him; God also bearing witness with signs, and wonders, and
diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. Over such neglecters are the woes
pronounced, and judgments denounced, Matthew. 11. 21, 23.
Woe be to thee Chorazin; Woe be to thee, Bethsaida, etc. And thou Capernaum,
which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down unto Hell: It shall be
more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, and the Land of Sodom, at the last day,
then for you. So Wisdom (even the essential wisdom of God, CHRIST JESUS) is
most earnest, ample, and admirable in this subject, Prou. 1. 24.
Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no
man regarded: but have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof; I will also laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction, as a
whirlewind, when distress and anguish come upon you; then shall they call upon
me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me: for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord:
they would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devices. So fearful is the estate of him, that hears and does not, even by
the testimony of the divine wisdom and truth it self, delivered with such
vehemency, as if he would shake Heaven and Earth.

Thus much of these four Verses, containing the conclusion of Christ's Sermon:
wherein because he lays all upon the doing, or not doing of these his
sayings, comprehending a short summary of his heavenly doctrine, especially of
that part, which concerns a right Christian conversation, it will be worth
the while to take a view of them, as they lie in order, and to compare our
lives to them. For certainly of most it may too truly be spoken, as Linacre,
that famous Physician, is reported to have said to King Henry the Eight;
Either these sayings are not CHRIST'S, or we are not Christians. And we are the
rather to lay our lives to these rules, because (as we may perceive by that
which has been already said) in the keeping hereof consists our wisdom,
and safety, amidst the greatest differences, dangers, and vexations, that can
befall in this life; and in the neglecting, most certain, inevitable, and
intolerable ruin, though all both men and Angels should lay their heads and
hands together to hold us up; Isai. 58. 14:
For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

To make the better way heereunto, let us first take in the sum of our Lord
CHRIST'S foregoing doctrine: which we may do the more easily because it is
summed up by this our Evangelist, Chap. 4. 17. in one only word, REPENT; that
none should plead the slipperinesse of his memory, for who cannot (if he set
his mind upon it) remember that one word? And further to admonish us, that
there is none obedience at all yielded to CHRIST'S sayings, by them, that repent
not of their sins: and when men do once unfeignedly repent, all obedience
will follow. Yet must we not imagine, that our Lord CHRIST went up and down,
repeating this bare word alone, but rather insisting upon the doctrine and
necessity of repentance, did explane, dilate, and urge it every where, upon
every occasion. This would be known before we go any further, what is meant
by repentance. This word is either taken in the large sense, as here; or in
the strict sense, as elsewhere commonly. In the large sense he preached that
men should repent, that is, (as we learn by the original tongues) come to
themselves, or to their right minds, out of the spiritual frenzy, which
naturally possesses all flesh, and return unto God their heavenly Luke 15. 17.
Father, and sovereign King, humbly confessing and bewayling their sins,
believing the Gospel, or gladtidings of free pardon and reconciliation with
God through him, and of all blessings spiritual and corporal to every
penitent petitioner: and lastly leading a life worthy of God, and of his
glorious Gospel, by an utter denial Titus 2. 1^
of ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living soberly and righteously, and
godly in this present world. In which denial and manner of living consists
our repentance in the strict sense, being caused by that godly sorrow for
sin, and belief in the Gospel before mentioned. For godly sorrow, or
sorrowing for sin, as it is sin and offense against the divine Majesty
(which cannot be without hope of pardon) 2. Cor. 7 10.
works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of.

To repentance in the large sense, consisting of due contrition for sin, true
Faith in God, through CHRIST JESUS, and new obedience to all his Commandments,
he exhorts all people by this maine reason, Mat. 4. 17.
The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; meaning that promised, and long expected
Kingdom of the Messiah, by whom they looked for a restoring of all things.
This is called the Kingdom of Heaven, because his coming into the World was
not to set up a worldly Heb. 9. 1.
sanctuary, or polity, as was formerly under the Law (comparatively:) but an
heavenly regiment, worship, and service to be performed in spirit and truth,
according to the tenor of the Gospel. This Heb. 9. 10.
time of reformation (as the Apostle calls it) now approached, yea, then was,
as he testified elsewhere to the woman of Samaria, John 4. 23.
The hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and truth. So, in like manner to the Pharisees, Luke 17. 21.
Behold, the Kingdom of God is in or among you already; meaning, that the
Messiah, whom they so much enquired after, was already come, even then present
before them. But it is said to draw near in respect of the fuller
accomplishment of all things, that were written of him, and further
manifestation of his Glory, by his meritorious Passion, victorious
Resurrection, triumphant Ascension, royal installment, or sitting at the right
hand of the Majesty, in the highest Heanens; magnificent gifts, which he Acts
2. 33.
( having received of his Father the promise of the Holy Ghost) shed forth
abundantly upon his Church; and finally, his most illustrious conquest, when,
to the amazement of all, both men and Angels, by the simple preaching of the
Gospel (as the World accounts it) he fetched in both Jews and Gentiles,
far and near, in great abundance, to the obedience of Faith. The heavenly
Kingdom, thus approaching, required a heavenly preparation for it, by that
repentance, before called for; without the which, they were utterly incapable
of it, and so, as chafe to be winnowed, or fanned out of God's floor, or
visible Church, and to be burned with fire unquenchable, as his forerunner (
John Matthew. 3. 12.
the Baptist) threatened his unfruitful hearers. This also is further to be
considered, that if the approach of this heavenly Kingdom required of every
one such careful preparation, by turning instantly to God with all their
hearts, and with all their souls; what does the presence of it require of us,
who now live in the time of reformation, and see, or may see, clearly the
accomplishment of all those high mysteries before mentioned, concerning
Christ's Death, Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven, sitting at the right hand
of his Father, the pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, and calling of the
Gentiles. To us especially is that notable exhortation directed, Psalm. 24. 7, 9.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors,
and the King of glory shall come in: for we especially are, by calling and
profession, a spiritual House or Temple, and our hearts, gates; or doors for
JESUS CHRIST, the King of glory, to enter in by: wherefore we, above all
others, are to lift up our heads on high, by raising up our minds above the
level of this World, and above all the things of this World, though never so
pleasurable and glorious in appearance. That so being Col. 3. 1, 2.
risen again with CHRIST, we may seek those things, which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God, we may set our affections on things
above, and not on things on the earth.

And this also justly calls for another deep consideration, That if the
near approach of the Kingdom of Heaven, by his appearing in grace to his
people, lay such a necessity upon them to turn (every mothers child) from
their evil ways, no believe in him, and, as becomes his Disciples and
followers, to bring forth fruit, worthy of so high and honorable a calling:
what does then the nearer approach of his appearance in glory and majesty, at
the last day (which now cannot be far off) when the Lord JESUS shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
flaming fire, to take vengeance on them that know not GOD, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. A man, living in the bosom of the
Church, and being put in mind hereof from time to time, as occasion is
offered, had need to have his conscience seared with a hot Iron, and his heart
(as the Zech. 7. 12.
Prophet complayneth) made hard as an Adamant-stone, if this most weighty
consideration do not awaken him to live 1. Cor. 15. 34.
righteously, and not to sin, as the Apostle speaks. But if neither the
presence of the Kingdom of grace, nor the expectation of the Kingdom of
glory, will do it, what remains, but that terrible sentence, which the
Son of God, the Lord and Judge of all, has denounced long ago, and will
pronounce on his tribunal seat in due time? Luke 19. 27.
Those mine enemies, which would not, that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me. Let this suffice for Christ's foregoing
doctrine.

That which remains now, is to take a view of his whole Mat. 5. 1, 2.
Sermon; the occasion whereof was offered by the marvelous concourse of
people, assembling unto him from all parts, as is showed, Chap 4. 25. as also
by the forwardness of his own Disciples, flocking about him to hear his
doctrine, and gaping, as it were for his instructions, none otherwise then the
dry and thirsty ground does for rain. This made our Lord and blessed Savior
(who always lay in wait to catch men, and was in this kind, a mightier hunter,
without comparison, then ever Genesis 10. 9.
Nimrod was in his) to spread the Net of his Evangelical and most powerful
doctrine upon the Mountain, (whither he had ascended, both to avoid the
throng, and to be the better heard.) Neither is it to be neglected, that he is
said to have sit down, as the manner of Teachers then was, and to open his
mouth, or address himself to utter his heavenly message, not lightly, or
slightly (as too-many do) but most gravely and graciously, as beseemed his
person, and the majesty of the divine Oracles, which were to come from him.
For this Teacher-like sitting down, and opening of his mouth, may serve to
admonish every one of us, that we are altogether forgetful of our duty, and
extremely unthankful, if with Luke 10. 39.
Mary, in the Gospel, we sit not assiduously and immovably at the feet of
this great Prophet, and open not our cares with due reverence and devotion, to
hear his Word. The rather, because such unmatchable treasures of spiritual
wisdom and understanding are herein contained, that this Sermon may truly be
said to be the Masterpiece of all his works, which are extant of this nature.

It may be reduced to these three heads; first, he instructs us more fully,
who are capable of that Kingdom, either of grace or glory, and so to be
accounted truly blessed: secondly, by what means, this great dignity is to
be attained unto: thirdly, what their conversation is, and ought to be, who
are of that rank.

Concerning the subject of blessedness, it has been much canuassed by the
great Philosophers, and wisemen of the world, placing it, some in one thing,
some in another: but in fine, after all disputes, leaving the matter as
uncertain as they found it. But this our heavenly teacher, without any going
about the bush, or intricate discourse, in very few words sets down most
plainly and pithily, who are indeed blessed; even such as natural men judge
of all other, to be most wretched and miserable; whom he describes together
with their blessedness. Cap. 5. verse. 3. to 13. First by their preparation to
the kingdom of heaven, and so to true blessedness. They are poor in spirit,
they mourn, they hunger and thirst after righteousness. Secondly, by their
inward disposition, they are meek, merciful, pure in heart, peacemakers.
Thirdly, by their outward condition; they are so far from civil and worldly
happiness, that they are forced to undergo many and manifold crosses, eue^
for their righteousness sake.

To take these things in order, as they are laid before us; in the Verse 3.
text, first he pronounces them blessed (what frailties or calamities soever
they labor under) who are poor, not so much in purse, as in spirit, being of
a broken and contrite heart, trembling at the word of God, whose displeasure
they fear (not with servile, but reuerentiall fear) above all dreadful
things, and whose mercy, through CHRIST JESUS, they make their only refuge,
disclaiming all affiance in themselves or any creature. And being conscious of
their own wants and weaknesses, they are much more vile in their own eyes,
then they are, or can be in other folks, as we see plainly Luke 18. 13.
in the poor Publican. The very heathen received (...), know thy self, as a
divine oracle, and laid it down, as the foundation of true wisdom and
happiness, as our Lord and Master here does.

In the second place, Verse 4. he pronounces them blessed, not who are at
ease in Zion, and live deliciously, but that mourn, not a thousandth part so
much for their afflictions and miseries (though they be sensible of them, and
bewail them also, as very bitter fruits of that bitter root of sin) but as
S. James teaches, James 4. 9, 10.
they are afflicted, sorrow, and weep, they turn their carnal laughter into
mourning, and joy into heaviness, casting down themselves for their sins
before the Lord: In which respect, they grieve at the heart, that they can
grieve no more. This godly sorrow for sin (wheresoever it reigns) causes
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of, (as was said before) and
therefore cannot but make him or her blessed, in whom it is found what sorrow
or anguish soever they meet withal in this present world: for this word of
Christ must stand for ever, Blessed are they that mourn. Only let our study
and care be, rightly to discern this godly sorrow from the counterfeit. In
godly sorrow, the mourning is for sin, as it is sin and offense against the
divine Majesty, and not for by-respects, as fear of punishment, shame of the
world, losses and crosses. Again, it is joined with hope of pardon, and full
purpose of an entire reformation. It is also exercised not only about our own
sins and evils, but (with 2. Pet. 2. 7. 8.
just Lot, and those holy mourners, Ezech. 9.) it makes us to be vexed in our
souls, by hearing and seeing the unlawful deeds of others. And finally,
wheresoever it is, there cannot but be exceeding sorrow for the Amos 6. 6.
affliction of Joseph, that is, of the people of God.

In the third place, Verse 5. they are pronounced blessed, not who are treafe
and teachie^, irefull and snappish, rendering evil for evil; nor the rigorous
exacters of their own right, but the meek who have learned in their greatest
distresses and wrongs, to submit themselves under the mighty hand of God, as
did patient Job 1. 21. 22. and 2. 10.
Job in all the malicious and most hostile incursions both of the devil and
ungodly men: and 2. Sam. 16.
David in Shimeis most bitter cursing, and other villainous abuses of him: so in
all cases of the like nature, to bear and quietly to pass by whatsoever
injuries of the adversaries, much more the frailties of their brethren and
sisters in Christ; giving soft answers, so much as may be, making the best
construction of every thing, and, when need is, forgoing their right ( Abram
Genesis 13. 9.
like) to buy peace and good will. Finally not to be overcome of evil, but to
overcome evil with their goodness. This is to become followers of him, who
Isai. 53.
was brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer
is dumb, so opened he not his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him, who
judges righteously, and in the mean season, not only prayed, but dyed for the
transgressors. This is indeed to Romans 8. 14.
be led by the (doue-like) spirit of God, and to approve our selves to be the
sons of God. Verily, the Lamb, whereunto CHRIST JESUS is resembled, and the
Dove, whereunto the Holy Ghost is resembled (being Emblemes of meekness, as
we know) are the Coat or Cognizance for every true Christian to be known by
in his spiritual warfare.

In the fourth place, they are pronounced blessed, not who are Gold-thirstie,
or full with the wind of ciuillo Pharisaicall righteousness, or with the swill
of worldly pleasures and delights, but which hunger and thirst after
righteousness; desiring most vehemently and eagerly (for hunger will break,
through stone-walls) further knowledge, apprehension, and sense of their most
happy restoring to the favor and image of GOD, by the blood and spirit of
CHRIST JESUS: That they may be able (with the holy Apostle) out of their own
experience, to glory and say, Gal. 2. 19, 20.
I by the Law (meaning the moral Law especially) being accused, condemned, and
driven to CHRIST JESUS, am dead to the Law, am under the malediction and
condemnation of it no longer, that I might live unto God, through his Son
CHRIST, by whom I have now received the atonement, and his holy Spirit
withal; I am crucified with CHRIST, by virtue of mine union with him by Faith
(which inestimable benefit was sealed up in my Baptism) I partake the sweet
fruit of his Death and Passion, as verily as if I had satisfied for my sins
in mine own person: Nevertheless I live spiritually, which, before mine
effectual calling to the knowledge of the Gospel, was spiritually dead: yet
not I, as of or in my self, but CHRIST lives in me by his Spirit; assuring my
spirit of the forgiveness of all my sins, and moreover quickening me unto
all righteousness; and the life which I now live in the flesh, while I am in
this present World, I live by the faith of the Son of GOD, whereby to mine
unspeakable comfort (whatsoever Law of Rebellion I find in my members) I rest
persuaded, that he has loved me, his poor creature, being by nature, now
wholly depraved, the child of wrath, and by life, without measure, abominable.
Yea, even when I stood in this damnable and desperate estate, he 2. Cor. 5. 21.
gave himself for me, to become sin and Gal. 3. 14.
a curse, that I through him (blessed be his holy Name for ever) might be made
the righteousness of God, and partake the promise made to Abraham our Father,
Gal. 3. 8.
In thee shall all Nations be blessed.

Know we notwithstanding, that though the Apostle thus gloried in the Lord,
that he had gone so far, to grace the Gospel, by means whereof he did it,
and to provoke the Galathians, and all others, to aspire unto the like comfort
and assurance; yet for all that, he exempteth not himself from the number of
such as hunger and thirst after righteousness: even to his dying day he
hungered and thirsted still, never more: for even in his old age, he Phil. 3. 7,
8. 13, 14.
counted all things no better then loss and very doung in comparison of a
fuller knowledge and experience of CHRIST JESUS, then he had yet attained to.
He complains that he was yet imperfect, and came short of the goal: he
professes in like manner, that (after the fashion of Runners in a race) he
for gate what was behind, and reached forth unto those things which were
before, and pressed toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of GOD.
He carried himself, to all purposes, as a man extremely hungry and
unsatisfied. And the more he fed himself, and feasted others, the more hungry
and thirsty he grew, as tasting more and more still, how sweet the Lord was.

This hungring and thirsting after righteousness, is, among the rest, a
notable mark and chara^^er of a man truly regenerate, and so of true
blessedness, and the degree of it does plainly demonstrate the degree of our
profiting in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

In the fifth place, Verse 7. he pronounces them blessed, not that live to
themselves, seeking their own only or chiefly (as most do;) much less the
cruel and hard-hearted, but the merciful; who having themselves found
unexpected and unmeasurable mercy at Gods hands, freely to remit the great debt
of their sins against him, as it were ten thousand talents (as it is in the
Parable) and withal (besides his infinite favors spiritual and corporal in
this present life) of his good pleasure to give them the Kingdom (whereof Luke
12. 32.) have learned for their parts, from their hearts to remit whatsoever
offenses of their brethren and fellow-seruants against themselves, as it were
some small debt Mat. 18. 21. etc.
of an hundred pence: so far forth, that if they offend, and that grievously
in their thinking, seven times; yea Luke 17. 4.
seventy times seven times, yet still upon their repentance freely and
ioyously to forgive and receive them into their favor, as they themselves have
been, to their unspeakable comfort, and would still be forgiven, and received
into Gods favor: and have further learned, as natural children of their
heavenly Father, out of an holy compassion and commiseration (which the Word,
here used, implies) to be helpful to others, especially to the household of
faith, in all things, so much as in them is, even to the very laying down of
their lives, as we are taught, 1. John 3. 16, 17. And lastly, have learned
(where ability is wanting to do any other good, or to do so much good as
they desire) to be of like affection with the people of God: especially to
Romans 12. 10. 15, 16.
weep with them that weep, and to rejoice with them that rejoice, being
kindly or naturally affectioned, to love one another with brotherly love. They
must needs be blessed, in whom is found this sweet fruit of the Spirit of
God, and that bear his image in so special manner.

In the sixth place, Verse 8. he pronounces them blessed, not who are
Impuritanes in any degree, whether walkers in the counsel of the ungodly, or
standers (through a habit and custom of doing evil) in the way of sinners, or
sitters in the chair of scorners, turning, as many do, plain Atheists and
mock-gods; nor yet those, who are pure in their own eyes, or externally only
in the eyes of others, as the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; but the pure
in heart, who have, as the Apostle Peter teaches, 1. Pet. 1. 22.
purified their souls, or made them chaste (as the word there signifies) in
obeying the truth, or Gospel, through the spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
brethren, so that they love one another, with a pure heart fervently. A very
excellent Scripture! giving us thus much to understand (and serves notably to
the clearing of that which we have in hand) that our souls, naturally
unclean, are to be purified by faith, as the same Apostle spoke, Acts 15. 9.
which he calls here obeying of the truth, through the blessed operation of
the Holy Ghost, that being now reconciled to God, and, as it were new-married
to him, we should be wholly devoted to him, as a chaste Matrone to her husband,
in obedience to his word, and love one another, with a pure and sincere heart
fervently. 1. Pet. 2. 1.
Laying aside to that end (as it follows a little after) all malice, and all
guile, and hypocrisies, and enuies, and evil speakings. This is indeed to be
pure in heart, and truly blessed, when, as newborn babes, they so desire and
drink in the sincere milk of the word, that all gall and guile being put
far away, they do, from an honest and good heart, perform due feruice to
God first, and then to their brethren for his sake, and at his bidding.

In the seventh place, Verse 9. they are pronounced blessed, not who are
turbulent, loving to fish in a trobled water, nor the proud and ambitious, who
are the authors of strife; nor whisperers and tale-bearers, who carry fuel
to that fire, and help blow it up; no, nor yet such as peruersely affect the
reputation of quiet folks and no medlers; but the Peacemakers, who being at
peace with God, and serving the God of peace, in the spirit of peace, according
to the Gospel of peace, are Psalm. 120. 7.
all for peace, with King David; not only laboring so much as in them is, so
much as is possible (for truth may not be sold away to buy peace) to have
peace with all men, especially to maintain and uphold love and amity with the
Saints, even according to the true pattern set down, Acts 4. 32. The
multitude of believers were of one heart, and of one soul: but their care is
also to make peace by all means, between God and man, in the first place, by
helping forward the conversion of a sinner going astray out of his way; every
one according to his gifts and calling: and, in the next place, between man
and man, reconciling parties at variance, so much as in them is, and so
stopping the passages of much uncharitableness and wickedness: for what evil
comes not of contentions, brawles, and suites? justly resembled to the
breaking out of a violent fire or flood. Blessed are all they whom God uses
for the quenching or setting of a sure damme against it.

In the eight and last place, Verses 10, 11, 12. he pronounces blessed, not
whose whole care is to sleep in a whole skin, and to save their carcass,
whatsoever become of their conscience, and of the very truth it sefe, nor which
receive honor one of another, not seeking the honor, that comes of God
alone; no nor yet Zealots in every cause, but which are persecuted for
righteousness sake, that is, for embracing and cleaving to him and his
Gospel, and making an ingenuous profession of it before this adulterous and
sinful generation; having also no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, neither running to the same excess of riot, which others do, when
for this cause they are spoken against, as evil doers, falsely, and reviled and
persecuted, as is here said, then are they most happy and blessed, even by the
most sacred testimony of Christ's own mouth, twice uttered with one breath, as
it were, not without a vehement exclamation, as it seems, and Apostrophe, or
turning of his speech to his Disciples, Oh blessed are ye when men shall
revile and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely
for my sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad. This earnestness of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, (who was never earnest, but in matters of the greatest moment) serves
to make the deeper impression in their and our minds. The more strange and
uncouth this doctrine is to flesh and blood; the more does he stand upon it,
and urge it: the more seriously are we also to meditate on praying instantly
for grace, that we may be able to mingle it with faith, and for strength in
the inner man to submit our necks to this part of his yoke meekly and
ioyously, when he shall please for his own glory and our trial, and for the
furtherance of our everlasting happiness, to lay it upon us; The rather,
because there is none other way to Heaven, but this to suffer with Christ, that
we may reign with him: and this, being rightly taken, and holden on in, unto
the end, is a most certain and infallible way.

Thus far of the persons, who are pronounced blessed: the description of
their blessedness is now briefly to be considered of, as it is annexed to
every beatitude, or proposition concerning blessedness; The poor in spirit
are blessed, because (in lieu of their worldly losses, sustained for
righteousness sake) theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: theirs is the Kingdom
of grace in present, even Romans 14. 17.
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, through Ibid. 8. 23.
the first fruits of the spirit, given unto them, whereby Ibid. 5. 5.
the love of GOD is shed abroad in their hearts. The which, in what measure
soever it be, is the handsell of the Kingdom of glory, certainly to follow in
due time. Secondly, the mourners are blessed, for they shall be comforted;
they shall be comforted here in the Kingdom of grace, by the sweet tidings
of the Gospel, whereof Isaiah (Chap. 61. Verse 1, 2, 3.) prophesies most
notably: as also by the promised Comforter, whereof Iohu 14. 16. 26. but
aspecially in the Kingdom of glory, where all tears shall be wiped from their
eyes, and former things utterly forgotten.

Thirdly, the meek are blessed, for they shall inherit the earth; not only in
regard of their right and interest, which they (and none, but they) have to it,
by CHRIST JESUS, but (which is the highest pitch of happiness in this life) in
regard of sufficiency, and 1. Tim. 6. 6. Psalm. 34. 9, 10.
contentment in that which they have. This blessing accompanies godliness,
and is proper to it, even in the greatest persecutions and crosses, that can
befall, they find Mark 10. 29, 30.
an hundredth fold in this life, and in the world to come, eternal life.

Fourthly, they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, are blessed, for
they shall be satisfied; they shall be satisfied here in part, with Psalm. 36.
8.
the fatness of Gods house, and shall be made to drink of the river of his
pleasures; meaning, that they shall be satisfied with the most foysonable and
battlesome word, and Ordinances of God, keeping (as it were) open house among
them, in his Tabernacle or Temple: which holds much more in the spiritual
Temple or Church of CHRIST JESUS, and in the most clear and lightsome doctrine
and ordinances of the Gospel. But they shall be fully satisfied in Heaven,
where Psalm. 17. 1^.
they shall behold his face in righteousness, and awaking, at the length, from
their long sleep in the grave, they shall be satisfied with his image.

Fifthly, the merciful are blessed, for they shall obtain mercy both
temporally and eternally: with what measure they mete, it shall be met to them,
now, and at the last day. As there James 2. 13.
shall be judgment merciless to them that show no mercy, so mercy
rejoices against judgment.

Sixthly, the pure in heart are blessed, for they shall see GOD, more clearly
then yet they do, even in this very life by the eye of faith; as did Moses,
who endured all brunts, and feared not the fierceness of the King, Heb. 11. 27
as he that saw him, who is invisible; but perfectly in the life to come, when
they shall see him as he is; though even then also, but comprehensiuely, every
one according to his capeablenesse. In this beholding or fruition of God,
consists the happiness of Men and Angels.

Seventhly, the peacemakers are blessed, for they shall be called the children
of GOD, that is, they shall be approved and confessed so to be. He, who is the
GOD of peace, (as was remembered before) will not be ashamed to own them for
his sons and daughters, who are the children of peace, or wholly devoted
thereto. This having of an holy peace with all men and making peace among all
men (so much as in us is) is a manifest Character of our adoption.

Eighthly and lastly, they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, are
blessed, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: And again, Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. As he comforted the poor
in spirit, Verse 3. by intitling them to the Kingdom of Heaven, with all the
riches and royalties of it, that they might not faint under the heavy but then
of their poverty, spiritual, or corporal: so here Verse 10. 12. he
comfort the poor persecuted, who for his sake, and the Gospells did
foregoe, or were resolute and ready to foregoe their worldly welfare, and to
conflict with beggary and misery by intitling them to that heavenly Kingdom,
and great reward: to let them understand, Romans 8. 18.
that all the sufferings of the present time (were they a thousand times
greater) are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall bereuealed
in us. And it is likely, that he calls the reward great, not only in regard
of the common pay or penny to be given at the evening of the World, or
Doomes-day, to every one that has labored faithfully in the Lords Vineyard,
but because God, of his free grace, crowning his own gifts in his servants,
will bestow upon Martyrs and Confessors a Crown of glory suitable to their
foregoing labors, and ignominies endured for his names sake; their Reu. 14. 13.
works, even in this sense, shall follow them. In them mean season, they have
not only the greatness and certainty of their reward, 1. Pet. 1. 8.
to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious (as the Apostle Peter speaks)
in the thickest of all their tribulations, but this also, that no 1. Pet. 4. 12.
new or strange thing happens unto them, when such fiery trials come: for so
(says Christ) persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you, even from
age to age: and we may add, so persecuted they Christ Jesus himself, with his
forerunner John the Baptist; So also have the Apostles, Evangelists, and
millions of Martyrs been persecuted, from the blood of Abel to this age: To
whom to be conformable, is the greatest glory, that can betide a moral man:
and cowardly to swerue from them, the greatest shame and ignominy that can be.
The Arc and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and his
servants are encamped in the open field, (says 2. Sam. 11. 11.
Vriath the Hittite) shall I then go down to my house, to eat and drink and
lie with my wife! How much more are we Christians to reason thus, Our Lord
Jesus Christ, with his most holy Gospel and Religion, the Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and Professors of all sorts, from the beginning of the World hitherto,
have been, and still are (in their fellow members) in open field assailed and
persecuted by the Devil and World; they are continually exercised with their
cruelties: and are we so nice, or base-minded, that we should be exempted?

The second main part, or passage follows, concerning the means of
obtaining this great blessedness, which, are three in all, mentioned Verse 13.
to 19. First, the Apostles, and all faithful Ministers of the Gospel:
Secondly, the Law and the Prophets: Thirdly, Christ Jesus his fulfilling of the
Law and the Prophets. Turning his speech to his Disciples, and in them to all
Teachers, whom GOD should raise up, and send forth to the end of the World, he
admonishes them of their dignity and duty. He admonishes also all
Christian people of all ages, what they are to expect at the hands of their
spiritual Parents, Pastors and Teachers. By four excellent similitudes he
expresses to the quick, of what manner of carriage they ought to be, both
for doctrine and conversation: whereof the first two, drawn from Salt, and the
Sun, seem to concern their doctrine chiefly; the other two, drawn from a
City upon a Hill, and a Candle lighted in the house, their conversation
especially.

All the Inhabitants of the earth, since Adams fall, are gone back from God,
and become unsavory, as we may see, Psalm. 14. 3. and elsewhere. God, looking
down from Heaven, found all corrupt, filthy, or stinking, none excepted. Now
as the nature of Salt is to suck out corruption, to make meats sauoury, and
to preserve from putrefaction: so the office of the Apostles, and all Ministers
of the Gospel, is, to fret out the corruption inherent in nature, by little
and little, to reconcile to God, making their hearers acceptable by faith in
Christ Jesus; and finally by their seasonable forewarnings to save from
destruction. An evident demonstration whereof we have in the Apostle Peter,
who, among the rest, here is called the salt of the earth, that is, of the
Inhabitants of the earth. He, in his very first Sermon, which he made
immediately after the sealing of his license to preach the Gospel all the
World over, by the miraculous shedding forth of the Holy Ghost, so rubbeth over
his restie hearers, with the salt of his heavenly doctrine, that the smart of
it pierced to their very hearts, and forced them to cry, Acts 2. 37.
Men and brethren, what shall we do? then comes he out with the glad tidings
of pardon and remission of sins to all, that will come in by Repentance, and
be b^ptized, whereby he reconcileth them to God, and makes them acceptable
through Jesus Christ: and lastly, he takes a course to preserve them in the
state of grace, when with many words he testified, and exhorted, saying Save
your selves from this untoward Generation. These Conuerts also (three thousand
in all) thus purged from their corruption, and seasoned with the salt of that
holy doctrine, know none other way to preserve themselves from relapse, and to
grow more sauoury, (that is, acceptable to God, and approved of men) then to
lay themselves in this ministerial pickle, or pouldering-trough. Wherefore it
is said of them, that after Baptism, They continued in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and Prayers; using the same Ministry
for their preservation and increase in grace, which it pleased Almighty God to
use at the first for their conversion. In all which, they are exemplary to us,
both for the duty performed, and manner of performance, which was with all
diligence, alacrity, and sedulitie on all parts, both of the Apostles, and
people also. This is the rather to be laid to heart of all, because as Salt,
having once lost his savor, becomes altogether unprofitable, yea noxious, or
hurtful, even to the very dunghill, and that unrecoverably: so if the virtue
and operation of this Evangelical salt, either in the seasoners, or seasoned,
do perish through negligence, or be washed away by the love of the world,
voluptuous living, or storm of persecution, they prove, of all people, most
debauched and dangerous, and that unrecoverably. Again, all the world sits
in darkness, and in the shadow of death their estate is altogether dismal and
disconsolate: now the calling of the Apostles was to be the light and Sun of
the world (not or ginally, that was Christ Jesus his peculiar honor; but
ministerially, by communication of his light to them) to clear, and cheer the
souls, as the light of the sun does the outward man; To clear, I say, their
minds, and to cheer their hearts, by giving the light of 2. Cor. 4. 6.
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face, or person of JESUS CHRIST. This
is made apparent, Act. 26. 18. where Christ the original light (as was said
before) by communicating that his light, makes his servant Paul the light of
the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to return them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them, which were sanctified by faith in him. What
is it to clear the minds, and cheer the hearts, if this be not? This is also
the honor of every pastor and teacher in his own flock, which serves to
commend the calling of the ministry above all other, for the excellency and
necessity of it.

By the third similitude, drawn from a City on an hill, he admonishes his
Apostles and all teachers, that being as they are, in the view of all, good,
and bad, they should, in all their ways, walk so circumspectly and trylie, as
might be to the admiration, instruction, edification, or conviction, at the
least, of the lookers on. Their care should be to teach by work, as well as by
word, acting before the eyes of their hearers, what they sprake, the rather,
because men, for the most part, are affected, and receive a deeper impression,
from what they see with their eyes, then from what they hear only. The
contrary also brings a very evil imputation upon the Gospel it self, which
people ordinarily are given to judge and speak of, according to the practice
and conversation of the Preachers and professors of it. Wherefore they also, I
mean, the hearers, and professers of true religion, had need to look well
about them. Hereunto tends his fourth and last comparison, from a candle
lighted in a house, and set upon a candlestick, to give light to all therein. To
put all teachers especially in mind, that being not only inwardly enlightened
themselves, but raised up of God, and appointed to be enlightners of others,
they should endeavor with all their might to be indeed such, not only by
teaching what to practice, but by practicing what they teach: that the word of
life, and the life of the word, may always go together. That as a candle
fills that part of the house, where it is placed, with the shining
brightness, so should they fill that part of the house, or Church of God, over
which the holy Ghost has set them, with the shining brightness both of their
doctrine, and life also. And therein, like the lamps in the sanctuaric, to be
content even to spend themselves, while they serve others. To which effect
serves that right notable exhortation following, Verse 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your father, which is in heaven: that is, have your conversation so
honest, so amiable, so without all exception, so rich and plentiful in all
good words and works, in the midst of a crooked and naughty generation, that
whereas for the most part they speak against you, as euill-doers, they may, by
your good works, which they shall see, glorify God in the day of their
visitation, that is, when by his gracious blessing upon your fruitful teaching
and living, he shall (as Saint Act. 15. 14.
James speaks) visit any of them, to take them out of this sinful world, for
a people to his name. Ye ought the rather to be stirred up hereunto, because
the maine end of our being, and of all Gods benefits spiritual and corporal,
in hand, or in hope, especially of ministerial gifts and callings, is the
glory of God: which ought to be much more dear to us, then our lives, yea
then the salvation of our souls, as it was to Exodus 32. 32.
Moses, and Romans 9. 3.
the Apostle Paul. Now as our Lord and Master Jesus teaches, Ioh. 15. 8.
Herein is our heavenly father glorified, if we bear much fruit. So that we
see here, how the truth in all things, must answer to the ancient type: the
Leuiticall Priests ministering in the holy place before the Lord, are commanded
to have their Exodus 28. 33, 34
golden bells, and silken pomegranates, upon the skirts of their garments; so
the golden bells of pure and vncorrupt doctrine must ever be heard from them,
that are the salt of the earth and light of the world; and the pomegranates of
a sauourie, fruitful, and wholesome conversation must ever be seen in them,
who are set, as a City upon an hill, and as candles, on the candlestick, to
give light to the house of God, which is his Church.

The second means of ataining to this blessedness, is, the law and the
Prophets, whereof he gives a touch, Verse 17. Think not (says he) as the
Scribes and Pharisees erroneously think, and slanderously give out) that I am
come to destroy, repeal or disanull the law, that is, the doctrine of Moses,
contained in his five Books, which are to be holden as the fundamental
Scriptures, given by inspiration of God; or the Prophets, the expositors of
that law, and applyers of it, every one to their several times and occasions,
all written by inspiration of God: I came not to destroy them; but leave them
as I find them, to be the only cannon or rule of saving faith, and of a life
pleasing to God. So many, as desire to recover their lost happiness, let them
Ioh. 5. 39.
search these Scriptures, with no less diligence and sedulitie then men search
the bowels of the earth for precious metals; for in them is eternal life to
be found, and they are they that testify of me, says our Lord Christ
elsewhere. Not without cause therefore does the blessed Apostle Peter (as he
had learned of his master) commend this diligence, and in commending, exhort
all to continue and increase in it; we have (says 2. Pet. 1. 19.
he) a more sure word of prophecy, to which ye do well, that ye take heed,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the
day star arise in your hearts: meaning thereby a perf^^^^r knowledge, then
was under the law, by the cleare^ (...)fest^tion of Christ Jesus. And we
cannot be ignora(...) the Prophet long before describes a blessed man (such a
one, as Christ speaks of in this Sermon) hereby, and distinguishes him from
all other that Psalm. 1. 2.
his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in that law does he meditate, or
exercise himself day and night. How much more does this hold in us Christians;
who besides the Law and the Prophets, remaining still in full force, (for who
shall repeal, or disanull them, if Christ do not?) have the more clear
writings of the Apostles, and Evangelists, as authentical expositors of them,
showing also plainly the fulfilling of all those things, which were obscurely
foretold and prefigured therein, and expected of the people of God, in all ages
with so great longing. Oh that it were well weighed, how ungrateful and
miserable thing it is, that such an invaluable, and most necessary treasure
should be left to the Church of God, and be so little regarded at most hands:
That the complaint of the Lord, by the Prophet, may too justly be taken up,
Hos 8. 12.
I have written unto them the great things of my law, and they were counted a
strange thing; or that of Solomon, Prou. 17. 16.
Why is there a price in the hand of a fool, to get wisdom, and he has no
heart?

The third means of ataining to this blessedness is Christ's fulfilling of the
Law and the Prophets, Verse 17.
I came (says he) to fulfill them: he fulfilleth them by his doctrine, merit,
and efficacy; by his doctrine, as our Prophet; by his merit as our Priest, and
sacrifice also; by his efficacy, as our King. For as our great Prophet, he
restored them to their true sense, freeing them from the most corrupt glosses
of the Scribes and Pharisees. As our high Priest, offering up himself in
sacrifice to God, upon the cross, for the sins of the whole world, he
fulfilled all that was promised, and typified in the Law and the Prophets
concerning our purgation from sin, and reconciliation with God. And as our
King, by the efficacy of his spirit, concurring with his word, he opens the
eyes of our understanding, and works faith in our hearts, whereby we
conceive, receive, and apply to our souls and consciences, the merit of his
sacrifice, for our purgation and reconciliation with God. By which efficacy he
renews us also, after the image of God, in knowledge, in righteousness, and
true holiness. So that he came to fulfill the Law, not so much in himself
(he had no need of it) as in us, when Romans 8. 3. 4.
by sin, or by his sacrifice for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit: his meaning is that all we, which
fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, but mortify the deeds of the body, by the
spirit, approve our selves thereby, to be in Christ Jesus by faith, and in him
to fulfill the Law, because for us, and in our place, he fulfilled it, doing
all righteousness, and dying for our unrighteousness, according to the tenor
of the Law. This his fulfilling of the Law is the very Basis, or groundwork,
both of our everlasting salvation, and of our consolation in present: in that
thereby we recover all our losses, by the woeful fall of our first parents;
he being 1. Cor. 1. 30.
made unto us of God, wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification and
redemption; wisdom, by his most sound and plenarie doctrine; righteousness,
by his most meritorious and sufficient sacrifice, once offered: sanctification,
in this present life; and redemption in the life to come, by the effectual
operation of his almighty spirit; freeing us from the dominion, not only of
sin, but of the grave, and clothing us with glory and immortality in due
time: That no flesh should glory in his presence; not the superstitious rabble,
in their traditions, will-worships, opus operatum, or bodily exercises; not the
iustitiarie, pharisaicall, or papisticall, in their legal righteousness, or
merit of works; nor the Pelagian, Papist, or Arminian, in their free will: but
he that glories, let him glory in the Lord Jesus Christ, ascribing all to
his most sacred word, blood, and spirit alone. Hence the perpetuity of the Law
of God, and of every part and parcel thereof is avouched with a vehement
asseueration, and laying the weight of his authority upon it Verse 18.
Amen, or verily, I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
title, shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled; meaning that
both all Evangelical promises and types should most certainly have their
accomplishment in due time: and all the precepts, moral, ceremonial and
judicial, in regard of the truth and equity of them, should endure for ever.
To this effect, the Prophet, with a holy admiration extolleth the word of God,
for the constancy and perpetuity of it, by comparing it with the most eminent
and durable creatures; Psalm. 119. 89, 90.
O Lord, says he, thy word indureth for ever in heaven. Thy truth is from
generation to generation, thou have laid the foundation of the earth, and it
abides. They remain to this day by thine ordinances. Teaching us, not to
measure the word and truth of God, by the wheeling about of things, which we
see in this world: it standerh firm, and shall stand firm for ever, by the
unchangeable decree of God in heaven. And if the earth, with the fullness of
it, remain still in that estate, wherein it was created, at the first by
virtue of Gods word; how much more shall that word stand for ever, which he
has spoken concerning his Church. Wherefore most assuredly blessed are all
they, that resting upon it, Psalm. 103. 18. and 119. 1, 2, 3.
keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments, to do them, as the
same Prophet testifies elsewhere. And woe be to the transgressers, because of
necessity, it must at the length befall them, according to Ioshuas
premonition, or forewarning, given to the people of Israel, upon experience of
Gods former works, Josh. 23. 14. 15
ye know (says he) in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one
thing has failed, of all the good things, which the Lord your God spoke
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed
thereof. Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come
upon you, which the Lord your God promised you, so shall the Lord your God,
when you have transgressed his covenant, bring upon you all evil things,
until he have destroyed you, etc. All which afterward, as we know, they found
most true, to their great cost: We also ( upon whom the ends of the world are
come) may in like manner now reason; As no one thing has failed, of all that
which God had spoken before, concerning the first coming of his Son,
concerning his incarnation, manifestation, death, burial, resurrection,
glorification: all things have come to pass in due time, just acording to the
predictions of the Prophets, though the^e we^e the greatest unlikelihood, and
opposition that could be, so can nothing fail, which he has foretold in the
holy Scriptures concerning his second coming in majesty and great glory, to
judge both the quick and the dead, and to render to every one according to his
works. And concerning his perpetual presence, and presidencie among his
people, for their defense and comfort, in all their tribulations and
temptations, and his judgments upon his and their enemies, how flourishing and
well-rooted soever they seem to be in this present world. Let this suffice
for the second passage, containing the three means of ataining to
blessedness, to wit, the ministry of the Gospel; the Law and the Prophets;
and Christ's fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets.

The third part of this Sermon follows, concerning the righteousness of all
those, who are to be accounted worthy to partake this blessedness. This
righteousness is first, described; secondly, commended, thirdly, explained. It
is most shortly, but most pithily both described, and commended, Verse 19. and
then explained in the rest of the Sermon. The whole nineteenth verse is
inferred upon his former speeches to this effect; Since I came not to destroy
the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them: again, since no one jot or
title of the Law shall pass unfulfilled, Therefore, whosoever shall break one
of these least commandments, and teach men so, etc. where to make the
description of righteousness more clear and lightsome, he illustrateth it,
by prefixing the description of the contrary unrighteousness. As if he should
say, that you may know your own duty the better, learn to know an ungodly
teacher and liver by these properties; first, by not teaching what he ought,
or not doing what he teaches, for this is to break the law of God. Secondly,
by conce^ting and maintayning some of the sacred commandments of God to be of
little or no moment, in comparison of men's traditions, as did Mat. 15. 16.
the Scribes and Pharisees; or in favor of his lusts, as did Mat. 14. 3.
Herod, who would needs take liberty to hold his Herodias. Thirdly, he would
have all other as bad as himself; other solkes must think, as his bells tinke,
he teaches men so. So that this in short, is the description of a wicked and
unhappy person; he breaks the commandments of God, at the least, some one
or few, which he conceiteth himself, and would bear other folks in hand, not
to be so greatly necessary: and is an author to all others (so much as in him
is) to do the like, which is the brand of one that breaks them habitually.
For otherwise through ignorance and frailty, who does not?

He describes the righteousness of all such as are truly blessed, in these
words, whosoever shall do and teach, meaning, those commandments before
spoken of, even to the least. Wherein, first observe, that a blessed man (whose
righteousness is here described) is not a talker and professor only, but a
constant doer of Gods precepts, or of all holy and heavenly doctrine; to wit,
Euangellically, or according to the tenor of the Gospel, that is, under the
promise of most gracious acceptance, through Christ Jesus, as of his person, so
of his sincere endeavor to do the whole will of God; as also of free pardon,
upon his repentance, when at any time he treads his foot awry. For
otherwise, Psalm. 130. 3. 4.
If thou Lord should mark iniquity, who shall stand? but there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

Secondly, a blessed man performs universal obedience to all, even to the
very least of Gods commandments. He does not only cashiere the traditions of
men, and their grosser sins, but laboreth, as in a case of life and death, to
bring into captivity every lust, yea, every thought, to the most holy law of
God. He counts nothing little, that proceeds out of the sacred mouth of God,
and which has the tagge (as Master Bradford terms it) of Gods heavy curse
against all transgressors, annexed to it. He knows none other way to heaven,
then to be holy as he is holy, and to walk in light, as he is in light. And if
he knew any other way, yet he would take none other then this, whereby alone
God is pleased and glorified, and whereby his blessed image is repaired in us.
Wherefore, howsoever he see nothing more common in this world, then light and
vain swearing, profitable and officious lies, waste and idle words, good
fellowship (as they call it) when men fear not to put themselves into all
companies, and accommodate themselves thereto; customarie breaking of the
Sabbath, ( by Isa. 58. 13.
doing their own ways, finding their own pleasure, and speaking their own
words;) Mal. 3. 8.
robbing of God in tithes and offerings, Ibid. 1. 13.
counting it a weariness to serve God; Eccles. 5, 1.
offering the sacrifice of fools, by Isa. 29. 13.
drawing near unto God, with their mouth, and honoring him with their lips,
but removing their heart far from him; going beyond, or ouer-reaching one
another in bargaining, or otherwise; rendering evil for evil, and taunt for
taunt, breaking jests, to the disgrace of others, (especially plain people;)
turning into the fashions and guizes of the world, for apparel, apish
gestures, and court-holy-water, and a thousand such like: yet his care is, to
Genesis 17. 1:
walk with GOD, and to be perfect, as God commanded Abraham. And the more
corrupt he sees the world, and ready to censure all that will have no
fellowship in their unfruitful works of darkness, for being more nice then
wise: the closer he endeavors ( Enoch-like) to walk with his God, avoiding
all evil, even the least, with all appearances and occasions of it

Thirdly, this blessed man applies himself to teach those commandments, even
to the very least, that he may bring others also to the state of grace,
wherein he stands. As Paul said to Agrippa, Act. 26. 29.
I would to God, that not only thou but also all that hear me, were
altogether such as I am. This is the fervent desire of every faithful teacher,
and the maine duty and charge that lies upon them. 1. Cor. 9. 16. 17
A necessity is laid upon me (says the Apostle) and woe be unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel, which belongs unto all, to whom the dispensation of
the word of God is committed. Whether they be entrusted with Mat. 25. 16. 17,
18.
five talents, or with two, or but one, they must, upon no pretense, be idle,
but occupy till he come. But howsoever these chiefly and most properly are to
do and Luke 19. 13.
teach, yet all faithful Christians (who are every one for their parts, to be
helpers to the faith) must in some degree or other, according to their gifts
and callings, teach also; as the husband his wife, what he has learned in the
public assembly, 1. Cor. 14. 35.
If the wives will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home. So
parents and governors of families, are by Gods appointment, Genesis 18. 19. Exodus
13. 14.
to teach their children and charge. Even godly matrones are not exempted: for
Bathsheba's virtuous woman is commended for this Psalm. 78. 5. Prou. 31. 26.
that she opens her mouth in wisdom, and the law of grace is in her lips.
And we know that a good child is commanded Prou. 2. 8.
to hear his fathers instruction, and not to forsake his mothers teaching.
Surely as the Dove is reported to puruey abroad for her young ones, and filling
her crop at herreturne, to disgorge it, for their sustentation: so should
governors of families puruey abroad, by frequenting with all diligence,
attention, and assiduitie, public exercises of religion, that they may bring
full crops of spiritual nourishment, to their several nests or companies. And
as mothers and nurses see reason, why they should look after most nourishable
food, and to drink of the best, and somewhat freely, that they may come with
full breasts to their young ones: so should the spiritual nurses of Gods sons
and daughters (so are our children called, Ezech. 16. 20, 21.) feed liberally
of the cheer, provided for them in the house of God, even till their breasts
ache again, that their nurseries (I mean their children and servants) may take
their full draughts, and so battle in grace and godliness. Brethren, in like
manner, friends, and Fellow Christians are 1. These. 5. 11. Heb. 3. 13. and 10.
24.
to exhort one another daily, while it is called, to day, and to this end to
consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works. Otherwise, we show
our selves to be most unworthy of the honorable name of Christians, which we
take from Christ, the anointed, because we are anointed by his holy spirit, 1.
Pet. 2. 9. Reu. 1. 6.
to be Kings, Priests, and consequently Prophets also, not only to know the
will of God, but to communicate it each to others, Romans 12. 3.
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith. To conclude
this first point, this is, in brief, the righteousness commended and
commanded by Christ to every blessed man, that he keep the Commandments of
God, even to the least, and teach others so to do, every man and woman for
their parts, according to their gifts and callings.

The second point in this passage, concerning righteousness, is the high
commendation given to it; he which performs it, shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. As on the one side, whosoever breaks the least of Gods
Commandments, and teaches others to do the like, shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven, meaning, that he shall be of none account or
reckoning in Christ's Church, and Kingdom, either of grace or glory: but he
shall meet with Belshazzars Dan. 5. 27.
Tekel, to be weighed in the balance, and found too light; or rather with 1.
King. 14. 10
Ieroboams heavy sentence, to be utterly swept away as doung; howsoever, in
the mean season, he justify himself, and bear a great port before men, as
the Scribes and Pharisees did: So on the otherside, he that works
righteousness ( doing and teachiog, as is here required) shall be called
great, that is he shall be of high esteem with God, and with his people in
Christ's Church and Kingdom, both of grace and glory. For 1. Sam. 2. 30.
them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed. Again, Reu. 3. 5. 12.
I will confess his Name (that cleaves to me, and to my words) says Christ,
before my Father, and before his Angels: I will make him a Pillar in the Temple
of my GOD; that is, I will make him most honorable, and glorious, most stable
also, and unremovable. He shall not upon earth have a corruptible Pillar set
up in honor of him, with the title and inscription of his Name upon it, as
victorious conquerours had: but he shall himself be made an immortal Pillar,
and immortal glory, put upon him, even in the heavenly Temple; howsoever he
be poor and vile, yea, even hissed at in this present World, many times, as
Christ Jesus, and the Apostles were. In earthly Kingdoms, men are set in the
Subsidie-bookes, according to their Lands and Livings: in this heavenly
Kindome, they stand in Gods Book, according to their doing and teaching.
There, though they be not great in the Subsidie-booke, yet they may have place
in in an inferior rank: here, except we become great indeed, by doing and
teaching faithfully, we are no body. Wherefore, to conclude this point also,
since all men look after greatness, and shun contempt, (what in them is) it
lies us in hand, serioussly to consider, what our practice is, whether we be
such doers of the divine precepts, what integrity is joined to our practice,
whether we have respect unto all Gods Commandments, (which was David's Psalm.
119. 1. 6.
only antidote against shame, and most sure way to blessedness) and finally
how faithful and forward we are in communicating to others, by way of
teaching, and mutual instruction, whatsoever God, of his good grace, has
communicated to us. That most wise Parable, which Solomon takes up, concerning
the right use of temporal blessings, holds in spiritual, Pro. 5. 15, 16.
Drink the waters of thine own Cisterne, and running waters, out of thine
own Well: Let thy Fountains be dispersed abroad, and Rivers of water in the
streets: that is, live of thine own frugally and comfortably, dispense and
disperse them to others liberally: so may we say of heavenly things, Drink
waters of thine own Cisterne, let thy Fountains be dispersed, etc. Rejoice
and be thankful to God, for his inestimable goodness, in giving thee a mind
to know him, to trust in him, to call upon him, to love and obey him from the
heart, strive to profit, and to grow in grace: but withal, endeavor, by all
means, to do what good thou can in blessing others, with whatsoever
blessings of this kind, thy heavenly Father has blessed thee: teach the
ignorant, admonish them, that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, exhort
all, such as thou find too remiss, to be zealous; such as thou find
zealous, to be more zealous for the truth. This is the true and only way to
greatness in Christ's Church, and Kingdom, and to avoid all disgrace, all
manner of ways.

The third point, concerning righteousness is the explanation, which holds
to the very conclusion of the whole Sermon. He explayneth the matter
concerning righteousness, first, by the contrary; secondly, by the
properties; thirdly, by the parts. The contrary to it, is set down, Verse 20.
and it is the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which was legal
only, traditionall, and hypocritical; legal, because they sought not
righteousness by Faith in Christ, who only fulfilleth the Law for us, but by
Romans 9. 32.
the works of the Law; traditionall, because they both expounded the Law, and
also blended the worship of God, with their own traditions; hypocrtical,
because in all their glorious works, they sought the applause of men, rather
then the glory of God. Except, in all these, our righteousness exceed theirs,
our Lord Christ peremptorily avouches here, that we shall in no wise enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, we shall have nothing at all to do with his
Church either Militant, or triumphant. That is, except we seek to be made
righteous before God, by Faith in Christ, Romans 8. 3, 4.
Who only fulfilled the Law for us, and we in him; except we perform to God
Number. 15. 39.
chaste, and Romans 12. 1.
reasonable service in all things according to his Word; except also in the
performance thereof we deny our selves, and seek after the glory that comes
from God alone.

The properties of righteousness (which is the second branch) are three, in
like manner: for it is spiritual, universal, and sincere. He proves it to
be spiritual, by giving the true interpretation of the sixth, of the seventh,
and of the third Commandments: of which briefly, because they are
Catechisticall points, which are, or ought to be often inculcated. The ancient
interpretation of the Verse 21.
sixth Commandment (see, how little heed is to be given to bare Antiquity) by
tradition, was, Thou shall not kill, that is, lay violent hands upon thy
Neighbor, to take away his life unjustly, as Cain did Abels. This only in the
sense of these goodly Interpreters, the Scribes and Pharisees, makes one
guilty of blood, and the Murderer worthy of death temporal by man's
judgment, and of eternal by Gods judgment. But our Lord Christ, Verse 22.
setting his own true exposition, against their ol^ ^radition, teaches, that
as God, the Lawgiver, is a Spirit, Maker and Searcher of the very hearts and
reins, so his Law is spiritual, requiring spiritull obedience in every thing:
forbidding on the otherside, whatsoever is contrary thereunto, seem it never
so light in the eyes of carnal men; as rash anger, or any light contempt,
expressed by Racha among them, (which word seems to import one void or
empty of good judgment) among us, by Dunce, Dolt, Ass, Block-head, Goose,
Woodcocke, and many such like. Add heereunto, Thou, in contempt, tush, a fig
for thee; so fleering, geering, breaking of jests, (things too common) frowning
also Cainish, or cast-downe looks, flinging away in a chafe, etc. Much more
he forbids under Murder, contumelious and reproachful terms, as Fool,
Knave, Rogue, Rascal, base Companion, and such like. In sum, he forbids
whatsoever stands not with unfeigned Charity to our Neighbors person. The
fearful danger of all which, he expresses by a similitude, drawn from the
Jewish Courts, or proceedings in judgment, who are said to have one,
consisting of three Commissioners, appointed to judge of less offenses;
another, of three and twenty, appointed to judge of greater offenses; another
of seventy two, called the Sanhedrim, or counsel of estate, to judge of the
greatest offenses. As then among the Jews there were degrees of punishment,
according to the quality and heinousness of the offenses, yet was it
intended, that none offender should go unpunished: so is it in Gods
proceeding; all breakers of this, as of other his most holy Laws, shall be
punished, but the greater offender shall have the greater torture inflicted
upon him. Which consideration (to let other things pass) ought to be an
effectual motive to draw our hearts to the obedience of all, even of the least
of Gods Commandments, and the very least branches of every one of them. And to
that end, to search diligently the extent of every precept, because knowledge,
of necessity, must go before practice, and Prou. 19. 2.
without knowledge, the mind is not good. This also calls for a further
degree of repentance, and watchfulness over our hearts and ways, then is
commonly thought upon. Contrariwise, by Christ's exposition of this sixth
Commandment, whatsoever things apperteine to Love and Charity are called for;
as Verse 23, 24.
reconciliation with the offended brother, which he makes so necessary, that
though a Jew came as far as the very Altar, with his gift or sacrifice, and
there remembered an offense made to his Brother or Neighbor, not to presume to
offer his gift, but to leave it there, until atonement were made with him.
God, in just offenses, will have their brother appeased, or at the least, all
means to be used for pacification, before he would be appeased, or at all
accept of their person or devotion: which holds in like manner with us
Christians; reconciliation one with another, or at the least, our best
endeavor for it, must, of necessity, go before, not only the holy
Communion, but all our other devotions whatsoever, if we make account to do
our selves any good thereby, and not rather to irritate and provoke the wrath
of God against our selves, for some degree of Murder. This holds also in
them, that go to Law, or are like to go to Law one with another: whom Christ,
according to the tenor of this sixth Commandment, exhorts to speedy
agreement, if not of conscience, (which alone, without any by-respect, ought to
be) yet in godly policy, for fear of after-claps; not only through the
rigor and cruelty of our adversary provoked by us: but even through the just
judgment of God, hardening his heart against us. So that when we will not, at
Gods bidding, agree with our adversary quickly, while we are in the way with
him, that is, before the matter come to trial (though it be with loss) we
may thank our selves, if afterward, being cast, he take the whole Law of us,
so far forth, as to cast us into Prison, and even to make Dice of our bones
(according to the merciless Proverb) because not only Neighbors and
friends, but Christ himself could bear no palm with us, to give in, in time.

In the second place, to prove our righteousness to be spiritual, he
handles the seventh Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, restoring it
to the natural and full sense. The Scribes and Pharisees were herein
(according to their usual manner) too literal; confining (as appears Verse
27.) all adultery to the gross act of uncleanness between parties, whereof
one, at the least, was married. But our Lord Christ (gaging the vessel to the
bottom) teaches, that the Verse 28.
lust of the heart is adultery before God, who is the former and beholder of
the heart, and gave his Laws for the bridling of it, as well as of the
members: yea, much more of it, as being the master-wheele, that turns all the
rest.

Secondly, that the unchaste look, whereby lust is engendered and increased,
does participate with that sin, and is a breach of the seventh Commandment:
which caused Job to Job. 31. 1.
make a covenant with his eyes, not to behold a Maid.

Thirdly, all occasions of stumbling and falling into adultery come within
this rank; whether the nearer and deerer, like unto Verse 29, 30.
ones right hand, or right eye, or more remote, Verse 31, 32.
as divorces, or any thing of the like nature. How near and dear soever any
occasion of whoredom (so of any other sin) be, though it be esteemed as the
right eye, or hand, yet except we would be cast into Hell fire unrecoverably,
it must not only, through Gods merciful assistance be forborne, but cut off,
and cast away with the uttermost detestation, that can be, what temporal pain
soever it put us to, or what miss soever we may seem to have of it. The near
and dear occasions of incontinencie, by any means, to be cut off and cast
away, are these, and such like, An idle and easy life, pampering and decking
of the corpse, lascivious company and communication, needless gadding, with
neglect of our callings, impure thoughts entertained with delight, haunting of
suspected houses, unseasonable meetings, and reuellings, Loue-songs and Books,
ribald-talke, if not used, yet heard and endured of us, filthy objects in
Pictures, Plays, or whatsoever else stirs up corrupt nature, prone to such
uncleanness, especially in youth and out of marriage. The remote occasion,
which participateth with adultery, and so comes to be forbidden in the
seventh Commandment, is causeless divorce: (Now Christ aloweth of none to be
just and warrantable, except in the case of formcation, whereby the
marriage-band is broken:) The Scribes and Pharisees taught, that Moses made it
lawful for men to to put away their wives, foreuery cause, and that he
commanded to give her a Bil of Divorce, which made her free to marry any
other: but Christ, here and elsewhere, teaches far otherwise; that for the
hardness of their hearts, this was only tole^ated, not allowed: and that by
such putting a way, the hasty and furious Husband occasioned both his Wife,
and him, that should marry with her, to commit adultery, besides the
temptations, which he should put himself upon. So that by such Divorces, a
great many transgressions of this Law, both his own, and of other folks, were
set upon his skore. Teaching us this great lesson by the way, that he who is
the occasion of sinning to others, is guilty of all sins committed, or which
might have been committed upon that occasion. Which made David, though he did
not commit Idolatry, yet to curse his Adversaries, that gave the occasion, 1.
Sam. 26. 19
Cursed be they, says he, before the Lord, for they have driven me out this
day, from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other
gods. This ought to be of use to Christians, who, though they have no such
causeless Divorces tolerated, yet many times go so far, as to separation of
the Wife from the Husband, or the Husband from his Wife: or if not so far,
yet to many brawles and much bitterness, so that though one house hold them,
yet one bed will not. If this, by Christ's exposition, come not within the
compass of the breach of the seventh Commandment, and add not many sins to
the score of the nocent or offending party, what does?

In the third place, to show that our righteousness, or obedience, must be
spiritual, Ver. 33. to 38
he handles in like manner, the third Commandment, concerning the not taking
of the most sacred Name of God in vain; restoring it to the full sense, which
of long time had been maimed by the Scribes and Pharisees, who restrained it
to for swearing only. So far had they learned to go by the letter of Moses
law, Leu. 19. 12.
ye shall not swear by my name falsely, nor profane the name of my God. They
made therefore great conscience of perjury and forswearing, which they knew to
be a fearful defiling of the reverend name of God, which he would by no
means put up. But our Lord Christ, knowing right well, what awful respect
ought to be given to that glorious name no ways to be taken up in vain, nor
made to trot (as commonly it is) for every trifling and frivolous matter;
knowing also what truth and simplicity ought to be among men, forbids in
ordinary communication, to swear at all by the name of God, not only
directly, by using, or rather abusing any of his titles, but indirectly, by any
creature, as heaven, earth, Jerusalem, his head, and such like, in which, as in
all other creatures, the glory of God shines, and his holy name is engraven as
it were: so that he which swears by any creature, swears by the Creator, as
we see plainly, Mat. 23. 20, 21, 22. Which exposition of Christ condemns
them of most heinous offense, with whom it is ordinary to swear by their
faith, troth, honesty, by bread, light, and such like, (for vain people have
their fantastic fashions for oaths, as they have for their apparel:) much
more condemns it such as use oaths of louder blasphemy, by God, by Jesus,
Gods wounds, blood, heart, death, (horresco referens) an honest heart, cannot
speak or hear such things without horror. No less condemns he oaths,
sauouring of idolatry, by the Mass, yea, or no, by Saint Anne, by Saint Mary,
or by abbreuiation, yea or no Mary, and many such forms, whereby the name of
an idol or creature is substituted in Gods place.

To finish this tractate, our great Prophet, Christ Jesus, who shall sit, as
Judge, at the last day, sets a most fearful brand, not only upon such
blasphemies, and idolatrous practices, but upon every exorbitancie, or going
out of the way, in this kind, Verse 37.
Whatsoever (says he) is more then yea or nay, that is, then plain
affirmation, or denial, in ordinary communication, is (...), from thine own
evil and wicked heart, or from that evil one, the devil, whose lusts you
do, when you profane the name of God any way Hereunto give me leave to add
a word or two, concerning the lawful performance of an oath. It is then only
lawfully performed, either in public before the Magistrate, or in private,
one neighbor to another, for necessary Hebr. 6. 16.
confirmation of the truth, and end of all strife: when, not in ordinary
communication, but according to the Prophet Jeremy his exhortation, men swear
Ier. 4. 2.
in truth, judgment and righteusnesse; in truth, that is, with an honest
heart, and pure conscience, without fraud, guile, or equivocation: in judgment
that is, by a lawful calling thereunto, and in an holy and most reverend
manner, as we see in Genesis 14. 22
Abraham: in righteousness, that is, in a cause most clear and weighty. For
what a horrible indignity is it, to call God to be a witness in every
trifling matter?

The second property of righteousness follows, that it is universal,
extending it self to all occasions, to all persons, and to all the laws and
commandments of almighty God: of which in order as they lie in the text. He
teaches, Verse. 38. to 43
that Christian righteousness is to extend it self to all occasions, wherein
such righteousness is to be showed, by freeing that judicial law, Leu. 24.
19. 20
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth (which you may call the principal
or ground of all judicials) from the corrupt practice and glosses of the
Scribes and Pharisees; who having nature rather then grace, to be their guide
gave liberty to any private hand to do the work of the public, that is, of
magistracy, by rendering like for like: Whereas Moses, in whom they trusted,
and gloried so much in, consined it to the judge; Deuteronomy. 19. 18, 19, 21.
The Judge (says he) shall make diligent inquisition, and do to the false
witness, as he had thought to have done to his brother, life shall go for
life, eye to eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot: it was the
Magistrates office, who sat in Gods place, to see this done. Contrariwise,
every private person must know, that it is his calling, when he suffers
wrong, to take it patiently, when he suffers wrong, to take it patiently,
when hels even Verse 39.
condemned and killed, against all right and reason, not to resist; as our Lord
Christ does not only teach here, but lays upon it the weight of his
authority, I say unto you, resist not evil, or the troublesome body, but
rather endeavor, so much as in you is, to overcome (if it may be) his wrath
and wrongs by soft answers, by your harmless, meek, and amiable behavior,
by good turns also, to the vtte^most of your ability; and if it must needs,
and may well be done, by imploring the protection of the Laws and higher
Powers, as the Apostle did, when he Act. 25. 11
appealed to Caesar: but altogether to forbear irefull and vindicatiue
courses, to say or do nothing at all in anger, or hot blood, no nor yet in
cold blood, by way of requital (that is worst of all) 1. Pet. 2. ^3.
committing our selves and cause to him that judges righteously, and praying
for the transgressors, as Luke 23. 34.
this our Master and teacher did, when he was put to, in the hardest manner
that could be; whose Disciples we are, when we walk in his steps. It is a
most glorious thing, even herein to follow the faith and resolution of those
three Worthies, Dan. 3. 17, 18. and to say; Our God whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from these malicious persons, and their scuruie dealings, and he
will deliver us, but if not, be it known unto them, and unto all men, that we
will not be so base, as to be overcome of our passions, or to break patience,
which we justly prize above all worldly things, yea, above our very lives.
Though they bring fire, we will bring water; though their fury and rage
against us break out violently, as a bullet out of the mouth of a Canon, we
will set our patience as a wooll-packe, or rather as a mount against it. He
Ver. 39, 40, 41
explaineth this point by three notable instances, or occasions, wherein he
will have our righteousness shine forth: the first is of the grossest
contumely that can be offered to our persons; when in hatred or contempt, we
are smitten on the face with the hand, or with a rod: wherein he will have us
value our charity, and patience, at so high a rate, that the greatest
indignity under the heaven shall not put us out of it. As it did not himself,
howsoever (according to Julian the Apostatas profane scoff) he did not
literally turn the other cheek, when the officer smote him on the face, but
gave a mild and cold answer, Ioh. 18. 23.
If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but of well, why smitest
thou me? just according to the tenor and purport of this precept, he chose
rather to receive double wrong, then to revenge his own grief, though he had
twelve legious of Angels at command, Reu. 13. 10.
Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints, so to do.

The second instance is of the hardest exigent that can befall us in our
outward estate, (which we know, is most dear to most people) when we are sued
at the law, even to the taking away of our coat: wherein he will have us to
value a peaceable and quiet life among men, but especially, our freedom and
liberty to serve God, without having our devotions interrupted at so high a
rate, as to part with any thing rather then to part with it, even to forgo our
cloak also, when the coat is euicted before. These are indeed hyperbolicall or
ouer-reaching speeches; yet do they plainly demonstrate, how far our
righteousness should stretch in this, and such like cases, and how peace which
is the bond of charity (as charity is of perfection) should be prized,
pursued, and redeemed of every one of us, even with our greatest loss, if we
cannot better cheap: Hebr. 12. 14.
Seek or pursue peace with all men, and holiness.

The third instance touches men in their liberty; a thing no less dear to
them, then their lives and livings: to be compelled by impressed from authority
to go a mile, a league, or more at the officers pleasure, as Simon of Cyrene
was, by pressed, compelled to bear Christ's cross after him. In which he will
have us value our humility, loyalty, and pliablenesse to the higher powers
(though forrainers, and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, as the Romans
were) at so high a rate, as to scotch at no hardship, to give them, or their
assigns, just content. We are not only to perform their commands (though
grievous in appearance) and that with all cheerfulness and alacrity, but
even to strain our selves to double their demands, if need be, and it lie in
our power: which holds in all other matters of like nature; to be so far
from whining and repining at any service to our Prince and Country, at any
rates and payments, that we, of our own accord, will rather put forth and
heighten our selves, beyond that which is imposed. How commendable were this,
and what an ornament to the profession of the Gospel?

To these three instances he adds a marvelous cloze, Verse 42.
Give to every one that asks, and from him that would borrow turn not away:
not meaning, to every inordinate asker, to maintain idleness and excess, but
to the truly needy and penurious, who, through vnauoideable necessity, are
brought into streights: or, if through their own fault, yet now seeming to
repent, and to give hope of a new course: or at least to such, as being
strangers, and unknown to us, we, in the judgment of charity, take to be
poor of the right stamp. To every such asker give according to thine
ableness, wisely, not prodigally, that liberality be not exhaust, or eaten up
of liberality. In no case let the enmity of any, or impossibility of
requital hinder thy good work: but the rather do all the good thou can to
them (exspecting thy reward from heaven) by giving, if their needs call for
that, or by lending, if they be of a better rank. Beware of vain shifts and
excuses, pleading thine own wants (when thine own heart gives thee the lie,
and God, who is above thy heart, sees the contrary) or excepting against the
persons of the poor, merely to put off a work of mercy. If our Lord Christ
had done so to thee, where had thou been, or should thou now be? Remember
ever that this is the Lords commandment, and that himself comes unto thee,
in their clothes, to ask, and borrow.

In the second place, he comes to the universality of Christian
righteousness, and proves it, by restoring to the native sense, the sum of
the second table, Thou shall love thy neighbor, Verse. 43. to 48
purging it from the Pharisaicall dross: first teaching, that by the word
Neighbor, not friends and brethren only are to be understood, but any other
man, friend, enemy, or alien, who bear the image of God, and participate the
same nature with us. In a word, he of whom we may receive, or to whom we may
do good, any manner of way, is our neighbor, as Christ makes plain Luke 10.
23. to 37.
in the parable or example of the Jews, falling among thieves, and cruelly
handled: and relieved by a Samaritane, whom the Jews had in abomination. So
Moses lays upon them the like charge Exodus 23. 4, 5 compared with Deuteronomy. 22. 1,
2.
of their enemies or brothers Ass or Ox. Secondly, he clears the sum of
the law, teaching, Verse 43.
that our neighbor, in this large sense, is to be loved; not friends only,
according to the lewd leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, (which was, Hate
thine enemy) but even our rankest enemies, laying, (after his usual manner)
the weight of his own authority upon it, and urging it in many words, as
knowing, that this doctrine concerning the love of our enemies (which we may
justly call the perfection of obedience to the second table of the Law, as that
of Whereof before Verse 10. 11. 12 in many words.
suffering persecution for righteousness sake, is of the first) would most
hardly sink into our hearts. First, is set down his copious proposition of
the matter, then his undeniable proofs likewise: his proposition, in these
words, Verse 44.
But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute
you. As if he should say, I, that am come a teacher from God, and the only
fulfiller of the Law, avouch unto you, that the true and natural obedience,
which the law calls for, is, to love your bitterest enemies, and to love
them, not teeth-forward, or with mouth-loue, accompanied with court-like, or
rather stage-play-like expressions of it, but 1. John 3. 18.
in deed and in truth. Blessing, that is, returning good speeches and wishes
for cursing, rewarding also their heathenish usage, with Christian kindness,
bounty, and prayers. This may seem a bitter pill, but a little sugar of
grace, and of the spirit of God, will make us swallow it down readily, as did
Isa. 53. 12. Luke ^3. 34.
Christ, Act. 7. 60.
Stephen, Romans 9. 1, 2, 3, and 11. 1. etc.
the Apostle Paul, and others innumerable.

But let us see his undeniable proofs; the first is the unspeakable comfort,
which the affectionate love of our cruellest enemies brings with it in
present. For we approve our selves thereby to be Verse 45.
the children of our heavenly Father, and to be led by his Spirit, whose works
we do. His perpetual practice is to do good to his greatest Enemies, causing
his sun to rise, and rain to fall on the evil, (whom only he accounts
his enemies) and the good, (whom only he accounts his friends.) Even the
most wicked, through his divine providence (ordering all, even to the least
drop of rain) enjoy Acts 14. 17.
fruitful seasons, and have their hearts filled with food and gladness. Now
we are commanded, Ephesians. 5. 1.
to be followers of God, as dear children, and to walk in love. The second
proof or reason, is, the benefit in future, which is the blessed reward, to be
expected from God, Verse 46.
If ye love them, which love you, what reward have you? God sets us on
work to love our enemies, and to overcome their evil with our goodness: he
will undoubtedly according to his promise, even of his free grace, crown our
obedience herein: which reward and crown we deprive our selves of, if we
love our friends and brethren only; yea contrariwise, we bring his heavy
wrath upon our heads, if we love not our most capital enemies also, and that
fervently, according to the foregoing charge.

The third proof, or reason, is drawn from a comparison, Verse 46, 47.
What singular thing do you? etc. That whereas Prou. 12. 26.
the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: and James 1. 18.
God, of his own will, has begotten us, with the Word of Truth, that we
should be consecrated to him, as the first fruits of his creatures: we are
also 1. Pet. 2. 9.
called to be a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that we should bring forth peculiar fruits; where is that
excellency above others, and those peculiar fruits, if we love our friends
only? What unregenerate man goes not so far? 1. Cor. 3. 3.
Is not this to be carnal, and to walk as men? yea what do we more, then
the scumme of the World? for so were the Publicans, and Toll-gatherers, at the
least, in the esteem of the Jews, who notwithstanding loved and saluted their
friends, and wel-willers. Is not this most fearfully to receive the grace of
God in vain, if in Love and Charity, the main duty of Christianity, we
go no further then they? This great lesson, by the way, is to be learned from
hence, and ever to be remembered, That we Christians are not to rest in the
ordinary righteousness of the World, but in all our works to aspire unto
excellency, performing all religious duties (which they have no skill nor
conscience of) religiously: and as for civil and moral duties, which they
glory in, to outstrip them, and as it were, out-shoot them in their own bow,
doing them in a more wise, eminent, and full manner, to the right end; ever
thinking with our selves, and having this before our eyes, What singular thing
do we?

In the third and last place, he proves the universality of our
righteousness, and urges it by the example of our heavenly Father, to whom,
of necessity, we must be made conformable. As he, that has called you, is
holy (says the 1. Pet. 1. 15, 16
Apostle Peter) so be ye holy in all your conversation: because it is written,
Leuiticus 20. 7 Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
Be ye holy, as I am holy. He is perfect: we, in regard of truth and
universality of obedience, reaching to all his Commandments, must also be
perfect; as was required of our Father Abraham, Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me, and be thou perfect; professed by David, Psalm. 18. 23.
that he was upright, or perfect before God, and kept himself from his own
iniquity; commended in Zachary and Elizabeth, that Luke 1. 6.
they were both just, or righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. Truth it is, that we
cannot in this life attain to the perfection of degrees, which was in the
first and second Adam, and shall be in us, in our heavenly Country: yet must
we, of necessity, be perfect in the perfection of parts; hating all and every
sin (more particularly, this of malice or ill will toward our enemies) even
from the heart, and deuoting our selves unfeignedly to perform all
righteousness, even this among the rest, of loving from the heart, and doing
the best good we can, to our cruellest adversaries: after the most blessed
pattern here set before us, which is not the Charity of an Angel or Man, how
holy soever, but of our heavenly Father, most good, and the Fountain of all
goodness: to whom if we strive not to be like in this perfection of Charity,
we shall never come to be like him in glory: CHAP. 6.

That our righteousness must be spiritual, that it must also be universal,
we have heard in the later part of the former Chapter: now follows the third
property of it, that it must be sincere, and without hypocrisy; which holds
to the nineteenth Verse of this sixth Chapter. This point, concerning
sincerity, is first propounded and confirmed, Verse 1. Secondly, it is
explained and urged more particularly in three principal instances, Alms,
Prayer, and Fasting, answering to the three main parts of Righteousness,
Piety, Charity and Mortification, specified Chap. 7. Verse 7. to 15. The
generality is propounded, Verse 1. with a most earnest caveat, because we are
in extreme danger, to be overtaken with ambition and vainglory, by reason of
our great propensitie thereto, and so to spoil all. Take heed (says he) that
you do not your righteousness before men: so does the vulgar Latin
Translation read righteousness in this Verse, and not Alms, (as it is
commonly read:) and so does reverend Master Beza translate it out of certain
ancient Greek Copies: and the context it self seems to call for it, as
answering best to Christ's charge, given Verse 20. of the former Chapter. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
etc. whose righteousness, as we heard, was (among other things) hypocritical.
Wherefore it follows naturally, to charge them, that they do not their
righteousness, as the Scribes and Pharisees did theirs, to be seen of men.

To make this yet more clear, it is to be observed, how not only the
particular instance of Alms, following immediately, Verse 2, 3, 4. but that of
Prayer and Fasting are inferred upon this general proposition, and
accommodated to it, in one and the same manner and form, without prefixing any
other caveat, but this, which he makes common to all three. But let us hear
what is propounded in the generality, Verse 1.
Do not your righteousness before men, to be seen of them; as though he
should say, I forbid you not simply to do your righteousness before men:
bring it upon the stage, in the Name of God, though you have ten thousand
lookers on: care not for that, the more the better: I have exhorted you before,
Chap. 5. 16.
that your light should shine before men, and so let it do, as much as you
can: but beware you do it not with a mind to be seen and praised of men;
that is the bane and break-necke of all goodness: yea, it turns the greatest
righteousness into the greatest unrighteousness: for what is greater
unrighteousness, then to put your selves into Gods place, by taking to your
selves the glory of your righteousness, proper to God, the sole author and
donour of it? We learn then from hence, above all things, to have an eye, not
only that our actions be just and holy in themselves, (alas, there are not
many, that go so far) but that our end and aim be answerable. The supreme
end of all our actions and dealings ought to be, that that 1. Pet. 4. 11.
GOD, in all things, may be glorified through CHRIST JESUS. Whereunto serves
that subordinate end, always to be before our eyes, which is 1. Tim. 4. 16.
the saving of our selves, and others, with whom we have to do: to which
agrees that notable exhortation and example of the blessed Apostle 1. Cor. 10.
31, 32, 33.
Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
GOD: give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of GOD: Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. This then must be the
constant endeavor, and whole life of a Christian, putting far away all
by-respects, to walk before God, and approve himself to his Majesty alone,
doing all his righteousness, or good works, to these, and none other ends,
repenting, as need requires, daily, of daily defects. This is the rather
seriously to be thought upon, because of the reason or confirmation annexed,
Else ye have no reward of your Father, which is in Heaven. A most weighty
reason, which if it move not, men may justly fear themselves to be dead in
trespasses and sins, or next door by. Our righteousness is not to be done,
to be seen of men, upon pain of forfeiting our heavenly Fathers approofe and
blessing, of being utterly bereaved of all acceptance, and reward at his hand.
For as in shooting, except the aim be well taken, the g^me must needs be
lost; so in our best actions, and dealings, except we propound the right ends,
we shall come short of the prize of the high calling of God. A good end does
not always sanctify the means of attayning to it (that is a Popish conceit,
as in the Gun-powder-treason, and other such like plots) but this is most
certain, that an ill end does evermore corrupt and vitiate all endeavors,
which are taken for it, though the works in themselves be never so sacred and
holy; as appears plainly in these three noble instances, Alms, Prayer,
Fasting, being done for vainglory, wordly pref^rment, opinion of merit, or
else without due respect to those ends before mentioned. In his explanation by
particulars, he holds one uniform order in every one of them. First, to
dehort from Verse 2. 5, 16
hypocrisy and ostentation, and that by reasons of great moment. Secondly, by
a most sweet and forcible reason, Verse 3, 4, 6, 17, 18.
he exhorts unto humility and sincerity. He dehorteth from hypocrisy and
ostention, and that by two reasons; whereof the former is the most odious
practice of the hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, to whom they must, in no
case, be like: Verse 2. 5, 16.
When thou do give Alms, fast, and pray, be not like the hypocrites. This
fashioning to hypocrites, the worst of all people, can no wise stand with their
present condition, who are, by Gods free election and calling, the best of all
people; as being restored to the favor of God, and renewed after his Image.
But to beat his Disciples the farther from them, he sets before their
eyes, their lewd, and, as it were, Player-like (so much the word hypocrite
imports) disguizings. When they gave Alms, up went the sound of the Trumpet;
they made choice of the most celebrious places of the City, as the Synagogues,
or streets to act their Pageant upon, to the greater vpbraiding of the poor
and magnifying of themselves. Again, when they made their Prayers (I mean,
not public but solitary) no place would serve their turn, but the Synagogue,
or corners of the streets, where two or three ways met, and no gesture, but
standing and perking up, to be seen the further off. And when they fasted,
instead of making their hearts sad, they made a sad countenance, instead of
disfiguring their lusts, they disfigured their faces, for the very nonce;
affecting rather the seeming, then the substance of sanctimony, the opinion
rather then the thing. Is not this most base and loathsome dealing, enough to
make one cast his gorge? ought we not to abhor, and abominate any spice of
it? Surely, as the Lacedaemonians are said to have set their drunken and spuing
slaves, before the eyes of their children, to cause them to abhor
drunkenness: so does our Lord and Master here set these ambitious and
dissembling wretches, before the eyes of his Disciples, and of all his
faithful people, to work in them a hatred and loathing of such doings, and to
make them more in love with humility and sincerity.

The second reason against hypocrisy and ostentation, is the unhappy success
of it, which (to make the matter out of all question) he avouches with his
usual asseueration, Amen, or verily, I say to you, they have their reward.
Praise they hawk after, and praise they have; one corrupt man applauding
another, (as one Mule or Ass knibbles another:) and more then that, are they
not to expect their reward shall dye with them. If they do not out-liue it, as
commonly hypocrites do, whose vizards at the length God pulls off from their
faces in this present life, and insteede thereof Mal. 2. 3.
casts dung upon them. But howsoever they enjoy their bright and brittle
reward all their days, being reputed Saints upon earth, yet shall that word of
Christ stand for ever, Luke 16. 15.
That which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of GOD.
And the more praise they find for the present, the more dishonor shall they
find at the last day, when fained holiness, charity, and humility will
clearly appear to be double deuillishnesse and iniquity. Then shall all
time-seruers know perfectly by woeful experience, how good a thing it had
been, not to have John 5. 44.
received honor one of another, but to have sought the honor, that comes of
GOD only.

In the second place, he exhorts them to humility, and sincerity in Alms,
Prayer, and Fasting, aduising them rather to affect obscurity, by hiding their
goodness from the eyes of men, then same and celebritie, by setting themselves
and their good works to sale any manner of ways. He would have them learn
the art of holy dissimulation, so far forth, that, if it were possible to
hide it from their own selves, they should do it, resting upon Gods approofe,
testimony, and reward alone. When thou give Alms, let not thy left hand
know what thy right hand does, signifying by this hyperbolicall proverb, that
if the left hand had reason and understanding, it should be kept from the
knowledge of that good which the right hand does; then much more should other
folks. Teaching us, to be so far from making that to be our aim, to please
men, looking no further (as hypocrites do not) that we should fear and flee
nothing more, then to do good upon these conditions, to sell away (as it were)
our golden works for such a drossie and durtie reward. But contrariwise to
hold such inwardnesse and secrecy with God, as to make it our great and only
ambition, that he alone (who alone is worthy) may be pleased and glorified by
all means. To this end serves that which follows, when thou prayest, enter
into thy closet, or some such place of priuacie, sequester thy self from all
company, set thy self in Gods presence alone with alone: pour out thine
heart in secret into his bosom, that dwells in secret. And know thou, that
this blessed secrecy with God, will in special manner further thy devotion,
and put by the occasion of vain glory, so much hated of God, and prejudicial
to men. So when thou fastest privately, howsoever thou weep and bewail thy
sins and misery, and the sin and misery of the time in secret, before
thine heavenly father, yet openly before men set as good a face on it, and
look as cheerfully as thou can, yea, rather then fail, use what Art thou
can to that end, wash thy face, anoint thine head (which was the manner of
that country, to express joy and cheerfulness thereby) put thy self in
such a habit, as will best serve to cover thine extraordinary humiliation. Let
it suffice thee, in the act of fasting, to approve thy self unto God, and to
be seen and known of him; as an honest Matrone is beautiful and trimmed
enough, if she be so in her husbands eyes, she looks after none other. Thou
have much more reason to stand so affected toward thy God; so thyselfe and
thine actions may be amiable in his eyes, to look no further. His reason
annexed hereunto, drawn from the fruit and benefit is very obserueable; Verse.
4. 6. 18.
And thy Father, which sees thine Alms, Prayer, and Fasting in secret, will
reward thee openly: where in the word reward, he gives none allowance to the
beggarly trash of Popish merit, but rather commends the rich treasures of
Gods mercy and goodness, who freely accepting us, accepts our works, done
at his appointment, and through his gracious assistance; crowning us, crowns
our works. So Psalm. 127. 3.
children, and the fruits of the womb, are called an heritage of the Lord, and
his reward, and free gift: So elsewhere. The meaning is, that whereas
hypocrites and vainglorious persons, looking to men, and having their worldly
aims and ends, utterly lose their reward with God: the faithful and truly
religious, trading (as it were) with God alone, and having a secret stock
running with him of Alms, Prayer, Fasting, and other good works, receive in
due time an open reward and blessing from their heavenly father, suitable to
their foregoing endeauours. Neither are we to confine this open reward (as most
do) to the life to come only. But we are to know, and be assured, that the
Alms, Prayers, and Fasting of Gods children, are apparently crowned with most
blessed success, beyond all expectation many times, even in this very life.
The merciful man (as has been said) finds mercy in time of need,
according to his mercy showed to others, and that with a rich increase many
times. The prayers of the Saints come not weeping home, but fetch down
blessings from heaven, to earth to their great joys increase. Their fasting
also is oftentimes turned to feasting; God gives them beauty for ashes, the
oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness. All which Cornelius the Centurion found most true by comfortable
experience; for his Alms, Prayers, and Fasting, (not done in hypocrisy or of
vainglory, but in faith and sincerity) Act, 10. 4.
came in remembrance before God, and received an open and Illustrious reward
from him. So this, or the like song, is often in David's mouth and pen, Thou
have turned for me my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my sackcloth,
and gird me with gladness. The like experience had Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, and
many others, whose inwardnesse and secrecy with God, in the performance of
these duties, carried away an evident and most ample reward, to the
unspeakable comfort of themselves, and of the whole Church. And verily, there
is no child of God now living upon the face of the earth, who has not the
like experience in some degree or other; receiving ever in due time an harvest
answerable to his sowing.

All this, as also all the foregoing and following doctrine of Alms, Prayer,
and Fasting, will yet better appear, if we look better into the nature of
these three Christian virtues. A true description will direct us to the right
manner and end of performance of them. By Alms then we understand a giving of
relief to the poor and needy, according to our ableness, at Gods bidding,
even out of tender compassion, knowing that they bear the image of God, and
are our own flesh. Alms must be done at Gods bidding, who requires and
straightly charge them to be done, in the books of the Old and New
Testament. So that the due performance of them is Psalm. 112. 9
righteousness and obedience, better then all sacrifice: and the contrary I
mean, the neglect of Alms, is unrighteousness and disobedience, making men
Mat. 25. 41.
culpable of hell fire. What place is there then of seeking our own praise, or
serving any ends of our own? Alms also must proceed out of tender compassion:
for the word here translated Alms, signifies mercy and pity: whereby we
learn not only this lesson, That not the thing given (how great soever) but
the affection of the giver makes it Alms; but this lesson also, That right
Almes-giuers stand not upon any by-respects: Pity and compassion, with bowels
yearning over their brethrens misery, is as a strong law in their hearts,
forcing them to give, and do good, when they can, and as much as they can,
though they be not praised for it, yea, though they should be disgraced and
punished for their labor; as in times of persecution, many have been, for
contributing to the necessity of the Saints. This consideration also, that
they bear the image of God, and are our own flesh, without any other spur, is
a sufficient inducement thereto. And as for prayer, what is it, but a most
humble and familiar talking of the soul with God our heavenly father, by the
direction and mediation of Christ Jesus, his son, and assistance of his holy
spirit, about all matters, concerning his glory and our own good, that is,
the good of our selves, spiritual and corporal, and of the whole body and
brotherhood of the Saints, with whom we hold communion? And it comprehends
1. Tim. 2. 1.
supplication, or deprecation against evil; prayer, or petition for any good,
which we find within our commission to ask; intercession for others; and
giving of thanks for all things that befall, prosperous or adverse, because
Romans 8. 21.
all work together for good, to them that love GOD. Which duty of prayer
being thus rightly performed, what place is there left for the heart to run a
rouing, or whoring rather, after worldly glory? And he that prays
continually, how can he but have his conversation in heaven? not seeking
popular applause, but the things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God. And to add that which he Verse 7.
adds further in this passage of prayer, what place is there for vain
repetitions? such as heathenish people use, who are without God in this world,
and do service to them, which by nature are no gods: who make none end of
laying on tongue in prayer, because they think to be heard for their much
speaking, or babbling. But we have heard, and it is most true, that prayer is
a talking, not of the tongue, but of the heart, with God, of the spirit with a
spirit, and that by the assistance of Gods holy spirit. This speech of our
spirits, with that incomprehensible spirit, or Godhead, howsoever sometimes it
be expressed by words, in some sort, as may be, and as our needs require
(which words, for the most part, are, or ought to be Eccles. 5. 2.
few) yet consists it mainely in heavenly affections, and Romans 8. 26.
in groans and sighs, that cannot be expressed. Away therefore with all
lip-labor of superstitious persons, of what rank soever, conceiting that God
is to be. wooed and won with art, and multitude of words; as if prayer,
exopere operato (as Popery speaks) by the work done, were a meritorious
service, or some strong ning charm, to bind God, and make him condescend to
our devotions. Surely, the praying in an unknown tongue, the running over of
many Pater-nosters and Aue-Maries, and such like stuff upon the beads,
praying by tale and number, rather then by weight, and infinite such vsages,
plainly demonstrate that Popery is full of this abomination, nothing at all
short of the heathen, if they go not far beyond them. So the manner of
praying, used by many, (I would I might not say the most) of them that profess
themselves to be of the reformed Religion, admits none excuse. When the
Lords Prayer is rabled over without duevnderstanding or reverence, the Creed
also, and ten Commandments are recited and brought as prayers into the
presence of the divine Majesty; with other set forms of prayer, sound in
themselves like enough, and of very great use; but without just attention and
devotion on their parts, that use them. And even the forwarder sort many times
conceiving prayer (how worthily I will not say, but wordly enough, and too
much) without premeditation, or due preparation, chopping into Gods sacred
presence, and dealing with him in matters of the highest nature, concerning his
glory and their own eternal good, so inconsiderately and irreuerently, that
it may too justly be said unto them, know you where you are, and in whose
presence you stand? And even so departing, call not to mind before whom, and
whereabout they have been. Do not these, and many such like courses, too
frequent in use, plainly speak, and proclaim (as it were with the sound of a
Trumpet) that there is very great danger, lest our Prayers also turn into
vain and heathenish babbling? This is the rather to be taken heed off, because
the nearer men approach unto God, and the more grace they have received at his
hands, the more he looks to have his holy Name hallowed by them, and the more
hotly shall his wrath and jealousy break forth, if it be not. We see
therefore what need we have to Ephesians. 6. 18.
watch in Prayer, that we be not overtaken, according to the Apostles
doctrine, laboring by all means that this exhortation of our Savior Christ,
among others, may sink into our hearts. Wherein, notwithstanding, let it be
remembered, that it is not simply repetition of the same words in Prayer, but
vain repetition, which is here condemned: for when the same words are
repeated, or with some little variation of speech, to express the feruencie of
our minds, and to further holy importunity in Prayer, this no Scripture
finds fault withal: and the Prophet David in his Psalms, and other servants
of God often used it. The Son of God himself, who forbids vain
repetition, prayed in the Garden, the third time, Mat. 26. 44.
saying the same words: in this case we also may so pray otherwise, not, Verse
8.
because our heavenly Father knows whereof we stand in need, before we ask.
If he know whereof we stand in need, before we ask, why then do we ask?
will some man say: If there were none other, it were reason enough why we
should ask, because he bids us so to do. His absolute Commandment, Pray
continually and call upon me, in the day of trouble, and infinite such like
precepts, and incitations to Prayer, are warrant enough for us so to do: and,
so doing to shut the gate against all solicitude, and carnal carfulness,
according to the Apostles divine counsel. Phil. 4 6.
Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto GOD; that is, taking
knowledge of your own wants and necessities, lay them forth before him in
Prayer, craving his aid and assistance, according to his own ordinance and
appointment: that obtaining favor, and Heb. 4. 16.
finding grace to help in time of need, we may return the praise and glory of
all to God, our heavenly Father and Benefactor, which he above all things,
requires and expects: and (which is another main use) may rest more
steadfastly upon him for the time to come, and fly unto him in all our needs,
with more confidence and comfort.

This service or sacrifice of Prayer being so worthy a subject, so necessary
for all persons and times, so many ways abused also, and the right practice of
it so hardly attained unto; our Savior Christ does not thus leave it, but
having discovered the abuses, as ambition, hypocrisy, vain repetition also,
and babbling, Verse 9. to 16
he now directs us to the right performance of it, After this manner
therefore pray ye, or as Saint Luke sets it down, When ye pray, say: not
binding us strictly to use these words always, and none other, but to use the
matter, manner, and like affection: as appears plainly by the practice of
Christ himself, and of his Apostles, who prayed sundry times according to the
matter, manner, and affection, here prescribed, but not in these very words.
But as for them, who cannot so well enlarge their suits in other words, or for
those also, who can and do it, yet remain still unsatisfied, as not having done
it sufficiently, (and who can do it sufficiently?) the Lord has left this
most excellent help, to use the very words of this divine Prayer, as the most
worthy servants of God ever have done. And learn we here by the way, what an
absolute necessity lies upon us (which ought to be our greatest glory and
comfort) to pray in these words, or in this manner: for it is the vndispensable
Commandment of our Lord Christ, After this manner pray.

Again, the excellency of this Prayer makes this bond the stronger. It must
needs be judged most excellent, first, in regard of the author of it: it is
in name, and indeed the Lords Prayer: secondly, for the most pithy shortness:
thirdly, for the exquisite order: fourthly, for the perfection, as containing
not only all matters to be prayed for, but the abridgement of the Gospel and
of all Religion: fifthly, for the acceptance, when it is rightly used. If a man
preferring a suite to a King, were not only sent by the Prince to his Father,
but had his words put into his mouth, yea, had his Petition drawn with the
Princes own hand, and that by the Kings own appointment, how great so ever
the suite were, and how poor and unworthy so ever the subject were, yet a man
would think, he needed not to doubt of good success in his suite. This is
our case, praying thus unto God, and the case of all truly penitent: yea verily
infinitely better then we are able to lay it open by any comparison.

Thus much for the Commandment, Pray in this manner: as for the Prayer it
self, it is a principal subject of public Catechizing; so well commanded by
authority, and practiced by the Ministry in many places, that I purpose not
to insist upon it: Only I will set down a very short summary, which may give
some light to the ignorant, for the better understanding of it. The parts of
the Lords Prayer (as it is notoriously known) are three; the preface, the
petitions, six in all, and the conclusion. The preface, Our Father, which art
in Heaven, teaches to whom we are to pray; even to GOD alone, besides whom
we have no Father in Heaven: and again, how we are to pray, to wit, in
Faith, and in Charity, and with the highest reverence. In Faith, and that most
assured, having to do with our most loving and all-sufficient Father. In
Charity, as calling God our Father in common with the whole brotherhood of
Saints, with whom we profess our selves to hold communion. And with the
highest reverence that can be, as coming into his presence, whose throne is
in the highest Heavens. Of the six Petitions, the first three concern the
glory of God alone, with the means of glorifying him, as the coming of his
Kingdom, and doing of his will: the other three, our own good (I mean the
good of the whole brotherhood) corporal, and spiritual. In the first
Petition, Hallowed be thy name, we desire before and above all things, to
have Gods holiness, or divine virtues, as his Wisdom, Power, Mercy, and
Justice, known and acknowledged, and duly ascribed to him, by word and deed,
of our selves, and others, far and near. Or, in short, that men universally
may Romans 1. 21.
glorify him as God, and be thankful: or that Psalm. 48. 10.
according to his Name, so his praise might be, unto the ends of the earth;
According to his Name, that is, as he has reueiled himself in his Word and
works. In the second Petition, thy Kingdom come, we desire the setting up
and advancement of his Kingdom of grace upon earth, and the manifestation of
his Kingdom of glory in Heaven: but, especially (no doubt) accommodating his
Prayer to the time, he teaches them and us to be suitors to God, that the
promises, concerning the long and much expected Kingdom of the Messiah, might
be accomplished still more and more. As he had most graciously begun
already by his coming in the flesh, victorious conflict with Satan, preaching
of the Gospel, miraculous operations, and gathering of Disciples to himself,
as the seminary of his future Church; as also by the preaching and Baptism of
John, the Son of Zachary, his forerunner. This worthily has the next place,
as the most special means of hallowing his Name. In the third Petition, thy
will be done in earth, as it is Heaven, we beg that the holy Will of God
revealed in his Word, or by the event, may be yielded unto of us, and all his
people, as universally, ioyously, and constantly, as it is of the blessed
Angels and Saints departed, who are at his beck in every thing, howsoever, for
the degree, we come far short of them. And this we crave, as a matter
absolutely necessary, both because we are one Family, Phil. 3. 20.
Commonwealth, and Kingdom of Heaven (as our Lord Christ commonly calls his
Church here beneath) with them, and because our doing of the Will of GOD is
the hallowing of his Name on our parts, which otherwise is Ezekiel. 36. 20. Romans
2. 24.
profaned. In the fourth Petition, give us this day our daily bread, we
entreat God the author of these our souls and bodies to support and comfort
them, both in the state of nature and grace, (so far the ancient, and some
new Writers also stretch it) by giving food and foison, bread and the staff of
bread, even all necessaries of this life, and a better, with his blessing upon
us, in the use of them. To the state of nature belongs food, raiment,
protection, gladness of heart, etc: to the state of grace belong the Word,
Sacraments, Ministry, the inward operation and gifts of the Holy Ghost, etc.

In the fifth Petition, forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, we
request, that though we still incur his danger, by our sins (as it were so
many debts) yet he would not withdraw his mercy from us, but settle our
hearts in the assurance of pardon, and withal spare his Rods. Whereof we
profess our selves to be persuaded, because even we, that are evil by nature,
have learned, at his bidding, and by his example to show mercy to our
repenting brethren, who have wronged us, in what degree soever. In the sixth and
last Petition, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, we
beseech God, that though the Devil desire to winnow us, as wheat, and we
deserve it, yet that he would not leave us in temptation, nor give us up (as
he does many to Satan's, or (our own lusts, but assist us evermore in our
spiritual warfare, and that Romans 16. 20.
the God of peace would tread Satan under our feet shortly. Finally, in the
conclusion, for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever,
Amen, which is the third part, we learn, that God alone is to be called upon,
without fainting, wavering or doubting any way, and to be praised incessantly,
because the absolute and independent souereigntie over all, and power to do
all, whatsoever he will, by his only word or beck, and glory for all (to
which glory of his he has joined our good, corporal and spiritual) belongs
incommunicably to him. How can he then, but, in due season and manner, hear
and help us his poor subjects (aiming at his glory, and depending upon him)
according to the tenor of the Petitions aforegoing? In assurance whereof, we
set to our seal, as it were, by saying Amen, so be it, yea, so shall it most
certainly be, and therefore, according to our bounden duty, we rest persuaded
of it, without taking any further thought about any of those things, which at
thine own appointment we have asked. Thus much briefly of the Lords Prayer:
only there is added (as it were) a Postscript, as an explaination of the
reason of the fifth Petition: Verse 14, 15.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses. In which words, he makes our forgiving of
others, though not the principal cause, moving our heavenly Father to forgive
us, (for 1. John 4. 19.
we love him, and our Neighbor in him, because he loved us first) yet the
certificatory cause (if I may so speak) as a necessary fruit, and inseperable
companion of the love of God toward us. So that where one of them is, either
Gods forgiving of us, or our sincere forgiving one of another, both are: and
where both are not, neither is. If my propensitie and readiness to forgive my
Neighbor, who has wronged me seven times, yea seventy times seven times,
and to do what good I can, to the wrong doer, and that of conscience to God,
bring not comfort to my soul, that my sins are forgiven me, nothing can
truly comfort. And if I can truly comfort my self before God, that I so
forgive, and do good, then a fig for all, that the Devil, or Man, or mine
own evil and distrustful heart can say to the contrary: I will ever stop
their mouths with this; Even I my self, that am evil, am taught of God, and,
I thank God, have learned to forgive men their trespasses, upon their
Repentance, and to do them what good I can; much more then my good God, and
heavenly Father will, upon mine unfeigned Repentance, forgive me all my
trespasses, and do me all good. And not without case is this point so much
insisted upon, because he knows our propensitie to revenge, and to bear a
grudge and loathnesse to be reconciled one to another: as also, because Psalm.
32. 1, 2.
the forgiveness of sins is our maine freehold, and inheritance, wherein
consists our everlasting blessedness.

Thus much concerning his directions for prayer: let us now at the length
proceed to the description of fasting, which we may in some sort define, to
be an Leu. 23. 32.
afflicting of our souls before God by a holy abstinence from food, and all
other comforts of this life (so far as may well be) for the space of four
and twenty hours, Ester 4. 16.
or more, according to the occasion, to testify and further our humiliation in
repentance, and zeal in prayer. This afflicting of the soul before God, can
no more stand with vain glory and hypocrisy, then fire and water, light and
darkness can agree together. And these true ends of fasting, humiliation in
repentance, and zeal in Prayer, are as directly opposite to all Pharisaiecall
and Papistical opinion of merit, ex opere operato, by the work done, as any
thing can be; for they consist merely not in any vain plea of the merit of
our work, but in a most humble confession of our guilt and misery. Besides
the true manner of fasting from food, and other comforts of this life, for
four and twenty hours, or more, confuteth plainly, not civil abstinence
from some kinds of meat, at certain times, for politic respects; but the
Romish abuses in their manner of fasting, standing in abstinence from flesh,
and their Supper, in lieu whereof they punish their carcasses many of them,
with such drinkings (wherein there is plenty of bread, beer, wine, cakes, and
diverse other iunkets) as many poor Christians of the reformed religion, if
they looked to their belly only, would give them high thanks, to exchange
with them for their Suppers.

Hitherto we have heard of the properties of Christian righteousness, that it
is spiritual, universal, and sincere: the parts should now follow; but
because there are three things especially, which hinder the atainement and
practice of righteousness, with the parts of it, to wit, worldliness, rash
judging, and indiscretion, he first sets himself most earnestly against
them; especially against worldliness. For as they were wont to say of Ottoman
the great Turk, his horse, that where he set his foot, nothing would grow,
because those cruel Turks made all desolate and wast, where they prevailed:
so may it be said, that where this horse of that great Ottoman, the devil (I
mean worldliness) sets his foot, no goodness can take place. He deals
against this, Verse. 19. to the end of the Chapter: and finding worldly minded
folks sick of a twofold malady, to wit, inordinate carfulness about
unnecessary riches, and carking and caring about necessary supplies; he
dehorteth earnestly from the first, to Verse 25. from the second, in all the
rest of this sixth Chapter. Concerning the point of unnecessary riches, he
first forbids Verse. 19
the laying up of treasures upon earth: secondly, commands Verse. 20.
us to lay up for our selves treasures in heaven. Thirdly, Verse. 21.
he annexeth a weighty reason, why we should do not the one, but the other:
fourthly, Verse. 22, 23 24.
he answers certain objections, which either were, or he saw would be made
against that he taught. Here we are first to understand, that beating men
off, from laying up treasures upon earth, he puts not by honest labor and
industry, every where called for in the holy Scriptures; nor the use and
fruition of riches, yea, of great estates, permitted by the word of God, and
Genesis 25. 5. 6.
practiced by his most holy servants, in all ages; no, nor yet simply Prou. 13.
22.
to gather, and treasure up riches for posterity, much commended in holy writ:
but excessive 2. Cor. 1^. 14.
care and travail about these worldly goods, with affiance in them, and
setting our hearts upon them; as if our burgeship or conversation were not in
heaven, but here upon the earth, or as if a man's life consisted in the
abundance of the things which he possessed; contrary to Christ's doctrine; Luke
12. 15 Where observe, how vehemently he opposes this impious conceit,
bringing in to that end, the parable or example of the great rich fool, whose
soul was taken from him, even then, when he was singing to it that sweet
lullabie, Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink and be merry. And yet this seems to be one of the wisest fools
in that kind: for most of them have their worldly wealth to no other end, but
to make them stark beggars, and their great abundance, to make them the more
penurious and miserable. Surely, as the Cherubin, by Gods appointment, with a
flaming sword, kept Adam and Eve out of Paradise: so through Gods just
vengeance, this, not Angel, but Devil of covetousness, keeps the Vassals
of this present world, as it were with a flaming sword, from the fruition of
their rich estates, which they have gotten with great travail. The wisdom
then, that we are to learn from hence, is not to trouble our selves, or spend
our precious time about superfluous riches, but to spend our time and travail
about things necessary and requisite for our persons and for the calling,
wherein God has set us; aiming always at the true ends of getting, gathering,
and laying up in store, which (in short) are, that we may have to live and to
give, I mean to live decently and commendably according to our places:
providing also, so much as in us is, that our wives, children, and others
belonging to us (whom the Apostle calls 1. Tim. 5. 8.
our own) may do the like after us, proving rather helpful then chargeable
to any, if it be the will of God: and to be able to give also to all pious and
charitable uses, for maintenance of Church and Commonwealth, and relief of
our needy brethren, especially those of the household of faith. Which provision
of means both to live and give, reaches to all, even to the poorest swains
that live upon the face of the earth, Ephesians. 4. 28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with
his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to GIVE to him that
needs. And this is indeed not to lay up treasures upon earth for our selves,
when knowing our selves to be but Stewards, entrusted with our Masters goods,
we so labor in our callings, with all our might to get them, that being
gotten, we make it our chief study and care about worldly things, thus to
employ them altogether according to his mind. The words, upon earth, moth,
canker, and thieves, contain reasons against this sin, and those of great
force. For concerning the subject, or place, the earth, is it not monstrous,
that men should once dream to find any piece of their happiness and
contentment, by laying up treasures upon earth? Since Adam and Eve, with all
their posterity, then in their loins, were cast out of Paradise, to inhabit
this earth, as a place of exile and banishment, yea of perpetual penance:
since also the curse of God lies upon the whole earth for the sin of man,
and shall lie upon it, until the time of the restoring of all things. What
blindness is it then to imagine, that by any skill we shall be able to fetch
blessedness out of this earth, which the Lord has cursed, though a man could
gain tho whole world to himself. Again, for the adjoined corruption and
casualty by moths, canker, and thieves; is it not more then monstrous, that men
should go about to make that the matter of their glory and felicity, which
should serve to humble them, and to raise up their minds to the expectation of
the new heavens and earth, wherein shall be righteousness, glory, and
stabilitie? What can a man look upon in this world that carries not a brand
of his sin, and of the curse adjoined? yea, that carries not a sword, or
whip in the hand (as it were) to punish him for sinning against his Creator,
waiting only for his beck to strike, and it strikes? If these worldly riches
could speak, they would even cry out, as Act. 14.
Paul and Barnabas did in another case, O men, why do you these things? Why
do you commit idolatry with us, by placing your delight and confidence in us?
Why do you trouble your selves so much to heap and hoord us up, as if any
part of your felicity lay in us? why do you fall together by the ears, and
be ready to pluck out one another throat for us? Alas, we are poor
creatures, subject to all manner of corruption and Romans 8. 19, 20 21.
vanity for your sin, we mourn and groan under it, and as it were,
standing on tiptoes, expect with stretched out necks, the glory which is to
be revealed to you. Fie for shame, why do not you mourn and groan much more
vnderyour own corruption and vanity? (that which we have, we may thank you
for it,) why do you not much more expect your own glory? And if the inbred
corruption, which we have in common with you, move you not sufficiently, add
hereunto the uncertainty and casualtie, whereto we are ever subject, by
thieves, pirates, wars, desolation, fire, water, suretiship, wastfull
children, untrusty servants, cheaters, oppressors, and infinite such like. And
so, at the length, pluck off your rejoicing and trusting in us, and place it
aright upon God Almighty, your heavenly Father; using us, as your poor
servants, by his gracious appointment, in the passage and way home to your
heavenly Country, and returning the praise of all to him alone, who alone is
your Lord, maker, and vpholder.

The exhortation follows, Verse 20.
Lay up your selves treasures in Heaven; meaning (no doubt) the treasures of
good works, especially of charitable dispensing of our Riches, by Almsdeeds:
as appears by his own Doctrine elsewhere, Luke 12. 33.
Sell that you have, and give Alms (teaching what should be done in case of
extremity, rather then the poor perish, or be too hardly put to, as also
upon an extraordinary calling, as the Apostle-ship,) provide your selves bags
which wax not old, a treasure in the Heavens, that fails not, where no
Thief approaches, neither Moth corrupts. To which accords that of the
Apostle, 1. Tim 6. 17, 18, 19.
Charge rich men not to be high minded, nor to trust in the uncertainty of
Riches, but in the living GOD: that they do good, and be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves
a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal
life. This one lesson of Christ being well learned, that a sanctified man (for
of such he speaks) given to Almsdeeds, lays up treasures in Heaven, will
direct us to the practice of the strangest, and most profitable art, for
thrift, that ever was heard off: To turn our earthly and corruptible wealth,
into heavenly; which is incomparably more excellent, then if a body had
learned by Alcumistrie, with little or no charge, to turn courser mettalls,
yea, the very stones, into Silver and Gold. Neither let the poorer sort
complain, that whereas wealthy people are here directed to a most rich and
undeceivable kind of trading, they are shut out, and made to look on: It is
nothing so, for even they 2. Cor. 8, 12.
if there be a willing mind, are accepted, according to that they have, and
not according to that they have not: besides, a willing mind will ever find
somewhat to express it self by. The Luke 21. 1, 2, 3.
poor Widows mite was most accepted of all other: she carries away the
glory of being the greatest Almes-giuer, and Alchymist of that kind. Yea,
though a man be as poor as Luke 16. 20.
Lazarus, or Ibid. 23. 40, 41, 42.
the Thief upon the Cross, yet if he treasure up Prayers and Christian
virtues, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, Humility, Heavenly mindedness,
forgiving, from the heart, his cruel and hardhearted enemies, and praying for
them, or otherwise doing them what good he can, sine thure litabit, he shall
offer to God a Sacrifice of most sweet savor without the frankincense of
Alms. He lays up in store abundantly rich and incorruptible treasures,
which he shall be sure to meet withal in Heaven.

But let us proceed to his most wise and weighty Reason, why men should not
lay up treasures upon Earth, but in Heaven, drawn from the effect, Verse 21.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also: meaning here by
treasure, their summum bonum, or most sovereign good, whereupon they had
laid, and still did lay the very prime and cream of their endeavors: as
everlasting Life, Alms also and all good works done in hope of that most free
and ample reward, which God, that cannot lie, has promised, are to heavenly
minded men; Riches, Honor, Ease, Pleasure, and whatsoever is of that stamp,
are to worldly minded people, whatsoever that be, heavenly or earthly, the
Heart, or Soul is swayed by it, and with the sway of it carries the whole
man, with every part and faculty of him after it. As a great and only
Favorite, swaying the Prince, swayeth the whole State, and then is it well for
the Kingdom, if such a Favorite be right wise, and nobly minded, and the
contrary, most terrible: so the Soul, being set as a great Empress in the
body of man, has a Favorite or Minion, to which it hearkeneth, and after
which it is carried, yea, is even so changed, and (as it were) transnatured by
it, that if it be heavenly, the Soul is likewise heavenly; if earthly it
makes in like manner, an earthly Soul: and as the Soul or mind, so the
members, which it commands. Which serves to stir us up, both to make a
right choice of our treasure, that our hearts may be carried the right way: and
also to make trial of our choice, by the sway of our minds, whether it be
right or no. The mind is truly said to be, where it loves, not where it
lives. If our love and delight (with Marie Luke 10.
in the Gospel) be set upon the best part (the first fruits whereof only
belong to this life; the full crop, to Heaven) assuredly it cannot be, but
where this treasure is, our heart, affection, and conversation must needs be:
to this dead carcass these Eagles cannot but resort. And as Jacobs seven
years painful service Genesis 29. 20.
for Rahel seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her: so how
long and toylesome labor soever be taken for this heavenly Rahel, it will
seem as nothing, in comparison, yea, rather as a pastime. So in like manner,
as Genesis 26. 9.
Isaacks sporting with Rebecca plainly discovered that she was his wife, how
closely soever he carried the matter: Of a surety, she is thy wife, (said
King Abimelech, when he spied it, looking out at a window) so our spiritual
Dalliance will plainly discover whereto our hearts are married; If to the fear
of God, and expression of it by good works, it will easily appear by our
embracing, and (as it were) hugging and kissing of it: when, in an holy kind of
dotage, our minds ever, or for the most part, run of it, we cannot but be
talking of it, or one way or other expressing our affectionate love to it, upon
every just occasion. Verily our own hearts may certainly conclude upon such a
constant practice, and the looker on, in some sort, This is thy Wife, or
Rebecca. But contrariwise, a man may conclude even of many a Professor, Of a
surety this World is thy Wife, thy pleasure is thy Wife, thy credit and
reputation is thy Wife: for thy mind, talk, and time, are wholly or chiefly
taken up about these: the fear of God, Alms and good Works, seldom come
into thy mind, and, when they do, it is but on the by.

After the dehortation, exhortation, and this Reason, whereof we have now
heard, two Objections follow, Verse 22, 23.
the first, in these words, The light of the body is the eye: if therefore
thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. But if thine eye
be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light,
that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that darkness? In both which
Verses is an answer to a secret Objection, If there be so great a treasure in
Heaven, why do so few find and affect it, according to the worth, but all men
almost seek their treasure here beneath? The answer is, because the clear
eye of the Soul is wanting to them, without which there can be no right
choice of their treasure, or placing of their affections. The similitude is
plain, and runs thus; As in the body, if the light thereof, which is the
eye, be simple or clear, the whole body, or conversation, is lightsome and
orderly; whereas contrariwise, if the eye be troubled, all is full of
confusion, as being done in the dark: so if the light, that is in us, viz. our
Reason and understanding be clear, that is, illuminated by the Word and Spirit
of God, to discern and judge aright, all goes well, and according to the
mind of God: but if corrupt, and void of judgment, (as it is naturally, by
Adams fall) how great is that darkness? their ignorance, sin, and spiritual
misery is most woeful, and intolerble. Men are then so stupid, that they are
not able so much, as to take knowledge of their lamentable condition, no though
it be never so plainly laid open unto them; much less can they take knowledge
of the remedy: but altogether, as distempered person, flee from it and resist
it. How does the Devil play Rex, when he has thus blown out Gods Candle?
The Prou. 20. 27.
spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord (says wise Solomon.) We may learn
from this notable similitude, That when the eye of the Soul is so illuminated
that it may indeed be called single, it makes the whole man, and his
conversation, to be gracious and fruitful throughout: as it is clearly
explayned by Saint Luke. Lu. 11. 34, 35, 36.
The sum of Christ's Parable, in that place, comes to thus much, That if the
whole body or man befull of light, that is, of knowledge and sanctimonie, then
the whole life or conversation shall be full of light, that is, shall shine in
good works, as when the bright shining of a Candle does give thee light; which
(we know) lightens every part of the Room, where it is set up. So that, in
short, by Christ's teaching, the eye of the Soul is good and clear, when the
whole man and life is so: surely, there are ^^y few single eyes by this Rule.
But whereas he adds, Verse. 23.
If thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness, he plainly
teaches, that where good judgment is wanting, there can be nothing good, but
all things extremely out of square, in the whole man, and every part of his
life: (howsoever Popery conceiteth of ignorance, that it is the Mother of
Devotion) the whole man, and his whole life, is as a dark dungeon, without any
manner of light. No marvel then if they discern not the heavenly treasure,
and durable, from earthly and transitory, and so look not after it. Ignoti
nulla cupido: what desire can there be of that, which a man has no knowledge
of at all? And when he brings it forth with a kind of exclamation, and with
an interrogation, If the light, that is in thee, be darkness, how great is
that darkness? he therein teaches, and that with great earnestness, that
the judgment it self, being corrupted, corrupts the whole man, and his life
most hideously; making their condition (where there is not grace to sanctify,
or, at least, to restrain) most abominable and desperate, as carrying men,
through the blindness and hardness of their hearts, from one sin to another,
and that with greediness; making them reprobate to every good work. And
hereof (that we may know how much we stand obliged and bound to God our
heavenly Father, for our effectual calling to the knowledge of his Truth) we
have most notable example, not only in the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19.
Walking in the vanity of their minds, having their understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of GOD, through the ignorance that is in them,
See also Rom, 1 28, 29, 30.
because of the blindness of their heart, who, being past feeling, gave
themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness, with
greediness: but also exorbitant and degenerating Christians, to whom, Tit. 1.
15, 16.
being themselves defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their
mind and conscience is defiled: they profess that they know GOD, but in
works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate. Letting other things pass, ^^member we this, That since our
blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, sets this down here, as a mark or
character of a blind heart, whose eye of his Soul is troubled, to be worldly
minded, or covetous, because they discern not the true treasure from the
counterfeit, but take Hob for Gib, one for another, to the utter undoing of
themselves: let every one try himself hereby, even by the right choice of his
treasure, whether he be indeed illuminated, and borne again, and not rest (as
most do) in an idle conceit of knowing and serving God aright.

The second objection follows in these words, Verse 24.
No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one and despise the other; ye cannot serve
GOD and Mammon: where he answers them who were ready to object, and say, (as
commonly men do, at the least, in their hearts) we will do both; we will
apply our selves to Gods service, and to the gathering and hoording up of
riches also; we will lay up for our selves treasures on earth, and in heaven
too. It is impossible (says Christ) to serve both, to set your hearts upon
these two treasures at once. This he clears by a similitude drawn from a
civil body or society, (as the former was from a natural body.) As
(according to the common Proverb) no man can serve, or wholly addict himself
to two masters, especially requiring contrary, or if but diverse services, at
one and the same time, but either he will hate the one and love the other, or
else he will hold to the one and despise the other: No more can any man
possibly serve God and riches, requiring offices, not only diverse but directly
contrary. The service of God (as we know) calls for truth and plainness
in all our dealings: the service of riches for cunning courses, colloguing, and
out-stripping one another with the odds of wit. The service of God mainely
urges mercy, liberality, and laying up of treasures in heaven: the service
of riches will have sparing, pinching, niggardliness, and laying up treasures
upon earth. God, and Christ, our heavenly Master, absolutely command all his
followers to cleave to him and his Gospel, with the loss of all, yea, even of
their very lives: on the other side, riches bind their vassals to cleave close
to them, whatsoever become of religion, or of their own souls. The holy
task, which God lays upon his servants, is prayer, the exercise of the Word
and Sacraments, due observation of the Sabbath, holding of an holy
correspondencie and communion with the Saints; setting their affections upon
heaven and heavenly things, and such like: on the contrary part, riches will
give their poor slaves no time to mind or attend upon such matters: all such
works are blacke-workes, yea loathsome to the servants of Mammon. Finally, God
delights to find in his servants an earnest lingering and longing after his
own presence, not only of grace, but of glory, that they should desire
(according to his will) to be loosed, and to be at home with him: but Mammon
the great God and master of this world, cannot abide that; he lulleth and
sings his servants asleep by giving them (with the rich glutton) their
consolation in present. So that the wise man breaks into this exclamation,
not without cause, O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
lives at rest in his possessions, etc. In these, and many other respects, the
service of God and riches cannot stand together. A man may serve God, and use
riches, as also all honest purueyance for them: but serve them, that is, to set
his heart upon them, making them, if not the only, yet the principal object
of his desire, hope, confidence, love, joy, fear, sadness, anger, etc. This
thraldom cannot stand with the service of God, justly styled perfect freedom.
Hence may we learn most worthy and necessary lessons; first, that except God
have our whole service, he will have none of it. The old saying is, Love and
Lordship will endure no Partnership: he professes himself to be our husband,
and that a jealous one; he cannot bear not only gross idolatry (as it were
spiritual Spouse-breach) but mental idolatry, by over great love of the
creatures, and affiance in them. He in like manner is our absolute Lord to whom
alone belongs all honor and service, because he alone has made us for
himself, and ransomed us most miserable captives out of the hands of all our
enemies, bodily and ghostly. Further, we learn, that then God has our whole
service, when forsaking all other, we love and cleave unto him alone. For to
this end is mention made of Verse 24.
loving and cleaving, or holding to one Master. Now thus to love and cleave to
our heavenly Lord and Master, is, as we know the tenor of the whole Law, Mat.
22. 36.
Thou shall love the Lord thy GOD with all thine heart, soul, strength, Deuteronomy.
10. 20, and 13. 4.
thou shall cleave to him, etc. It is also the condition propounded in the
Gospel to every Disciple of Christ Jesus, Luke 14. 26.
If any man come to me, and hate not (in comparison of me) father and mother,
wife and children, yea, and his own life, he cannot be my Disciple. It was
the exemplaric Ioh. 8. 29.
practice of our Savior Christ so to love his heavenly father, cleave unto
him, and please him in all things, not doing his own will. And this, and none
other is the end of our being in the state of nature and grace, and of all Gods
benefits in hand, and in hope. The sum of all, and the maine scope or aim of
this parable, is, that for men to set their hearts upon riches, is plainly to
renounce God: for his peremptory conclusion is, Ye cannot serve GOD and
Mammon, or abundance. It lies every man in hand therefore very strictly and
narrowly to examine himself, whose servant he is, lest, being suddenly
surprised, while he is in the service of riches, he perish unrecoverably, with
the lovers of this present world. And whereas, for the most part, men are only
afraid of poverty, which they dread more then sickness, infamy, yea, then
dishonestie and death it self: our wisdom is to fear riches (as Prou. 30. 8.
Agur did) as much, if not much more, knowing the danger of them, which few
escape. Whereof Christ himself gives warning, Mat. 19. 23.
How hardly do rich men enter into the kingdom of heaven? Because it is a
most hard thing to have riches, and not to trust in them, not to rejoice in
them more then in the living God, howsoever the heart of man, (deceitful above
all things) will not be brought to see and confess it.

In the next place follows the second branch of covetousness, or
worldliness, consisting in solicitude, and ouergreat carfulness about
necessary supplies, what to eat, drink, or put on: which tractate holds to
the end of this sixth Chapter. Wherein (as in the former branch) he both
dehorteth from the inordinate seeking of the very necessaries of this life: and
also exhorts Verse 33.
to the seeking (with might and maine) of the things of a better life. His
dehortation is first propounded, Verse 25. and (to drive the nail home to the
head, notwithstanding our toughness and knottinesse) it is repeated again and
again, Verse 31. 34. Secondly, it is urged by sundry reasons of great
importance, which we will take, as they lie in order. He propounds it with
very great earnestness, in manner of a conclusion, or inference upon his
former doctrine, concerning covetousness, striking here, at the very root of
that sin, putting upon it also (as his manner is) the weight of his
authority, Verse 25.
Therefore I say to you, take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or
what you shall drink, nor yet for your body, what you shall put on. In which
words also is employed an answer to a common objection, I look not for great
things, my care is only for food and raiment. Yea, but (says Christ) I
forbid you to have your minds distracted even about these necessary things,
meat, drink, apparel; walk with God in your callings, let all your works
be done with all possible diligence, faithfulness, and forecast, and there an
end, trust God with the rest. It is he alone who is able and will give such
success and blessing, as he knows to be most fitting. His promise is, not
to leave and forsake you: your part is to rest upon it, with a calm mind. To
do otherwise, is to go about to take his work out of his hands, and to
ingrosse all to your selves; which you shall have small joy of. But for the
better clearing of this point concerning covetousness (which men are extremely
blind in, and are willing to be blind) know we that there are three degree of
covetousness, whereby the Devil fasteneth upon men, and hooketh them to
himself (as 1. Sam. 2. 14.
the Sons of Heli did the flesh out of the Cauldron, with a flesh-hooke of
three teeth; The first is the grossest of all, carried after an unlawful
object, as that of Balaam, Achan, Ahab, Judas, and such like. The second is
that, which Christ fights against Verse. 1^* 20. etc.
in the former branch, which also is very foul and gross: it is carried after
a lawful object (as goods gotten without oppression or fraud any way) but
excessiuely, consisting in heaping, hoording, and making provision for the Romans
13. 14.
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; as that of the Fool before mentioned,
rich to himself, and not to God. The third is that which is here condemned,
carried after a lawful and necessary object, without any such excess, but
inordinately with carking and caring instead of dependence upon God, in holy
silence and security. So that the great lesson, which our Lord Christ, in this
place, will have us take forth, is, 1. Tim. 6. 8.
Not only to be content with things necessary, as food and raiment, but for
those necessary things to look up to Heaven, and expect them at the hands of
our heavenly Father, in rest and quietness: according to the most sweet word
and promise of the Lord God, the holy one of Israel, Isai. 30. 15.
In rest and quietness shall ye be saved: in quietness and confidence shall
be your strength. This the Prophet opposed against all unlawful means used by
the Jews, who in their danger depended not upon God, but went a gadding into
Egypt for help. Let us, according to Christ's doctrine, learn to oppose it
against all distrust in Gods Providence, against all wordly cares, and
whatsoever distraction of mind, arising from thence. It is true indeed, that,
we cannot altogether shake off the punishment, which sin has brought upon
man, to eat his bread with sweat and sorrow; yet as wise Bathsheba taught her
Son Prou. 31 ^6.
to give wine and strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and has
grief of heart, that he may forget his poverty and misery; so let us labor
to be filled with the Wine of the Spirit, to have our souls thoroughly cheared
by Faith and a pure Conscience (which is to drink a true health) and that will
easily make us forget, at the least in great part, the labors and sorrows of
this life. This, Genesis 6. 29.
as Noah, will comfort every good Lamech, concerning the work and toil of his
hands.

Now let us come to the Reasons briefly. It is not without the force of a
Reason, that he is so earnest, charging us by his own authority (as we have
often heard) who is our great Lord, and Master, I say to you, take no thought,
etc. which is of the more force, because this his charge was not verbal, but
real; his whole life being a practice of this his doctrine, for he ever did
the works of him, that sent him, and took no thought for outward things. His
first Reason is drawn from a comparison, and to put the more life into it, is
propounded with a vehement interrogation, Is not the life more then meat, and
the body then raiment? meaning that God has given the greater, without all
carking and caring on our part: wherefore out of question, he will not scotch
with us for the less. He has given (...), our essence or substance, he will
not withhold (...), any necessaries, appertayning to our essence or substance:
as he seems to intimate in the fourth Petition, give us this day, (...) our
daily bread. God is not like to a House-wright, Ship-wright, or maker of
Clockes and Watches, who take no more care of their works, when they are once
finished, but leave them to others for to repair, guide, and set: but this
Psalm. 48. 14.
God is our GOD for ever and ever, he shall be our guide unto death, as it is
in the Psalm. Wherefore we are commanded to 1. Pet. 4. 19.
commit our souls, or selves, unto him, in well doing as to a faithful
Creator: and so let us do, and there rest.

His second Reason is also drawn from a comparison with a note of attention
prefixed to awaken us from our drowsiness, Verse 26.
Behold the Fowls of the Air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into Barnes, yet your Heavenly Father feeds them: are ye not much
better then they? Giving us to understand, that those fowls, infinitely
inseriour to us (they were made for us) wanting all those means, which we
enjoy, neither are at all regarded of man (as the fowls of the Air are not)
yet want they not necessary food, but expect and receive it at the hands of our
heavenly Father, every one in due time. As the Psalmist notably observes Psalm.
145. 15.
The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat indue
season: thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.
Again, Psalm. 147. 9.
God gives to the beasts their food, and to the young ravens that cry. Again,
Psalm. 104. 21.
The young Lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God. How
much more then shall God, not theirs, but our heavenly Father, look out for
us, and furnish all our needs in due time. And when this comes out with a
note of attention, Behold, it teaches us, that those works of God, which
seem to be of the lowest rank (commonly least heeded) such as the fowls of
the Air, and Lillies of the field, are not to be passed by, as the manner is,
or negligently to be looked into, but with most attentive heed and
consideration, of every child of God, for consolation, as here, and for
instruction. To which end Prou. 6.
the practice of the little Emmet is commended and urged. For if we think God,
and his divine virtues, worth the beholding, next to his holy Word, and
Sanctuary, or holy place, it is to be done in his Creatures and Works,
wherein Romans 1. 20.
the invisible things of him, even his eternal Power and Godhead are to be
seen: not only in the Sun, Moon, and Stars, or in Job 40. 15. and 41. 1.
Behemoth and Leuiathan, but even in those which seem the least, and most
contemptible of all other, as the Emmet before mentioned, the Prou. 30. 24.
Conies, or Mice of the Mountains, the Locusts, and Spiders, whose strange
industry and operations, wise Agur much admireth. Of which, and infinite such
like, that of the Prophet may justly be taken up, Psalm. 111. 2.
The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all that have pleasure
therein. To this seeking, and pleasuring in the works of God, we are called,
both by the manner of creating, in that God made not all at once by his Word or
beck (as he could have done) but by peecemeale in six days; that we might
follow him, and consider of every days work severally: and also by the first
institution of the Sabbath in the close of all; which besides other ends, was
ordained to be a day of contemplation, or beholding of God in his works; as
the Psalm. 92.
Psalm or Song for the Sabbath, insisting upon the Works of the Lord, plainly
intimates. If we could (as duty binds us) be brought hereunto, we should
then live in this World, as in an ample and magnificent Temple, furnished with
most beautiful Images, or Laymens Books of Gods own making, to admonish and
comfort us upon every occasion, and should have no need of Popish Images, to
that end, directly against the express mind of God, revealed in his Word. And
let me add thus much more, for the increase and confirmation of our comfort
herein; By this comparison drawn from the unregarded fowls of the Air, from
Sparrowes and Ravens (as we may seec, Luke 12. 6. 24.) we are taught, that no
sense of our own vileness, or want of means, ought to pluck us from resting
upon Gods Providence, but rather send us to it. Shall Mat. 10. 29.
Sparrowes, sold so good cheap, and ravening Ravens, safely rest upon it, in
their kind, without all means, and not be disappointed? And shall not we, made
after Gods own Image, redeemed by the blood of his only begotten Son,
sealed by his Spirit unto the day of Redemption, to whom it is his good
pleasure to give the Kingdom, do it much more? The third Reason, propounded
also with a vehement Interroation, does demonstrate the vanity and
unprofitableness of taking thought about outward supplies, Verse 27.
Which of you by taking thought, can add one Cubit to his stature? What manner
of reasoning this is, Christ himself shows elsewhere, Luke 12. 26.
If then ye be not able to do that which is least, why take ye thought for
the rest? So that he makes it a reasoning from the less to the greater: to
be of tall, or low stature, conferreth little, or nothing, to a comfortable
life; yet are we not able by any solicitude or carfulness to mend our selves
therein any whit. All that we can do, is, to use the means, which God has
appointed to that end, by taking sustenance, and preserving our health so much
as in us is, and to leave that increase of our stature and of our childrens, to
God alone: so in like manner are we, for competencie and suffizance in outward
things, to use the best industry and provision that we can, and then in faith
and holy dependence to expect the success from God, Prou. 10. 22. Deuteronomy. 8. 17,
18. Psalm. 127. 1.
whose blessing only makes rich, and gives content. The short is, that as
our stature, so our state of life comes merely from the hand and appointment
of Almighty God. That notable comparison, which Irenaeus takes up to
illustrate the doctrine concerning the communion of Saints, may well be taken
up in this case: As one lump and one loaf cannot be made of dry wheat,
without moisture, so neither can we, being many, be made one in Christ,
without the water which is from heaven. In like manner, how wise and working
heads soever men have, and what means and endeavors soever they use, yet the
lump or leaf of thrift cannot be kneaded or raised up, without liquor from
heaven, that is, without Gods blessing. Where that is wanting, great husbands
with all their great travel and cares, do but as bowlers, who cry rub, rub,
and bend their body which way they would have their bowl to go, but all in
vain.

Hitherto our Lord Christ, Verse. 25. 26, 27,
having earnestly taxed men for torturing their minds about necessary food,
does now the like about raiment, Verse 28. 29, 30.
And why take you thought for raiment? consider the Lillies of the field, how
they grow; they toil not, neither do they spinne, etc. using the like
vehement interrogation, and undeniable reasoning from the comparison of the
less, as before. And here also in so low a degree, that it ought to make us
ashamed of our unbelief, to have the least mistrust, that he should not
cloathe us, who cloatheth the Lillies, not of the garden only, which are
regarded of men, but of the fields, which no body looks after; whose beauty
and bravery he makes to go beyond Salomons, the mirror of majesty and
magnificence: which thing he calls upon us to consider, and diligently
meditate on. Shall God, our heavenly father, so cloathe the grass, which is to
day, and to morrow is cast into the furnace, or else otherwise soon withers,
and dies away? and shall he not much more cloathe us, for whom he has made
these and all other things, and whom, out of his rich mercy and grace, he
has clothed with his son Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory. Let us stay here
a little and observe well, and lay to heart, how irreligious and absurd this
carfulness about apparel must needs be: Since it is not only against our
Lord and Masters most earnest prohibition, but against a more sure word and
ordinance of Almighty God, then that of the Lilies (if anything can be more
sure:) For they, being in appearance dead in Winter, yet by virtue of Gods
operative Genesis 1. 11.
word, grow again in the Spring, and without their labor and spinning are so
arrayed, as Christ here speaks. We have, for this purpose, the word of the
same God, in a far more excellent manner, both his vocal word, promising
Psalm. 34. 10.
that they which seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing: auouching also,
that he Deuteronomy. 10. 18.
loves the stranger (who of all other is most to seek) giving him food and
raiment: and his operative word also, in making good that promise from time to
time; as we see in our first parents, Genesis 3. 21.
whose nakedness he clothed; in Jacob, Genesis 28. 20. and 32, 10.
whose petition for bread to eat, and raiment to put on, God most graciously
and plentifully answered; in the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8. 4. and 29, 5.
following him through the barren wilderness, to whom most miraculously he did
the like forty years together. To let this pass, observe here by the way,
how kindly a check is given to all vanity and excess of apparel: for when
nice and vainglorious fools have even strained to go as far as ever they
can, either in strange and new fangled fashions, or in over great costlinesse,
or in spoiling precious time by curious tricking and trimming of their earthly
mass or lump of flesh, in setting their ruffes, starching, tooting into the
glass, laying out their hair and breasts, and many such like gewgawes, they
come far short, not only of some of their compeeres, and greaters
especially, but of many very base creatures, which surmount them, yea, go
beyond Solomon himself, who in his lawful and warrantable pomp out-stripped
all others. And whereas he shakes them by the shoulder as it were, saying, O
ye of little faith, it is indeed a sharp reprehension, justly deserved on
their and our parts, when instead of depending upon the divine promise and
providence, we fall to this demurre about apparel, or any other thing of the
like nature: yet for all that, it may bring sweet consolation to the humble and
broken hearted, trembling at the word of God; in that Christ rebukes his
Disciples and followers indeed, for the weakness of their faith (so Matthew. 8.
28.) but rejects them not for it: he rather animateth and strengthens them.
It is a more blessed thing to have that (...), or Romans 4. 17. 18
strong faith that was in our father Abraham: notwithstanding, if poor
Christians be not so happy as to be carried under full sails, at all times,
but must content themselves with a fainter gale, they are not to be
discouraged, because the God of truth accepts of truth and sincerity:
Neither is it the degree of faith, but Christ the object, that makes the
believer acceptable. Yet that no man deceive himself, know we, that where this
life of true faith is, how infirm soever, there cannot but be the breath of
prayer in some degree for daily increases; there must needs be some heat of
charity and zeal, some sense also of our own vileness and spiritual wants,
as of Gods mercifulness, (except in a desertion or spiritual swoune, when
contrary to sense, we are to believe, and with Christ himself to cry, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me) there is with all motion, and Hebr. 6.
1.
striving to go on unto perfection. To which end, there cannot but accompany
and insatiable hungring and thirsting after righteousness, and so a continual
clinging to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the means: as we see in the
weak Disciples John 6. 48.
Master, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. This have
I thought good to point unto by the way: let us now proceed. To set yet a
sharper edge upon it, and to stir up our dull and distrustful hearts to more
often and serious meditation of this weighty point, he repeateth his
exhortation and adds two reasons more against distrustful and anxious
looking after food and raiment. His repetition is in another form, very
significant: for those carers and carkers about outward things are brought in
uttering their own distrustful thoughts, sauouring of some spice of Atheism.
For as if they had no God to provide for them, or as if all the promises of God
were moone-shine in the water, they say, Verse 31.
What shall we eat? what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed?
as doubting how it may or can be, all means failing, either by losses,
deadness of trading, increase of charge, old age, sickness, persecution, and
such like disasters. So did the children of Israel in the wilderness, when for
their probation and trial, they were somewhat hard put to, the next was, Where
shall we have water to drink? who shall give us flesh to eat? Psalm. 78. 19.
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? would to God we had dyed in
Egypt, etc. When their arms were too short to help themselves, poor
wretches, they could not see how the arm of the Lord could be long enough to
do it: which disease, who is it, that (knowing his own heart) finds not in
corrupt nature, when tentations of this nature fall out to be heavy and
frequent. Wherefore as Christ rouzed up his Disciples in another case, Mat 26.
41
Watch and pray lest ye enter into tentation: the spirit is willing, the flesh
is weak: so are we every one of us to rouse up our selves in this very case.
We little think, especially while we enjoy the world at will, how wicked we
shall find our rebellious and unbelieving hearts in the day of trial (which
few or none escape at one time or other) let every one call to mind how he
has found it at any time heretofore, when it has gone very hard with him,
whether he were not then at his wits end in a manner. And though he brake not
out into such loud and passionate speeches; yet whether his heart were not
full of distraction, fretting, and murmuring, but rather (as it ought to be)
by resting upon God, and humbling himself under his correcting hand, he gave
glory to God, making him his only sanctuary and repose. In sum, our
Savior Christ, in these often repetitions, commends this unto us, as an high
and necessary point of wisdom and duty, not to suffer our minds to be
troubled or royled (as it were) with the sense of present want or expectation
of future events, but John 11. 9. and 9, 4.
walking in the day, and doing the work of every day, while it is day, to
wait upon God with a quiet mind, Psalm. 123. 2.
as the servant upon his Master, the handmaid upon her Mistress. The better
and more able Master we have, the more steadfastly ought we to do it; we
shall find in experience, this to be the best sugar and water to cure the fret
in the belly of our souls.

The two reasons follow; whereof the first is, Verse 32.
for after all these things seek the Gentiles, or rather over seek them, as
the original word signifies. They make this the only or principal care,
what to eat, drink, and put on: because their happiness is bounded within
the narrow compass of this perishing world: more they know not (poor souls)
and therefore can look no higher; As appeared in the old world, and in the
Sodomites, who Luke 17. 26, 27, 28.
did eat and drink, married and gave in marriage, bought, sold, built, and
planted, having their minds wholly taken up, and inthralled therewith. We
learn hereby, that it is merely heathenish, and to be abhorred of
Christians, to have our minds turmoyled and tortured about worldly supplies,
which we ought to put God in trust withal. To what end have we learned
Christ, if his blessed doctrine and practice can bear no more sway with us
herein? How do we profess the hope of an heavenly inheritance, if upon Gods
promise and perpetual experence of his mercifulness and truth, in providing
for his own, we be no more secure of our earthly sustenance, then they. The
Apostle would not have us 1. These. 4. 13.
mourn for the dead, as men without hope; and shall we, professing our faith
and hope to be in God, be of no better practice or comfort about these smallest
matters, then the very Pagans, who Ephesians. 2. 12.
are without GOD in this world? The second reason is drawn from the knowledge
or regard of God; your heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these
things; meaning, that he knows perfectly, and that with more then a Fatherly
respect and regard of us. For stiling him our heavenly Father, (because his
glory chiefly shines there) he would have us to understand, and remember, that
he is most willing and able to succor us, in all extremities, (as Parents, in
high place, can and do their children.) So that we are here taught to stay
our selves in the greatest temptations of this nature, with this meditation,
which can never fail, or deceive us, That God, our heavenly Father, is privy
to all our needs, and that he has the greatest power, and propensitie also to
relieve and help us, and will do it also in due time, when it may do us most
good. If this comfort were seated in our breasts (as it ought to be) we might
safely sing careaway, and take up that of the Prophets, Psalm. 3. 5. and 4. 8.
I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep (whatsoever streights I be in
for the present) because thou, Lord, only susteinest me, and make me dwell
in safety. Whereas, contrariwise, the staggering herein is the cause of all
discomfort, and even of despair, and death it self: for 2. Cor. 7. 10.
worldly sorrow, arrising from thence, causes death. Thus we see what
patheticall Inhibitions and Reasons this divine Teacher has used, to beat us
from the inordinate seeking of the very necessaries of this present life.

In the three and thirtieth Verse he interlaceth an exhortation to seek the
things of a better life; But first seek the Kingdom of GOD, and his
righteousness, (annexing, for our encouragement, an ample promise thereto,)
and all these things shall be ministered unto you. Wherein, because contraries
are cured by contraries, he labors to draw men from undue, yea, ungodly
carfulness about earthly matters, by stirring them up to most due, religious,
and necessary carfulness about heavenly. As Physicians, to stay the inward
bleeding, by reason of some rupture in the body, upon a vein: so Christ
here, to stay our spiritual bleeding, and languishing, by reason of that
fearful rupture of covetousness, or worldly carfulness, opens a vein,
as it were, to turn the blood of our souls quite another way. He taught us
before Verse. 10.
to pray for the coming of the Kingdom of GOD, that is, for the setting up,
and advancement of his Kingdom of Grace upon Earth, and manifestation of his
Kingdom of glory in Heaven; but especially for the advancement and
enlargement of the much expected Kingdom of the Messiah, then beginning to
appear, whereby the Name of God was chiefly to be hallowed, or glorified;
which glory of God is (as we know) the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end of our whole life, and every action of it. Wherefore this Kingdom of God,
being the primary means of it, is primarily before, and above all other
things, not only to be sued, but to be sought for; knowing, that suing,
without seeking, is idle, as seeking without suing to God by Prayer, is
presumptuous, and speedeth thereafter. Again, as this Kingdom of God is to be
sued, and sought for, so his righteousness, 1. John 3. 23. and 5. 3.
or doing his will by Faith in Christ Jesus, and Charity expressed by
obedience to all his Commandments. So that his present exhortation is thus
much in effect, Instead of having the World, and the things of the World in
chase (as most have) carking and caring about this present life only, to no
purpose, God knows, but to their extreme annoyance, and utter undoing, if
God be not merciful unto them; to make the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness their gain and sport, employing all the powers and faculties of
their souls and bodies in the pursuit of it, studying and laboring by all
means, that the Gospel and Church of Christ (commonly in the New Testament
called the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven) may spread, and be glorified, and
that obedience of Faith at all hands, especially of their own selves, may be
yielded thereto, more and more. Now if men knew the gift of God, and what it is
to have him reign in them, and over them, by his Son, Spirit, Word, and
Ordinances, there would be no great need to use many Reasons to persuade
hereunto. The more is it to be lamented, that instead of this seeking the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness in the first place, the Cart is set
before the Horse, and the World, with the lusts of it, must first be served,
Quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nummos: Money and things of like nature
must have the primacie; Religion and virtue find, for the most part, the poor
Christians entertainment, Iam. 2. 3.
stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool. And again, whereas Christ
puts the Kingdom and Righteousness of God together, and it holds in this
especially, What GOD has joined together, let no man put asunder, a most
impious Divorce of these is commonly attempted, (attempted, I say, not made,
that cannot be) to seek, have, and hold his Kingdom, without his
Righteousness. As when Boaz Ruth. 4. 7.
made offer of Elimelechs Land, the next Kinsman answered, I will redeem it:
but when the condition was added, What day thou take the Land, thou must take
Ruth the Moabitesse to wife, to raise up the name of the dead, upon his
inheritance, that made him shrink in the wetting: I cannot redeem it (says
he) lest I mar mine own Inheritance: so let an offer of Christ, our Savior,
of forgiveness of sins, and of everlasting life, through Faith in his name,
be made; many are most ready to strike up a match: but tell them, what day
they meddle with Christ, they must meddle with his Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
they must turn new creatures; howsoever they dare not professedly disclaim,
yet inwardly they shrug at it, and are ready to pluck off their shoe, and
give it to any that will take it: Ruth. 4. 7.
they will not mar their Inheritance, by parting with their paultry profits
and pleasures.

But let us now come to see wherein this seeking chiefly consists. First,
undoubtedly in searching for the knowledge of it, who Christ Jesus is, and what
he has done for the salvation of man, what that great mystery of godliness
is, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
GOD manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up in glory.
This most admirable mystery is, before and above all things to be sought, and
looked into, and all things to be accounted no better then dross and draffe,
in comparison hereof. The means which God has sanctified for this purpose
are (as we have been taught) to be assiduous and constant in searching the
holy Scriptures, and sitting at the feet of the faithful Preachers, to hear
their doctrine.

Secondly, it consists in the effectual seeking after the participation, and
enjoying of this blessed Kingdom; so that we know our selves truly
infranchised therein, and be able out of infallible sense, or (at the least)
apprehension of Faith, to say with the Apostle. Phil. 3. 20.
Our conversation, or Bu^geship, is in Heaven. This is done when the holy Word
or Gospel Heb. 4. 2, 3.
is mixed with Faith in them, that hear it: for we, which have believed, do
enter into rest. This Faith, with the daily increase of it, is to be sought
after with might and main, as in a matter of life and death.

Thirdly, this seeking consists in our uttermost endeavor to spread and
enlarge this Kingdom, every one according to his gifts and calling. Worldly men
run themselves out of breath, to join house to house, and land to land,
that, if it were possible, they might dwell alone upon earth, And the Scribes
and Pharisees compassed Land and Sea, to make a Proselyte: ought not then the
Burgesses of this heavenly Kingdom be sharp-set upon the enlargement and
advancement of it? Accounting it their joy and crown, yea, the very life of
their life, to win many to Christ Jesus, their Lord and Sovereign, to see
the Gospel, which is the Sword or Scepter of his Kingdom, to 2. These. 3. 1.
have free passage, and to be glorified. Surely this is, and ought to be the
main study and endeavor of all true seekers; of the Clergy, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God; of private men and
women, as of helpers to the Faith. Questionless, if the Prophet and people of
God were so affected to the earthly Jerusalem (the only Mart, and Staple of
true Religion in those days) that they solemnly profess and protest, Psalm.
137. 5, 6.
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning: if I do
not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief joy: we should infinitely stand more tenderly
affected to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the City or Kingdom of the living
God, to seek the good of it, by the propagation of the most glorious Gospel
of Christ Jesus, always, by all means, grieuing at the contrary.

Fourthly and lastly, our seeking of it consists in seeking how to grace,
beautify, and adorn (so much as in us is) the Gospel and Church of Christ,
by the shining brightness of a right Christian conversation, Mat. 5. 16.
according to that which we heard before. This is that righteousness of the
Kingdom here mentioned, which serves as a notable lure to draw many to the
love and obedience of the Gospel. So that first to seek the Kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, is to use all diligence, (whatsoever become of us, and
of all other things) to know, participate, enlarge, and adorn his blessed
Gospel, and the refined estate of his Church and People, by the coming of his
Son, the promised Messiah into the world. And withal, so demeaning our
selves, as his dutiful subjects upon earth, to rest sweetly in hope and
expectation of that most glorious life and immortality, which is reserved in
heaven for us. The promise annexed, is, And all these things shall be added
unto you: as when a grand Manor is made over to any, all the royalties pass
with it: so this inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away, being once assured to us by our heavenly father, the petty matters of
this life cannot but attend upon it. Luke 12. 32.
Fear not little flock (any want of food or raiment) for it is your Fathers
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. So that howsoever this be a paradoxe,
or strange opinion to the world, yet among them that are perfect (as the
Apostle speaks) it must be received and acknowledged as the wisdom of God,
and an infallible truth, That the only sure way to get sufficiency of all
needful succors for this transitory life, with the cheerful use of them
(which few have) and a clause of warrantize against all danger, is, by c Mat.
22. 29.
seeking the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. If there be any demurre
about this most clear point, it is (as was said to the Sadduces) because men
know not the Scriptures, nor the power of GOD. For we know that the holy
Scriptures afford infinite promises of this kind, and in like manner,
infinite examples of Gods provident and powerful purueyance for his own
people, in all ages; as for the Patriarchs, while they were soiourning in the
Land of Canaan and Egypt; the Israelites in the wilderness; David Psalm 23.
in all his distresses; for Eliah, by Ranens; the widow of Sarepta, by drawing
out the meal in the barrel, and oil in the cruse; the poor widow of one of
the sons of the Prophets, 2. King. 4. 1, 2.
by a strange multiplication of oil; for Josiah, Ierem. 22. 15.
who did eat and drink, and it was well with him, doing judgment and
justice; the followers of Christ in the wilderness, fed and satisfied two
several times; his Disciples Luke 22. 35, 36
going forth at his bidding, without purse, serip, or shoes; to let pass
other examples which are innumerable. There is no faithful man or woman,
seeking the Kingdom and righteousness of God in truth, and perseuering
therein, that has not experience in some degree of the performance of this
most gracious promise, at one time or other; howsoever God exercise their faith
and patience for a season.

In the last place, to tax our great propensitie to this sin of
distrustfulnesse, and to beat us yet more thoroughly from it, he adds a third
repetition of his foregoing prohibition, inferring it upon his former promise
to this effect, Since God has passed his word, that all these things shall be
added to the seekers of his Kingdom and righteousness. Verse 34.
Take therefore no thought for tomorrow, that is, not so much as for the time
nearest at hand, but trust God with it. Do the work of every day on the day,
use withal the best providence and forecast that you can, eat, drink, and be
clothed, according as God has blessed you, doing also what good you can, to
all, and there an end. Torture or vex your selves no further about future
events or supplies: if thou beleeuest that God is thy God, and heavenly father,
that he will not leave thee nor forsake thee, according to his free and
merciful promise, (which above all things is to be believed,) believe, that
he which looked to thee, and fed thee to day, will do the like tomorrow: and
though he seem not to do it, yea though he kill thee, yet with patient Job,
resolve to trust in him, according to thy bounden duty. Many have befooled
themselves for trusting in God too little, but never any for trusting in him
too much, and for not leaning to their own wisdom. The rule for the due
observation of the Sabbath, may, and ought, in some sort, to take place herein,
that which cannot be done before nor after, and yet is necessary to be done,
must be performed even upon the Sabbath; otherwise to be put off: so that
care or provision for tomorrow, or the time to come, be it long or short,
which cannot endure leisure, is presently to be made, as in summer against
winter, in youth against old age, in single estate, against marriage, which is
full of charge; in breeding time (which many brute creatures neglect not)
against bringing forth, etc. But where no such urgent necessity appears,
there to leave every thing to the own time and place, letting tomorrow alone
with his own care and work, as our Savior Christ here most elegantly
speaks. To do otherwise, is to double our burden, when the single alone
lies very hard and heavy upon our shoulders. The morrow shall take thought
for the things of it self; sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof: which
affords this lesson undeniably unto us, That sorrow and labor is every days
portion to every man, according to Gods iudiciarie sentence in the beginning,
Genesis 3. 17.
In sorrow thou shall eat of it (meaning, of the fruits of the earth) all the
days of thy life. This holds much more in the faithful, who besides the
common cup, whereof all must needs drink, have a special one mingled to them
for their chastisment, trial of their faith, and quickening in well-doing. Paul
and Barnabas, Act. 14. 22.
confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the
faith, assured, that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of GOD. What folly and madness is it then for us, by taking forbidden thought
about the necessaries of this life, to add yet more to the heap or pile of
those vnauoideable evils, which by Gods vndispensable appointment, follow both
nature and grace; As if a man in a hot burning fever, or under the strong
pains of the strangurie, winde-colique, or gout, should wilfully increase his
disease by evil diet and surfeiting. We may again then break forth into that
holy exclamation of the beloved Disciple, (which can never be taken up too
much) here is the patience and the faith of the Saints: here is extreme need
of both these; of pati^nce, to bear with a quiet mind (as having offered our
selves in sacrifice to God) the daily troubles of this life, or pilgrimage,
Genesis 47. 9.
the days whereof are few and evil, Job 14. 1.
of short continuance, and full of miseries, as Jacob and Job especially
pitifully complains. As flies swarm about any raw or tender part of the
body, and though they be scared away, yet return again, or others in their
room: so do these troubles and miseries continually swarm about our wounded
and tender souls, so that though there be a resistance, and chasing away of
them in part, through Gods good grace, yet will they, or a new supply return
to vex one way or other, continually and incessantly; the end of one
affliction proving (for the most part) the beginning of another. Wherefore we
have ever need of patience, it must be of daily and hourly use, as the very
garments which we wear, for covering and defense: without it, we may not set
our foot over the threshold, nor venture our selves into company or business.
Grant Lord, that this Iam. 1. 4.
patience may have her perfect work, that we may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing. But above all the faith of the Saints is necessary both to
bear up their patience by the help of hope, expecting the heavenly reward,
apprehended by faith: and also to put life into all this most holy,
comfortable, and infallible doctrine of our Lord and blessed Savior, against
worldly carfulness, and concerning Gods divine providence and provision for
us in all our needs; which we are commanded many times over to rest upon,
without doubting and wavering. Without which faith it will all turn into
smoke, and our selves at the length be turned into the fire, that never shall
be quenched. And this shall suffice for this Tractate, or Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
WE have heard, From ver. 1^ to the end of chap. 6.
how earnest and powerful our Lord Christ has been in dissuading from
worldliness, and persuading to heavenly mindedness, that so he might remove
the first and chiefest of the three obstacles or lets unto Righteousness. Now
in the next place, because Righteousness is the doing of Gods Commandments,
even to the least, and teaching men so, as he Chap. 5. 19.
taught before, he instructs all, both Ministers, and People, concerning the
right manner of teaching: wherein he gives two most worthy caueats; the
first, to beware r of judging rashly, proudly, or partially; the second, to
beware of Verse 6.
zeal without knowledge, in dispensing Gods holy Mysteries. As for rash
judging, he first Verse. 1. to 6.
most earnestly forbids it: Secondly, s Verse. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Verse 5.
he prescribes a sovereign remedy against it. He forbids it in two words,
Judge not, and then deterreth, and even beats us from it by very piercing
Reasons, drawn from the danger and odinesse of that sin. In saying, Judge
not, his meaning is not simply to forbid all manner of iudgeing, for there are
iudgings not only lawful and warrantable, but necessary, without which no
Church or Commonwealth can stand; as first, public judging by the Magistrate,
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, who have a calling to judge, and sit in Gods place
to that end, even by his own assignement, and are called Gods, and their
sentence, Gods sentence. Secondly, private judging, which is done by way of
brotherly admonition, exhortation, rebukes also, when need requires, and the
offense given does justly call for it. God himself commands every man and
woman in that case, and manner to judge, Leu. 19. 17.
Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.
Again, Mat. 18. 15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go tell him his fault, or reprove him,
etc. Provided, that it be done brotherly, out of a pure conscience, to reform
and gain one another, and not to cross, gore, and shame one another, or any
other sinister end. The thing here forbidden, is an evil Disease or Itch in
our corrupt nature, whereby, either out of malice or in a kind of bravery, men
are sharp-sighted and curious, ever peering into other folks frailties, yea,
making faults many times where none are, and, in the mean season, are
altogether careless of their own faults, though never so foul and gross:
they are more then Eagle-eyed abroad, and as blind as Beetles, or Moules at
home. To prevent this evil so much opposed by Christ, our wisdom is, first,
to beware of iudgeing or speaking against any body in passion, or when we do
but suspect our selves to be passionate, by reason of some unkind passages
between us and any other: for Anger, Envy: Disdain, and such like
affections, may be resembled to false Glasses, which make every thing appear
otherwise then it is. It will be safest, in that case to bend our selves to the
contrary, either to say nothing at all, or make the best of every thing.
Secondly, in indifferent matters, which may be done, or left undone, without
sin, to carry our selves as indifferent persons, not judging one another in
meat, drink, apparel, company, recreations, or any thing of the like nature:
but leaving every man to stand, or fall to his own Master, it is sufficient
for us, upon good grounds, to be fully persuaded in our own minds of the
lawfulness, and conueniencie of that, which we our selves do. It was extreme
uncharitableness in the Scribes and Pharisees, to be ever censuring of Christ
and his Disciples, about healing on the Sabbath day, eating with Sinners, and
with unwashed hands, plucking the ears of Corn, etc. So for Judas, and others
to grumble at Marie, for her cost of Ointment, Michol, to tax David, for
d^ncing before the Arc; Eli, to judge Hannah to be a drunken and wicked woman
for her gesture. A dram of Charity, Wisdom, and Humility, would have
helped all that. Thirdly, to prevent rash judging, we must acquaint our selves
more and more with Christian equity, which teaches to set the best
construction upon every thing, which has some appearance of evil: if it will
bear any good construction, Charity (which bids us love our Neighbors as
our selves) binds us to make the best of it: and if, among many
constructions, one only be good, to take that. So deal Parents, excusing,
before strangers, all the weaknesses and faults of their children, so far as
there is any place for an excuse: so one dear friend, with another; and thus
ought it to be among all Christians. Fourthly, where no excuse can be found,
but a fault is a fault, and cannot be denied, yet when it seems to proceed of
frailty, Charity (which believes all, and hops that all shall be well)
being ever long-skirted, is not slack to spread her garment over it. It
insulteth not, it clamoureth not, it divulgeth not, but labors to hide it,
so much as is possible. Feeling members of the mystical body of Jesus Christ
endeavor to cover such things, even as people desire to hide (so much as in
them is) the uncomely sores and blaines in their natural body. Fifthly, they
go yet further; for if any be overtaken in a fault, they endeavor, with all
their might, to restore such a one, with the spirit of meekness, dealing
tenderly with them (as Surgeons with such arms and legs of their Patients,
as are broken, or out of joint) Gal. 6. 1.
considering themselves, lest they also be tempted. The observing these five
points well, will make us good obseruers of this most charitable charge, Judge
not, and rash judgment comes of the neglect of all or some of these.

This shall suffice for the charge: let us take in the reasons, and all the
rest, more briefly. The first is from the danger to have the wrong done to
others in their good name, retaliated or returned back upon our selves; for so
he says, that ye be not judged. God in his just judgment will raise up
others to pay us home with our own money, to serve us as we have served
others; to censure the censurers, to backbite the backbiters, to whisper of
whisperers, to scoff at scoffers, to rail upon railers, in a word, to
mis-iudge mis-iudgers. If then conscience toward God, if love of the brethren
(the very mark and character of a true child of God) cannot restrain men from
thinking and speaking amiss of others, or from joining with others in that
sin by lending their cares to the deprauers of their neighbors (then which
nothing is more common) yet a man would think, the care of their own
reputation should do it: since Christ that cannot lie, has told us that they
shall carry it neither to hell nor to heaven (according to the Proverb) but as
they deal, they shall be dealt withal; speaking of that which falls out
most commonly, even by divine ordination. It is confirmed therefore by the
usual byword, Verse ^2.
With what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. So that if
we desire to have and hold a good name in the world, it lies us in hand to be
charie of other folks good name. If we desire to be equally and justly dealt
withal, belay we then to deal equally and justly with all people. If we
desire to find mercy in our need, our care must be to extend mercy to the
needy: and so in all other matters. This may also serve to admonish us, that
when any thing falls out cross with us any way, to seek and search for the
cause in our selves. David's adultery and murder came home to him in the same
kind, and he took knowledge of it. And no marvel, since the very heathen,
yea, the very worst of them did so; Judge. 1. 7.
Seventy Kings (says Adonibezeke) having the thumbs of their hands and of
their feet cut off, gathered bread under my table: as I have done, so God has
rewarded me. Surely, every calamity, either of bad tongues, or of bad usage
otherwise, ought to be as a bloud-hound to bring us to the sight of our own
sins, and mis-handlings. His second reason against rash judging, is drawn
from the absurdity and odiousness of the sin propounded (according to his
manner) by vehement interrogations, to declare his extreme indignation against
it, Verse 3. 4.
And why see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not
the beam that is in thine own eye? or how say thou to thy brother? suffer
me to cast out the mote out of thine eye, etc. Speaking by way of supposition,
that if it were possible for a beam to be set in ones eye, the sons of
hypocrites (which they would take no knowledge of, but bare them out under a
mask or vizard of holiness) were as b^g as such a beam, in comparison of the
smaller faults of their brethren, whom they censured, and would needs be
correctors of. For whatsoever the sins of such reformers were in substance,
as those of the Scribes and Pharisees (whom Christ seems here chiefly to
thunder against) were intolerably enormious, viz. Mat. 23.
their ambition, covetousness, extortion, hatred and persecution of the truth:
yet by circumstance, they became infinitely more abominable, because they lived
therein, under an hypocritical show of sanctimonie: that was in them (as it is
in all other) double iniquity. And this vehemency of our Lord Christ, in
reproving, (who used not to be stirred, but for very great cause) shows not
only how detestable this shameless self-love, pride, and hypocrisy, is in
the eyes of God, and ought to be in our eyes, but alsowhat propensitie is in
every one of us, to hood-winke our selves, and pass by our own fouler
corruptions: and in the mean season, as if we had no work at home, to cast
our eyes abroad upon other folks, and to take their actions and intentions
(nothing so much out of square as our own) to do; as if Lazars, all
ouer-spread with botches and blaines, should have their fingers itching to
turn Physicians, for the healing of other men's pushes and pimples.

But let us now come to the remedy here prescribed Verse 5.
Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye: as if he should
say, Thou, whose grace consists in disgracing thy betters, first relinquish,
and that with detestation, thine own villainous actions and intentions, and
then thou shall clearly see to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. The
mending of thine own greater faults will get thee both experience, and
authority also, to redress other men's less faults. This then is the rule of
our Lord Jesus, ever to be remembered of all that desire to do good in their
places, and not much harm to themselves and others, That whosoever goes about
to mend others, must first mend himself, and he that takes upon him to
redress his neighbors less faults, must go through-stitch in the redressing
of his own greater faults. Is it probable that he, who is fast set in the
quagmire of gross wickedness and hypocrisy, should work his brother out of
the slough or ordinary frailties and infirmities? It is a rule in oratorie,
that to move others, a man must first be moved himself; he must feel the
part which he acts: this holds in preaching, reproving, instruction,
admonition, or whatsoever other duty of that kind, which necessarily call for
an affectionate reformation of our own lives, with an intestine hatred and
loathing of whatsoever sins we formerly lived in. And as for authority, we
know it is utterly lost, and instead thereof contempt and irrision comes in
place, when it may be said, Physician, heal thy self. Naturally men are led
rather by the eye, then by the ear, (as has been said) so that when they
hear good words and see evil deeds, they will incline rather to what they
see, then what they hear. In sum, Christ teaches us thus much, that it is a
most fearful thing for Ministers, Magistrates, Parents, Masters, or seeming
Zelots of any kind to have the place, and to take upon them the office of
reformers, if their practice hold not correspondencie in all points, with their
place and profession. Not, but that having a calling thereto, men are to
admonish, reprove, and correct others, as need requires, though themselves
labor of many frailties and infirmities, so brethren in Christ to exhort one
another and edify one another, though there be weaknesses on all sides:
elsewhere there an end of this duty for ever, since the poor Saints of God
upon earth shall never be fully freed of them. But it is to be understood,
that Christ here speaks of regnant sins, when there is also little or no
care used for the repressing or reforming of them, but only a face of
holiness set upon it, borne up by most unconscionable censuring of othets.
Whereas if there be in men an unfeigned purpose of heart, to turn from all
unrighteousness, if there be a continual strife, and endeavor to keep a good
conscience in all things, and that the duty of admonition be performed out of
Charity, Humility and fellow-feeling, at the least, there appears nothing
to the contrary: in this case, notwithstanding all wants and imperfections (as
sickly folks using all the means they can for recovery, lovingly communicate
their counsels and medicines one to another) we must every one of us, so much
as in us is, be our Brothers keeper, observing and considering one another, to
reclaim, so much as may be, from all evil, and to provoke to love and good
works. And we must every one of us Ephesians. 5. 21.
be subject one to another, in the fear of GOD: and then not only the beams
of grosser vices, but the motes or strawes of smaller offenses come within the
compass of our Brotherly consideration and admonition.

The second caveat follows concerning iuordinate zeal in dispensing of holy
things. Wherein, howsoever he Chap. 5. 19.
taught before, that Righteousness consists in doing and teaching the
Commandments of God, even to the least of them, every one according to his
gifts and calling: yet, for all that, he wills us, in teaching, to have
respect to the persons, with whom we deal, to the sacred subject whereabout we
deal, and to our own safety and comfort: so much do his words intimate,
Verse 6.
Give not that, which is holy, unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before
Swine: lest they tread them under their feet, and turning again, all to rend
you. Where he instructs us, First, for the persons, whom we take in hand to
teach, admonish, or reprove; that they be not Dogs, for their inueterate
hatred, and enmity against the doctrine of the Gospel; or Swine, for their
contempt of holy documents, and delight to wallow in the pleasures of sin, as
Swine in the mire. For if, upon good judgment and experience, we find them to
be such, and to be habituated therein: then, though we have cast the beam out
of our own eye, and through Gods grace, see in part, how to pull the mote out
of our Brothers eye, yet are they none of those Brethren, to whom this duty of
private instruction and admonition belongs. They put a bar against
themselves, by their dogged snapping, and swinish grunting, and wallowing in
the mire. The Holy Ghost forbids Prou. 9. 8.
to rebuke a Scorner, that is a desperate wicked man, that is readier to jar,
or to geere, then to receive good counsel. Secondly, he wills us to have due
respect of their majesty and worth, which he terms holy things and Pearls,
to show how reverend, precious, and inualuable, good counsel and instruction,
out of Gods most holy Word, is. That we might learn, to make more account of
these heavenly treasures and jewels; be more thankful to Almighty God for
them; rest in them, with mote contented minds, whatsoever our outward estate
be, rich or poor, noble or ignoble; and finally (which is the scope of this
place) to dispense them with more care and conscience, that, so much as in us
is, they may be glorified by all means, and no way abased and abused by
malicious and filthy wretches. Thirdly, he wills us in all our instructions,
admonitions, and reproves, to have an eye to our own safety, that we bring
not an old house upon our heads, when like sleeping Curres, so awakened by us,
they turn again, and all to rend us, by railing and reproachful speeches, and
other cruel handlings, which usually comes from such companions. Of this
also we are forewarned by that wise Solomon, Prou. 9. 7.
He that rebukes a Scorner, purchases to himself shame, and he that
rebukes the wicked, gets himself a blot. Be ye wise as Serpents, says
our Savior: now herein consists this wisdom in great part, that when we
speak the words, or 1. Pet. 4. 11.
oracles of GOD (which we stand bound to do every where, upon every just
occasion) we observe carefully to whom we speak, that they be teachable, and
not doggish Carpers, or swinish Despisers. Again, what we speak, even the
most holy words and oracles of God, the rather to stir up reverence, and
admiration in our selves and others. Lastly, what issue, or fruit is to be
hoped for, whether it stand with our own safety and comfort. For why should
we not beware of men, according to Christ's caveat, but expose our selves with
our most holy and precious treasures, to needless and forbidden dangers and
disgrace.

Having thus forewarned, and so fore-armed us against the hindrances of
Righteousness, to wit, worldliness, rash judgment, and indiscretion, he
comes now at the length to the Handled from Verse 6. to 15.
parts of it, which are Piety toward God, Charity toward our Ne^ghbour, and
Mortification of our own corrupt n^tu^e. Piety toward God (according to the
usual manner in the holy Scriptures) is expressed Verse. 7. to 12
by the principal part of it, which is invocation of the Name of God, or
Prayer: to the true and due performance whereof, all other parts of Piety must
needs concur, as the knowledge of God, Faith unfeigned, the fear and love of
God, with obedience to all his Commandments, Thansgiuing for his manifold
benefits, and what not? without which there can be none acceptable Prayer
offered up unto God. This above others, is enjoined and urged, as the only
means, to fetch in grace and ablenesle for the performance of all those great
duties before required, as also of those, which shall yet further be commended
and commanded unto us. Withour help from Heaven we can do nothing: and
Prayer assid^ous and fervent, by divine ordination, is the hand to reach to us
that help. In all this passage it is to be observed, that he does not so much
call for the thing to be done, as for the due manner of performance; that
Prayer be made in sense and feeling of our own wants, in assurance of Faith,
with seruencie also and perse^erance, and finally, in holy reverence and
sobriety; not presuming to open our mouths about that which we have no
warrant to ask, and is not fitting for us to receive. For all these and such
like matters are employed in the vehemency of his exhortation, and his most
patheticall Reason adjoined, drawn from us earthly Parents, by a comparison of
the less. For a man had need to be deeply touched with the sense of his own
wants, have much assurance of Faith, be very fervent in Prayer, very submisse
also, and sober-minded, that rightly turns himself into the practice of this
most worthy and comfortable exhortation and Reason. For observe here with me,
how he is not content to bid us ask, but withal assures us, that it shall
be given us, (and what makes more for the assurance of Faith) yet not resting
there, he bids us seek those things, which we have not, at the hands of
God, whereof we feel our extreme want, and see no means in the World how to
come by them, he warranteth us, that we shall find them. And as if that were
not enough, he urges us to knock, to use all earnestness and violence, as
it were rapping and pealing at Heauen-gates without intermission, when the
door of Gods bounty seems to be shut against us: even in this case he
lays the weight of his Word and Promise upon it (which never failed nor ever
shall) that it shall be opened unto us. Our Prayers, made in such feeling,
assurance, feruencie, and reverence, will break open all locks and bars,
Jacob wrestled with God, and was too hard for him, because his good pleasure
was to be overcome by the importunity of his poor, afflicted, and infirm
Servant. Neither has he any more power to resist us, setting upon him with
that humble resolution and courage, which was in Iaakob, and the Cananitish
woman, who extorted this from our Savior Mat. 15. 28.
O woman, great is thy faith, be it as thou desire. And this is yet further
made good in the next Verse, where it is admirable to consider, that, not
contenting with what he had said, having spoken so comfortably and fully,
knowing the certainty and infallibility of this great truth, and our extreme
propensitie to distrust and so to wax faint in Prayer, he yet fetches it
about again, and avouches it as confidently, as before, that not only his
Disciples, or near and dear Favorites, but generally whosoever (man or
woman, learned or unlearned, strong or weak Christian) asked, received;
sought, found; knocked, had the door opened. As the Sun shines
indifferently upon all, who could open the eye of Faith to behold it. As none
at Gods bidding, did look upon the Brazen Serpent, which, by virtue of the
promise, were not cured: so assuredly none, at Christ's bidding, do thus fly
unto the Throne of Grace by Prayer, casting the eyes of their Faith upon him
lifted up upon the Cross (now ascended into Heaven, and sitting at the right
hand of his Father, to make request for them) which by virtue of this, and many
such like promises receive not that they pray for, so far forth, as is any
way expedient for them. Heereunto serves the comparison before mentioned,
Verse. 9 10 11
What man is there of you, which if his Son ask him bread, etc. The sum
is, You Parents, that are naturally evil, yet when your children ask good
things at your hands, cannot find in your hearts to give them any thing, which
you know to be naught or noisome; nay you would withhold it from them, and
look out such things as you thought best and wholsomest for them: shall not
then your heavenly Father, who is good and gracious, abundant in kindness and
truth, that sets you on work to ask, and has so often, and earnestly
promised to grant your requests, much more, in due time, give you good things
indeed, and withold the contrary, though he exercise your Faith and Patience
with never so long delays? And our Lord Jesus, by this notable comparison,
further teaches us to descend into our selves, and seriously to consider of
those few drops of Fatherly kindness, which he has instilled into us, that
when our Faith, in Prayer, faints, and, by reason thereof, our feruencie
slaketh, we may comfort and quicken our selves with the meditation of that
fullness, and Ocean (as it were) of Fatherly goodness, which we have learned
to be essential, and so immutable in him. And this is yet further put home,
Luke 11. 13. where he says, If ye which are evil, can give good gifts to
your children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to
them that desire him? meaning an happy increase of the gifts and graces of the
Holy Ghost: and if that, then what not? He that witholdeth not his Spirit, what
will he withhold?

The second part of Righteousness follows, which is Charity and Equity,
inferred (as it seems) upon that which goes before, Verse 12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do even
so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. As though he should say,
Since your heavenly Father, being good, and the vndrainable Fountain of all
goodness, is more ready to give good things to you, then you, who are evil,
are or can be, even to your dearest children: And since with what measure you
mete, it shall, without all question, be met to you again: see therefore that
you do justly, and extend mercy in all things, great and small, to the
uttermost of your power, as your selves would gladly be dealt withal. For
besides this, that you are one flesh, end partake the same Image of God;
besides also that you may certainly expect not only a just retribution in the
world to come, but, even in this very life, to drink of the same cup your
selves, which you have filled to others, you are of necessity to take
knowledge, that it is your heavenly Fathers will, who straightly cha^geth you
so to do. His will alone is and ought to be reason enough, without all other
Reasons. Yea it is not only his will and absolute Commandment, but the tenor
and purport of the whole Law, or Doctrine of Moses in his five Books, and of
the Prophets, his Expositors, so much as concerns the second Table of the
Law, prescribing all duty to our Neighbor. Otherwise, the Law and the
Prophets contain all the duties of the first Table concerning Piety toward
God: they contain also the promises and types concerning the Messiah then to
come. This pass^ge barreth all men from doing any harm to their Neighbor, any
manner of way, directly, or indirectly, or to suffer any to be done, either in
his person, goods, or name, more then they would have done to themselves. It
does also lay a necessity upon every one to turn his Brothers keeper; no man
Phil. 2. 4.
looking on his own things, but every man on the things of others also;
Remembering ever, wh^ said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. When we
find any particular Rule in the holy Scripture to go by, let us follow it and
cleave to it: but where particular precepts are wanting there are we always
to set before our eyes this general direction; not daring to go one hairs
breadth from it, and passing no day without strict examination of our lives and
actions by it; thanking God, who has set us down the whole mind of the Law
and the Prophets, and of this our great Prophet and Lawgiver, Christ Jesus,
concerning mutual love, in so few words. And if this most equal and just
rule, by which we shall be judged at the last day, now bear palm in our
hearts, we would every one of us erect such a high Court of Chancerie within
our selves, that a little law would serve the turn, and many flaunting Lawyers
would be forced to turn their velvet and silken suits into plain beggars
g^ay.

The third part of righteousness, which is mortification of our own corrupt
nature, Verse 13. 14.
follows. And this is brought in by way of an answer to a secret objection,
If so exact love toward our neighbors, such faith and feruencie in prayer,
such reformation of our selves, and discretion in our admonitions, such resting
upon Gods providence, for all necessaries of this present life, and laying up
of treasures in heaven, so spiritual, universal, and sincere obedience, in
doing Gods commandments, even to the least, be requisite and necessary, who
then can be saved? For upon this ground, (no doubt) was his question raised,
Luke 13. 23.
Lord, are there few that shall be saved? our Lord Christ answers there as
here, that there are indeed few in comparison of the great multitude that
perish: and those few are to strive and strain mightily, as if they were to
crowd hard in at a strait gate, and go on along in a very narrow way or lane
(which we know is often mirie, and many ways vncheerly to travelers:)
whereas contrariwise, the ungodly, being many in number, and marching by
troops and armies (as it were) enter in a-brest at the broad gates, and
expatiate all the fields, and country over, taking their delight and pastime
therein: so much the word (...) imports. But all is well that ends well, and
a woeful end makes all that went before miserable and deare-bought pleasures:
and that our Savior Christ forgets not to put v^ in mind of. Fot when he
had first generally propounded his exhortation to his Disciples, and all well
affected, Enter Verse 13.
in at the strait gate, by way of explanation he tells us, that it is the
wide gate and broad way that leads to destruction everlasting, and that many
there be which go in thereat. On the other side, that Verse. 14.
the gate is strait, and the way narrow, that leads unto life (everlasting
and few there be that find it. Now for the wide gate and broad way, taken by
the ungodly, there needs no great proof, experience testifies sufficiently.
They follow the current of their corrupt nature, and what great reluctation can
there be in that their predominant lusts command, and they obey? Besides, the
devil en^yeth them not, he crosses them not: but rather leuelleth and
stroweth the way for them And as for the world and children thereof, they c^y
all, have with you; yea, when they give Alms, Pray, Fast, and do other
works, in themselves good (as the Scribes and Pharisees did) but not from the
right fountain, nor to the right end, that is, not from a pure heart, nor to
the glory of God, they may gallop away with them, as horses do with an empty
Cart, there is nothing to straiten the gate or way against them: while God is
not served in the practice of such works, but their own lusts, they shall
have good thanks of the flesh, world, and devil, so be forward in them; which
made works of that nature to be so rife in Popery and Paganism, and not to
be unusual among the better sort of civil people. But let a man or woman
(according to Christ's teaching elsewhere) John 8. 31.
continue in his word, and so become his Disciple indeed, and he shall tell me
tidings, that these words, Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, were not
spoken for nothing; when he shall find the Flesh, World, and Devil meet in a
conspiracy, and practice inuisibly against him. Ephesians. 6. 12.
We wrestle not (says the Apostle) against flesh and blood (only or chiefly)
but against Principalities, Powers, rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in high places. Where he resembles the life of
a Christian to a continual wrestling not only with our selves and men, (the
flesh always lusting against the spirit, and men hating us to the death, for
cleaving to God and his truth) but with the devils of hell, by nature, spirits,
by situation, in high places over our heads, by condition, principalities,
powers, and rulers of this dark and blind world, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
ranging abroad, as Lions, that seek their prey. In regard of all which
dangers, the putting on of the whole armor of God is enjoined: that we should
not sometime only, when need requires, as in other wars, but always have
it about us, march, and lie in it. As the war admits no truce with the
enemy, extremely malicious and restless; so no vacation or freedom from
arms: which how uncouth it is to flesh and blood, who knows not? But to make
this point concerning the strait gate and narrow way, more clear we may
remember, that there are two things, whereunto the state of Christians is most
usually and aptly resembled, whose passages, of all other are most strait and
narrow; that is to say, of the birth and death of a man. For with what pain
and difficulty we come into the world, and go ont of the world, who is
ignorant? Now John. 3. 3, 5.
except a man be borne again, or from above, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of GOD. A new birth and 2 Cor. 5. 17.
creature, is absolutely necessary; again, without dying to sin, and to the
world, being Gal. 5. 24.
crucified thereto, by partaking with Christ Jesus in his cross and Col. 3. 3.
4.
death, there can be no such new birth. This mortification or dying to sin,
and regeneration or living to God, is (to the quick) expressed in our
baptism; wherein we are ingraffed into the death, burial, and resurrection
of Christ, as Romans 6. 3, 4
the Apostle teaches: which cannot be without repentance from dead works,
faith in Christ Jesus, and a sacrificing of our selves to God in new obedience.
All which necessarily require supernatural striving and streining on our part,
and traveling (as it were) in birth, or under the pangs of death. For to
begin with repentance, how can that be, without an utter renouncing of all
our sins (naturally most sweet and dear to us) without bewailing and
confessing of them, out of a broken and contrite spirit, without crucifying
(the most grievous manner of killing) Gal. 5. 24.
the flesh, with the affections and lusts of it? Again, what faith in Christ
can there be without disclaiming of our own righteousness. civil,
hypocritical, legal, that coming naked to him, we may be clothed with his,
to rest and rejoice therein merely: to which how hardly the natural man (who
would feign be some body) is drawn, all experience teaches. This is a very
hard nut to crack: yet is there a far harder. For when the performance of
Gods promise is long delayed, and nothing almost appears in the mean season,
which seems not contrary to it, then with faithful Abraham, Romans 4. 18.
against hope, to believe in hope, and to Psalm. 109. 13.
wait for his counsel: and not rather with the unbelieving Israelites in the
wilderness, to flinch, murmr, and limit the holy one of Israel, hoc opus,
hic labor, this indeed is to crowd in at the strait gate, and to walk in the
narrow way. Summa ars piorum (as it was notably spoken by an ancient Divine)
credere inuisibili^, sperare dilata, diligere Deum ostendentemse tanquam
hostem, and inimicum, and sic in finem vsque perseuerare, that is, The art or
mystery of the godly is the highest of all other, to believe things invisible,
to hope for things delayed, to love God showing himself, not as a father or
friend, but as an enemy; and so to persevere even unto the end. Lastly, what
sacrificing of our selves in new obedience can there be, without an utter
denial of our sweet selves, of our wit, will, affections, appetites, with
whatsoever seems excellent in our own eyes, that we may submit our selves
entirely to the most sacred will of Almighty God our heavenly Father, as it is
teuealed in his world; to make that alone the man of our counsel, a lantern
to our feet, and a light unto our path, not turning to the right hand, or to
the left? A man's heart would far more easily be drawn to cloy God with Mic.
6. 6. 7.
burnt offerings, and calves of a year old, to please God (if that would do)
with thousands of rams, and with ten thousand rivers of oil, to give his
first borne for his transgression, and the fruit of his body for the sin of
his sonle. He would build Almes-houses, Churches, Colleges (good works
indeed) Abbe^es, and what not? rather then to humble himself to walk with his
God in this new obedience. This is to him too strait a gate and narrow a way:
the more are we to strive to it, giving God most high thanks, who, of his
rich grace has given us both a calling, and minds also to stoop to it. To
this point of new obedience belongs that which is terrible of all terribles
to flesh and blood, to wit, our passive obedience, which ever must go with the
active in some degree or other. Luke 9. 23.
Whosoever will be my Disciple (says our Lord and Master Christ Jesus) let him
deny himself, and take up his cross (either of passion or compassion) daily,
and follow me. And whosoever overcome (woe be unto us if we overcome not) must
overcome Reu. 12. 11.
by the blood of the Lamb, by the word of their testimony, and not loving
their lives unto death, that is, by faith in Christ's blood, by free and
faithful confession of the truth, and by martyrdom if God so appoint. Thus
we see how the gate is strait, and the way narrow, and by reason thereof much
unknown and unfrequented: but this ought not to discourage the poor Saints,
for he that calls them hereunto, and has promised not to leave nor forsake
them, will so uphold them by his grace, cheer and strengthen them by his holy
spirit, from time to time, according to their needs, that they shall find it
no vain word, Mat. 11. 30.
My yoke is easy, and my burden light: and 1. Ioh. 5. 3.
his commandments ate not grievous. In comfort and confidence whereof, as also
in the undeceivable hope of the life and glory which is to be revealed, let
us rest, and so proceed.

Our Lord Christ, having thus instructed us concerning the parts of
righteousness, piety, charity, and mortification, before he comes to the
conclusion of this notable sermon, gives us warning of three extreme dangers,
to be put out of the strait gate and narrow way, before commended to us; the
first is from From Ver. 15 to 21.
false Prophets; the second is from Whereof v. 21
a glorious profession and seeming zeal; the third is Whereof v. 22, 23.
from eminency of gifts and prerogatives. Concerning false Prophets, first he
gives us an earnest caveat against them, Beware of false Prophets: secondly,
he shows the dangerousnesse of them, they come in sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves: thirdly he directs to their fruits, to
know them by; Verse 16.
ye shall know them by their fruits, etc. By false Prophets he understands
not only such as pretended to foretell things to come, and by lying fignes and
wonders would seem to countenance such predictions, prophecies, or any false
doctrine whatsoever; wherewith the people of God were tried, before Christ's
coming in the flesh (as Deuteronomy. 13. 2 and 18, 22.
Moses gave warning,) and should also be tried after his a^cension into heaven,
Mat. 24. 24. but he understands generally all false and corrupt teachers
that should rise up from time to time, who under pretense of reducing, should
seduce the people; for converting should subvert both them and the strait ways
of God; instead of building up should destroy many by their pestiferous
doctrine, application, examples tending either to heresy or carnal liberty,
and so carrying amain from the strait gate and narrow way, whereunto he
calls. Such as (not long after) were the Nicolaitans, who for their filthy
lusts and lucres sake ( Balaam-like) taught things that they ought not; as to
eat meat sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication: against whom, as also
against their favorers, Christ threatens Reave. 2. 16.
to fight with the sword of his mouth, even his most holy and sacred word. In
which he is a president to us, to beware of false Prophets, and to withstand
them in like manner, and fight against them with the same sword: which yet is
to be done with some distinction. As for the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadduces, which is false doctrine, we m(...) have nothing at all to do with
it, but with the sword of Christ's mouth beat back both their erroneous
expositions of the holy Sctiptures and impious traditions, set up by them above
the word of God.

But especially, and with the uttermost detestation, that Sword is to be
unsheathed against their damnable Heresies, as that of the Sadduces, denying
the Resurrection; of the Papists, urging Justification by Works, Image and
Breadworshinpping, setting the authority of the Church above the holy
Scriptures, mayntayning that a man is able to keep the whole Law of God in
regard of any mortal sin, and such like abominations. Here, if any where,
that caution of the Apostle takes place, 2. Joh. v. 10.
If any (be he Sadduce, Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or whatsoever) come, and
bring such Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God-speed. Deal in this case, as Eve should have dealt with the Serpent;
break away from them, have nothing at all to do with them, except you have a
special calling thereto. But for the Luke 12. 1.
leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, which is hypocrisy, when Mat. 23. 3.
they say; and do not, or apply the general truths, which they teach, to
their own ends, which tend to carnal liberty any way, making the wicked
glad, and the godly, sad, in this case of Hypocrisy, while they preach the
Truth, and hold them thereto, in all the fundamental points of Religion, at
the least, that Golden Rule is to be followed. Mat. 23. 2, 3, 5
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that observe and do, but after their works do ye not, for
they say, and do not: all their works they do to be seen of men: when we
meet with such Teachers, we stand bound to follow their Doctrine, and let
their hypocrisy go. And remember, that here, above all, is need of much
watchfulnes and Prayer: for as the Devil is ever to be taken heed off, but
then especially, Mar. 1. 24 Act. 16. 17.
when he speaks some truth: so his Ministers, and Agents are ever to be taken
heed of, but then especially* when they come with the truth in their mouths.
It requir^^ a great deal of grace, hearing them ordinarily, to be able to
look or go neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but to cleave at all
times to the truth which they bring. The dangerousnesse of them (which is the
second point) is greater, then can be imagined, because they come in sheep
clothing, they Luke 16. 15
justify themselves before men, by setting a fair outside, not only of
profound knowledge, and most glorious titles 2. Cor. 11. 13* 14, 15.
transforming themselves (through Satan's art) into the Apostles of CHRIST, and
Ministers of righteousness; but of sanctimony also, through much exercise of
the holy Scriptures, long Prayers, and very devout in appearance. Add hereunto
frequent fasting, plenty of Alms, feruencie of zeal, (in that they, like the
ancient Pharisees, stick not to compass Land and Sea, to make one of their
profession (pretended Charity toward their hearers, for whose sake, their
blood should not be dear unto them, (as they bear them in hand) undaunted
courage and resolution (as we see in the Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and other
Heretics) to lay down their lives for their heretical Assertions, strange
Simplicity, Humility, and Mortification in show, according to that of the
Apostle, Col. 2. 23.
Who make indeed a show of wisdom in voluntary Religion and humbleness of
mind, and in not sparing the body, neither have they it in any estimation to
satisfy the flesh. Besides the Lure or Charm rather, Romans 16. 17, 18.
of good words, and fair speeches, whereby the causers of division and
offenses, contrary to sound Doctrine, serving not the Lord Christ, but their
own bellies, deceive the hearts of the simple: To be short, there is no
virtue to be found among the Saints of God in truth, which they will not
express to the very life of it in hypocrifie. So that a man had need to have
his wits about him, not natural, (which affords no help, but hinderance
rather in this case) but spiritual, whereby we may be able Ioh. 4. 1, 2.
not to believe every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of GOD, for
many false Prophets are gone out into the World. This, of necessity, requires
much watchfulness at all times, much Prayer to God, not only for wise and
faithful, and against corrupt and hypocritical Guide^, or Teachers, but for
the spirit of discerning, and for ability to judge: and to that end, with the
wise and noble Beraeans Act. 17. 11
receiving the Word with all readiness of mind, to search the Scriptures
daily, whether those things be so, as we are taught. This of necessity,
requires much hearing, reading, reading, meditation, conference in all
humility, fear, and reverence, an holy consociation with the Saints also,
left, as straglers ftom the Camp of Israel, we be surprised by the Deuteronomy. 25.
18.
Amalekitish Jesuits, Seminaries, Arminians, loose and dissolute Pastors and
Teachers. This, of necessity, requires a special care in every one of us, to
be well grounded our selves, and to see our Families and Charges, (so much as
in us is) to be well grounded in the principal and fundamental points of our
most holy Religion, by the public and private exercise of Catechizing. For as
an house, having a good foundation, saves it self from winds and storms;
contrariwise, for want of such a foundation, is ruinated: so falls it out in
Christianity; a man well grounded and founded in Religion, saves himself
from all Impostors, and Seducers, whereas others are cartied about with every
wind of Doctrine. Lastly, and above all, this, of necessity, requires that we
should beware of that most fearful and regnant sin, which we may call
Epidemicall, as ouerspreading all (some few excepted) far and here; which
the Apostle makes the breeder and bringer forth of this deadly plague by false
Prophets, 2. These. 2. 10.
Because men receive not the love of truth, that they might be saved, GOD
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies: that they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness; so he calls whatsoever is embraced instead of the truth, or
Gospel, bear it never so great a show in the World. This not receiving of the
love of the truth, but pleasuring in unrighteousness, is the very cause, why
God at this day gives up so many to be seduced by false Prophets, Popish, and
others. Wherefore, not the profession only, but love and delight in the truth,
with all due expressions of it, is to be looked, and labored after, infinitely
more, then we would do for our life it self, if it were any way hazardous.
The rather, because false Prophets, whatsoever they appear outwardly, yet
indeed they are ravening Wolves, if not in intent, (which they are commonly)
yet in event. All they that fall into their hands, shall be sure to find them
such, at the long run, when it shall be too late to say, Had I wist.

In the third place Verse 16. 17.
he directs to the fruits, whereby they are to be known, Ye shall know them
by their fruits, which he illustrateth by a similitude drawn from trees, Do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? So every good tree brings
forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree, etc. These fruits, which Christ here
directs us unto, may (as I take it) be drawn to three heads; first, their
Doctrine; secondly, their life and conversation; thirdly, their scope, aim, or
end: as the Apostle, among other things, mainly appealeth to to these three,
approouing himself thereby to Timothy's conscience, that he was an vncorrupt
Teacher, Thou have fully known my doctrine, manner of living, purpose, or
aim; to which three heads may other virtues, there annexed, be reduced. And
hereby may every Teacher try himself, and every hearer discern his Teacher;
first, whether his doctrine (at the least, in the fundamentalls) be agreeable
to the holy Scriptures, that he both can, and does bring Scriptum est, It is
thus written, for it: and concerning any other matter, that is not of the
foundation or essence of Religion, but appertains to order and decency, that
there be no Scripture against it. Secondly, whether his life be consonant to
his Doctrine habitually, or in a settled course: for there are none so loose,
but that they stumble upon some good words and actions sometimes; and there are
none so perfect, but that they labor of some frailties, and tread their foot
awry sometimes. Thirdly, whether his aims and ends be holy, as his Doctrine and
life seem to be. Now they are to be judged holy, when, in the judgment of
Charity ( which believes all things, hops all things) we cannot perceive
that his own pleasure, profit or glory, or the pleasing or displeasing of
other men in any thing, is so much looked after, as 1. Pet 4. 11. John 7. 18.
Phil. 3. 19.
that God in all things, may be glorified in Christ Jesus. Contrariwise, it is
many times found in experience, that some Teachers howsoever they preach
general truths, and lead peradventure a civil life, free from scandal, yet
do so distaste the power of Religion (without which what denial of our selves
can there be?) and are so fallen out with zeal, that they turn the edge of
their Doctrine against all such as are not of the Laodicean temper. When the
Lords fences and pales are thus broken down, and all laid common, that every
one should be alike, and no one more strict then other, but all to live in a
kind of carnal good fellowship, and worldly iollitie, what becomes (I pray
you) of the strait gate and narrow way, before so earnestly commended and
commanded unto us? Questionless, either our Lord Christ was mistaken, when he
added, and few find it, meaning the strait gate and narrow way: or else are
they all mistaken, who imagine that all or the most part find it.

The similitude follows drawn from trees, Verse 17.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles? even so every good
tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree bring^th forth evil fruit.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil frnit, neither can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down
and cast into the fire: wherefore by their fruits you shall know them. The
effect and purport of all is this; As a good tree brings forth good fruit,
and cannot bring forth evil, and an evil tree brings forth evil fruit, and
cannot bring forth good: so a true Prophet teaches wholesome doctrine, leads a
life answerable, and propounds none other end then to serve and glorify God,
and to win others to the love and obedience of the truth, and can do none
otherwise habitually (whatsoever befall him through infirmity) because the
holy Ghost is his teacher, quickner, and as it were the sap of the tree.
Contrariwise, a false Prophet (like a corrupt tree) brings forth the fruit of
false doctrine, leads a scandalous, or (at the best) but a civil life, and
would feign have all others as bad as himself. Neither can he do otherwise
habitually (howsoever at a start he may seem to do pretily well) standing,
as he does, in the state of corrupt nature, under the power of Satan, the
Prince of this world. And as every tree that bears not good fruit, is at the
length hewn down and cast into the fire: so all corrupt teachers with their
Disciples and followers, shall in fine, be cut off, and cast into hell fire.

The Evangelist Luke Luke 6. 43. 44.
extends this not only to all Ministers, but to all persons in general, as
also we find it, Mat. 3. 10. and 12. 33. From whence in brief arise these
doctrines necessarily to be considered of every one; first, that it is
impossible for a mam not borne again, to do any good and acceptable work:
for till a man be accepted himself, his work cannot. The Genes. 4. 4.
Lord had respect to Abel, and then to his offering, but unto Cain, and unto
his offering he had no respect. Mat. 12. 33.
Either make the tree good (only regeneration, or the new birth does that) and
his frnit good: or make the tree evil, and his fruit evil; the fruit must
needs be as the tree is. Nothing therefore is done in the business of
religion, until a man in deed and in truth become a new creature: or as our
Lord Christ phraseth it, John 3 5.
until he be borne again, or from above, of water and the holy Ghost; that
is, until the holy Ghost have renewed and restored him to the favor and Image
of God, through the ministry of the Gospel, Luke 3. 3.
preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. The second
doctrine is, that universal righteousness (or walking Luke 1. 6.
with Zacbarie and Elizabeth, in all the commandments and ordinanees of the
Lord blameless) does of necessity proceed from all that are so regenerate. It
is here set down as a ruled case, That every good tree brings forth good
fruit, and cannot bring forth evil habitually, or in a settled course, as has
been said: they are, and must Mat. 5. 48.
be perfect, as their heavenly father is perfect, as we have heard The third
doctrine also is as true, as it is terrible to all hypocrites and worldlings,
that utter reiection from the face of God, and hell fire it self, are the
certain reward of an unfruitful life, though it be not tainted with gross
sins. The fruitless tree is sentenced to be cut down, Mat. 25. 30
the unprofitable servant to be cast into utter darkness: and in the last
day, it shall be said, I was hungry, and you fed me not, naked, and you
clothed me not, sick, and in prison, and you visited me not, etc.
Wherefore, go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels: and none excuse will serve their turn. The fourth and last
doctrine is, that which ought to awaken every man to live righteously and
fruitfully, viz. that every one is to be judged not by his words, or
profession, but by the evidence of his works, and that not only at the last
day, but even in present; for so he says, Verse 20. so Cap. 12. 33.
Ye shall know them by their fruits: in which respect, a man is truly said to
be justified or condemned by his works declaratiuely. Wherefore (as the Apostle
writes) Tit 3 14.
Let ours also learn to show forth good works for necessary uses. But of
this more follows to be spoken upon the next verse wherein is contained the
second danger of being withheld or carried from the strait gate and narrow
way: and that is by a glorious profession and seeming zeal, in these words,
Verse 20
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven: but he that does ehe will of my father which is in heaven. As there
is extreme danger from false Prophets, so except we look well about us, there
is no less danger (if not much more) from our own selves, through the
deceitfulness of our evil hearts. For it is possible (and too too frequent in
use) for men to live under wise and faithful teachers, and to hear from them
the pure word of God, with out mixture of false doctrine, or hypocrisy, to
receive it also gladly, to believe Jesus Christ to be the only begotten Son
of God, the promised Messiah, to profess him to be their one and only
Savior, to call upon him, not with a single Lord, but with Lord, Lord, that
is, affectionately and zealously in appearance, to do, yea and to suffer many
things gladly, being at a point with Mat. 8. 19.
the Scribe to follow Christ, whithersoeuer he goes, and in regard of these
and such like matters, to think themselves as good as in heaven already; and
yet for all that to come short of the goal, which is the prize of the high
calling of God: because these glorious shows are without the substance and
power of godliness, wherein the Kingdom of God consists, and not in word,
profession, or any external thing. This is that which Christ here calls the
doing of the will of his father which is in heaven; which may then truly be
said to be done, when the doctrine which we hear out of his holy word, is on
our parts received, and Heb. 4. 2.
mixed with faith unfeigned; when daily and deep repentance for our daily
transgressions follows it, and to that end, we narrowly Psalm. 119. 59. Lam.
3. 40.
search our own hearts and ways that we may the more effectually turn unto
God, in obedience to all his commandments and ordinances; when there is to be
found in us a perpetual striving and streyning, that we may not Romans 8. 13.
live after the flesh, but mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit; when
our special combating is against our special sins and corruptions, either
by custom, complexion, or calling, and herein chiefly against hypocrisy,
desiring from the heart* even before God, to be righteous in every thing,
rather then to seem so; making it our ambition and covetousness, not to
please men, and to grow great in the world, or in common graces of the spirit:
but to please the all-seeing eyes of God, and to grow rich in saving graces, in
faith, hope, charity, patience, humility, meekness, temperance,
heauenly-mindednesse, to be plentiful in good works, laying up fot our selves
treasures in heaven, ever suing and saying with David, Psalm. 4. 6.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us: when we apply and settle
our hearts 1. These. 5. 17, 18.
to pray without ceasing, and watch thereunto; In every thing to give thanks
also, because this is the will of GOD in Christ Jesus concerning us. Lastly, to
let pass all other particulars, when in the point of charity, our faithful
and constant endeavor is to love our neighbors, yea even our very enemies,
not only as our selves, which is the righteousness of the law, but even above
our selves, being ready according to the will of God, to sacrifice not our
goods only, but our very lives also, for their behoof, which is the
righteousness of the Gospel: whereof Christ our Savior is both the author,
and pattern or president; who loved us, his enemies above himself, and laid
down his life for us, 1. Ioh. 3. 16, and 2. 6. Phil. 2. 5, etc.
whose example is often set before us for imitation. To this doing of the
sacred will of our heavenly father we stand bound (as we may and ought to
remember) by our baptism; wherein our renouncing of the flesh, world, and
devil, our faith in Christ, and our new obedience according to the tenor of
the Law and of the Gospel, was restipulated and vowed on our parts in the
presence of God, Angels, and Men. The performance whereof in trurh, though in
much weakness, is the doing of the will of God, and the certain and
infallible way to the Kingdom of heaven: the contrary leads to perdition,
which perdition will prove so much the more sore and grievous, as the sin of
receiving so inestimable a grace of God in vain is heinous.

In the third and last place he forewarneth of the great danger of presumption
and carnal security, through eminency of gifts and Prerogatives, which might
and would occasion many to be less careful to enter in at the strait gate,
and to walk in the narrow way, as fancying themselves to be in far better
estate then many others, by reason of their very extraordinary graces and
operations, as to prophecy in his name, that is, to interpret the holy
Scripture, and to preach the Gospel by revelation from heaven, at his
appointment: and through his spirit, and in his name, by his power and
authority, or through calling upon his name, (ae we see, Act. 19. 13.) to
cast out devils from such as were possessed, and by his name, Act. 3. 16.
by faith in his name, to do many wonderful works or miracles, while it
pleased God at the beginning, in such manner Joel. 2. 28.
to pour out his spirit upon all flesh, for the gracing of the Gospel, and
gathering together of the Saints from among the Jews and Gentiles. And there
is the more danger herein, because it would be the case of many living under
the Gospel, and famous also, not only for Lord, Lord, which theyin like
manner should have in their mouths, making show of no small forwardness; but
for those their special endowments before mentioned, for the good of the
Church, though to their own great cost, Verse 22.
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, have we not prophesied, etc? The
wide gate and broad way (as we heard before) is the hardlier to be shunned,
because many walk in it. Examples move much, especially tending to liberty
and loosnesse of life; but above all, the examples of men notable for their
great gifts, labors, and miraculous operations, being also many in number.
What is more ready with diverse, then to think and speak also? if such worthy
persons miscarrie, what will become of us, who have not the tithe of their
graces? what will become of many thousands of inferious rank?

But our Lord Christ reads us a Lecture here worthy and necessary to be
learned of all that look to be saved; not to live by examples, but by Rules,
even the infallible Rules of the holy Scriptures, let the examples be what
they will, excepting that of Christ Jesus. The blessed Apostle will have us 2.
Cor. 21. 1.
followers of him, as he is of Christ Jesus, and none otherwise. And in his
striving after perfection with all his might, he exhorts the Philippians; and
all others, Phil. 3. 17, 18
to be followers together of him, and make them which walk so, as they have
him for an example. For many walk (as he then complained, and the Church in
all ages may) as the enemies of the Cross of Christ (what face soever they set
on it) whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is
their shame, and who mind earthly things. Wherefore it lies us in hand, to
hold on our way (even the narrow way) as they that Phil. 3. 20.
have their conversation, or Burgeship, in Heaven; resolving with our selves,
that how many soever they be, that walk otherwise, whatsoever their calling,
profession, gifts, and operations be, howsoever they be applauded and magnified
of men (as false Prophets, Timeseruers, and mealy-mouthed Preachers have been
before them) and whatsoever apparent Reasons they use, to beat us from the
straight gate, and narrow way, yet, through Gods grace. according to Christ's
bidding, and the Prophet Ieremies exhortation, we will Ier. 6. 16.
stand in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good
way, and walk therein, that so indeed we may find rest for our souls. And
know we, that that old and good way is plainly chalked out by our Lord
Christ, in this Sermon upon the Mount.

All they that are careful to walk according to these Rules, may know
themselves assuredly to be in it: but contrariwise, they that complain of them
to be over strict, or are ready to say, It were well indeed, if we could do
them, but where is the man, who can? and so will needs be despensed withal for
the whole, or, at the least, for some part; let such set their hearts at rest,
they have no part nor fellowship in this business. Whosoever is in the narrow
way, they are in the broad, and whosoever comes to life, they are in the
highway, that leads to destruction. And their corrupt Teachers, what
eminenceie of gifts soever they have, shall do them no good, but perish with
them everlastingly at the last day; when Christ, the Judge, shall solemnly
Veese 23.
profess unto these great Masters, extraordinarily gifted, and officiating
accordingly, much more to ordinary Teachers, I never knew you, or approved of
you for mine own, no more then I did of Judas (whom otherwise I knew from the
beginning to be a Reprobate) hitherto, ye have holden a kind of communion with
me, in my Kingdom of grace, and I have made use of your persons and gifts,
for the conversion and edification of others: but now depart ye, and be ye
separated for ever from all fruition of my Kingdom of glory. Take your parts
among Hypocrites, your associates, according to your demerits, in the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. For howsouer you made a profession of
godliness, and employed my gifts and graces to serve your own ends, that you
might seem some-bodie in my Church: yet in your hearts and practice also
(open, or secret) you were workers of iniquity; turning your selves into the
courses of this sinful World, balking and beating down the straight ways of
the Lord, and causing all others to do the like, so much as in you was. But
letting them alone, and leaving them to their Lord and Judge; be it spoken to
all that are indeed Religious, and, with full purpose of heart, cleave unto the
Lord, how straight and narrow soever the gate and way be, as the Apostle spoke
to his Scholar Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 11, 12.
Thou, O man of GOD, flee these things (meaning the inordinate love, and
pursuit of worldly wealth) and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith,
love, patience, meekness, fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal
life. And as in the same Epistle Ibid. 4. 8.
he opposes godliness to all bodily exercises, auouching that it is
profitable for all things, (which nothing in the World is besides) so may and
ought it to be opposed to all excellency of gifts, ministrations and
operations; knowing that without godliness (which comprehends the awful
fear and love of God, proceeding from faith, and causing a dutiful
observation of all his Commandments) without this godliness, I say, all
common graces of the Spirit, as Prophecy, casting out Devils, miraculous
operations, strange languages, deepnesse of learning, and knowledge, eloquence,
to be able 1. Cor. 13. 1.
to speak with the tongues of men and Angels, the greatest largeness of Alms
also, or any other thing of the like nature, are of none esteem with God, yea,
tend rather to the heavier condemnation of all them, in whom they are found.
But godliness either without, or with these, has the undeceivable promises
of this life, and that which is to come. One dram of it is of more worth, and
will stand us in more steed at the last day, then many talents of knowledge,
that puffs up, and of other endowments of the Holy Ghost, so highly prized
(and not unworthily) among men.

Wherefore to conclude this passage, as all the rest; I humbly entreat all
good people, to take Christ's yoke upon them, and to hold on constantly in the
narrow way, what sloughes, and rubs soever they meet withal; Heaven will pay
for all, and in the mean season, God, that cannot lie, has promised not to
leave nor forsake them. Give no way either to the enchantments of false
Prophets, or to any vain opinion or show of zeal, without the substance and
truth of it (beware of ouer-weaning) or to any conceit of your own, or other
men's worth, by reason of ordinary or extraordinary great gifts. Whatsoever is
not godliness, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Zeal, Humility, Meekness,
Temperance, Patience, Watchfulness, Heavenly mindedness, use it so far forth,
as God appoints it for use, and labor ever to make the best use of the best
graces, and Ordinances of God, but rest not therein. Rest only in those gifts
and works, (make them the sole matter of your rejoicing) which make an assured
way for you into your heavenly country, and will shine as Pearls, in your
heavenly Crown. I say again, forget not to follow ever, and earnestly such
Revel. 14. 13.
works, as will follow you at the hour of death, and grace you at the Day of
Judgment; besides, that will comfort you also in the evil day, even while you
are in your journey. The God of peace and Father of all consolation, guide and
uphold us in the ways of peace, evermore, with all that call upon his Name in
truth.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

