CHRIST HIS LAST WILL, AND JOHN HIS LEGACY.

In a Sermon preached at Clare in Suffolk, By Bezaleel Carter Preacher of the
word of God at Canham near to Saint Edmunds Bury.

Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently that cause division
and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.
LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop for Edward Blackemore and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Blazing-Starre in Paul's Church yard.

1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND ZEALOVS GENTLEWOMAN Mistress Borlace of little
Merlow, and to the noble and learned Gentleman Sir William Borlace the elder,
her son, of Mednam in Buckinghamshire, and to the virtuous and elect Lady,
the Lady Marie Borlace his wife, Bezaleel Carter a weak and unworthy Minister
of Gods word, wishes the blessings of both worlds.
RIght Worshipful, I confess that I have had an intention to have written of
all the sufferings of our Savior Christ under Caiphas, Herod, Filate and to
have been as large upon the whole 23. chapter of Saint Luke, as I have been
upon these two verses in the following Pamphlet, but so I am prevented through
a numberless number of businesses by reason of my Sabbath days pains, my
weekeday Lecture, teaching children, and other employments, that I almost
wonder at my self, or rather I admire Gods goodness, that has enabled me and
carried me through all these. If God shall please hereafter to raise me up such
competency of means that I may without further distractions follow my private
studies, I yet resolve (when I see a calling) to publish all my Meditations
upon that Chapter. In the Interim, I have adventured to the light this simple
Discourse, and have also presumed to Dedicate it to your selves, as a testimony
of unfeigned affection, and thankfulness, and as a motive to excite you to
charity and constancy in Gods service. I say to you as Paul to the Galathians,
you have begun well, nay I doubt not but that I may praise God for you: as the
same Apostle did for the Thessalonians, because your faith grows exceedingly.
My prayer for you is that as you have been for many years fruitful trees in
Gods Vineyard, bearing and bringing forth much good fruit: so also you may
persevere, flourishing like the Cedar tree, that says Pliny, bears the best
and the most fruit in the oldest age, in which regard the Psalmist resembles
the righteous man to the Cedar, Psalm. 92. The righteous shall flourish like a
Palm tree, and spread abroad like a Cedar in Lebanon, and then it follows in
his old age, he shall be fat and well liking. Right Worshipful these have been
the motives which made me bold to consecrate these my labors to your names,
neither do I doubt (all weakness and imperfection bewrayed notwithstanding)
for the Authors sake, at the least, you will accept them, who also remains
and shall ever.

Your worship in all duty and service Bezaleel Carter.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, it came to pass after I had furnished my self my self
with matter for another congregation (while these meditations following were
fresh in my memory) that I rode through the town where this Sermon was
preached, being then the lecture day: and as God disposed of things, at that
time disapointed of a supply: what needs multitudes of words, my self was
requested by the careful Pastor of that place, to speak to the people;
persuasion overcame me; but the Sermon finished, it is admirable to consider
how many mouths were opened against me, some said that I was mis-informd
against the place, other said that I was an hateful enemy to such as are
called professors, all concluded that I was a man of a turbulent spirit: the
report of that I should speak passed with swiftness from man to man,
molehills were made mountains, moates were made beams: some that heard me
defamed came, and lovingly conferred with me: others (and such as should have
been more charitable) did not only hear reports, but ran current with the
rest* trumpetting forth what they heard, in the extremest manner. Now whether
there is a just cause of offense given, let him judge that reads over this
following Discourse, which I wrote out (hearing my self to be so traduced) I
will not say verbatim, forasmuch as my manner is not to write out all I speak,
and when I have it perfectly by heart to repeat it syllabice according as I
wrote it, but as near as I could remember (my Authors names excepted which are
written in the Margent) I wrote out the same words that I preached, without
taking away or adding: only I have added somewhat to the six and twentyeth
verse, that I had thought to have urged but could not for want of time, and I
have now raised some of my observations of the 26. verse, that I then raised
out of the 27. verse, as that one where children are commanded to honor and
maintain their parents, supplying their necessities: that other of aflictions,
how one cross follows another as one wave wallowes in the neck of another,
etc. which may be raised naturally out of either verse the manner of handling
both in preaching and writing, was the same. I know that several men have
several aims in printing even as in preaching, some have one end, some
another, some preach out of lucre, others out of envy, others out of good will.
Phil. 1. 15. So in printing, some print out of malice, that they may spit out
their poison in their faces that have displeased them, others out of
ostentation and vaineglory, like the builders of Babell to get a name. For my
part I dare aim at no other end then the advancement of Gods glory, and the
satisfaction an edification of the Church: should I aim at man's praise, I know
I should miss of mine end, and loose my reward with God: should I aim at
revenge, and stuff my Book with scoffs and froathy inuectiues, (as too many
do that write controversies, maintaining their assertions with scoffs and
taunts, rather then by reason and argument) I should but discover malice, and
do that that I must bewail with tears, or have my portion with the scorners.
God knows that I have another end, and a better, viz. the satisfaction of
many, and the edification of all. In others of my labors I have seen the
fruits, who knows whether God will also bless me in this. If such as make a
trade of traducing others (shall notwithstanding that I have said) yet fall a
judging and condne^ing me, God I praise him that I pass not for man's
judgment, neither do I judge my self, he that judges me is God, judge
nothing before the time. So be thou find these laoburs aduantageous to thee,
bless God, pray for the Author, that cease not to pray for thee, remaining

Thine in Jesus Christ, Bezaleel Carter.

CHRIST HIS LAST WILL, AND John's Legacy.
JOHN, 19. 26. 27. When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the Disciple
standing by whom Jesus loved, he says unto his mother behold thy son.

Then says he to the Disciple, behold thy mother. And from that hour the
Disciple took her to his own home.


RIght Worshipful and well-beloved, I have in mine own charge discoursed of the
bitter passion of our blessed Savior under Caiphas, Herod, Pilate, and the
notable accidents that fell out as he was going toward Golgotha, the place of
his execution: something also I have spoken of the wonderful occurrences that
fell out during his aboade upon the Cross, and the memorable speeches uttered
thereon, seven in number; the first a prayer for his enemies, Father forgive
them they know not what they do. Luke 23. 24. The second and third
consolations, one to the converted thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Luke 23. 43. The other to his mother, Behold thy son, Ioh. 19. 26.
The fourth word was a word of complaint, My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Math. 27. 46. So was the fifth also mentioned by John, when he
knevv that all things were accomplished, he said, I thirst. John 19. 28. His
sixth word was a word of triumph Consummatum est, It is finished. John 19.
30. The seventh was a speech taken out of the 30. Psalm. Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit. v. 5 I am to speak at this time of his third word,
in which you may note with me.

First, the occasion, in these words: When Jesus therefore saw his mother and
the Disciple.

Secondly, the speech it self, which was double.

First, to the virgin Mary, Behold thy son. Division of the text:
Next, to John the Apostle, Behold thy mother.

Of the occasion first, S. Luke says, that when Christ was going toward
his execution, there follovved him a great multitude, and women that bevvailed
him, yea they follovved him as the word imports in the original, at the hard
heels, and exceedingly bevvailed him: yea they follovved (...)
him till they came (...) iuxta, hard to, or exceeding near the cross till
they came under the cross; whom when our Savior beheld, and amongst others
his mother, and beloved disciple, in the midst of his extremity, as it were,
casting off all grief: he comforts his mother and prouides for her after
maintenance, Iohannem commendans Mariae matri, and vicisim Mariam Iohanni Woman
says he to his mother, Behold thy son: and again to John, Behold thy
mother; commending Marie his mother to his Disciple John, and John the Disciple
to his mother Marie. For we must not so understand the words as if that
Christ had spoken to this effect, behold and cast Non morum implorat ope^sed
iuvat. Aeretius.
thine eyes upon me thy woefully and miserably afflicted son: this had been
to add sorrow to sorrow, affliction to bonds. But thus conceive it rather,
that our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ being fastened to the Cross, his
hands nailed, his feet nailed, so as he could uneath stir, either hand or
foot, or any part of his body but his head: it may be with a nod of his head,
or winking upon her with his Erasm. in Ioh.
eye, he speaks to her in some such words as these; Woman thou know how
faith fully and carefully I have hitherto provided for thee, with what
childlike and filial affection: but now mine hour is come and we must part,
yet be not too much abashed, either for my death, or fear of want after my
death; though thou loose a son thou shall find a son, he stands by thee,
and will be as careful and tender over thee, as an if he were thy son. And
forthwith looking directly upon the Apostle John, he adds: Behold thy mother:
not that John was Mary's son, or Marie John's mother, for John was the son of
Zebedeus, Math. 4. 21. but his meaning is this, that he would have John as
highly to honor and tender her, as if she had bin the mother that bare him:
for, says a learned Pifeat. in John Non quod ex ea genitus est sed quod Eliali
amore eam debet am plecti.
expositor, Johannes Mariae filius dicitur: John is called Mary's sons, and
illius matter and Marie John's mother, not that the one was the mother, and the
other the son, but that he would have John to embrace the Virgin Marie with
a filial love and affection. Neither were his words uttered in vain for it
follows in the story, that the Disciple took her to his own home.

Thus having intended to have spoken of the occasion of the words I have (I
know not how before I was aware) discoursed of the meaning of the whole Text:
it will be time for me now to return to my intended method, and first of the
occasion, in which observe three things.

First, Quis, who he sees; Christ.

Secondly, Quos, whom he seeeth; Marie and John.

Thirdly, Vbi, where he sees them; viz. near the Cross.

And in handling all these I must be exceeding compendious, lest my matter be
to begin when the hour is at end. The 1. Quis, who sees. Bullinger in Ioh
annem.
first point is Quis? who? and that was Christ that saw the^ after he had bin
persecuted, bettayed, condemned, scourged, nailed to the cross: Nunc etiam ne
quid deesset passionis acerbitat: That he might want nothing to augment the
bitterness of his suffering: he sees his mother under his cross, ready to be
swallowed up in the gulf of sorrow: In this life we must expect cross upon
cross.
which brings into my mind the speech used, 1. Sa. 25. 1. after relation of
David's troubles one in the neck of another* it is also added as to all the
rest, and Samuel also died. As one drop of rain follows another, as one wave
wallows in the neck of another: so one affliction follows another, a second, a
first; a third a second, and commonly the last is not the least: therefore
Eliphaz in Job tells us, That crosses come by fixes, nay by seauens. God
delivers in fix troubles, and in the seventh, evil shall not come near thee.
Job. 6. As Job had messenger after messenger: so must we have cross upon
cross; which doctrine may be applied after a double manner.

First, it may teach us to live in a continual expectation of afflictions, not
of one Let no man expect an heaven upon earth.
but of many: all the sons of Adam are subject to crosses; the sons of the
first, the sons of the second Adam, but especially the sons of the second
Judgment begins with the^, yea not only begins, but like a continual torrent
runs over their backs from their birth to their grave: and yet I know not how
it comes to pass, if the torrent be never so little dried up; that is, if God
give us never so little ease, we are ready with David to dream of immunity
and exemption from crosses, and to say as he said, Thou God of thy goodness
have made my hill so strong, that I shall never be removed. God no sooner
remooueth the whippe, but we are ready to sing unto the Carles tune. Soul
take thine case, eat, drink and be merry. We have no sooner any
intermission but we sing a Requiem to our selves, and secure our selves like
Babel: Though others be fatherless, and Widows, yet we shall see no
sorrow: when indeed this world is a Sea of troubles. Reul. chap. 4. verse 6.
And therefore as Mariners upon the sea expect and look for storms, and when
one blast is over, expect another: so should we ever look for crosses, either
loss of parents, loss of children* loss of goods, and when one is blown
over, be sure that another is near.

Secondly, our Savior his troubles came Let no man say that he is singular in
his suffering.
might, me thinks, have taken up the Churches complaint Lamen. 3. 5. 12. Thou
have compassed me with gall, and filled me with bitterness, thou have made me
a mark for thine arrows, and turned thy power against me all the day long:
and wherefore then is the complaint so common, see and consider if ever sorrow
were like my sorrow: for to name no more then are there mentioned in this text,
Christ, Marie, John, the first the natural son of God, in whom he was well
pleased the second a blessed woman, blessed above women: the third an Apostle
beloved above all the Apostles, and yet their First Christ.
crosses equalled, nay exceeded thine. First to begin with Christ, how many
and manifold were his sufferings, by hunger, Math. 4. by thirst, by weariness,
John the fourth; yea how grievous were his sufferings when he sweat water and
blood, or as the new translation has it; his sweat was, as it were, drops of
blood: quasi grumi (...). Luke 22.
grumus, signifies a clod of earth, or rather a clod of curded milk in a woman's
breast. Now his agony was so great, that he sweat (if we may so speak) clods
of blood yea so admirable was his passion, that upon the Cross he cries out
like one forsaken, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? rather then might
our Savior hanging upon the Cross (and many Divines apply it to him) have
said, see and consider if ever sorrow were like my sorrow.

Secondly, how great and many were ^ Marie.
the myseries of the virgin Marie, whose soul was wounded with the sword of
sorrow; and then especially when she beheld her son Christ lifted up upon the
Cross? I remember what I read of Hagar Genesis 21. 16.
when she and her son Ismael were cast out of Abraham his house, and Hagar
wanted sustenance to give her child, the story says she cast him down and
went from him, lest said she, I should see the death of my child: and she sat
down and lifted up her voice and wept. If Hagar could not endure io see the
death of Ismael her son, judge whether the sword of sorrow must not needs
pierce the soul of the sacred virgin, to see her son Christ so cruelly
murdered. The Papists affirm, that the virgins love to her son, exceeded the
love Anto. de Gue. Hisp.
of all, the angels in heaven: this I am able to justify, that parents do
tenderly affect and love their children: you may see it by Jobs example, that
seemed to be little moved Job. 1. 14. 20.
at the news of all his losses, till he heard his children were slain, and
then he could conceal his sorrow no longer, but rent his cloths, shaued his
head, and was woefully perplexed. So David also, though he could bear Shimei
his railing and other crosses patie^tly, yet when he heard of Absoloms death
how he cries out, O Absalom my son would I had dyed for thee; O Absalom my 2.
Sam. 11. 33.
son, my son. Yet David saw not his sons death, nor Job saw not his sons
death, but the blessed virgin did not hear of, but was an eye witness of the
cruel martyrdom of her son Christ. Oh hold her sorrow but exceed, to behold
so rufull a spectacle, yet we are ready to imagine our selves singular in our
sufferings.

3. Are thy sorrows greater then the sorrows of the Apostle S. John; who also
was an eye witness of his masters death? If David* cried out when he heard of
Ionathans death, Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan thou were very kind to
me in thy life, thy love was wderfull to me, passing the love of women. Might
not John the beloved disciple (upon whose bosom Christ had so often leaned)
have cried out, Woe is me, thy love to me was wonderful. O noble Israel he is
slain, tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in Ascalon. Must it not needs
perplexe him (think ye) to see how his master bones were stretchd out of
joint? how the dogs inco^passed him? and the assembly of the wicked closed him?
how his hands and feet were pierced with nails, and yet thou say see and
consider if ever sorrow were like my sorrow. Lay but the sufferings of either
Christ, or Marie, or Ihon in one balance, and thine in another, and see
whether theirs will not infinitely outweigh thine. If these things were
considered as they ought, thou would be so far from such murmuring, that we
should praise God with the Church, and say; It is Gods mercy that we are not
consumed, because his compassions Lamen. 3. 22.
fail not.

The next point is, whom he sees: When 2. Quo^.
he saw his mother, etc. Luke says their followed him a multitude of women
that bewailed and lamented him. Luke 23. 27. Matthew affirms, that many women
of Gallile followed him. Math. 27. 55. The Evangelist John testifies, that many
women followed him, as Marie the wife of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalen, and the
virgin Marie: but it is obseruable that we read not of one man by name that
followed him, except John the Apostle, and he also was of Gallile, a country
so mean and base that the Pharisees supposed no good thing could come out of
Gallile: so true is that saying of the Apostle, not many wise nor many mighty
are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise, and the weak to confound the mighty. 1. Cor. 1. 26. Peter that was so
ready to offer his service to the death; Though all men forsake thee, yet will I
never forsake thee, was now fled for fear with the rest of the Apostles, and
not one of the Disciples durst show their heads except John, and he spoke not
one word (that we can read of in his masters cause) and yet there were women
that openly bewailed him, and never left him, till they were separated from him
by his death. Thus God makes his power perfect in weakness: but I must not
stand upon this point.

The third thing to be considered in the 3. Vbi.
occasion is ( Vbi) where he sees them; and this was iuxta erucem, near the
Cross: and here of necessity a question must be asked and answered, to
reconcile* Scripture to Mat. 27. 55. Mark. 15. 40. Luke 23. 29:
Scripture, for Matthew says, the women stood a far of: so say Mark and Luke
also. And many Divines have collected much matter from their standing a far
of; one gathers that in the best actions we bewray infirmity; these women
(says Aretius*
he) follow Christ to the Cross, and yet even in this worthy act they bewray
infirmity, for as much as they follow with Bullenger.
Peter a far of. Another persuades women to modesty by an argument drawn
from the women standing a far of, for (says he) though many women followed
Christ, Nihil tamen faciunt contra Decorum: yet they do nothing that is
unseemly, not rushing amongst the soldiers and men of war; but kept
themselves back, and beheld e longinquo, a far of: a good item for our
brazen faced harlots, that run without all shame to Bearebaitings, Playhouses,
and thrust themselves into the thickest throngs; these and other collections I
could well like of, so be, they were built upon a good foundation: For my Text
says, that they stood near the Cross. But still it may be objected, how
then reconcile we one place to another? how says John they stood near the
Cross: the other Evangelists, that they stood a far of. There be diverse
answers.

Some answer it thus, that John and the three Mary's stood near the Cross,
the other women which lamented him stood further of: and hence also they have
gathered, that even amongst those that love God there are degrees of love, as
amongst Christ's followers, some followed him near and ventured themselves more
others a far of, and ventured themselves less; yet all loved him. This answer
as I reject it not, so neither do I embrace it; because Saint Luke says, that
a great many women followed him, and the word in the original notes (as I
said) a near follovving of Christ, and it appears indeed that they follovved
him near; because our Savior preached to them that divine Sermon as he was
going toward his ex^^ution. Daughters of Jerusalem Luke 23.
weep not for me but for your selves, and for your children, the days shall
come, etc. And if they were not afraid to follovv him as he was going to
toward his execution, and hear his doctrine: it may be coniectured also that
they were as little afraid to stand by him during the time of his execution,
and abode upon the Cross.

Secondly, others answer that at the first these women might stand a far of,
Bellarm. de 7. verbis Christi.
Impediente turba and militibus, being hindered by the soldiers and the
multitude, that pressed near to see and hear what was done: but afterward,
when that Christ was lifted up, and many were returned home, that then they
drew near to the Cross, else (quoth Bellarmine) how could Marie know that he
spoke to her, or John that he spoke to him, when their was such a multitude
present, and Christ calls neither of both by their names. But this cannot be,
for even after our Savior had given up the Ghost, it is said that the women
that followed him from Gallile, beheld him a far of: so as it was not at the
first, but afterward th^^ they Mat. 27.
stood a far of. And though there were present never so many people, and
Christ named neither Marie nor John, yet he might so fasten his eye upon them,
as they might well know to whom he spoke.

Thirdly, therefore I take this for the best answer, that at the first they
stood nearer the cross, till such time as Christ had commended his mother to
John his care and custody: but after that, they departed out of the press, and
stood and beheld a far of; all the time of his passion. And thus having
cleared this doubt; be pleased to observe with me two things, out of this
third point.

First, the loving faithfulness of John and Marie to Christ, that followed him
even to the last, till they came under his Cross. Secondly, Christ's care over
them, beholding them with pity and compassion from his Cross.
The first of these, minds me of Aretius Aret. in John. Obser.
his note; Very amici libenter adsunt morituris, iuuant, etc. A true friend
will not forsake his friend in his greatest adversity, not in the prison, not
in bands, not at the place of execution it self. Entreat me not to leave
thee, said Ruth to Naomi, where thou Ruth. 1.
go I will go, where thou dyest I will dye, nothing but death shall
separate us asunder. False and flattering friends are like a man's shadow, that
is seen to follow a man so long as the Sun shines, but as soon as the Sun
is ouerclowded it vanishes away: Donec eris felix, etc. So long as a man is in
prosperity, so long as the Sun shines, as it were, so long a man shall have
abundance of friends: where the carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort.
But if there come cloudy and tempestuous time

Tempora si fuerint nubula solus eris. Ovid.
If the world frown never so little, our credits are ecclipsed, our names put
out as evil: if times of persecution come upon us, then shall you see false
friends vanish away. Nay what speak I of vanishing, it may be they will
verify Micha his saying. Micha. 3. 5.
If you fill not their mouth with bread, they will prepare war against you:
Or me thinks I may fitly resemble them to little brooks or rivers, that when
we have water enough in the winter season, are brimme full; and like Jordan
ouerflow their blankes, but in the drought of Summer, when ponds, and wels, and
springs, are dried up, are so empty that they will not affoorde one drop of
water to the weary passenger: you may easily apply the resemblance. The wealthy
want no well willers, when corn, wine, and oil abound, friends will abound:
but says Solomon, if a man be poor, his own Prou. 19.
brethren will hate him; how much more will his friends go far from him,
they will pursue him with their words, but they will not help him. Thus it is
with false friends, but true love is like wildefire Cantic. 8. 7.
that burns even the water it self, much water cannot quench love, nor floods
drown it. True love, Oh it is like mighty wine, strong as death, what can
quench it? The Scribes and Pharisees endeavored, even with all their might, by
lies, slanders, false reports, to alienate the peoples affections from our
blessed Savior, they said he was a Drunkard, a devil, that he cast out devils
by the devil: they said he was a seditious person, an enemy to Caesar, etc.
and yet all this water could not quench their love, yea though after they had
slandered him, they scourged and crucified him, yet says Josephus Antiquit.
lib. 8
they that followed him from the beginning ceased not to love him for the
ignominy of his death.

But this of the first point, that they followed Obser. 2.
him till they came under the Cross.

The second is this, that our Savior beheld them with pity from the Cross*
so the Text says, When he beheld his mother, etc. Now before I gather my
assumption, let me first move that same question that our Savior moved. Math
12. 49. Who is Christ his mother? and who is his sister? You know the answer,
Whosoever does the will of my Father in heaven, he is my mother, sister, and
brother. And if Christ beheld pittyed, comforted, cared for his mother, his
natural mother under the Cross, (let this be the collection) will he not
also behold thee with the eye of pity and compassion (whom he calls his mother
also) when thou art afflicted under the Exodus 7. 3.
Cross? I remember what God says of the afflicted Israelites oppressed in the
land of Egypt; I have seen, I have seen (says the Lord) the afflictions of
my people, and have hard their cry, and am come to deliver them: they were
under the Cross indeed, but the Lord beholds them under it, and that not after
a slight manner, as the Priest and Leuite saw the wounded passenger: but after
an effectual manner, as the good Samaritane that saw the injured traveler, and
succored him: so are the words, I have seen my peoples afflictions, and am
come to deliver them. I will to the amplification of this point add but one
place more, and that is a place that much affected me when I read it. It is
Heb. 2. He (that is Christ) took the seed of Abraham, and became like unto
his brethren in all things, he suffered and was tempted: and why? that he might
be merciful to us and succor us, when we are tempted. What an encouragement
may this be to us, to bear the cross with patience when we shall consider
it, that Christ sees us, pittyeth us in our afflictions, nay was himself
subject to all our infirmities, (I mean all our miserable, though not sinful
infirmities; hunger, thirst, weariness) that out of his own experience he
might pity us when we are hungry, thirsty, weary, etc.

Hitherto of the occasion of Christ's his speech. From the occasion come we to
the speech it self, uttered first to his mother. Behold thy son. Next, to John
the Apostle: Behold thy mother. In the first observe:

First, the manner how he speaks to her, in that he calls her woman; Woman
behold thy son.

Secondly, the matter of his speech; Behold thy son.

In discoursing of the former, it would be enquired wherefore our Savior says
not rather, mother behold thy son, but woman behold thy son: An
dedignabitur vocare eam matrem? Did he disdain to call her mother, that he
calls her woman? In the sixth of Mark, it is said, that he was obedient to
his mother, and to Joseph also that was but his reputed father. Neither can it
be denied, but that Christ fulfilled the fifth Commandment as fully and
perfectly as any of the rest. How comes it to pass then that in my Text he
calls her woman? and that he answers he^r so roundly, John the second the
fourth verse: Woman what have I to do with thee, mine hour is not yet come?
Did he use his mother after an vnrespectiue manner? and may children take
courage from hence to use their parents irreverently? God forbid, for he does
not call her woman, out of contempt, but for other reasons.

First, to teach his mother and all that Beza in Hom. pass. 19.
were there present, that he was the son of an higher calling then of the
virgin Marie: if he had called her mother it might happily have confirmed them
in their error, which supposed him to be a mere man, a Carpenter, the son
of Iosoph and Marie, etc. But in that he calls her woman, he gives them all
to understand, that he was the son of the most high, as well as Mary's son.

2. He calls her woman (says a wise man) Ex commiseratione cordis eius
maesticiam hac voce intenderet magis quam sedaret*
lest he should add sorrow to her sorrow in calling her by the name of mother,
for it makes the^ pae^rts bowels even to yearn over the child, when their
children in distress shall call them by the names of father or mother. In
which regard Christ commands us before we pray, to call God by the name of
Father. When you pray, Musc. in Ioha: 1. Mat. 6. 9.
pray thus. Our Father which art in heaven. And Christ in his agony forgets not
to call God Father: Father if it be possible let this cup pass away from me,
etc. I say it adds to the parents grief, when a child in distress shall call
a father, father; or a mother, mother: and therefore our reverend Savior, lest
he should geminate and double her grief, in calling her mother, he calls her
woman; and says, Woman behold thy son. A notable pattern for rebellious and
disobedient children, that vex and grieve their parents at every word they
speak, by their cursing, banning, railing, gibing. Christ would not speak one
word to grieve his mother, he would not call her mother, if the name of mother
shall grieve his mother. Oh that incorrigible children, which do little better
then feed upon their parents bloods, would sew according to this Sampler.

Thirdly, he calls her Woman for another Ferus, Tollet, or any other Romanist
that I have read of Christ passion whose policy I approve rather then their
faythfulnesse.

Chemnisius is so bold to tell them, he calls Vt futurae superstitioni de
advocatione Mariae opponeret. Chem. Harm.
her mother (says he) that he might prevent superstition in after ages; yea
this was not the first time that he had called her after this manner, as it
appears by the place forementioned. John 2. 4. And if you mark it, in reading
Scripture, you shall not find any mention made of the virgin Marie, but it is
as Beza says Moderata mentio: A moderate mention made of her. When the woman
lift up her voice and cried; Beessed is the womb that bare thee and the pappes
that gave thee suck: nay rather says Christ, Blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. And Acts 1. it is said that the Apostles continued
with one accord in prayer with the women, and Marie the mother of Jesus. To
which we might add Math. 12. 48. read it at your leisure. In all which and
diverse others, though there be mention made of the virgin Marie, yet is but
moderate, lest in time to come men should ascribe the honor due to the son,
unto the mother; Beza. Hom: pass. 29.
as the Papists either through blindness, or obstinacy do at this day^, that
adore and worship the virgin Marie, Et omne titulum Jesus, etc. And attribute
all the honorable titles belonging to Christ, to her. Christ they call Lord,
her they call Lady. Christ they call King, her the Queen of heaven: Yea they
call her their life, hope, joy, salvation, and pray to her as if she could
command her son. Their Psalter called our Lady her Psalter is so full of
blasphemy, that I will not recite one word of it, but refer you rather to the
Ecclesiastical story, called the book of Martyrs, Fox Acts and Monument*
where their blasphemies are discovered to the full. Yet that I might not too
lightly pass over this point, and that by the less you may judge the more, I
will not pass over one Idolatrous prayer that I lately read.

Aue miserorum patrona, aue caelicae matrona
Tu, ancillam Jesus Christi, te vocari voluisti
Sed vt docet lex diuina, tu ipsius es domina,
Namius habet and ratio, matrem praeesse filio
Ergo ora suppliciter, and praecipe suhlimiter
Vt nos in Mundi vespera, ad regna ducat supera.
This and a great many other like Rihmes are sung to the magnifying, I was
about to say, the deifying of Christ's mother, obscuring and dimming the glory
due to Christ himself: All which I speak not to derogate from the sacred
virgin, whose rare virtues I dare not neglect, nay dare not for my soul but
reverence and admire. The Papists extol Stulti dum vitant vitia, in contraria
currunt.
her too much, many of us esteem her too little. Her privileges were high and
admirable above all the women's that were before her, or shall be after her.

First, though she had original sin, yet the course of original deprauation
was so stayed in her, by the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost, that she brought
forth a child perfectly righteous without sin, which never any but she did.

Secondly, She was mother and nurse to our Savior Christ, the son of the
most high, in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed, which is so great
aprerogatiue, that the Prophet Isay sets it forth with an ecce, Behold a
virgin shall conceive and bear a son, etc.

Thirdly, the holy Angel pronounced her blessed amongst women. Luke 1. 28. All
generations ought to call her blessed. Luke 1. 48. All which considered, I
cannot but grieve, and have indignation, when I hear the inconsiderate
speeches that some have adventured to pour forth in discoursing of the virgin
Marie. But to pray to her, to adore her, as the Antichristian rabble do at
this day, that know no bounds when they praise her, nor mean when they honor
her. As there are many places against it, so I take it, none more apt then this
Text, where our Savior speaking to his mother, says not, mother, but woman
behold thy son.

From the manner, proceed we to speak of the matter of Christ's speech; Behold
thy thy son: as if he had said, this is he that I appoint and constitute to
be in place of me thy son, to provide and care for, and comfort thee; which
I know he will as carefully perform, as if he were thine natural son.
Before I come to gather any doctrine from the words, let me assoyle two
questions.

First it may be questioned why Christ John rather then to any other Disciple,
since there were more Disciples then John, of whose affection our Savior little
doubted, though now through frailty and infirmity, they forsook him.

Bellarmine yields many reasons, as first, Bell. de 7. verb:
because Christ knew that John should out live Marie and all the rest of the
Apostles. Secondly, he knew John to be his most loving, as he was the most
loved Apostle. Thirdly, because John was present with him in his greatest
abasement, when the other Disciples were fled for fear, I think to these
three I may add a fourth, viz. this. That Christ commends her to John and none
other, to prevent superstition. Papists prate and pride of Primacie Aret. in
Johan:
and Princedome, as if Peter had had the jurisdiction over, and been head of
all the Apostles, and yet our Savior ever loved (and in some sort honored and
preferred John) and was more familiar with him then with Peter, or any Disciple
else. Ioh. 13. 23. It is said that John leaned upon Christ's breast* and in the
same chapter it is said, that when Christ had spoke the word, One of you shall
betray me; the Disciples looked one upon another, and Peter beckened to John,
that he might ask his master of whom he spoke. verse. the 26. To which also
might be added that the Revelation was delivered to John and not to Peter.
Reu. 1. 1. And here the virgin Marie is committed to John's custody and not to
Peter's, yea it is remarkable that the infirmities of Peter are more displayed
in the Scriptures then the infirmities of any of all the Apostles, perhaps his
rashness when he cut of Malchus his ear. Math. 27. Certainly his cowardice,
that he denied, and not once, but thrice together denied, yea and forswore his
own master. Mark 14. 72. and many other of his infirmities the Scripture
mentions, that I forbear to rippe up, out of the reverence I bear to so
worthy an Apostle, and yet could not say less then I have said, to stop the
mouths of such as extol Peter as the Prince and principal of all the
Apostles.

The second doubt to be answered is, The second doubt answered.
why Christ commits the care of his mother to John only, and not rather to all
and every one of his Apostles, and to her kindered also that were then present,
as well as John? The saying is, Vnita vis fortior, a threefold cord is not
easily broken: suppose that one should have proved unfaithful to the virgin
Marie; yet if the care of her had been committed to many a man would think in
reason, though one should forsake her, yet all would not forsake her. Why then
does Christ commit her to the care of one, and but one?

To this I answer, that whatsoever in Aristotls rule, whatsoever is regarded of
al is regarded of none. Yea experience confirms as much, let me instance it in
particulars; Quod multorum fidei and cnrae committitur, non satis probe
curatur. Musc. in Johan Arist. pol. lib. 2. cap. 2.
it is the duty of every town and parish, of every particular man and woman,
according to their ability to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, but if that
there were not an over seer or two in every town appointed for that end, that
the poor might (and through their negligence it comes to pass sometimes) that
they are cast away for want of sustenance It is the duty of al to defend the
innocent and helpless from the mighty man, and ftom the oppressor; but had we
not also Magistrates to that end armed with the sword of authority and power;
as in the wilderness one beast preys upon another as in the Sea one fish
deuoureth another: so one man would oppress, and as the Apostle Gal. 5. 15.
says, byte and devour another. It is the duty of all and every one in the
congregatihn, to call upon such as they have seen baptized, to hear sermons;
etc. It is the duty of all to teach and instruct such, as soon as they shall
find them capable: but because (as I said) no man regards that which is
committed to every man's charge; it is a laudable and commendable order in our
Church, that certain men and women which we call godfathers and godmothers are
appointed, that personally and particularly promise to see them taught the
Creed, the Lords prayer, and the ten commandments. Particular comma^ds do more
move then general. Sed haec hactenus. The only point that I intend to insist
upon is this: That children ought Luke the second, That he went down with
them Children must relieve their parents.
and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them, but also if need require they
ought to supply their parents wants and necessities, so long as God shall give
them life, Miraedum quidem exemplum.
(and as Christ did for his mother) provide for them also after their
departure, if it please God that their parents out live them. So did our
blessed Savior, that provided for his mother in this life, and was not
regardlesse of her at the hour of his death.

And to say truth, the relieuing of our parents wants, it is a part of that
honor due to our parents, and required in the fifth commandment. Honoring of
parents implies maintenance as well as reverence, for our Savior expounds it
contrary to the Doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees. Math. 16. 6. Mark 7. 10.
The doctrine that they broached amongst the people, was this, viz. that it was
a matter of greater necessity to fill their bags and cram their wallets, to
enrich their treasury and temple, then for men to relieve their blind, lame,
and aged parents: yea and withal, taught them how to answer their parents,
craving aid and succor at their hands, to say to them it is corban, that is as
much as to say, that they had distributed to pious and charitable uses: and
therefore had fulfilled the commandment of God, though they saw and suffered
their parents to perish through need and poverty. And thus says Christ (to
satisfy your own avarice) in stead of Gods commandments; you teach your own
traditions and constitutions: Gods commandments cries it in your ears, honor
that is love, reverence, obey, relieve your parents, but you think if you can
say it is corban, that it is a gift, that there is no more required at your
hands: and so make the commandment of God of none effect. By which exposition
it appears, that all such as relieve not their parents wants, are breakers of
the fifth commandment And thus also the word honor is often used in other
places, as Honor the king. 1. Pet. 2. 14. Which precept not only enioynes to
love, and to obey our Princes, but pay them such customs and tributes as are
necessary for the maintenance of their honor. The same Apostle faith, Honor
your wives as the weaker vessels. 1. Pet. 36.
That is, not only bear with their fraylties, and weakness, but furnish
them also with all things needful and necessary for their place and callings.
It was Paul's iniunction, honor, that is, respect, relieve, reverence widows
that are widows indeed. By all which Scriptures it appears that when God
faith, Honor thy father and mother, he intends amongst other duties, that
children should to their utmost power sustain and relieve the wants of father
and mother.

Joseph deserves high commendation for the care he had to discharge his duty
in this kind; for he did not only send for his father and kept him in a time
of famine. Genesis the forty seventh Nay it is said in the 12. ver. of that
chapter, that he put meat into his fathers mouth. Senex bis puer; all men are
children twice, and prove as troublesome in extreme age as in their tender
infancy; they must be clothed and unclothed by others, fed by others, led by
others, supported, it may be carried upon others shoulders; in a word Multa sen
em circumueniunt incommeda. Horace.
they are in old age as troublesome as chargable. But neither of both these
dismayed Joseph, but notwithstanding he sent for his father, and put meat into
his mouth: a metaphor (as I think) drawn from mothers and nurses, which put
meat into the infants mouths unable to feed themselves. Proofs might be
multiplied suffice us to confirm this doctrine with two or three reasons.
Reasons.


First the law of nature requires it, Valerius Val. Max. c. 4.
Maximus says, that it is prima lex naturae, the very first law of nature for
children to relieve their parents. Paul says, It is a just thing and a right.
Nature teaches Ephesians. 6. 1.
to dogood to them that have done good to us. Pharaohs Butler confessed it a
Genesis 41. 9.
fault, that he had received kindness from Joseph, and had not requited it.
Christ says If you love them that love you, and do good to them that do good
to you, do not the Publicans and harlots do the same. Proclus the Academicke
Gall. Acad.
was wont to say, that a father was the true image of the great and sovereign
God, and that all children next under God hold life, goods, and all they have
of their parents. It is an heathenish and savage course, nay worse then
Paganish, for children to have riches and wealth, and want nothing of all that
our souls can desire; and yet suffer, I say, not their brethren, sisters, but
their own parents that begat, bare, and comforted them, to be pinched and
pined away, through necessity and want; and surely the Publicans and Pagans,
Turks, and Tartars shall rise up in judgment against such. We read of
Antigonus the son of Demetrius, that when his father was prisoner to
Seleucus, that he (notwithstanding his fathers charge to the contrary) sold
away his towns, lands, jewels, to pay his fathers ransom; nay offered to
become pledge and prisoner in his room, to procure his fathers liberty.

And Valerius Maximus of whom, I Val. Max. li. 5.
spoke before alleges another example so memorable, that I have read it at the
least in ten several Authors, of a daughter that gave suck to her father in
prison, being condemned to dye by famine, which when the Iaylor had espied and
published abroad, and the Magistrates heard of, they so well approved the
fact, that they pardonned her father and restored him to liberty. Even these
Pagans shall come and rise up in judgment against us that are called
Christians, and condemn us. Nay the dumb and unreasonable creatures shall
rise up in judgment against the men of this generation.

It is written of the Storkes, that they will feed their Sires, and carry them
about upon their backs, when through age they are unable to feed themselves
or fly. How are they worse then Paganish, then bestiall, that neglect this
service?

Secondly, consider we the law of nations. The ^ ^eason.
Zenophon reports of a Law that was amongst Zenophon. de dict.
the men of Athens, that if a man were known to have denied succor to his
parents in the time of their want, that such an one, if he fell into want,
should not be succored, no though he dyed through want. To which law also I
might add the laws of other nations: it shall suffice to rehearse the words
of a learned Expositor upon the fifteenth of Matthew: Musc. De legislatore
quoda^ scribitur.
It is written says he of a famous Lawgiuer, which enacted many good statutes
for repressing many vices, and yet enacted no law at all to punish such as
should murder father and mother, and being demanded his reason; he answered,
because he supposed there was no such execrable and detestable villainy to be
found upon earth, that any should be so diuellishly impious, as to deprive them
of life from whom they had received life. But those times were golden times,
and those that lived then are dead now, in whose rooms are started up an
unnatural brood of patricide, some such as have laid violent hands upon, and
shed their parents blood but multitudes of such are as careless to relieve
their parents wants, and if the axiom be true, Si non pauisti occidisti, these
are murderers, yea patricides. The uses of this point are diverse.

First, it makes against the Romanists proculcatis parentibus, even trampling
their parents under their feet, ought to run into monasteryes: they say that
children being once admitted into that order, ought to despise father and
mother; they say that they ought to despise them so far, as not to be present
with them upon their sick, no not upon their death beds: they say that
children by their prayers, dyrges, Masses, may profit their dead parents, and
by these and the like doctrines make childten to east off all care of parents,
sink they, swim they: either they suppose they are not bound to care for them;
or else they are of opinion that it shall suffice to care for the good of their
souls after they are departed this life.

Secondly, this doctrine reproues those that eythet relieve not their parents
at all, or else do it after such a niggardly and repining manner, that a man
shall never come where their parents are, but he shall hear them cry out like
Rebecca, that they are weary of their lives: or like Jonah it is better for
them to dye then to live; the Ezekiel. 22. 7.
world swarms with such men as Ezekiel speaks of, and reprooues such as set
light by father and mother; such as will as soon condescend to relieve a
vagrant rogue by the high ways side, as their owe father and mother. Now, even
now are the days come which Paul foretold of, in which 2: Tim. 3. 2.
men should be unnatural, unthankful. The tears that I have seen trickling
down the cheeks of aged parents, and the neglect which I have seen amongst
ungrateful children, do even force me, and compel me to speak; yea and if
I fear to speak in so right and just a cause as this, let my right hand rot,
and my tongue cleave to my jaws. Thou unthankful unnatural Impe, that wilt not
feed the^ that have fed thee; nor cloth the^ that have clothed thee: how can
thou love God that thou have not seen, when thou love not thine own brother
that thou have seen; nay not thine own father and mother? how unlike art thou
to Jesus Christ that cared for, and provided for his mother. Yet (says
Bellar.) was not he so much Christus aute^ minus de^^^t parentibus suis quam
celeri homines suis parentibus debent. Bell. de 7. verb.
bound to his, as thou to thy mother: do thou what thou can for thy blood,
thou can never requite the fears, cares, costs, of thy parents. ^mo vero
(says the forenanamed author) debes tu vitam parentibus; thou owe them thy
life, thy blood. Honor thy father (quoth Solomon) do it Eccl 7. 27.
with thine whole heart, see thou forget not thy mothers sorrows, for thou
can never recompense what they have done for thee. Christ only did, for he
only Bellarm.
could requite his mother: Accepit vnam vitam, he took but one life, viz. his
humane life of the virgin his mother, but for that one he gave her three lives.

Vitam humanam, an humane life.
Vitam gratiae, the life of grace.
Vitam gloriae, the life of glory.
First, he gave her a humane life, when together with the Father and the holy
Ghost he created her: for he made all things, and without him was made nothing
that was made.

Secondly, he gave her that life of grace in that he quickened and regenerated
her by his spirit.

Thirdly, he gave unto her also the life of glory, in that he dyed for, and
shed his precious blood for her, to the intent that she might not perish but
have life eternal. Thus our Savior had requited his mother 3. for one: but as
Solomon says, thou can not requite thy parents. Christ had done it, and more
then done it already, yet behold he still cared for his mother: thou have, nor
can not requite them, and yet leauest them to the wide world, to hunger, to
thirst, to cold, to nakedness, to sink, to swim, to go forward, to go
backward. Oh how unlike art thou to Jesus Christ in this: in the fear of God
let us learn hereafter by this pattern of patterns to make conscience of
this duty.

Thirdly and lastly, this that has been said, taxes such children as are so
far from Absalom (would God there were not thousands such Absoloms amongst us)
that had a long time complotted, and at the last attempted to depose and
dispossess his own father: but God hung him up for a spectacle between
heaven and earth in his own locks, to the terror of all such graceless
miscreants; God of his mercy grant, that this one man hung up (as it were) in
chains may be a terror to others that blend in the same sin. And now at the
length come we to the next Verse.

Then Jesus said to the Disciple whom he loved, etc. Note in the words two
things: First, Observations.
Christ's charge. Secondly, John's obedience. Before we come to the more exact
handling of this text, one thing would be noted generally. viz. Christ's
earnestness in the behalf of his mother. First he directed his speech to his
mother, Behold thy son. And had he said no more but this out of question it
would have made John exceeding careful: but Christ contents not himself with
this, but makes sure work and directs his speech to John also, saying, Behold
thy mother. From his example learn we to deal earnestly and zealously, not
carelessly and coldly in the behalf of the distressed. The Apostle tells us
that it is good to love earnestly in a good thing. It was Salomons item, that
thou do, do with all thy might: exhort all with all thy might, reprove all
with all thy might, plead the poor man's cause with all thy might. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God (says Christ) with all thine heart, and with all thy
Math. 22. 29:
might, and thy neighbor as thy self. A lesson that gals and wrings our
lukewarm Laodeceans, that happily will plead the poor man's cause; but how?
they care not whether they speak or hold their peace, whether they win or lose
the day, after a dead and dull, and frozen, and cold manner, without all spirit
and zeal. But this obiter. Come we to the words themselves, and first of the
charge, wherein consider:

First, Cui, to whom Christ speaks.

Secondly, Quid, what he speaks.

First to whom, namely to the beloved First, Cui.
Apostle: and here many things are colligible, I will select a two or three of
them.

First, our Savior commits the charge of his mother to a Disciple, and none
but a Disciple, though there were never Musc. in John.
so many of her kindred according to the flesh present, Non alii tamen cuipiam,
etc: Yet would our blessed Savior commit her to the trust of none but of a
Disciple, At quos Discipulos habent Euangelii ministri, etc. But says a
learned man, where shall a paynful and laborious Minister of Gods word find
such a Disciple, to whom he may with confidence upon his death bed, commit the
care of his father, mother, wife, or children. It makes me even woe to
consider it, that when Gods Minister has spent his strength, and like a lamp
wasted himself to give light to others; spent his body, spent his substance
upon his flock: has been instant and earnest in season, out of season, not
three years together, as Paul was at Ephesus, but ten, Act. 20.
twenty, thyrty, forty years together; in labors often, in trauells often,
in watchings often, in prayers often, in perrils often; and when he has
performed the duty and office of a faithful Pastor, his course being
finished, it makes my bowels even turn within meto see his poor widow to
become a vagabond, and his children like Judas his to beg their bread: yet such
is the ingratitude, and unmercifulness of these unthankful times that a
Minister may spend his spirits and life and blood, in, and for a congregation,
and yet amongst thousands of such as are or ought to be disciples, not a man to
be found that will relieve either mother, wife son, or daughter, in lieu of al
their labors, They will as soon, it may be sooner, provide for the wife and
posterity of their shepherd or neatheard. and think themselves as much bound
to it, as to provide for the wife and children of their deceased Pastor. Let
their kindred provide say we; and what reason have we to take our childrens
bread and give it to strangers, as if the care and faithfulness of a Disciple
ought not to exceed the care and faithfulness of a kinsman, or brother. The
virgin Marie had much kindred, yet Christ commends her to a Disciple, not to
her kindred.

Secondly, observe that John writing of Observation.
himself, says not; Deinde dicit mihi. Then he said to me, Behold, etc: But
thus he said to his Disciple whom he loved, etc. And so in the consequent words
he says not, Ego recepi, I took her; but ille recepit, he took her to his
own home: Suppressit nomen Are. in Johan.
supra, etc. he suppressed his name before verse the twenty fifth of this
chapter and here he suppresseth it again, if you would have any reasons for
his so doing, I answer you.

First, he does it out of singular thankfulness R. A. in doct. Euang. p. 177.
to Christ, for his entire and especial affection toward him: this great
favor would never out of his mind, that his master loved him above all the
Apostles, and therefore he delights to call himself the Disciple whom Jesus
loved, even out of a thankful mind. It was no small favor to be the best
beloved Apostle: the least that John could return, was the sacrifise of praise
for so great a mercy, to think of it, speak of it, write of it, and as David
Psalm. 66. 20.
says, to exalt God with his tongue, by acknowledgement of so admirable
kindness. It makes to the everlasting praise of David that famous singer of
Israel, that he never received a new mercy, but with all he would sound forth
a new song of praise to God: in one Psalm he cries out Psalm. 103. 1. Psalm. 105.
Benedic anima mea Iehouae, etc: Soul praise thou the Lord, let all that is
within me praise his name. In a second place; Quid retrihuam, etc. What shall
I render unto the Lord for all Psalm: 33. 1.
his benefits bestowed upon me. In a third place; Cantate iusti in Iehoua;
Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, praise is comely for the upright. In a
fourth; Laudate Iah: Praise the Lord for it is good to do so, it is a pleasant
and Psalm. 147. 1^
a comely thing: In a fifth place; Halaluiah, laudate Iehouam, laudate eam in
excelsis, etc. Praise the Lord, praise the Lord from the heavens, Psalm. 148. 1.
praise him in the height. In a word, his life was even a continual recounting
of Gods mercies. Oh that we were men of the same spirit in these days:
thousands, millions, myrriads of blessings, even the blessings of both hands
has God poured down upon us, right handed, left handed blessings, for this
life and a better; he has placed peace upon our borders, enriched us with
plenty, and crowned every new year with new blessings, delighting to do us
good, as a father to his own son: he has declared unto his word and
statutes, showed us his ordinances, he has not dealt so with any nation. But
where is the man that like John delights to talk of Gods mercyes to him? who
sings with that sacred virgin, Magnificat anima mea, etc. My soul does
magnify the Lord, and Luke ^^
my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. How do we vnderprise and
vndervallew the greatest blessings? nay are we not so far from
thankfulness, that we murmur and complain because of the abundance of Gods
blessings: how many contemners of the word of God, that in stead of
thankfulness for the word, cry out as the Israelites of their Mannah, We can
see nothing but this Mannah; how many seditious persons? that cry out against
our glorious peace, and in stead of praising God for it, are ready to say, that
times of war are better then times of peace. How many that in stead of
praising God for our great plenty? do repine and murmur at it. Well: take we
heed if* we be thus unthankful that we make not God to delight as much in
punishing us, as ever he did in blessing us: that as it is in Ose. that Osea
10. 10.
we make not God desire to chastise us.

A second reason why John conceals his name, and calls himself the disciple
who^ Jesus loved, was modesty, and therefore though 2. Reason. Ob modestia^
Aret. in Johan.
he were the best beloved Apostle, and Christ his master honored him so much,
as to commit his mother the virgin Marie to his custody, yet as one regardles
of praise he calls himself only by the name of the beloved Disciple, out of
thankfulness, but mentions not his name, out of an holy modesty and humblenes
of mind eschewing of vaynglory. An admirable pattern worthy to be set before
our eyes in these days wherein we thirst after man's praise, as much as ever
dropsy man did after drink: we give alms happily, but it is to be seen of
men; we fast, we pray, we come to hear the word, but whatsoever we do, like
the buylders of Babel, here is our aim, to get our selves Gen 11. 4.
a name, I know not better, to whom I may compare many men better, then to
Players (you that haunt profane Theaters know their fashions better then I)
first they blow a trumpet to call spectators together, and when many eyes are
fixed upon them, then they begin their pageant: and thus do a number of our
Pharisees, that never do good work but it is in public, and in open view, as
if God would believe nothing without witness. But what says the blessed
Apostle Paul, Let nothing be done through contention or vaineglory. And the
same Apostle, Be not desirous Phil. 2. 3. Gal. 3.
of vaineglory, provoking one another, envying one another. And our blessed
Lord and Savior Christ. Math. 6. When thou give alms let not thy right hand
know what thy left hand does: when thou prayest enter into thy closet and shut
the door to thee: do that thou do in secret, so he that sees in secret
shall reward thee openly.

And this out of the first part of the The second part of Christ his charge.
charge, Cui, to whom.

The second is Quid, what he says: Behold thy mother, (...). This particle
Behold, is diversely taken in Scripture, sometimes as a note of admiration,
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son. Behold Isa. 7. 14. Luke 7. 37:
a woman in the city that was a sinner came to him, Sometimes as a note of
attention. Behold how good a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity.
Psalm 133. 1. Behold Psalm. 134. 1.
praise ye the Lord. Behold the bounty and justice of God. Behold I stand at
the door and Romans 11: 22*
knock. Sometimes as a note of exultation. Reu. 3. 20.
Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, which Luke 2. 10.
shall be to all people. Sometimes as a note of demonstration, Behold where
they have laid Mark 16. 6.
him. Sometimes a note of derision. Behold the man that took not God for his
strength. Sometimes as a note of compassion, moving to take pity upon the
miserable, and so it is used here, Behold thy mother; that is, comfort and
cherrish her as if she were thine own mother: or if you please take it thus:
to Behold implies two things in this text. First to see the virgins misery.
Secondly, to relieve her misery. There are some that see the miseryes of
others, as the rich glutton happily saw Lazarus his soars, or the Priest and
Leuite saw the Luke 15. 20.
wounded passenger after a regardlesse manner. There are others also that see
the necessities of others, the father saw his Luke 10. 33.
prodigal sons, and had compassion on him and ran to him* and fell on him
and kissed him. Or as the Samaritane that saw the poor traveler and had
compassion on him, and bound up his wounds, and set him upon his own beast etc.

My meaning is that they see after an operative and effectual manner the
miseryes of others, and such a beholding it is that God calls for in this
text. John could not but see the virgins sorrow, before our Savior spoke unto
him: yet says our Savior Behold thy mother: how behold her? effectually,
really, operatiuely; care for her, cherrish her, comfort her, as she were thine
own mother. The observation to be collected hence (because it generally
concernesall Gods people, and not John alone.) I will propound it generally,
viz. that is the duty of all Gods people, Observation.
not only to see but according to the means that God has given them to
succor and relieve the miseries of the afflicted. Romans 12. 13.


So says Paul, distribute and communicate to the necessity of the Saints.
Christ also charges us to make our selves friends Luke 16. 9. Reason. 1.
with unrighteous Mammon; and to give to the poor. It were easy to produce
Scripture upon Scripture for the confirmation of this truth. Suffice it to
produce a reason or two.

First, to see and succor others in affliction is a most honorable thing, it
honors God, according to that of the wise man; he that has mercy on the
poor honors God. It honors our Pro. 14. 31*
religion and profession, yea what is it that makes professors (as they call
them) and profession evil spoken of, but the dissolute and scandalous lives of
our professors, because they are gripers, grinders of the poor, extortioners,
usurers, merciles. I have heard many professors rayled upon, but few
charitable professors. It honors God then, it honors our profession to be
merciful; yea and it honors our selves also, makes us like to God himself,
according to that, Be you merciful as Luke 6. 36:
your heavenly father is merciful. It makes us the Lords Stewards, Almoners ^
and if it be an honor to be a kings Almoner, how great an honor is it to be
Almoner to the king of kings.

Secondly, to behold and succor others James, pure religion and undefiled
before God even the father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widow, and
to keep himself unspotted of the world. Their are two marks, effects,
properties of pure religion, innocence, charity, he that cannot testify the
James ^ 27.
truth of his religion by these two, whatsoever his words may be, is but a
rotten post painted, a marble tomb full of rottenness, an hypocrite, an enemy
to God. How abides the love of God in that man (says John) that sees his
brother in need 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
and shuts up his bowels of compassion against him? Pretend unmerciful misers
what they will, they are haters of God, infidels: faith without charity is but
a fiction; every school boy can tell you, fides a Fides sine charitate fictio
est
fio. When a tree is cut from the root, we wonder not though it ly year
after year and brings forth fruits, faith is as it were the root, to give to
distribute, etct. he fruits: would you know the reason why there are so many
vnbearing trees; it is Homo homini Deus, one man ought to be a God to another,
the merciful man is in some respects as a God amongst men: it was wont to be
said, that one Physician experienced in his art, is worth a thousand men: but
I may truly say, that one merciful man like Job, is worth a thousand, yea
thousand thousands such as Nabal was, Churles, Carles, covetous persons: what
loss has a common wealth when a dog dies? even as much as when a dogged
Dives dies, like to an horse or dog that perishes: but great, great is Psalm.
49. 12.
the loss of a merciful man. The merciful man dies (says the Prophet) and
no man lays it to heart, they are taken away, but none considers it. The
Prophet could not but admyre the depth of their security, that they had so
great loss and were totally insensible of it, and I pray God that I have not
just cause to take up the same co^playnt against our times; what a many of
merciful men and women have been taken away from us lately, and Sir Edward
Lewkenor, Sir Calthrop Parker, Sir Edward Bacon Mistres Luce Thorton, while
they lived patterns of mercy.
some in the prime of their youth: oppressors, extortioners, usurers are left
behind; and like the Grasshoppers of Egypt swarm amongst us. Homo homini lupus:
one man is even a Wolf to another, nay a devil to another, going about
continually seeking whom they may devour, and yet we lay it not to heart nor
consider it. Help Lord for the godly man cease, arise for the oppression of
the poor, and sorrowful sighing of the needy in these days, when indeed we may
praise the dead, and those that are unborn, because they see not the horrible
oppression under the Sun. I have read of Cannibals men-eaters, I think there
are some in our times little better, that flay off the skins; and eat the
flesh of Gods people like bread. But brethren Psalm. 14. 4:
how can we think that God will own us for his children if we have no
mercy; suppose there are children under thy roof that call thee father, thy
wife affirms them to be thine, if they be like thee, especially if they be
like thee in face and countenance, thou delightest in them the more. Mercy is
called Gods face. God be merciful unto us and bless us, and Psalm. 67 1.
show the light of his countenance and be merciful unto us, etc. Though thou
call God father every day thou rise, yet if thou be not like him in face and
countetenance, that is in mercy and compassion, God will be so far from
delighting in thee, that he will not acknowledge thee for his child. What if
every child be not like his father in face and visage? yet every child of God
is like to God in this, viz. merciful, as God their father is merciful, and
whosoever is not thus like him in mercy, God will not acknowledge for his
children at the great day of judgment; you know the words as well as my self.
Then shall the king say to those one his Math. 2542.
left hand, I was hungry you gave me no meat, I was thirsty you gave me no
drink I was naked and you clothed me not, go you cursed into everlasting fire.

But leave we the first word of the charge, Behold, to add a little also of
the next two words (for every word will afford plenty of matter) and it
follows that he should behold his mother. It would be loss of time yet again
to unfold the sense: by John's mother, Christ indeed means his own mother the
virgin Mary now at this time as Bellar. confesses, destitute Bellarm. de 7.
verb.
of all help, nay he goes further, yet (I know not how truly) having neither
Nec parents, nec vitum, nec frates, nec sorores habens.
parents, husband, brethren, sisters. But most palpable it is, that the virgin
Mary was a poor woman. Amongst others there are three things that plainly
prove it.

First, her delivery of her child in a stable: Retruditur ad iumenta in
stabulum, etc. She was thrust up into a stable amongst Justin. Mart. Luke 2.
the oxen. There says Luke she brought forth her first begotten son, and
wrapped him up in clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no
room in the Inn. Mark the words a little; first, she was not affoorded a
convenient lodging, not so much as a little corner of good room, but is thrust
into a stable. Secondly, she has not company about her as at Era ipar^n Luk
such times are usual, keepers, nurses, etc. but is compelled for want of
other help with her own hands to dress her newly Erasm. in Luke
borne infant. Thirdly, she was not provided of linen, wolle^, cradle, etc.
but wrapped up her child, perhaps in rags in stead other clothes, and laid
him in a Cratch in stead of a Cradle.

Give ear thou proud rich man whosoever thou art that ioynest house to house,
and land to land, and buildest by 2. Reason.
blood and by iniquity palaces, and piles of wonderment, like Nebuchadnezar,
Augustus, till the poor has no room to dwell in: hear this thou proud
earthworme, he that was Lord and maker of all, Jesus, despised all, would not
be borne of a rich but of a poor woman, would not be born at Jerusalem, but
at Bethelem, which Justin Martyr calls a little village, scarcely Just. Mart. in
orat. ad Ant. Imp.
mentioned in scripture, except in the Prophecy of Michah only: and there I
say was our Savior borne, yea not in a principal or chief house in the
town, but in the Eras. in Luke
stable of a common hostery.

Secondly, it appears plainly that she was poor by that gift she offered at
the time of her purification, being a pair of turtle Doves, or two young
pigeons. This Luke 2. 26. Leuit. 12. 6.
was Gods law that when the days of a woman's purifying was fulfilled for a son
or for a daughter, she should bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt
offering, and if she were poor, and not able to bring a lamb, that then she
should bring two P. ver. 8. Quoniam Euangelista Lucas mentionem agnicul. nulla^
fecit, etc. Hun. in Euan.
turtles or two young pigeons. If Marie had been able to have given a lamb, it
is not to be questioned but that she would have done it: and therefore since
the Evangelist Luke makes no mention of any lamb but of two turtles, or two
young pigeons: Iudicare promptum est (says one) we cannot but judge that she
was a poor woman and not a rich.

Thirdly, it appears that she was poor Considerandu^ quae fuerie fortuna
matris domini quam illa fuerit adeo tenuis vt necesse fuerit alicui
comendari-Musc.
because our blessed Savior upon the Cross, commits her to the care and
custody of another to provide for her. But I must not enlarge according to my
desire. The uses of this doctrine are diverse and use full.

First of all, let it be an item to us as Solomon Eccl. 11. 2 Mat. 27. 55.
Math. 8.
says, to cast our bread upon the waters, to give a portion to seven, and also
to eight: since so godly people as the mother of Christ highly beloved of God
may be in want; nay since Christ himself lived by the benevolence of others
that ministered unto him: not having of his own an house to hide his head in:
therefore as elect of God holy and beloved put on the bowels of mercy: while we
have time let us do good to all, but especially to the household of faith.

Secondly, see here as in a table drawn with most orient colors, the strange
inconstancy Marie Christ's mother was of the blood royal, naturally descended
Math. 1. 16. Luke 3. 27.
out of David's loins; Joseph also that was betrothed was right heir to the
crown, and yet see how the wheel turns (and in them as in a glass) behold
the vanity and vicissitude of all things in this world; the one being
constrained through want, was feign to labor for his living, and became a
Carpenter, viz. Joseph* The other, I mean, the virgin Marie, to live by the
alms and cost of John the Apostle. But this it was and will be ever, riches
and honors are deceiuable, they betake them to their wings like an Eagle and
are soon gone. We may fitly compare them to a Squirrell or Bird, that leapes
or flies from bough to bough, from tree to tree: so do riches and honors from
man to man. In the Revelation, the world is resembled Reu. 4. 6.
to the Sea. Before the throne was a Sea of glass, that is, the world as
brittle and frail as glass, as inconstant and turbulent Isa. 57. 20.
as the Sea, that cannot rest but casts up mire and dirt. In the twelfth of the
Revelation, the world is compared to the Moon: A woman was clothed with the
Sun, and the Moon was under her feet: by the woman clothed with the Sun
understand the Church clothed with the Sun of righteousness Jesus Christ: by
the Moon understand the world, and what more variable then the Moon, that
waxes sometimes, and waynes sometimes, and never continues at one stay? I
remember what I have read of one Eumenes Gall. Aca;
a Thracian raised up to that height by Alexander, that he was able to meet
Antigonus king of Macedonia in a pitched field, and made his party good against
him, and yet afterward he starued for want of food. Cressus was so rich that
it grew to be a Proverb, as rich as Cressus, and yet he came unto great
poverty. Zerxes renowned for his huge army, was overcome, and vanquished, and
insulted over. Baiazeth the Emperor after he had conquered in many a pitched
field, was at length taken and kept and famished in an iron Cage by Tamberlaine
the king of Parthia. But thus it was ever and will be ever, a man shall as
easily make the Sea to cease her motion, as to make the world cease from
changing and inconstancy; yet what ado for riches before we have them, what
trust and confidence in them? so we may get them, we care not how we get them;
one man is to sell, and he makes a small Ephah, a great Shecle; another is to
buy, and he cries it is naught, it is naught, that he may deceive the seller:
one has money to lend, and he takes merciless usury, devouring widows
houses: another wants money, and he rises early, goes to bed late and eats the
bread of carfulness to supply his want: one like Joseph is put in trust with
all his Master has, and he proves a Judas, a thief, and cares for nothing
except to cramme his own wallet or fill his own purse; another is to marry a
wife, and if she have but Achsah her portion, fuitfull lands, or that Peter
wanted, gold or silver, let her be what she will be, as blind as Bartimeus,
as lame as Mephibosheth, as stubborn as Vashti, as light as Oinah, it matters
not: it is a world to see how men bestir themselves, exact, law, cheat,
break, cut one another throats, ingrosse, sophisticate, grind, grate the
poor, lie, swear, forswear, steal, kill, and what not to get the world,
which done, it is a world to see also how men rely and trust in that they have:
the rich man's riches are his strong hold (says Solomon) he thinks if he be
walled about with a golden or silver wall, I mean if he have but wealth
enough, that then he is sure enough for any want or ill willers, surer then if
he were in Dover Castle, or the Tower of London: the criple lays not all his
weight so securely upon his cruches, the Arc rested not so firmly upon the
mountains of Arrarat, as these securely rest upon carnal helps that will
deceive them. But what says Paul, charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be Timotheus.
not proud, nor trust in uncertain riches. And David, Trust not in Princes nor
in any son of man, (he means that we should not trust in any worldly
helps) and yields this reason: There is no help in them; riches, friends,
etc. are but weak holds, they are but as paper Nahum. 1. 7.
walls that cannot defend us, but what says the Prophet, The Lord is good,
he is a strong hold in the day of trouble, and

Thirdly, Marie, Christ's mother, was a poor woman: so have many of the Saints
from time to time been poor; be patient therefore in thy greatest wants: the
World is as it were a natural Mother to all the ungodly, and thinks nothing
too dear for them, and but a Stepmother to the godly, that holds them as short
as she can: but what of that; since God has said it, I will not leave thee,
nor forsake thee: as true a word as it is common and well known. There must be
poor in the World: now if our God, that rules and disposes of all things,
will have me or thee to fill up that number, and to be of that rank; behold,
here we are, let the Lord do to us as seems 2. Sam. 15. 26.
good in his own eyes: not riches, but the joy of the Lord is our strength;
wherefore rejoice in the Lord, again I say rejoice. Had thou Octauians
treasure, one drop of Gods mercy is more worth then all. Had thou as many
Kingdoms as Ahashuerosh, thou could but live, and so thou may, though
thou go to thy day labor, and endurest the heat and brunt of the day for
small and slender Wages. It is but a little, even an ynch of time from our
birth to our grave: a little., even a very little, contents Nature: Natura
paucis contenta.
And therefore cast Care away; cast thy burden upon the Lord: Resolve with
Job, to trust in God, though he slay thee; learn with Paul, to be content in
all Estates: yea, let us rejoice in our tribulations; rejoice in the Lord,
again I say rejoice? so I say and cry to mine own Soul: the Lord of his rich
grace work it in us:

This of Christ's Charge. Now follows John's obedience, From that hour the
Disciple took her to his own John's obedience.
home. Christ charges, and John obeyes, yea in a matter of charge and trouble:
he bequeathes him a legacy* but it was such an one as a worldly wise man would
have utterly refused, a legacy of charge and trouble. There is not a man says
Beza, Non recusant homines haereditates, aut legata adire lucrosa, etc. Beza
Hom. pass. 29.
that will refuse legacyes of gain, both their hands are open to receive such,
like the barren woman they cry give, give, and cannot be satisfied: but
bequeath them a gift of charge, the guardianship of a child, the custody of
father and mother, brother, etc. request them to perform any office of
friendship else (if they may not at the least save themselves harmles) they
have no disposition at all to business of that nature. It was a true saying of a
R. A.
new writer, there is a great deal of passive but there is but a little active
charity among us. Alas, alas, there are few such as John was, that will obey
when God commands, especially to their own loss: there is a great deal of
preaching, a great deal of hearing, a great deal of professing, and God grant
that his ministers may double their diligence in preaching; God grant the
hearers may be more swift to hear, and all that profess Christ may be more
resolute in profession of his name: I entend not my speech against man truly
religious, but against hypocritical white skinned professors, that make a show
of godliness and deny the power of it. In the name of God profess, but
divorce not between profession and practice; profession is good, but one dram
of obedience is worth an whole tallent of prating knowledge: I speak no more
against profession then Christ did against Tything Mint and Annis and Rue, etc.
But yet I cannot but from my soul lament the nullity and nothingnesse of
obedience. Most of some men's religion is merely verbal, we draw near to God
with our lips, and honor him with our tongues, and yet it is too shameful to
name the things that are done in secret. Some (I fear me) even of our greatest
professors, as great oppressors, as biting usurers, as extreme Landlords, as
unconscionable tithers, as they that are most. Some as bitter raylers as
Rabshekah, as sacrilegious as Achan, as cruel as Caius, as dogged as Nabal, as
unmerciful as Jews, as flintie hearted as Turks, as lying for gain as
Ananias and Saphira, as mocking as Michol; some (I fear me) even amongst our
Professors. Me thinks I may fitly compare Erasm. col.
diverse Professors to the Coriander, that has a naughty Root, a stinking
Leaf, a naughty Blade, and yet a sweet Seed: so Pliny.
our glozing Hypocrites, their hearts are naught, full of all unrighteousness,
wickedness, covetousness; their eyes naught, full of Adultery; their hands
naught, full of Bribes and Blood; all naught, except their words, and they are
as sweet as honey: Mel in ore, verba lactis, fell in cord fraus in factis. But
what says our Savior, My John. 6.
sheep hear my voice and follow me: And James tells us, That we deceive our
selves if we James. 1. 22.
be not doers as well as hearers of Gods word. Let such as give Gods Ministers
the hearing, consider this, that come to Church as others do, and lift up
their Eyes and Hands, and say Amen to every petition, and as soon as they are
out of the Church run headlong in the high way to hell, or if they obey in
some matters, as the external observation of the Sabbath, prayer in their
familyes, etc. there is all. Call upon them to give alms, to forgive their
enemies, to make restistution of wrong gotten goods, and then mors in olla,
mors in olla, then they pleaded as Naaman the Assirian herein, the Lord be
merciful unto me. But brethren, even all you that hear me this day, I
beseech you all to behold and consider the example of the Apostle John that
when the Lord commands, consults not with flesh and blood, whether it would
stand with his ease or commodity, but as soon as ever he was commanded
obeyes: I could wish that I knew many like him. This somewhat more generally. I
must not leave the words thus.

From that hour he took her, etc. The words in the Original are, (...), etc.
Abs illa hora, that is, from the time that Christ spoke to him, to the time of
the virgins Mary's death he took her to his own home. Time has exceedingly
prevented me already: and I must perforce without any further descant, fall
abruptly upon these three conclusions. viz.

First, John's present obedience. Secondly, John's cheerful obedience. Thirdly,
John's constant obedience.
First, when Christ commanded, he obeyed John's present obedience.
presently, he delayed not the time, no not an hour. In the 8. of Matthew 13.
Christ says to the believing Centurion. Go thy way, be it to thee according
to thy faith. And then it follows: His servant was healed the same hour: that
is, instantly and presently. So here from that hour, that is, even instantly
he took her to his own home. True obedience is like to gunpowder or tinder,
or touchwood that kindles quickly. When Christ called Andrew and Peter, saying,
follow me: the story says, They left their nets Math. 4.
presently and followed him. When Jesus said, Zacheus come down at once: it is
added in Luke 19.
the Text, He came down hastily and received him joyfully. When God commanded
Abraham to sacrifice his son, he did not only Genesis 22.
do it, but he rose up early to do it. When Christ arose from the dead, he
arose not on the second, or third, but upon the Luke 24.
first day of the week, he arose not about noone, or toward night, but early
in the morning. He that seek me early says God, shall find me. Paul calls
upon us for early and present repentance. Behold, says 2. Cor. 6. 2.
he, now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation. Now is the time
that we are sure of, and we are sure of no time but this now, we cannot recall
the time past, we know not whether ever we shall enjoy that is to come, we
are sure of no time but this nunc, even this moment: watch and pray therefore
you know not the hour, we know not whether we shall live to the end of another
hour, or quarter of an hour; and therefore let us (as we say of soldiers)
be at an hours warning, yea at a minutes warning. I shake and shiuer to think
of the vain confidence of carnal men that defer all obedience and
repentance till they come to their death beds, and when their souls lie at the
gate of their bodies ready to go out; when the breath sits upon the tip of
their tongues ready to fly away, then will they lump with God for all. The
devil may most aptly be compared to an usurer; the deferring sinner to an
incestuous dingthrift. Dingthrifts when they have morgaged house and land to
the Usurer, plead commonly for longer respite, for a quarter or half year, or
a years day. Usurers give them golden language till they have broken day, and
then they seize upon all with extremest tyranny. Thus it fares in matters of
repentance; drunkards would feign have a little respite to follow their
drunkenness, adulterers, would run to the harlots house a little longer:
will it not be time enough if they repent hereafter? Yes says Satan, twenty,
forty years hence: enough when thou hear the bell tole for thee: in the
mean time, God tops them off suddenly like an ear of corn, or takes away
their senses, or hardens their hearts that they cannot repent. What follows?
the breath is no sooner out of their bodies, but the devil seizes upon their
souls, which he straight ways plungeth into so horrid torrid torment, that
were I able to express it to the life would make the heavens melt, and the
earth shrink to hear it. In the fear of God, while we have time, even
instantly enter we upon a good course.

2. Observe John's cheerful obedience, John's cheerful obedience
he does nothing after a repining manner questioning and reasoning as a worldly
man would have done. What? are their no more Disciples but my self? Are not
many of her kindred present? Am I nearer to her then they? He reasons not
thus, but as one rejoicing that his Master would command him any thing, even
presently he takes her to his custody and keeping.

It is not enough to do that that God requires of us, but we must do it with
alacrity and cheerfulness. The Lord loves a cheercfull giver. Exodus 15. When
2. Cor. 9. 7.
Moses was to take thc peoples benevolence toward the building of the
tabernacle, God commanded him to take the gifts of none but such as gave
freely. It is a true Axiom that God looks rather to the affection of the
Agent then to the Act it self: the widows Mite was accepted (though not for
the quantity of her gift) yet for her good affection: Thy will be done in earth
as it is in heaven, is one petition in the Lords prayer: Fiat voluntas tua, Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Quid hoc says Augustine? Aug. de
temp.
What means this petition? Vt quomodo tibi seruiunt Angeli in Coelo, etc. This
is the meaning, says he, that as the Angels serve God in heaven, so we
desire ability and strength to serve God on earth: yea but how do the Angels in
heaven serve God? The reverend Babbington tells us, they obey Bab. on the Lords
prayer.
God, Lubentissime, citissime, fidelissime, etc. Willingly, chearefully,
speedily, faithfully, etc. they fly when God commands. I cannot deny it, but
that we perform some actions in themselves commendable: we give alms, pay
tithes and tenths, but what says God? My son give me thine heart: all is
done in vain, if God have not the heart as well as the hand.

3. Observe John's constant obedience, he John's constant obedience.
took her not to his care for a time, but was careful and tender over her so
long as she lived From the hour, etc. Some write that she lived with John
eleven years after Christ his death. Others that she lived Nicephorus
with John 23. years: others that she lived with John full 24. years. When
the holy Ghost ouershadowed her (they say) she Epiphanius.
was 14. years old. Betwixt the time of Christ his birth and death was 33.
years; after Christ's death she lived 24. years, and if this be true, the
virgin was about 72 years old when she dyed. The popish Legend (if there be
any heed to be given to that heap of lies) says, she lived with John the
space of twelve years; but what need I trouble you or my self in the
rehearsal of sundry opinions; so long as she lived, so long the Apostle took
care of her? were it 11. 12. 23, or 24. years. Learn we by his example not to
be weary of well doing: Paul says, that they shall inherit Romans 2. 7.
eternal life that continue in welldoing. Woe to that man that lays his hand
to the plow, and looks back says the Spirit: it is a notable commendations
of Ruth, that she showed more good at the Ruth. 3.
last then at the first. A great commendations of the Church of Thyatira, that
her Reu. 3.
works were more at the last then at the first. I pray God that I were able to
give the same testimony of all in our times, but I cannot; for of some I scarce
think, but I Dan 2. 23.
think of the Image that* Nebuchadnezar dreamed of: The head was fine gold,
his breast and arms silver, his belly and thighs brass, his legs iron, his
feet partly iron, partly clay, still worse and worse; and so is it with many
in our times to whom we may apply that saying of the Apostle; Evil men and
deceivers wax worse and worse: at the first profession of religion they were
exceeding forward for the advancing of Gods worship, ready to distribute, etc.
But now are as cold as frost or Ice in winter; like the Sun in Joshua his
time, they stand still; nay it may be like the Sun in Ezekiah his time, go
backward, turn mocke-Gods, opposers of the Gospel, and what not. I have read
of Silkewormes, that after they have done their master service in making silk
for garments, some of them turn to mothes, and fret garments: even so is it
with many in our times, that at the first profession of godliness, do God
some service, by countenancing and encouraging such as are good; but afterward
turns to be very fretting moathes, as cruel and deadliest enemies as God has
in his Church. But brethren, beloved in the Lord, remember Lots wife that was
turned into a pillar of Salt for looking back. Oh it is a fearful thing when
we are come out of the Sodom of our sins, to look back again toward
Sodom: Paul calls the Galathathians fools, because they began in the spirit
and ended in the flesh. Be thou faithful to the death, says God, and I will
make thee heir of eternal life. In a word, let us all take heed that there be
in none of us, an evil and unfaithful heart to depart away from the living
God: for it were far better never to have known 2. Pet. 2. 21.
the way of righteousness, then after we have known, to turn away from the
holy commandment given unto us.

Pardon now my boldness, I will speak but this once; there is one point more
out of the last words of the verse to be handled: for want of time I will but
point to it. It follows in the Text that John took her to (...), his own.
The point flows Observation. John 2^.
so naturally, that I may deliver it without further discoursing upon the
words: and it is this, that the Apostle John had goods and riches of his own,
able to live of himself, and to be helpful to others: Peter had a vocation
and followed it: probably the rest of the Apostles had as well as he, only
want of time suffers me not to prove it now.

Bellarmine that Bell de 7. verb
John was one of those that said, Behold we have forsaken all and followed
thee, what shall we have therefore? and shall urge us further, that that they
forsook was house, Math. 19. 27.
brethren, sisters, father, mother, wife, children, lands. Yea and shall urge
that place, Matthew 4. 21. How Jesus saw James and John his brother mending
their nets, and that at Christ's command immediately they left their nets and
followed him.

To this I answer, that though it be but after a sort; they left not all
simply and wholely, take all who would, but they left all as one says,
Quatenus illo impedimento esse possent, etc. So far forth as they might
hinder them in preaching the Gospel and not otherwise, they did not so leave
all, but they could at their pleasure make the best advantage of that was
theirs: in one place we read that Peter had an house, and that Christ
repaired to it. In a second we read that Matthew after his calling from the
Math. 8. 14.
receipt of Custom, made Christ a great Feast at his own house. Here we see
in this Text that John had if not an house Math. 9.
yet substance of his own. He took her to (...) to his own.

And this Doctrine like a two edged sword wounds on the right and left hand;
and contrary to Christ his practice, and the practice of his Apostles, that
never led so John 12. 6.
base and sordid life as they pretend, but had that which was needful and gave
alms: and while they lived gave many precepts persuading rather to give to
others then to be chargeable; yea not only to give but to frequent in this
duty, read at your leisure these Scriptures, Luke 11. 11. 41. Romans 12. 13. 2:
Cor. 9. 6. Gal. 2. 10.

Secondly, this doctrine that John took Marie to his own, makes against
Anabaptisticall community, which Anabaptists and Familists seem to prove out
of that place where it is said, that all that did believe were in one place,
and had all things common, they sold all their possessions Acts. 2. 44.
and goods they had. And this they run upon that they did not only sell, but
sold all, (...), moveable and not moveable, possessions, goods: they made a
through sale of all.

My answer in a word is: first, no man was compelled to sell, so Peter said to
Ananias, Acts. 5. 4.
was it not thine own while it remained? As if he had said, who compelled thee
to sell?

Secondly, It is not said they sold all, but only that they had all things
common; Aret. in Act. Apost.
Non est expressum quod omnia vendiderint; sed quod omnia habuerint communia.

Thirdly, of that that was sold, they suffered not every man to be his own
caruer, Quae venditasunt prudenter diuidunt.
but they distributed according to every man's necessity, to some more, to some
less,

Fourthly, If all things be common, why says God, Thou shall not steal? Why
1. Cot. 6:
says Paul, That thieves shall not inherit Gods kingdom? How can there be
theft if thou take away propriety of goods?

Fifthly, If all things be common, then Frustra passim praecepta, etc. Aretius.
are all those precepts in vain that call upon us for bounty and alms, why
did not God call rather for community then liberality?

Sixthly, Why writes Paul for his cloak, and parchments, if they were another
as well as his?

Lastly, a world of other inconveniences will follow if we deny propriety of
goods, it will follow that Naboth was too scrupulous in the matter of his
vineyard, that the eight commandmant might well be razed out from the rest of
the commandments; nay if this gap be opened, would their not quickly follow a
fearful confusion of all things? And yet mistake me not, for though I defend
propriety of goods, yet I defend no other propriety of goods, then may stand
with the communion of Saints. Zacheus his goods were his own, so were Jobs,
yet they imparted to the necessityes of others: it was a Nabalish speech, shall
I take my bread and give it unto strangers: though thy goods be thine, yet they
are not so thine, but that the poor have a letter of Attorney from God, to have
to their use as well as thy self. The conclusion for want of time shall be
only this; be merciful as your heavenly father is merciful.

FINIS.

