To the Right Worshipful and godly Lady, the Lady LEVVKENOR of Denham, Grace
and Peace.
ELect Lady, it was the saying of David, The righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. and of Solomon, That the memorial of
the just shall be blessed, Prou. 10. 7. These two Scriptures have much
encouraged me, to pen and print this Sermon following; and your entire love
to your loving husband departed, has emboldened me (with hope of acceptance)
to present it to your Ladie-ship, as a picture at all times to put you in mind
of his godly life and conversation, that in these perilous and lukewarm times,
when zeal grows cold, and few or none labor to draw on others, and
encourage others to run the ways of Gods commandments, when you shall at
any time behold this picture, you may be provoked and stirred up (as you have
begun well) so to persevere and proceed on, and grow more and more in grace.
The eternal God of heaven comfort you, even as he has afflicted you, and that
God crown both you and yours with his best blessings. So prays still,

Your Ladyships in all duty bounden B. C.
Canham, October. 24. 1618.
And to the Right Worshipful and religious Gentleman, Sir ROBERT LEVVKENOR, of
Acris in Kent, to Mistress GOVRNY of great Ellingham, to Mistress STEWARD, and
Mistress CATLIN of Denham, Grace and Peace.
RIght Worshipful, after I had preached this Sermon, I conferred with some of
my brethren about the publishing of it, and some advised me to print it, others
to conceal it for two causes: First, because the world is full of books:
Secondly, because it would make me liable to many censures and imputations.

For the first, I answer, that the world is full of books, but that it is too
full of godly books, I could never hear it proved. Secondly, I know that I
shall bewray mine own weakness exceedingly, and expose my self to many hard
censures, by publishing this Pamphlet; and yet for all that, I choose rather to
be hated, to make my self a byword, and a reproach, then to neglect any
course that may turn to the good, though but of one soul; yea, and if it
should turn to the good of none, yet shall I sing but to the same tune that
others of Gods servants have done before me: I have labored in vain, and
spent my strength to no purpose, Isa. 49. 4.

Whatsoever I have done, I have made bold also to present it to your Worships,
as a testimony of my thankefulnes unto you all, and a means to revive and
continue, (as much as in me lies) the deserved memory of your godly brother,
whom from my soul I loved in his life, and from my soul desire to honor in
his death. If this poor mite may be accepted of you, and profitable to Gods
Church, I have my desire: which that it may be, I have prayed: and so prays
still,

A poor, but a zealous welwiller to your whole stock and family, BEZAL.
CARTER.

PSALM. 2. 10. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings: be learned, O ye Judges of
the earth.
THis Psalm was penned by David: witness, Act. 4. 25. Which by the mouth of thy
servant David have said, Why did the Gentiles rage, etc. The principal matter
contained in it, is Christ and his Kingdom, as you may perceive if you read,
Act. 4. 25. and Act. 13. 33. and Hebr. 1. 5. for here David, as in many other
things, is a type of Christ: and though all this Psalm may be applied to
David, and his kingdom; yet notwithstanding it may be applied also to Christ,
and his Kingdom: and the spirit of God would teach us, that as David reigned
and ruled in Zion, and subdued his enemies, even so should Jesus Christ reign,
and bear rule in his Church, even in despite of the Churches enemies. And
whosoever reads the whole Psalm must needs see,

First, what opposition was made against the Kingdom of Christ.

Secondly, the sequel and consequent upon the opposition made.

Their opposition was universal, Kings and Commons; Princes, Peers, and
People; Jews and Gentiles. The Kings and Princes raged, the Jews, the
heathens, and all people murmured, and all to no purpose: for he that sat in
heaven laughed at them, and by their rebellion they exposed themselves to
exceeding peril and danger. For first, in opposing Christ, they opposed God
the Father also, that gave this authority unto his Son, and made him the ruler
and governor of his people; I (says God) have placed my King upon Zion mine
holy mountain, etc. I will declare the decree, etc. He that dwells in heaven
shall laugh them to scorn, etc. Secondly, their danger is further amplified in
regard of God the Son, that is also every way furnished with sufficiency of
power, both for the defense of his Church, and the final overthrow and
confusion of his enemies; and is therefore compared to some mighty giant, with
a mace or iron scepter in his hand; and Kings, and Princes, and all nations are
resembled unto potters pots: and it should be no more with Christ to
overthrow and crush them in pieces, then it would have been for Goliath with
his massy spear, whose shaft was like a weauers beam, to have broken an
earthen vessel in pieces. But of these things I have spoken before; now mark
and observe how one thing depends upon another. Kings and Princes make
opposition against Christ and his Kingdom; God the Father he sits in heaven
and laughes at them, and vexes them with grievous judgments; God the Son, he
stands like a mighty giant, with a mace of iron in his hand, ready to strike
and quash them in pieces: and then it follows, Be wise now therefore, O ye
Kings: be learned, O ye Judges, etc.

Now for the words themselves, note in them these two things.

First, a double exhortation: 1. To wisdom: 2. To learning.

Secondly, the circumstances expressed: Division.
1. Of the time, and that is presently, now. 2. Of the persons: 1. Kings: 2.
Judges: Be wise now therefore, etc.

For our better proceeding, it would be enquired, what he means, by wisdom,
and learning. And, Be wise.


By wisdom, he means not here a carnal or worldly wisdom, such an one as
James speaks of, and calls it earthly, sensual, and deuillish, chap. 3. 15.
when men are wise to take vengeance upon their enemies, to hoard up wealth, to
manage their affairs to their best profit: for this wisdom is not wanting
amongst the men of the world, that are wise enough to discern the face of the
sky, and the signs of the times, Matthew. 16. 2. and wise enough to make a
small Ephah, and a great Shekle, and a false balance, Amos, 8. 5. and
generally the men of the world are wise in their generation, Luke 16. 8. But
the spirit of God in this place speaks of a spiritual and heavenly wisdom: of
which David speaks, Psalm. 119. 8. The wisdom of the prudent, is to
understand the way of the Lord: but the foolishness of the fool is deceit:
and this wisdom, was that which Solomon prayed for, and did obtain of God,
1. King. 3. 9. This is that which James calls the wisdom from above, Iam.
3. 7. This is that which Paul speaks of, when men are wise to salvation, 2.
Tim. 3. 15. In a word, let that notable place, Deuteronomy. 4. 5. suffice for the
defining of true wisdom: Behold, says Moses, I have taught you statutes, and
judgments, as the Lord has commanded me: keep therefore, and do them: for
this is your wisdom and understanding. So as he that knows his duty to God,
and does it, he is a wise man.

For the more familiar handling of this Doctrine, and the further confirmation
of it, consider we by way of resemblance, who is a wise man, and what wisdom
is.

Two things here are which makes men to be accounted wise: 1. Sight. 2.
Foresight.

First sight, when men are able to judge of things.

Secondly, foresight, when men are wise to foresee dangers, as also to provide
for time to come.

First, he is accounted wise, that is skillful to discern of things that
differ one from another; and when he has the proffer both of good and mix
wares, is skillful enough to preserve himself from cousenage.

Secondly, we count him wise, that is wise to prevent dangers: The wise man
has eyes in his head, but the fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2. 4.
Solomon resembles fools to blind men, or men that walk in the dark, that
foresee no perils: and compares wise men to those which walk at high-noone
and foresee every inconvenience; a prudent man sees the plague and hides
himself, but fools go on, and are punished. Pro. 22. 3.

Thirdly, he is also accounted wise, that is wise to provide and lay up for
future time; and thus the unjust Steward is commended, because he provided
against the time that his master should discharge him of his office: for so the
text says, that the Lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done
wisely, Luke 16. 8.

The assumption to be gathered from all that has been said is only this,

regenerate men are wise,and all unregenerate men no better then fools. First,
regenerate men are only wise to judge, and choose the better part with Mary,
Luke 10. 42.

Secondly, they only foresee the plague, and avoid it; Pro. 27. 12.

Thirdly, they only lay up treasures for time to come even in heaven, Matthew.
6. 20. and therefore they only are wise.

As for the unregenerate. First, they want judgment. Whereto may we better
resemble them, then to little children, that are more desirous of toies and
trifles, of apples and babies, then of lands and inheritances. To whom may we
liken them better then to profane Esau, that esteemed more of a portion of
meat, then of his birthright, Heb. 12. 16. Would we not brand him for an idiot,
which would choose brass rather then gold, flint stones before precious
stones, chafe before corn? and yet thousands there are in the world, yea and
counted wise men, that are more foolish, and prefer riches, pleasures, fair
houses, convenient dwellings, before Gods word, heaven, God himself.

Secondly, how careless are they to prevent dangers. Happily there is many a
Shemei wise enough to meet David in time for his own sauegard, 1. Sam. 19. 19.
many an unjust Steward wise enough to prevent beggary, Luke, 16. many a Pilate
wise enough to keep in Cesars favor, Ioh. 19. 13. many like those of Tyrus and
Sidon, wise enough to make peace with those which are too strong for them, Act.
12. 20. and generally men are quick-witted to keep fire from their houses, the
theife from their gold, to avoid infectious places, stinking prisons, poisons,
etc. and yet in the mean time run on in their sins without all dread of
danger, fear of judgments, of Gods wrath, of hell it self: and such as these
may be accounted wise, cautelous, circumspect, etc. but alas, it is but poor
wisdom for a man to be afraid of the frying pan, and not of the fire; for a
man to fear sickness, want, etc. and not to be afraid of hell it self.

Thirdly, how negligent are they to provide for future time, all their whole
care being only for things present, present pleasures, delights, etc.
altogether neglecting that immortal, undefiled inheritance, reserved for them
in heaven. Infinite is their greediness after gold and silver, their thirst
more then a dropsie-mans after drink: all their joy is to slap in the filthy
puddles, and to rake in the stinking dunghills of this world to increase their
substance: and yet so far from laying up treasures in heaven, that if a man
should but speak to them of an heavenly conversation, and of laying up in
store a good foundation for time to come, 1. Tim. 16. 19. it would be as
welcome as smoke to the eyes, or rain in harvest. Pro. 26. 1. O brethren, who
are fools if these be wise? would we not count him for a senseless person,
that would spend much time in trimming his garments, and suffer his body (which
is far better then raiment) to perish thorough famine and hunger? but far
more senseless are those men which pamper the body (which is but as it were a
cloth or a garment to the soul) and suffer their dearest darlings, their
souls which are far better then their bodies, nay far more worth the^ a
world, nay then a 1000. worlds to perish eternally. Understand ye unwise
amongst the Psalm 64 8.
people, and ye fools when will you be wise?

Paul did for the Colossians, that God would fill us with the knowledge of his
will, Col. 1. 17. Let it stir us up to call for wisdom, and to cry for
understanding, Pro. 1. Let it provoke us to labor after heavenly wisdom: for
if thou want this, though thou were able to discourse of the Pleyades, and
Orion, Job. 38. 39. of the Sun, and Moon, and stars; though thou were
able, with king Solomon, to discourse of trees and plants, even from the Cedar
in Libanon, to the hyssope that springs out of the wall; though thou were able
to discourse of beasts, and souls, and creeping things, and fishes, 1. King.
4. 33. though thou were as learned as Moses, Act. 7. 22. as politic in
state-affaires as Achitophel, 2. Sam. 16. 23. yet if thou be not wise to
salvation, thou art but a Naball, a stark fool in Gods esteem: according as
it is written, The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, 1. Cor. 3.
9.

viz.) That those which can multiply proiects, go beyond others in buying and
bargaining, or can disappoint the practices of their enemies, that such men are
wise men: and as for those that the Spirit calls and styles by the name of
wise, such as watch at the gates of wisdom, Prou. 8. 33. and call and cry for
wisdom and understanding, Prou. 1. such are generally condemned of folly;
insomuch that the world wonders at them, and wink with their eye, as Solomon
says, Prou. 6. 13. and lade them with taunts and scoffs, as the silliest
people under heaven. And that which I have delivered, does notably confute this
vain opinion: for whomsoever they account wise, and the most wise, God
accounts fools, and the most fools. And hence it is, that Solomon does so
be-foole the unregenerate man: Fools despise knowledge, Prou. 1. 7. You
fools, how long will you love foolishness? v. 22. Ease slays the fool, v.
32. I saw amongst the fools a man destitute of understanding, Prou. 7. 7.
Forsake your ways, O ye foolish, Prou. 9. 6. And so the rich man in the
Gospel, as wise as he was, is styled by the name of a fool, Luke 12. 20.
Contrariwise, who^soeuer they account fools, them does the Lord account for
wise: He that keeps Gods commandments is wise, Deuteronomy. 4. 5. They which fear
God, and depart from evil, are wise: the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, Psalm. 111. 16. Job. 28.
28. Yea, says God, who so seems wise in this world, let him be a fool that
he may be wise, 1. Cor. 1. 20. And therefore though men abound with carnal
policy, though their heads be as full of subtle fetches as this Church is
full of air, yet God accounts them stark fools, I was about to say, wise
fools: witness that of Paul, He catches the wise in their own craftiness,
and he knows that the thoughts of the wise are vain, 1. Cor. 3. 20.

The second thing that Kings and Judges are called upon for, is learning; Be
learned Learned.
O ye Judges, etc. Some translate it, be you instructed, others be you
chastised, others be you warned, some others be you reformed: for mine own
part, I entend to follow our judicious translators that have turned it thus:
Be learned, O ye Judges, etc. and indeed learning implies all these, both
instruction, and reformation; both knowledge and practice.

Moses was said to be learned, Act. 7. 22. and, Neh. 8. 13. the Elders of
Israel are said to have been instructed, or to have learned Gods law.

reformation and practice: Learn of me (says Christ,) and what should they
learn of him, but meekness and humility? I am meek and lowly, Matthew. 11.
29. and, Ephesians. 4. 7. Walk not henceforth as other Gentiles have done, in
vanity of their minds, having their cogitations darkened: but you have not so
learned Christ: and, Isa. 1. 16. Wash you, make you clean, and cease to do
evil, learn to do well, etc. So as here I have occasion to exhort to a
twofold duty. First, to labor after knowledge. Secondly, to practice according
to knowledge.

Dorcas is called a disciple: and, Ioh. 13. 38. Joseph of Arimathea is called a
disciple: Ananias is termed a disciple, Ioh. 19. 10. All the Christians in
Antiochia are termed disciples, Act. 11. 26. and wherefore, I pray you, are
they so styled? but to intimate unto us their desire to learn in Christ's
school: for these two, to be a scholar in Christ's school, and a disciple
are both one: and this I dare say with a grave Divine, that he which is no H.
page 83.
disciple, is no Christian; and would to God there were more disciples amongst
us. How justly may the Lord complain of us, as he did of the Jewish nation; The
ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters cribbe, but Israel has not
known me, Isa. 1. 3. The Storke of the air knows his appointed time, and the
turtle, and crane, and swallow, observe the time of their coming, but my
people knows not the judgment of the Lord, Ier. 8. 7. Infinite is our
blindness and blockishnesse in matters of God, and which is most lamentable of
all, there are few disciples amongst us; yea may not wisdom cry out in our
streets, O you fools, how long will you love foolishness, and hate knowledge?
Pro. 1. 20. And if this seem too general, consider we what reasons may move
us, to call and cry for knowledge and understanding.

And amongst many, I will content my self with these two.

This people do err in their hearts, because they have not known my ways,
Psalm. 95. 10. yea, and sometimes all manner of sin is styled by the name of
ignorance, because that the ignorant man runs into all sin: (...), etc. the
High Priest once a year offered a sacrifice for himself, (...), for himself,
and for the ignorances of the people, Heb. 9. 7. the Apostle calls all their
sins by the name of ignorance: for that ignorance is as it were the root, and
spawne, and mother of all sin, and vshers in a world of sin; Spiritual
pride, Romans 10. 3. Idolatry, Gal. 4. 8. blasphemy, oppression, 1. Tim. 1. 13.
and indeed what not? for whither runs he that is blind? so as here is one
reason to stir us up to learn and to be good disciples in Christ's
school-house, since ignorance is the prime cause of all ungodliness.



temporary judgments, as banishment; Because they have no knowledge, therefore
they are gone into captivity, Isa. 5. 13. Yea, ignorance causes God to
destroy the most famous and renowned places of the world. Let Jerusalem
witness for me; The defenced City (says God) shall be desolate, and left
like a wilderness: and mark the reason, for it is a people of no
understanding: therefore he that made them shall have no compassion of them,
Isa. 27. 10. 11. and, Hos. 4. 6. Because thou have refused knowledge, I will
refuse thee: and because thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will also
forget thy children. And again in the same chapter; The Lord has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, etc.

As many as sin without the Law, shall perish without the Law, Romans 2. 12.
He which knows not his masters will and does it not shall be beaten, Luke 12.
47. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. The Son of man shall come in slaming fire, rendering
vengeance to those which know him not. And if our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them which are lost, whose eyes the devil has blinded that the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ should not shine unto them. 2. Cor. 4. 4.

fulfilled with knowledge, Col. 3. 16. and the word must dwell plentiously in
us, and we must search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5. 39. here then are our Romanists
confuted, that have painted over the face of ignorance, and style her the
mother of devotion: and under this pretense have (as one says) set lock and
key upon the Scriptures, forbidding the common people the searching of the
Scriptures: abusing that divine precept of our blessed Savior, cast not holy
things to dogs, Matthew. 7. 6. as if all Gods people were dogs and swine: but
what says Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27. I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle
be read to all the brethren the Saints. And again, Romans 1. 3. the Apostle
writes his Epistle generally to all the Saints at Rome. And wherefore then do
the Papists bar the people from the use of Paul's Epistles which the Apostle
would have common; and not from the use of Paul's Epistles alone, but from the
whole use of Scripture?

learned in his word, this reprooues the blockish ignorance in these times: for
now are the days come that we may cry out with David, there is none that
understands, Psalm. 14. 1. We live under a glorious sunshine, but this is
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more
then light, Ioh. 3. 19. God has been maruailously rich in mercy, in
vouchsafing unto us means of knowledge. The messengers of God cry unto us,
saying, this is the way, walk in it, Isa. 30. 21. the golden bells of Aaron
rings in every place; and indeed we want neither books, for God has written
unto us the great things of his law, Ose. 8. nor tutors, to open unto us Gods
counsel, Act. 20. 20. nor nothing sit for Christ's scholars to increase our
knowledge; and yet notwithstanding our tutering, teaching, preaching, planting,
sowing, watering, yet how many are there that know not wherefore they were
sent into the world. Question a drunkard about wine and strong drink, a
covetous man about building and pulling down, of digging, ditching, plowing,
sowing, and therein you shall find them very sensible and intelligible, quick
either to conceive or discourse; but talk to them concerning those admirable
mysteries of our redemption, justification, etc. and they understand no more
then if a man should read them a piece of Aristotle, or Plato, or any other
author in a strange tongue. O that such treuants as these would think upon
that saying, Ioh. 14. 22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had had no
sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin.

learned in Gods laws, hence it follows further that we must not content our
selves with a little measure and modicum of knowledge, but we must strive to
be learned; that is, to be full of knowledge. For he is not a learned man that
knows two or three grammar rules, but he that is skild in the tongues, in the
arts, and sciences: so he is not a learned Christian, that understands two or
three easy principles; but he that has the spirit of wisdom, and
revelation, through the knowledge of Christ, that have their understanding
lightened, and know what is the hope of their calling, Ephesians. 1. 17. Well then,
since the Spirit calls upon us to be learned, therefore say I, that as good
students are insatiably thirsty after learning, like Aristotle that was (...),
indeffatigable in pains, and unweariable in his labors for the increase of
his knowledge: such also is the eager affection of all such as are Christ's
Disciples, and right learned indeed, that their thirst after knowledge cannot
be quenched.



and but 5. to another, yet would there not be a dunce in a country, if men
would but observe these rules following.

First, to pray for knowledge; If any 1 Prayer.
man want wisdom, let him ask it of God, Iam. 1. 5. The way to have the eyes
of our understanding opened, is to pray to God with blind Bartimeus, O son
of David, have mercy on us, Lord, that we may receive our sight, Mat. 10. 51.
Luther, that was so mighty in the Scriptures, was wont to protest that he had
more revealed to him by prayer, then by study and reading. But though this be a
notable means of illumination, yet at this time I intend to follow the phrase
of my text. And this is all I say, that if a student will be a good proficient
indeed; First, he must plie his private study: Secondly, he must frequent
learned exercises: Thirdly, he must be much in conference: Fourthly, he must be
much in contemplation.

First, he must study hard: Learning 2 Reading.
is not gotten without study. Socrates would read and meditate 20. hours
together, and Cato got not his learning with being idle, Heluo erat librorum,
libros legebat nec eorum lectione satiari potuit. Whosoever will be a good
proficient in Christ's school, must take the Apostles advice to search the
Scripturs, yea and spend time in reading of godly books: but I name the
Scriptures especially, because all the rest of the sheafes must do reverence
to this sheafe: Let not the word of this law depart from thee, says God, Ios.
1. 8. And what says he to the King, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. He shall read the words of
this Law all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God, and to keep the words of this Law, etc. And here, brethren, is the reason
why there are so many unlearned ones amongst us, even because the Lord has
written unto us the great things of his Law, and we do not regard them, Hos.
8. 13. here is the reason, because we are like to many idle scholars that have
their studies full of good books, which lie moulding upon their shelues, and
are covered over with dust, whilst they lavish away their time at chesse, or
tables, or worse recreations, and no marvel then if they increase not in
knowledge and learning: and thus it is with many in the school of Christ; come
into their houses, and you shall see their shelues adorned with good books,
the bible and other godly treatises; but alas they hunt after riches, and
friends, etc. and are such strangers to Gods word, that they read not a chapter
in a whole month together, and no marvel then if they be unlearned.

Secondly, to increase knowledge, 3 Hearing.
we must frequent the assemblies of the Saints. The house of God is the Lords
schoolehouse, the ministers of the word are the Lords teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. 1.
Tim. 2. 7. The preaching of the word may be compared to the reading of a
Lecture: and how I pray you can a man hope to gain learning, that hates his
tutor, shames all godly exercises, and will not once set his foot within the
school doors. O that I had not just cause to cry out with the Prophet, Oh
earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Ier. 22. 19. when men would
not hear, he calls upon the dead earth to hearken. And since the times are
now come upon us, that wisdom cries in the high places, and is despised
amongst us, Prou. 1. 21. since God has raised up so many faithful teachers
and tutors almost to every school a teacher; since we have Lecture upon
Lecture, Sermon upon Sermon, and so few resort to the school-house; since the
word is accounted the very burden of the Lord, Hear, O heavens, and I will
speak, and let the earth hear the words of my mouth, Deuteronomy. 32. 1. O heavens,
bear ye witness of the horrible unthankfulness of this people, and let the
dead earth testify of their contempt of Gods word, or if there be any that
have ears to hear, let them hear, Reu. 3. 22. If there be any that desire to
come out of their blindness and ignorance, let them thirst after the word, as
the dry ground after the sweet dewes and showers of rain: let them desire the
sincere milk of the word, 1. Pet. 2. 2. and hearken to the voice of Christ
speaking to us by his Ministers, 2. Cor. 5. 28. To speak plainly, let them
resort diligently to the school-house, and so shall they be enlightened, and
learn what is the good will and pleasure of God.

A third means to increase in learning, 4 Conference.
is conference with those which are learned: the way to be learned, is to
learn of every man, Sapientior omnibus ^ris, si ab omnibus discere volueris,
qui ab omnibus accipiunt omnibus ditiores sunt, says one: thou shall be wiser
then any man, if thou would learn of every man. The Ethyopian gained more
by conference with Philip, then he gained with much reading, Act. 8. 39. And I
remember what Paul says, Romans 1. 12. I long to see you, says he, that I might
bestow some spiritual gift amongst you, and that I might be comforted together
with you, through our mutual faith, both yours and mine. The Apostle was a man
full of knowledge, and the poor Saints in Rome were many thousand degrees
inferior to him, and yet for the futher increase of his knowledge, and for his
further confirmation and establishment, he desires to take a journey to them,
and doubts not but to gain somewhat by conuersing with the most simpliest
Christian. And the truth is, that a man shall sometimes learn from the
weakest, that which he could never learn by conuersing with the most wise and
literate;

Quod tu non nosti fortassis nouit assellus. And here is another especial
cause of our intolerable ignorance, because there is so much strangeness
amongst us, and one Christian will not converse with another, and confer of
good things; but either they shun all society, or if they meet, all the time
is wasted, and devoured in gibing and ieasting, idle talk, frothy speeches, if
not in swearing, blasphemy, etc. Here is another cause of ignorance, the
remedy is godly conference.

Fourthly, the last means to attain 5 Meditation.
to learning, is contemplation. Though a student read much, resort to lectures,
confer, yet all will profit him little without meditation. I know that
reading, hearing, etc. are notable means to increase knowledge, and yet all
these will avail little without meditation. The word may aptly be compared to
meat, meditation to disgestion: what good does meat if a man shall vomit it up
again as soon as ever he has received it into his stomach, and what will it
profit a man to hear, confer, etc. if we shall as it were instantly vomit up
all again? meditation is the very life of our devotion. And for this cause
after Paul had exhorted Timothy to sundry duties, he adds this also, hac
meditare, 1. Tim. 4. 15. Oh, how I love thy law, it is my continual
meditation, says David, Psalm. 110. 97. I will not stand to speak of Isaacks
contemplation, Genesis 24. 64. nor Ezekiahs, Isa. 38. 14. nor of the virgin
Mary's, Luke 2. 10. I will, to quicken you up to meditation, conclude with that
place, Ier. 82. 11. The whole land is fallen to desolation, because there is
none that considers. And thus having delivered rules for the increase of
knowledge, I come yet to a fourth use. ( viz.)



First, to Patrons: If Magistrates in Patrons.
corporation-townes, where free schools are erected, shall choose unskillful
and negligent Teachers, must not the scholars be unlearned, when their
masters are unlearned? If one blind man lead another, they fall both into the
ditch, Matthew. 15. 14. I must not fear the faces of men, and I will be bold to
tell many gentlemen that they are causes of the ouer-spreading sin of
ignorance, and that their covetousness is the cause why whole parishes
generally are so ignorant. For why? many gentlemen are grown to that pass,
that they will do any thing for lucre: I do not accuse all, nay, I can acquit
many out of mine own knowledge: but there are a great many also that cast lots
upon Christ's coat, such as sell the portion of the Lord for money: and provided
that they may fill their bags with gold and silver, would present they care not
whom to their benefice. I could willingly spend some more time in reproof of
such a merciless generation, that care not whose soul fries in hell, so they
may have two or three years profit before hand, or a yearly reservation to
themselves of the tithes and tenths. But I shall have occasion to return
again to this point.

Secondly, a word or two, to ministers: 2 Ministers.
for as I said, if Tutors be naught, the pupills must needs be naught. The
ministers of the word are the salt of the earth, Matthew. 5. 13. the light of
Christ's mystical body: and therefore if they be unlearned, or careless, needs
must they bring blindness to the whole body. Alas, that we have cause to
complain with the Prophet, Their watchmen are blind, they have no knowledge,
they are dumb dogs and cannot bark, they sleep and delight in sleeping,
Esa. 56. 10. God forbid that I should cast stones at the head of innocence. I
know that there are many faithful laborers, such as divide the word aright,
2. Tim. 2. 15. such as labor in the word and doctrine, 1. Tim. 2. 15. such as
may say of themselves, as Paul of himself, In weariness often, in watchings
often, 2. Cor. 11. 27. and yet besides these, there are some amongst us,
idoll-shepheards, slowbellies, dumb dogs, loyterers, nay murderers, that open
not a pulpet door once in an whole year, except upon some high and festiual
day: and what are these but murderers? and conscious of murder in the highest
degree: for what cruelty is like to soulecruelty? and if Abells blood, nay
every drop of Abells blood, (as the original will bear it, thy brothers
bloods cries Genesis 5. 10.
unto me from the ground, yea every drop of thy brothers blood:) if I say
every drop of Abells blood cried for vengeance against Cain, what a fearful
cry shall the blood of many souls make before the throane of God, asking
vengeance against their pastors, which have starued their souls to death, by
detayning and holding from them the bread of life?

3. Lastly, to conclude with Parents Masters of families.
and masters of private families, whose negligence in teaching and instructing
their children and servants, is an other cause of our ouer-spreading ignorance:
for the Preachers of the word may labor, and be instant in season, and out of
season, 1. Tim. 4. 1. and all to little purpose, if masters of families neglect
their duties: neither do I wonder to see so many men and women so
intollerably, and incredibly ignorant, since to speak truth, a man had as good
be some man's beast, as either their son or servant. For what do their
masters or parents regard them, more then their brute beasts? they feed their
servants, and so they do their cattle; they work their servants, and so they
do their beasts: if any of their servants be sick and diseased, they will
seek out for remedy, and so they will for their beasts. Again, their care to
instruct and teach their families, and bruit beasts, is much one: they teach
their children and servants, nothing but how to plow, sow, ditch, etc. and as
much as this they teach their cattle, their oxen to draw, their horses to
pace, etc. and therefore no wonder though their children and servants be as
ignorant as the horse and mule, that have none understanding. O that masters of
families would learn, to spend some of that precious time which they misspend
in twatling and idle talking, in backbiting, slandering, etc. in teaching and
instructing their families, whose blood shall otherwise be required at their
hands if they perish!

The next conclusion gathered out of this second exhortation was this, viz.

knowledge: Not the hearers of the law are righteous before God, but the doers
of the law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. For the further proof of this point,
you may at your leisure read these places, Ioh. 15. 14. Ioh. 10. 27. Matthew. 7.
24. Luke 8. 20. Matt. 12. 50. and if these may not suffice thee, then I say,

Though I knew all knowledge, says Paul, yet were I nothing if I wanted love,
1. Cor. 13. yea if a bare and naked knowledge would save, then the devils
themselves should be saved; for they know enough: Jesus I know, and Paul I
know, said the evil spirit, Act. 19. 15. And if you read Matthew. 4. 6. there
you shall see, that the devil is a cunning Scripturian; It is written, says
he, that he will give his angels charge over thee, etc. v. 6. Suppose then that
thou have never so much knowledge, suppose thou have read as much as Josephus,
of whom it is said, that he turned over all the whole library of the Greeks;
yet if thou know much and practice just nothing, why should not the devils
(which know more) be saved as well as thou.

He that knows his Masters will, and does Luke 12. 27.
it not, shall be beaten with many stripes: and Iam. 4. 17. He that knows how
to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin: and as one says well upon
these words, not sin simply, but sin with a witness, or sin with
advantage. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had had no sin, but
now they have no cloak for their sins, Ioh. 15. 22. And how does our
Savior Christ vpbraid those cities where they had so much means; and
doubtless a great deal of knowledge? Woe to thee Corazin, we to thee
Bethsaida: for if the great works that were done in you, had been done in
Tyrus and Sidon, they had repented long ago in sackecloath and ashes, Matthew.
11. 20. By Gods word (says Augustine) August.
man sins so much the more, how much the more by the word he knows that to
be sin which he commits.

Peter's counsel, to add to our knowledge temperance, to our temperance
patience, and to our patience godliness, 2. Pet. 1. 5. for otherwise, as
Chrysostom wrote to the people of Antioch, that were desirous to gain
knowledge, and yet were ready to swear, and upon every occasion to rappe out
oaths; The more (says he) that you know, and the oftuer you hear, etc. the
more you sin against God, and the more you increase your punishment, because
you live in the practice of those courses which you know to be sinful. And
would to God that our hollow-hearted professors, which know Gods will, yea and
carry before them the lamp of profession, and yet lead their lives after such
a manner, that if the devil himself were in a bodily shape, he could live no
worser; usurers, extortioners, cheaters, raylers, etc. would to God, I say,
they would consider it, that their knowledge and gifts shall but help them on
the more roundly to hell fire, without obedience. I speak not against
profession, neither against knowledge; I know there can be no salvation
without profession, nor no obedience without knowledge; but this I say
moreover, that obedience is the end of our knowledge. And if we know the Law,
and yet sin against it, then shall that be verefied against us, Romans 2. 12.
As many as sin in the Law, shall be judged by the Law.

And thus I come to the circumstanstances First circumstance of the time.
expressed in this text. And first of the time, Be wise now, O ye Kings;
Vaugnattah, even presently, while the Lords scepter is in his hand ready to
smite, and before he smites you: even out of hand furnish your selves with true
wisdom and learning, least you be broken and bruised in pieces. And here
note two things:

First, that repentance must not be deferred.

Secondly, that the consideration of Gods judgments, ought to move us
repentance.



First, then it stands us in hand to repent, because of the uncertainty of our
life: nihil certius morte, hora mortis nihil Life uncertain.
incertius, nothing more certain then death, then the time when we shall die,
or the place where, or the manner how, nothing is more uncertain. And therefore
Ioh compares the life of man to a candle, Job. 15. 17. for as a candle though
it burns never so clearly, yet a little wet, or a small gale of wind will
blow it out suddenly; so though a man be never so lusty and strong; yet a
little grief or sickness may be to him, as the wind is to the candle, or
rather as the hammer is to the potters pot, breaking these earthly vessels of
ours in pieces. Go to then, thou which say to morrow will be time enough to
repent, I am yet in the flower and prime of my youth, youth must sow the wild
oats, etc. take heed that thou be not taken aaway like Ishbosheth in thy
dead sleep, 2. Sam. 4. 7. or topt off suddenly like an ear of corn, Job 24.
24. like the churl in the Gospel, Luke 12. 6. or Herod, Act. 12. 13. or
Ananias and Saphyra, Act. 5. 5. The men of Sodom dreamed not of a storm of
fire in the morning, nor the men of the old world for a flood of water; but Lot
was no sooner upon mount Zoar, nor Noah within his Arc, but that the Lord
rained fire from heaven upon the one, and opened the windows of heaven, and
destroyed the other with waters, Genes. 7. 20. Genesis 19. 23. And therefore thou
which say, I will stay a while longer, and I will repent in my man-age or
dotage; take heed that thou be not upon thy sick bed, in thy winding sheet
before that time comes.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, says Solomon, Eccl. 12. 1.
the wiseman would have us remember God betimes; and why? because he is our
Creator: it is he which made us, and therefore we are his by right of creation,
and owe all our service to him alone. And, Eccl. 31. There is an appointed time
for all things under the Sun, a time to plant, a time to build, etc. but he
says not, there is a time to curse, and a time to banne, a time to whore, and
a time to steal; because that God has allotted out no time to sin.

repentance is Gods gift, and not in our own power; yea, and the longer we
defer, the harder will it be to repent: the longer we suffer our houses to
run into delapidations, the greater will our trouble and charges be to
repair them:

Si non vic hodie, cras minus aptus eris. I remember what I read concerning our
Saviors raising up of Lazarus out of the grave. S. John says, that he groaned
in the spirit, and was troubled in himself, Ioh. 11. 33. and what was the
reason that our Savior groaned more now then at other times; a great divine
gives August.
this reason, because Lazarus had been dead four days: and so I say, when
men are not only dead in sin, but have been dead many days, and have lain
rotting and soaking in their sins, and that not four days, but four
years, nay forty years, insomuch that their bones are filled with the sins
of their youth, Job. 20. 10. is it not a great miracle if these should be
quickened and raised up again? Oh take we heed that sin plead not custom,
that we suffer not our wounds to putrify; I mean, let not our sins grow
incurable through our negligence. But to day while it is called to day, let us
seek the Lord, Heb. 3. 13. while we have time, Gal. 4. 13. while we have
light, Ioh. 12. 35. whlie we have day before us, let us turn unto God. And as
we read of Abraham, that he went to sacrifice his son Isaac early in the
morning, Genesis 22. 3. so I say of our sins, that we love as dearly as ever
Abraham loved his son Isaac, or David his Absalom, away with them, crucify
them, sacrifice them; yea and go about to offer up thy sacrifice betimes:
offer up your selves a living sacrifice, Romans 12. 1. In the morning sow thy
seed, and in the evening withdraw not thine hand, Pro. 27. 6.

souls lie frying in hell before they were aware. Behold, says the Apostle,
now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, now is the time while
the gates of mercy stand wide open: and therefore now, even now let us be wise,
and fill our lamps full of oil, least that hereafter we knock with the five
foolish virgins, and cry, Lord, Lord, and it prove too late, Matthew. 22. 1.

Ninevites, Ion. 3. 9. The Prophet of the Lord preached destruction against
them, After forty days, and Nineueh shall be destroyed, etc. Well, and what
course took the citizens for their own safeguard: Cry we mightily unto God
(said the King to his subjects) turn we from our evil ways: who can tell
whether the Lord will turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not. And
then it follows in the next verse, that God repented him of the evil, etc.
And no less remarkable is that notable example of the good King Josiah, 2.
Chro. 34. 27. Because thine heart did melt, and thou did humble thy self
before me, and did weep, etc. thou shall not see all the evil, that I will
bring upon this place, and upon his inhabitants. I will not trouble you, nor my
self, with other proofs for the ratifying of this Doctrine.

the fire with oil: sin is very fuel for Gods wrath, and when the wrath of
God is kindled against them, the more God punishes, the more violently do they
lash out into sin, swear worse, rail and murmr worse then they did
before: and what is this but to quench fire with oil? and the course were
better to quench the fire with tears of remorse and repentance.

judge stands at the door, Iam. 5. 9. and is now ready to come upon us with a
besome of desolation in his hand, to purge these Augean stables of our tippling
houses, dicehouses, filthy houses: and if any man shall laugh in his sleeue,
and bless himself, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. and say, Tush, Go^ will do neither good,
nor evil; I answer again, that the whole head is sick, and the whole heart
heavy, Isa. 1. 5. our contempt of Gods word more then paganish, all the
damnable sins of Sodom and Samaria swarm amongst us; our idleness,
wantonness, and millions of other sins cry and roar to God for vengeance
against us: and have we not cause to fear, least God has a controversy with
the inhabitants of the Land; Hos. 4. 1. O brethren, that I could draw waters
out of the hard rocks, some tears of repentance from the eyes of drunkards,
whore-hunters, to quench the fire of Gods displeasure kindled against us. In
the fear of God let us humble our selves before God; let our hearts melt, our
eyes spout out tears as a conduit spouts out water, let us fast and pray, and
call and cry to God, before the decree come forth, and we be made like Sodom
and Zeboim, like Gath of the Philistims, or like Jerusalem, or other famous
cities and kingdoms, whose sins has laid them level with the earth. And
this of the first circumstance, of the time.

The second follows of the persons, ^. Circumstance of the persons.
Kings first, secondly Judges: that is, those rulers that exercise authority
under Kings and Princes. And here I might stand upon many particulars.

does in this place to the Kings and Judges: so he did give warning to the men
of the old world, before the flood came: thus he foretold of the Babylonian
captivity, of the destruction of Jerusalem, etc. though his bow be ever bent,
yet he never shoots one shaft but he gives warning, by his word, his ministers,
by signs and prodiges, etc.

Judges as well as Kings, inferior Magistrates as well as superiors, that
here again we may observe, that Judges must labor to get wisdom as well as
Kings and Princes: my meaning is, that those that are in inferior places must
labor for wisdom as well as those that are in superior places: how can
Kings rule well, when their Magistrates be evil, how can Magistrates reform
the people, when the people are incorrigible, etc.

Kings and Rulers, because they are for the most part led by the mighty:

Regis ad exemplu^ totus componitur orbis. If Herod despise Christ, his men of
war will despise him also, Luke 23. 11. If the king honor Mordecay, Haman his
mortal enemy will honor him, Hest. 6. 10. If the Scribes and Pharisees cry
out against Christ, let him be crucified, the common people will say the same
tune, let him be crucified, Luke 23. 23. If Jeroboam be an idolater, so will
all the 10. Tribes, 1. King. 12. 28. If Constantine be a Christian, he makes a
Christian world. And thus the examples of great men like floods and
inundations, do carry the common people headlong.

item to all such as are any ways eminent, that they do not for their lives
give an evil example, least they sin like Jeroboam that sinned, and made
Israel sin: an evil example in great men, is like an ecclips of the sun:
much observed, and usually the forerunner of some dearth or famine to follow:
when great men sin, many eyes are upon them, and usually judgment is not
far off, where the rulers are naught.

And now, brethren, when I consider how men live by pattern, and not by
precept, and how ready men are to give an ill example; when I think of our
late and general loss, and of the hand of the Almighty upon us, in taking
from us a worthy lamp, I speak of Sir Edward Lewkner, that not long since was
Lord of this town, and to the comfort of my soul and joy of many Christians,
frequented these assemblies, and shined like a light amongst us all, Oh when I
think of this, then do I wish that my head were full of waters, and mine eyes
a fountain of tears, that I might bewail his death day and night; Oh then my
soul is full of heaviness, my bowels swell, and mine heart is even turned
within me, because he that was wont to go out and in before us by a good
example, is taken away from us, and makes his dwelling in the dark. Beloved in
our Savior Christ Jesus, spare me a little, while I shall propose (I was about
to say a matchles) I dare say a worthy example before you for your imitatio^.
Neither let any in this assembly pass any rash and unadvised censure against
me, for honoring a righteous man in his death, whose memorial, says God,
shall be blessed, Pro. 10. 7. For mine own part, I cannot think it needeles
in these times, when men live by example, and not by rule, to propose a godly
example before you for your imitatio^. For want of time, I will bound my speech
within the compass of these three particulars.

First, to speak of his wisdom; that he was a wise man.

Secondly, of his learning; that he was a learned man.

Thirdly of his obedience; how careful he was to add practice to his
knowledge.

And all that I shall speak, the Lord of heaven knows is truth, yea your
selves can avouch it to be true. Indeed he lives lewdly in these days, that
cannot have one parasite or other, to make a funeral Sermon in his praise and
commendation: but for my self, if I speak false, when I come down from my
pulpit, accuse me before this Congregation; and if I speak but true, then give
glory to God, and testify with me.

And first, I say, that he was truly wise A wise man.
to discern of things that differ, to prevent danger, and to provide against
time to come. First, to discern and judge of things: counting al things in
this world, riches, pleasures, beauty, as loss and dung, for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ, Phil. 3. 8. Secondly, as wise to prevent danger,
rather willing to loose any thing, then his own soul. Thirdly, as wise to
provide and lay up treasures in heaven, Luke 12. 33. yea, his conversation was
in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. his affections mounting and aspiring upward. And
whereas others of his rank are wont to make this world their Paradise, one
making a god of his belly, another a goddess of his Herodias; one hunting
after honor, another after wealth; one consuming all his precious time upon
dogs, another at the dice; one in an humor of clothes, a second in an humor
of building; and all drowned and drunken with the love of vain pleasures, etc.
neglecting the good of their souls: you all know, that his delight was, like
Ieremies, in the word of God, and that was the joy and rejoicing of his heart,
Ier. 15. 16. His delight was like David's, in the house of God, and rejoiced
when they said, Come, let us go to the house of the Lord, Psalm. 122. 1. His
joy was like Paul's, in the free preaching of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 18. His
delight was in the company of the Saints, and those which are excellent,
Psalm. 16. 3. And as for that mad mirth, spoken of, Eccl. 2. 2. and the
rejoicing of the ungodly, spoken of, Job. 20. 5. might he not have taken up
Salomons words, I said of laughter, thou art mad: and of joy, what is it that
thou do? Eccl. 2. 2.

Secondly, was he not also learned, yea 2 Learned.
take the word in what sense you please, in regard of humane or divine
learning? If I should report how well skilled he was in the tongues, in arts
and sciences, how cunning he was in the Scriptures, how powerful he was in
disputation, how strongly he would refel a falsehood, how quick he was of
invention, how ready to perceive, etc. I should speak no more then every man
knows already, that were any whit of his acquaintance. The truth is, that for
strength of wit, and natural parts, as Iunius said of that famous Vrsinus, I
see not what was wanting in him, that may be found in a man. Well, me thinks I
may say of him with a little alteration of the words, as one writes of that
blessed and worthy King, Edward the sixth, Aderant enim illi gratia, linguas
enim multas callebat: Anglicam natalem, Latinam non expers (vt audio,) Grecae,
etc. non illi dialectica deerat, non naturalis Philosophiae principia, etc. and
Cardanus.
as an other holy divine wrote of the same Prince, the same may also be said
of him; There wa^ted in him no promptness of wit, gravity of sentence, ripenes
of judgment: and over and besides these notable excellencies, and other great
virtues in him, add moreover skill and knowledge of tongues, and other
sciences, whereunto he seemed rather borne Fox page 1547.
then brought up.

But had I Moses learning, Act. 7. 22. were I as eloquent and mighty in
Scriptures as Apollos, Act. 18. as full of knowledge as a full vessel is full
of liquor, or the sea full of water; yet all were nothing Thirdly, (...)
obedience.
without obedience. Speak we therefore in the next place, of his practicke and
operative learning; of his sanctification and righteousness: for as all sin
is either (...), or (...), ungodliness, or unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. so
all the obedience that God requires of us, consists in the practice of these
two things, 1. Holiness: 2. Righteousness. And whosoever can find in
himself a concurrence of both these, a care to serve the Lord in holiness,
and to deal justly with men, is truly regenerate, Luke 1. 73. Tit. 2. 12.

Begin we then with sanctification, His holiness.
which generally discouers it self by a godly life, 1. Pet. 1. 15. 16. Leu.
19. 2, 3. and more particularly by these fruits of sanctification: 1. zeal for
Gods glory: 2. frequency in prayer: 3. a care to draw others to God: 4. a care
to honor Gods name: 5. care in the choice of godly servants: 6. almsdeeds:
7. progress in grace: to name no more, all these are fruits, and effects, and
companions of holiness. See, Psalm. 66. 9. and 119. 139. Act. 10. 1, 2. etc.
Hos. 6. 1. Ioh. 4. 28. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. and by all and every one of these it
plainly appears, that this godly Gentleman was truly sanctified.

For first, with the Prophet Elijah, he His zeal.
was very zealous for the Lord of hosts, 1. King. 19. 10. and like David,
accounted the wrongs done to God, as done to himself, and hated the enemies of
God, as his own enemies, Psalm. 139. 21. and as David speaks, Psalm. 119. 48. I
will speak of thy testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed: so let
this be published to his eternal praise, that he was not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, Romans 1. 16. but wheresoever he came, and amongst whomsoever, such
was his zeal for God (that he could not like many temporizers, and
time-seruers, and formal professors, that walk in a middle temper, and are
neither hot nor cold) sit still and hear men plead for carnal liberty, and
say nothing; or hear the name of God blasphemed, or preaching auiled, or
profession or professors of the Gospel spoken against, and never unfold his
lips, for God or his brethren: like many neuters, and night-professors, Ioh. 3.
2. But as he was learned, and knew how to speak, so also he was zealous, and
resolute, and would not spare to speak for Christ and for his Gospel. 2 In
prayer often.


Secondly, how holy was he in his morning and evening sacrifice, in his more
private, and public devotions, twice a day reading the word, and praying in
his family: except some minister of the Gospel (whom like another Obadiah he
fed at his own table) were present to perform that duty: neither did he
read his prayers upon a book, or tied himself to stinted forms (which I
condemn not in those which have not the hard gift of prayer, being like some
man newly recovered of some sickness, that cannot go except they be supported
by another man's hand) but he prayed freely according to the motion of Gods
spirit: and how skilfully, and zealously, there are many of his religious
family to bear witness. I remember what I read of Job, Job, 1. 5. when his
sons were banqueting in their houses, Job sent, and sanctified them, and
offered up burnt offerings for them: and the text adds moreover, that he did it
daily and constantly, Thus did Job every day. The like may be said of this
worthy servant of God, that he offered up his sacrifice of praise and prayer to
God, every day a morning and evening sacrifice; and that so daily and
constantly, that his greatest and waightiest employments were none occasion to
him of intermission: insomuch that a little before his dissolution, being high
shreise of this County, and taken up with many and great employments, yet was
he so careful and assiduous, even in the busiest time of the Assizes to begin
and end the day with invocation, that he would not enter upon any business in
the morning, nor give sleep to his eyes in the evening, before he had called
his company together to join with him in prayer. Neither was he careful
alone to pray in his family more publicly, Oration secretum postulat, nay his
reins taught him in the night season, (and as I am informed by those from
whom he could not altogether hide it) he set large times apart also for
private prayer. Some indeed there are that never inuoke Gods name, except
before witnesses. First, they get them upon the stage, and cause a trumpet to
be blown, and when they have spectators enough, then they begin their
devotions. But David prayed in secret, 2. Sam. 12. 16. so did Peter, Act. 10.
9. so did Jacob, Genesis 32. 24. so did Christ Jesus, avulsus est ab eijs quasi ad
iactum lapidis, etc. He went a stones cast from his disciples, and kneeled
down, and prayed, Luke 22. 41. Private prayer is an infallible symptom of
sanctification.

And now, brethren, I would I could speak something to move you in these
vn-praying times: I have called upon you from Sabbath to Sabbath, and Sermon
after Sermon have I proved both the necessity, power, and efficacy of
prayer, and for ought I hear all is as water spilt upon the ground, 2. Sam.
14. 14. I beseech you al by the mercies of God, that this Gentleman's practice
in this kind, may never out of your remembrance: think of his care to
sanctify his family, in offering up his morning and evening sacrifice, think
of his secret and private conference with God, what secret intercourse there
was twixt God and his soul: I beseech you again, I was about to charge you in
the name of my God, to keep this example in remembrance, and that the thought
of it may be as a spur to provoke you on to prayer: and if this example move
you not, hearken then to Ieremies prayer, Power out thy wrath upon the heathen,
and upon those familyes that call not upon thy name, Ier. 10. 25.

Thirdly, how careful was he to draw Desirous to draw others to God.
on others to God? I shall I confess tell you strange things, and yet no more
then truth, that whereas other gentlemen of his sort, are wont to make
merchandise of men's souls; my meaning is to present idle and unworthy
shepherds to their benefices for their own advantage, and so fill the Church
of God full of blind guides, fitter to be ouer-seene themselves, then to
ouer-see others; yet this gentleman, shall I say that he was a free Patron;
nay, which is more strange was he not ready to purchase Churchliuings with his
own silver, and bestow them gratis, as we say, upon such Pastors as would be
careful of the flock committed to their charge: and for mine own particular
I must needs acknowledge it with thankfulness, that he freely and frankly
made me the unworthy pastor of this congregation, at his great cost and
expenses. Again, whereas others of his rank, are wont to purloyne and rob the
Church, and seem to compound with the devil, Damihi diuitias caeteri toll
tibi: give me the profits of the Church, and take thou the souls of the
people, and so place some unworthy of their cures, while they make themselves
merry with the Lords portion, and spend it upon dogs, hauks, and twenty to one
of worse matters; and then color over all their the every by calling of their
benefices by the name of donatiues: this gentleman (whom I cannot easily
parallel) whatsoever he might do by humane law, yet would he not make ship
wrack of a good conscience for a little lucre: but like Abraham to
Melchizedecke, he paid tithes of all, Genesis 13. 20. But alas, our friend
Lazarus is dead, his habitation is in the hill of Zion in the city of the
living God: and behind him there remain, a number of Church-pyrats, that
would not only rob the parson, vicar, Church, Chapel, God, but would venture
a voyage to hell for a little lucre.

and honor Gods name: and this am I able to testify for him, that since first
I knew him, never did I hear one oath or No swearer.
other great or small fall from him, which speaks not a little to his
commendation in these times, when our whole land is too full of blasphemy, and
those deadly words spoken of, Eccles. 23. 11. are as common as stones in our
streets: the time was when there were few swearers except men-swearers, but
now our women are not ashamed to rap out oath after oath, to the dishonor of
God and his Son Christ: and as for too many of our gentry, (woe is me that I
am borne to be a contentious man) come but within their thresholds to hear the
master swear, and servants swear (I quake and tremble to name their oaths, by
the precious wounds of God, by Gods heart, by Christ's blood, etc.) a man would
think himself entered into the very suburbs of hell; yea and with your favor,
many also that make scruple of greater, make little scruple of lesser oaths, by
their faith, troth, etc. and such a family as Sir Edward Lewkners (pardon me
though I speak bluntly) whether I have so often resorted, and never hard one
oath throughout the whole family, is hardly to be found in a country. Alas,
my brethren, how can we choose but expect judgment, when this fearful sin
so reigns, and rages amongst us? I turned, says the Prophet, and looked,
and behold, a flying book, the length of it 20. and the breadth of it 10.
cubits: and then it follows, Lo, this is the curse that goes over the whole
earth, and every one that steals, and swears, shall be cut off as well on
this side as on that, Zach. 5. 1. 2. 3. and Zophon. 1. 4. I will, says God,
stretch out mine hand upon Judah, etc. and I will cut off them that worship the
host of heaven, and swear by the Lord and Malcham; and them that are turned
back from the Lord.

there shall not dwell a wicked person in mine house, Psalm. 106. All his care
was to have servants fearing God under his roof, ruffians, swaggerers,
tospots, profane Esaus, blasphemous Rabsaches were hateful to him; and which
is very memorable during the time of his shreiualdry, and having (if I mistake
not the number) near upon sixty wearing his livery, yet could I never hear of
any outrageous or inordinate swearers or drunkards amongst the number. Neither
can I a little muse at many gentlemen, yea and of some that would make a show
of the best things, that yet entertain roysters, and riotous persons within
their doors; and when we preach against it, reply for themselves, that good
servants are not to be found in an whole country. To which I answer again,
that though godly servants are as thin sown as godly masters, yet some there
are to be found, else God forbid. And secondly, let no man take offense against
me for speaking truth; for mine own part I am of this opinion, that it were
better for gentlemen to do any office themselves, then to entertain one leude
servant into their houses: for one godless wretch in an house, is like Jonah
in the ship, and brings vengeance upon all the rest.

spirit says of His alms.
Cornelius, that he was a devout man, and how does he prove it? He gave much
alms, and prayed much, Acts. 10. verse. 2. The like may I say of our kind Lord
and friend deceased; he was a devout man: and thus I prove it; he prayed
much, and besides he was full of mercy. Your selves can bear me record, how
many of your poor people he clothed with the sleeces of his sheep, and what
his custom was, ( viz.) for every Last year being 32. years old, he
clothed 32. poor people.
year of his life, to cloth one of your poor and naked ones. Some may
happily wonder at so great expense from one man, and it may be some have said
to him as Judas did; Ad quid perditio haec? what needs all this this waste? is
it not enough to cloth the poor of your own town? The money spent in
apparelling so many poor, would buy a great deal of soft raiment for your
own family: Charity must begin at home: In time this course will suck your
coffers too much. Though I accuse none, no nor suspect any, yet is it probable
enough, that some might open their mouths to this effect. Christ never did good
work but some or other were offended. Yea, but may some say, the hungry must be
fed as well as the naked clothed: our Savior says, not only, He that has
two coats, let him give to Luke 3. 11.
him that has none: but he adds moreover, and he that has meat, let him do
likewise: did he therefore feed the hu^gry? Yes verily, and gave a portion to
seven, and also to eight, Eccles. 11. 1. witness the great company of
Orphans, widows, and fatherless children that weekly and daily sought and
found releife at his gates: and which is worthy remembrance in these days,
when some like Absalom build Pyramides to keep their names from oblivion, 2.
Sam. 18. 18. and others like Nebuchadnezzar, mount up their turrets of Babell,
Dan. 4. 33. for vain ostentation, till they have utterly disabled themselves,
for all works of charity; This gentleman (at the nameing of whom mine heart
bleeds afresh within me) his buildings were for better uses: and it is well
known to you which hear me this day, that he reared up one building near his
own house, furnished it with a large table to the only use and relief of the
poor, that thrice a week resorted thither, and were liberally provided for,
to his great expenses. Insomuch that he might have pleaded for himself as Job
did; If I have restrained the poor of his desire, or have caused the eyes of
the widow to fail; if I have eaten my morsells alone, and the fatherless
has not eaten thereof; if I have seen any perish for want of clothing; if I
have lift up mine hand against the fatherless, then let mine arm fall from my
shoulder, yea let it be broken from the bone. Job. 31. 16.

holiness appeared by his continual progress in grace. For so says God,
They which wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall lift up
their wings as the eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk
and not faint, Isa. 40. ver. 31. And whereas the ungodly may fitly be compared
to the children of Ephraim, that bent their bows, and made a show as though
they would fight, but turned back in the day of battle, Psalm. 78. 9. or rather
to men in a consumption, that consume away by little and little, until they
are buried in the earth: though hypocrites decline and grow worse and worse,
yet now I speak of one, of whom I may say, as it was said of the Church of
Thyatira, that his works were more at the last, then at the first, Reu. 2. 19.
or as it was said of Ruth, the same also may be said of him, that he showed
more good at the latter end, then at the beginning, Ruth. 3. 19. more heavenly
minded, more zealous for Gods honor, more careful to draw others to God, more
often in prayer, more cautelous in the choice of his houshold-seruants, fuller
of good works and almsdeeds, and every way more fruitful (though never
barren) at the last then at the first: all his houshold-seruants perceived as
much: and for mine own part, I never resorted to the house, but me thoughts I
saw a sensible growth in goodness. And now, beloved, since a godly life in
general, and the particulars named, of zeal, frequencie in prayer, etc. be
infallible notes of sanctification, though I say nothing of his humility,
being as humble as the child newly weaned, Psalm. 131. 2. of his care to hallow
and sanctify the Lords Sabbaths, both he and his household: of his care to
teach and instruct his family; yet have I spoken sufficient for the probation
of his holiness.

I might now speak as largely of his 2. His righteousness.
righteousness, but that time commands me to take my work out of the loome.
Yet thus much I will be bold to speak, and promise before this audience, in
the words of Samuel to the people, 1. Sam. 12. 3. Whose ox has he taken? or
whose ass has he taken? to whom has he done wrong? or whom has he hurt? or
at whose hands has he taken a bribe? and if he has it shall be restored. But
I cannot stand to speak of these things, neither of his godly death, wherein
also I might be copious. But dead he is, his body I mean is dead; as for
his spirit, that lives in the city of the living God, amongst millions and
myrriads of heavenly Angels, in the company and Chuch of those first begotten,
which are gathered into an heavenly, with the Judge of all flesh, in the new
Jerusalem, whose gates are pearl, whose streets gold, whose walls are precious
stones, where quires of angels, the Cherubims and the holy Seraphims, sing
Halaluiah, Hosanna, to God on high; and there he shines and shall shine, like
the brightness of the firmament, and glister like the stars for ever and
ever: while we remain upon the troublous sea of this world to lament his
loss; yea, who can sufficiently lament it?

How can his godly Lady lament enough, for the loss of so kind and loving an
husband, that loved and tendered her as his own soul.

How can his young children lament enough, when they shall come to years of
discretion, and find themselves bereaved of so careful and loving a father.

How can his servants lament enough for the loss of so religious a Master,
that was wont to go out and in before them by a godly example, and was so
diligent to teach and instruct them in the way of godliness.

How can the learned and lovers of learning lament enough, since he is gone,
that like that famous king of Sicilia, being asked whether he had rather
Robert, King of Sicil.
forsake the company of certain learned men about him, or his Kingdom;
answered, his kingdom, rather then his learning, or learned tutors: since he
is gone that preferred learning before his great possessions.

How can the despised Ministers of the word lament enough, now that they are
counted the skumme of the world, and refuse of the people, and he is fallen
that accounted of them, as the Ambassadors of God, and the dispensers of the
mysteries of Christ Jesus.

How can the professors of the Gospel mourn enough, since he is taken away
that loved the very name of a disciple.

And all the poor and needy in the town round about, that are hungry,
harbourlesse, and want clothing, how can they lament enough, since he is dead
that was wont to give them meat in due season; and whilst he lived, delivered
the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him;
that was an eye to the blind, a foot to the lame, and a father to the poor,
Job 29. 14, 15.

And for my part would I could weep showers of tears with Augustine, or floods
of tears with Ambrose, yea day and night with Jeremy, since I have lost, what
is hardly found, a true, a faithful friend. Since he is gone, whose equal
(consider his young years, his great estate, his gifts both of grace and
nature) will hardly be paraleld. Something I have spoken in his just praise,
but alas, I have but touched the honey, like Jonathan, with the tip of my rod,
1. Sam. 14. 43. and lapt with Gideons soldiers; my meaning is, that I have not
spoken according to half his worth. I know indeed that love is mighty as wine,
and strong as death, and affection may carry me too far; happily I may
commend him too much, that it may be I loved too much; but God knows, that I
ever hated a parasite from my childehood; and the Lord the seer and searcher of
all hearts knows it, that I have not spoken one word with an intent to flatter
any person living, by commending him that is dead. And yet notwithstanding,
since the examples both of the living and dead, do far more move then
precepts, I hope it will not be altogether unprofitable to propose a godly
example before you, though for his good works, (I must needs say what I
think) and say as the Queen of the South said of the glory and wisdom of
Solomon, that the one half has not been told you. We that live so much by
pattern, would God we would set this pattern before our eyes, and learn by
his example to labor after heavenly wisdom, and true learning, and stir up
our selves to serve God in holiness and righteousness before him all our days;
yea, and to enter upon this gracious course most speedily. It is not long since
this gentleman being but young, about 32. years of age, it is not long since
that he was alive, and in liking as we are, not long since that he sat where we
sit, and heard where we hear, and prayed where we pray, and had we not need
then to look about us? If Abell die, must not Cain much more: If Isaac die,
must not Ismael much more: If Simon Peter die, must not Simon Magus much more?
if holy, religious, righteous Sir Edward Lewknor die before he see 33. years,
why should we dream of any long continuance? If (...)


