THE Spanish Colonie, OR Brief Chronicle of the Acts and gestes of the
Spaniardes in the West Indies, called the new World, for the space of xl.
years: written in the Castilian tongue by the reverend Bishop Bartholomew de
las Casas or Casaus, a Friar of the order of S. Dominicke.

And now first translated into english, by M. M. S.

Imprinted at London for William Brom. 1583.

To the Reader.
Spanish cruelties and tyrannies, perpetrated in the West Indies, commonly
termed The new found world.
Briefly described in the Castilian language, by the Bishop Tryer Bartholomew
de las Casas or Casaus, a Spaniarde of the order of Saint Dominick, faithfully
translated by James Aliggrodo, to serve as a President and warning, to the xij.
Provinces of the low Countries.
Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.
GOds judgments are so profound as man's wisdom, no not the power of Angels
is able to enter into their depth. Thou shall (friendly Reader) in this
discourse behold so many millions of me^ put to death, as hardly there have
been so many spaniardes procreated into this world since their first fathers
the Goths inhabited their Countries, either since their second progenitors the
Sarazens expelled and murdered the most part of the Goths, as it seems that
the Spaniardes have murdered and put to death in the Western Indies by all
such means as barbarousnesse it self could imagine or forge upon the anueld
of cruelty. They have destroyed thrice so much land as christendom does
comprehend: such torments have they invented, yea so great and excessive have
their treachery been, that the posterity shall hardly think that ever so
barbarous or cruel a nation have bin in the world, if as you would say we
had not with our eyes seen it, and with our hands felt it. I confess that I
never loved that nation generally, by reason of their intolerable pride,
notwithstanding I can not but commend and love sundry excellent persons that
are among the^. Howbeit, God is my witness, hatred procures me not to write
those things, as also the author of the book is by nation a Spaniard, and
besides writes far more bitterly then my self.

But two reasons have moved me to publishe this preface, which I do dedicate to
all the provinces of the Low countries: The one, to the end, awaking the^selus
out of their sleep, may begin to think upon Gods judgments: and refrain from
their wickedness and vice. The other, that they may also consider with what
enemy they are to deal, and so to behold as it were in a picture or table,
what stay they are like to be at, when through their rechlesnesse, quarrels,
controversies, and partialities themselves have opened the way to such an
enemy: and what they may look for. Most me^ do ground their opinion upon the
goodness of their cause, concluding, that in as much as God is just, he will
grant victory to the right, and will overthrow the wicked. This was Iobes
friends disputation, where they concluded that for that Job was afflicted,
undoubtedly he was wicked. Which reason is drawn out of a certain rule, which
it seems that nature has printed in our hearts, that is, that God punishes
the evil, and in mercy rewards the good deeds. There upon did the
inhabitants of Malta report that Gods vengeance would not permit S. Paul to
live, when after he had escaped so dangerous shipwreck, the Viper leaped upon
his hand. Howebeit notwithstanding this rule be certain and true, yet do
many therein diuersely deceive them selves, concluding thereby that GOD
sends no affliction but to the wicked, as if he laid not his cross also
upon the good: As Job, the Prophets, and Martyrs: yea, his own son Jesus
Christ, and that for the mortifiyng of the flesh, and more and more to quicken
man in good living: and for his son, to the end in him to punish our sin
which he took upon him. Others do believe that God will never suffer sin to
be long unpunished, notwithstanding yt having long waited patie^tly for our
repentance, his clemency is at length converted into justice. Some again,
that it is impossible for the wicked to get the upper hand in an evil
cause, notwithstanding we daily see it fall out contrary: undoubtedly the
Turks victories and conquestes in Christendom have no foundation, but consist
upon mere tyranny and usurpation. For although Christians sins, especially
the great abuse in Gods service, have bin the causes of our punishment, yet
must we confess that the christians, what errors soever some of them do in
their doctrine maintain, are not nevertheless so far deuoid of the truth, as
are the Turks, and yet do we see how mightily in few years they have
conquered and encroched upon christendom. Also before the coming of the
Turks, namely soon after the time of Mahamet, there came such a flock of
Sarazins, that they devoured first Egypt, then all Afric, and rooting out
Christianity out of the said countries seized upon al Spain: yea proceeding
forward, they camped in Aquitain upon the river of Toyre: insomuch that it was
to be doubted yt they might soon have caught hold upon France, and so upon the
rest of christe^dom, had not God raised up that mighty Duke of Brubant,
Charles Martel, who defeating them, drive them beyond the Pirenean mountains.
But if we list to consider the examples contained in the holy Bible, whose
reasons are more exactly expounded by the prophets, we do find that in the time
of K. Hezechias, although the head city, namely Jerusalem, was not forced,
yet the lesser towns being taken by the enemy, the flat country spoiled,
the K. and the princes of Judah had no more left them but the bare walls of
Jerusalem. Also, albeit God did marueilously strike the army of Senacherib,
and that his own children flew him in his gods temples: yet were not gods
people free from suffering much, and from seeing the enemy enjoy the most part
of their law: their commons did bear that which now we know, and more then we
would, that is what an enemy entering by force of arms into a land is able to
do. But Nabuchadnezers victories were far others, when he took, burned, and
sacked eue^ the head city, together with ye very temple of Jerusalem, and
took their K. P. and hie P. prisoners, and ^lu pulled out ye eyes, and fettered
some of the^ forcing the commons during the siege to eat their own dong and
Who is he therefore that dare accuse God of wrong, since such tyrants be called
the Axe in the Lords hands, as the executioners of his justice? Further we
see, that those that have the most right are by the wicked robbed, slain, and
murdered, which is nevertheless Gods doing. For it is said: Cursed be he that
does the Lords work negligently, in which place the holy scriptures do speak
of such ministers and instruments of God. In this discourse of Don Bartholomew
de las Casas, we do find a manifest example. For I pray you what right had
the Spaniards over the Indians: saving that the Pope had given them the said
land, and I leave to your judgment what right he had therein: for it is
doubtful whether his power do stretch to the distributing of worldly
kingdoms. But admit he had that authority, was there therefore any reason
that he should for crying in the night, There is a God, a Pope, and a King of
Castile who is Lord of these Countries, murder 12. 15. or 20. millions of poor
reasonable creatures, created (as our selves) after the image of the living
God: Here do I, as in the beginning I said, see a bottomless depth of Gods
judgments. For it is a small matter to say that the wicked do molest better
men then themselves, for the causes aforesaid: but to see a whole nation, yea,
infinite nations perish so miserably, and as it seems, without any cause, is
it that makes most men to wander, yea even astonisheth such as do examine
these effects by the rule of their own reasons. Howebeit we have two examples
in the Bible, though not altogether like, yet very near. It is said in the
overthrow of Sehon: In those days we took all his towns, and destroyed men
women and childen in the same, neither left we any thing remaining. The like
sentence is there also of Og king of Basan, yea, Moses sone after allows all
that was done, commands Joshua to do as much to all the other kings in his
journey as was done to those two. If we seek the cause of such executions,
man will be as it were at his wits end and stand mute. Again, if men should
consider the example of king Saul whom God rejected, because he did not wholly
discomfit Amelec, but saved their king, and reserved the fattest of their
cattle for the sacrifices, their understanding would give sentence clean
contrary to gods. What will they say, was it not a come^ndable, yea, a noble
mind, for a king to spare his brother, either for an Israelite to spare the
cattle to the end to sacrifice them to the God of Israel: yet was Gods
sentence pronounced by Samuel clean repugnant thereto, God loves obedience
better then sacrifice. And not long before God had commanded both, namely,
that the Cananites and Amalekites should be rooted out: and therefore he was
to be obeyed, and for their disobedience the Cananites remained thorns in the
eyes of Israel, and the king of Amalec whom Samuel nevertheless hewed in
pieces, was the subversion of Saul and his royal family, But here may
express reasons be alleged for such judgments of God, which seeming severe
to man are nevertheless, in that they proceeded from God, mere justice. Moses
says, when the Lord thy God has rejected them before thy face, think not in
thine heart, saying: The Lord for my righteousness has caused me to enter
possession of this land, seeing he has for their wickedness rooted out
these nations before thy face. For thou art not through thy righteousness and
uprightness of heart come to inherit their land, but it is for the
abhominatio^s of these people, whom the Lord thy god has expelled before thy
face.

True it is, that as in a cleeare sunnie light we may more easily discern all
that is object to our sight, even so of things contained in the holy Scriptures
commonly the causes are to be found: but for other matters, as the
destruction of diverse nations among the Heathen: and finally for this so cruel
and horrible example, contained in this book, there can be alleged no
particular reason, other then that gods judgments are botto^lesse pits: also
that since he has done it, it is justly done. And yet are not the Spaniardes
being the executors of this vengeance, more excusable then Pilate for
conde^ning our savior, or Annas or Caiphas for procuring his death
notwithstanding gods counsel and hand wrought those things. For behold gods
sentence pronounced against the wicked, whom he uses in chastening the good,
whom by those means he does try, and punishes the wicked according to their
deserts:

Oh Asshur, the rod of my wrath: and the staff in their hands is my
indignation. I will send him to a dissembling nation, and I will give him a
charge against the people of my wrath, to take the spoil, and to take the
pray, and to tread them under foot like the mire in the street. But he
thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so, but he imagines to
destroy and to cut off not a few nations. For he says, Are not my princes
altogether kings? Is not Calno as Charchemish? Is not Hamath like Arpad? Is not
Samaria as Damascus* Like as my hand has found the kingdoms of Idols, seeing
their idols were above Jerusalem and above Samaria: Shall not I, as I have done
to Samaria and to the Idols thereof, so do to Jerusalem and to the idols
thereof? But when the Lord has accomplished al his work upon mount Sio^ and
Jerusalem, I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the K. of Ashur, and his
glorious and proud looks, because he said, by the power of my own hand have I
done it, and by my wisdom, because I am wise. Therefore I have removed the
borders of the people, and have spoiled their treasures, and have pulled down
the inbabitants like a valiant man. And my hand has found as a nest, etc. So
that although the wicked for a time do triumph, yet does not God leave their
abominable cruelties unpunished. But Gods judgments being in the mean time
such, that by the wicked he punishes those that be wicked: notwithstanding
their wickedness be somewhat less, as also the good be chastised by the cruel
and bloodthirstie: it is certain that we are not thereby to judge that our
selves shall have the victory over our enemies, because our cause is the
better, for we are replenished with vice enough, whereby to leave unto god
sufficient matter to punish us. And therefore as I said two things me
thought, and yet me seems in these Countries worthy admiration: One is,
that we trusting that the defense of our liberty is unto us a just occasion
do not in the mean time consider that we commit no less faults, then those
which Ezech, cast in the Sodomites teeth, Behold the iniquity of thy sister
Sodom was pride, fullness of bread, and the ease of Idleness: these were in her
and in her daughters* and (...) as if we had made atonement with death, we
fear not gods judgments. If we look upon the (...) may see a great abuse in
gods service: but so far are we from indeuoring to correct it, that
contrariwise some would that the remembrance of God, at the least for this
time, might be buried in oblivion: therein resembling ^ on, or the children
which would that during their infancy there might grow no twigge^ in the
wood^. Others (...) reformed, being never the less reformed but in mou^^
(...). For the wine and the harp as the prophet says, are as common in their
bankets as before time, neither are they sorry for the contrition of Joseph. The
other is, that in manner every man generally has an eye to his own private
affairs, no (...) the common, unless it be to reproove, but not to help*
^atr^^ possesses many of their hearts, and which is more strange, although
there be many in these Countries that have heretofore felt the manifest
injuries of the spaniards: yet as if their memo^y wholly failed them, they be
ready to compound with the (...) they suppose, to the destruction of their
confederates, (...) in (...) to the general subversion of the whole country.
To the end therefore they may at the least (...) in a ^able behold the nature of
their enemy, his purpose and intent: here ^asueth a true history written by
one of their own nation, wherein they may learn not that which is yet fully
executed in these low countries, but which (had not god stopped their course)
they had long since put in execution: and hereby I hope al good men will (...)
to be resolute, and ^mending their lives (...) ioy^^ (...), not in words only,
but in deeds also, to repel so arrogant and (...) an enemy. But there
needs no other admonition then the same which the author has set down, and
therefore I pray you read him as diligently as he (...) grave and worthy (...)
himself to his own so cruel and barbarous nation: and let us render thanks
to god for sending us so good masters to instruct us in our duties in this
so miserable and wretched time, in hope that we not quailing in our office, he
will also finally grant us happy deliverance.

The Argument of this present Summarie.
THe state of things happened in the Indies, even from the time they were most
wonderfully discovered also since the Spaniards for a while began to enhabite
those places, and afterward successively unto these days, have in all degrees
bin so maruailous and incredible unto such as have not seen the^, that they may
seem sufficient to darken and bury in oblivion and silence whatsoever else
have passed in all former ages throughout the world, how great so ever is has
been, amongst which the slaughters and murders of these innocent people,
together with the spoils of towns, provinces, and kingdoms, which in those
parts have bin perpretated, as also diverse others no less terrible matters are
not the least. These things when do^ Bart^^^w de las Casa^s, being made of a
monk a bishop at his coming to the court, there to inform our ^. and M. the
Emperor, as having (...) an eiewitnes of the same, had rehearsed to sundry
persons, who as yet were ignorant thereof, and thereby having driven the
hearers into a kind of ecstasy and maze, he was importunately requested briefly
to set down in writing some of them (...) of ye last, which he did. But
afterward seeing sundry persons who deuoyd of remorse and compassion, being
through avarice and ambition, degenerate from all humanity, and who by their
execrable deeds were grown into a reprobate sense, not being satisfied with
such fellonies and mischiefs as they had committed in destroying such a part of
ye world by all strange kinds of cruelties, were now again importunate upon
the King, to the end under his authority and consent, they might once more
return to commit the like, or worse, if worse might be, he determined to
exhibit the said Summarie which he had in writing and record unto our Lord
the prince, to the end his highness might find means that they should be
denied, which he thought best to put in print, to the end, his highness might
with more ease read the same. This therefore was the cause of this present
Summarie, or brief information.

The Prologue of the Bishop Friar Bartholomewe de las Casas or Casaus, to the
most high and mighty prince, Our Lord Don Philip Prince of Spain.
MOst high and mighty Lord, as god by his prouidente has for the guiding and
commodity of mankind in this world, in Realms and Provinces, appointed kings
to be as fathers, and as Homer names them shepheardes, and so consequently
the most noble and principal members of commonweals* so can we not justly
doubt by reason of the good wills that kings and princes have to minister
justice, but that if there be any things amiss, either any violences or
injuries committed, the only cause that they are not redressed, is, for yt
princes have no notice of the same. For certainly if they knew of them, they
would employ all diligence and endeavor in the remedy thereof. Whereof it
seems that mention is made in the holy Scripture in the Proverbs of Solomon,
where it is said, Rex qui sedet in solio Iudicii dissipat omne malum intuitu
suo. For it is sufficiently to be presupposed even of the kindly and natural
virtue of a king, that the only notice that he takes of any mischief
tormenting his kingdom, is sufficient to procure him, if it be possible, to
root out the same as being a thing that he cannot tolerate even one only
moment of time.

Considering therefore with my self most mighty Lord the great mischiefs,
damages and losses, (the like whereof it is not to be thought, were ever
committed by mankind) of so large and great kingdoms, or to speak more truly,
of this so large new world of the Indies, which God and holy Church have
committed and co^me^ded unto the K. of castile, to the end they might govern,
convert, and procure their prosperity as well temporally as spiritually. I
therefore (I say) being a man of experience, and filtie years of age or more,
considering these evils, as having seen them committed, at my being in those
countries: Also that your highness having information of some notable
particularities, might be moved most earnestly to desire his Majesty, not to
grant or permit to those tyrants such conquestes as they have found out, and
which they do so name, (whereinto if they might be suffered they would return)
seeing that of themselves, and being made against this Indian, peaceable, lowly
and mild nation which offends none, they be wicked, tyrannous, and by all
laws either natural, human or divine, utterly condemned, detested and
accursed: I thought it best, least my self might become also guilty, by
concealing the loss of an infinite number both of souls and bodies which are
so committed, to cause a few of their dealinges which of late I had selected,
from among infinite others, and that might truly be reported to be printed,
to the end your highness might with more ease peruse and read them over. Also
whereas your highness master the Archbishop of Toleto, when he was bishop of
Carthagena required them at my hands, and then presented them to your highness:
peradventure by reason of such great voiages as your highness took upon you,
both by sea and by land for matters of estate wherein you have bin busied, it
may be you have not perused, either have forgotten them, and in the mean time
the rash and disordinate desire of those which think it nothing to do wrong,
to shed such abundance of man's blood, to make desolate these so large
countries of their natural inhabitants and owners, by slaying infinite
persons, either to purloyne such incredible treasures, do daily augment, these
tyraunts proceeding under all counterfeit titles and colors in their instante
and importunate suit, namely, to have the said co^quests permitted and granted
unto them: Which in truth cannot be granted without transgressing the law
both of nature and of God, and so consequently not without in curring mortal
sin, worthy most terrible and everlasting torments: I thought it expedient
to do your highness service in this brief Summarie of a most large history,
that might and ought to be written of such slaughters and spoils as they have
made and perpetrated. Which I beseech your highness to receive and read
over, with that royal clemency and courtesy, wherewith you use to accept and
peruse the works of such your servants, as no other desire, but faithfully to
employ themselves to the common commodity, and to procure the prosperity of
the royal estate.

This Summarie being perused, and the vildenes of the iniquity committed
against these poor innocent people, in that they are slain and hewed in
pieces without desert, only through the avarice and ambition of those that
pretend to the doing of such execrable deeds, being considered, It may please
your highness to desire, and effectually to persuade his Majesty to deny any
whosoever shall demand or require so hurtful and detestable enterprises: yea,
even to bury any such suite or petition in the infernal pit of perpetual
silence, thereby showing such terror and dislike as hereafter no man may be so
bold, as once to name or speak thereof. And this (most mighty Lord) is very
expedient and necessary, to the end God may prosper, preserve and make the
estate of the royal crown of Castile for ever to florishe both spiritually
and temporally.

A brief Narration of the destruction of the Indes, by the Spanyardes.
THe Indes were discovered the year one thousand, four hundred, nientie two,
and inhabited by the Spanish the year next after ensuing: so as it is about
forty niene years since that the Spaniards some of them went into those
parts. And the first land that they entered to inhabit, was the great and
most fertile Isle of Hispaniola, which contains six hundredth leagues in
compass. There are other great and infinite Isles round about and in the
confines on all sides: which we have seen the most peopled, and the fullest of
their own native people, as any other country in the world may be. The firm
land lying off from this Island two hundredth and fifty leagues, and some what
over at the most, contains in length on the seacoast more then ten
thousand leagues: which are already discovered, and daily be discovered more
and more, all full of people, as an Emmote hill of Emmots. Insomuch, as by that
which since, unto the year the fourtieth and one has been discovered: It
seems that God has bestowed in that same country, the gulphe or the
greatest portion of mankind.

GOD created all these innumerable multitudes in every sort, very simple,
without sutteltie, or craft, without malice, very obedient, and very faithful
to their natural liege Lords, and to the Spaniardes, whom they serve, very
humble, very patient, very desirous of peace making, and peaceful, without
brawles and struglings, without quarrelles, without strife, without rancour or
hatred, by no means desirous of reuengement.

They are also people very gentle, and very tender, and of an complexion, and
which can sustain no travel, and (...) die very soon of any disease
whatsoever, in such sort as the very children of Princes and Noble men
brought up amongst us, in all commodities, ease, and delicateness, are not
more soft then those of that country: yea, although they be the children of
laborers. They are also very poor folk, which possess little, neither yet do
so much as desire to have much worldly goods, and therefore neither are they
proud, ambitious, nor covetous. Their diet is such (as it seems) yt of the
holy fathers in the desert has not been more scarce, nor more straight, nor
less dainty, nor less sumptuous. Their appareling is commonly to go naked:
all save their shamefast parts alone covered. And when they be clothed, at the
most, it is but of a mantell of bombacie of an elle and a half, or a two else
of linen square. Their lodging is upon a matte, and those which have the best:
sleep as it were upon a net fastened at the four corners, which they call in
the language of the I Will of Hispaniola, Hamasas. They have their understanding
very pure and quick, being teachable and capable of all good learning, very
apt to receive our holy Catholic faith, and to be instructed in good and
virtuous manners, having less encombrances and disturbances to the atteyning
there unto, then all the folk of the world besides, and are so enflamed, ardent,
and importune to know and understand the matters of the faith after they have
but begun once to taste them, as likewise the exercise of the Sacraments of
the Church, and the divine service: that in truth, the religious men have need
of a singular patience to support them. And to make an end, I have heard many
Spaniardes many times hold this as assured, and that which they could not
deny, concerning the good nature which they saw in them. Undoubtedly these
folks should be the happiest in the world, if only they knew God.

Upon these lambs so mecke, so qualified and endewed of their maker and
creator, as has bin said, entered the Spanish incontinent as they knew them,
as wolves, as lions, and as tigres most cruel of long time famished: and have
not done in those quarters these 40. years be past, neither yet do at this
present, ought else save tear them in pieces, kill them, martyr them, afflict
them, torment them, and destroy them by strange sorts of cruelties never
neither seen, nor read, nor heard of the like (of the which some shall be
set down hereafter) so far forth that of above three Millions of souls
that were in the I Will of Hispaniola, and that we have seen, there are not now
two hundredth natives of the country. The Isle of Cuba, the which is in length
as far as from Vallodolyd until Rome, is at this day as it were al wast. S.
John's i will, and that of Iamayca both of them very great, very fertile, and very
fair: are desolate. Likewise the isles of Lucayos, near to the i will of
Hispaniola, and of the north side unto that of Cuba, in number being above
threescore Islands, together with those which they call the isles of Geante, one
with another, great and little, whereof the very wurst is fertiler then the
kings garden at Seuill, and the country the healthsomest in the world: there
were in these same isles more then five hundredth thousand souls, and at this
day there is not one only creature. For they have bin all of them slain, after
that they had drawn the^ out from thence to labor in their minerals in the
i will of Hispaniola, where there were no more left of the inbornes natives of
that island. A ship riding for the space of three years betwixt all these
islands, to the end, after the inning of this kind of vintage, to gleane and
cull the remainder of these folk (for there was a good Christian moved with
pity and compassion, to convert and win unto Christ such as might be found)
there were not found but eleue^ persons which I saw: other isles more then
thirty nere to the i will of S. John have likewise bin dispeopled and marred. All
these isles contayn above two thousand leagues of land, and are all dispeopled
and laid waste.

As touching the maine firm land, we are certain that our Spaniardes, by
their cruelties and cursed doings have dispeopled and made desolate more then
ten realms greater then all Spain, comprising also therewith Aragon and
Portugal, and twice as much or more land then there is from Seuill to
Jerusalem which are above a thousand leagues: which realms as yet unto this
present day remain in a wilderness and utter desolation, having bin before time
as well peopled as was possible.

We are able to yield a good and certain account, that there is wtin ye space
of ye said 40. years, by those said tyra^nies and diulish doings of the
Spaniards ^^^n to death unjustly and tyrannously more then twelve Millions of
souls, men, women, and children* And I verily do believe, and think not to
mistake therein, that there are dead more then fifteen Millions of souls.

Those which have go them out of Spain into that country, bearing them
selves as Christians, have kept two general and principal ways to eradicate
and abolishe from off the face of the earth those miserable nations: The one is
their unjust, cruel, bloody and tyrannical war. That other manner is, that
they have slain all those which could any kind of ways so much as gasp,
breath, or think to set them selves at liberty, or but to withdraw them
selves from the torments which they endure, as are all the natural Lords,
and the men of valor and courage. For commonly they suffer not in the wars
to live any, save children and women: oppressing also afterward those very
same with the most cruel, dreadful, and heinous thraldom that ever has been
laid upon men or beasts. Unto these two kinds of tyranie diabolical, may be
reduced and sorted as it were the issues one under another to their head, all
other their diverse and infinite manners of doing which they keept to lay
desolate, and root out those folk without number.

The cause why the Spanishe have destroyed such an instnite of souls, has
been only, that they have held it for their last scope and mark to get
gold, and to enriche them selves in a short time, and to mount at one leap to
very high estates, in no wise agreeable to their persons: or, for to say in a
word, the cause hereof has been their avarice and ambition, which has seized
them the exceedingest in the world in consideration of those lands so happy
and rich, and the people so humble, so patient, and so easy to be subdued.
Whom they have never had any respect, or made any more account of (I speak the
truth of that which I have seen all the time that I was there conversant) I
say not then of beasts (for would to GOD that they had entreated and esteemed
them but as beasts:) but less then of the mire of the streets, and even as
much care is it that they have had of their lives and of their souls. And by
this means have died so many Millions without faith and without sacraments.

It is a certain verity, and that which also the tyrants them selves know
right well and confess, that the Indiens throughout all the Indes never
wrought any displeasure unto the Spaniardes: but rather that they reputed them
as come from heaven, until such time as they, or their neighbors had
received the first, sundry wrongs, being robbed, killed, forced, and
tormented by them.

Of the I Will of hispaniola.
IN the I Will Hispaniola, which was the first (as we have said) where the
Spaniardes arrived, began the great slaughters and spoils of people: the
Spaniardes having begun to take their wives and children of the Indies, for
to serve their turn and to use them ill, and having begun to eat their
victualles, gotten by their sweat and erauell: not contenting them selves with
that which the Indians gave them of their own good will, every one after their
ability, the which is algates very small, forasmuch as they are accustomed to
have no more store, then they have ordinarily need of, and that such as they
get with little travel: And that which might suffice for three householdes,
reconing ten persons for each household for a months space, one spaniarde
would eat and destroy in a day.

Now after sundry other forces, violences, and torments, which they wrought
against them: the Indians began to perceive, that those were not men
descended from heaven. Some of them therefore hid their victuals: others hid
their wives and children: some others fled into the mountains, to separate
them selves a far off from a nation of so hard natured and ghastly
conversation. The Spaniardes buffeted them with their fistes and bastouades:
pressing also to lay hands upon the Lords of the Towns. And these cases
ended in so great an hazard and desperatenes, that a Spanishe Captain durst
adventure to ravish forcibly the wife of the greatest king and Lord of this
I Will. Since which time the Indians began to search means to cast the
Spaniardes out of their lands, and set them selves in arms: but what kind of
arms? very feeble and weak to withstand or resist, and of less defense
(wherefore all their wars are no more wars then the playings of children, when
as they play at Iogo di Can or Reeds.) The Spaniardes with their Horses,
their spears and lances, began to commit murders, and strange cruelties:
they entered into Towns, Borowes, and Villages, sparing neither children, nor
old men, neither women with child, neither them that lay In, but that they
ripped their bellies, and cut them in pieces, as if they had been opening of
Lambs shut up in their fold. They laid wagers with such as with one thrust
of a sword would paunche or bowell a man in the midst, or with one blow of
a sword would most redily and most deliuerly cut off his head, or that would
best pearce his entrals at one stroke. They took the little souls by the
heels, ramping them from the mothers dugges, and crushed their heads against
the clifces. Others they cast into the rivers laughing and mocking, and when
they tombled into the water, they said, now shift for thy self such a ones
corpse. They put others, together with their mothers and all that they met, to
the edge of the sword. They made certain Gibbets long and low, in such sort,
that the feet of the hanged on, touched in a manner the ground, every one
enough for thirteen, in the honor and worship of our Savior and his twelve
Apostles (as they used to speak) and setting to fire, burned them all quick
that were fastened. Unto all others, whom they used to take and reserve alive,
cutting off their two hands as near as might be, and so letting them hang,
they said: Get you with these letters, to carry tydinges to those which are
fled by the mountains. They murdered commonly the Lords and nobility on this
fashion: They made certain gra^es of perches laid on pickforkes, and made a
little fire underneath, to the intent, that by little and little yelling and
despeiring in these torments, they might give up the ghost.

One time I saw four or five of the principal Lords roasted and broyled
upon these gradeirons. Also I think that there were two or three of these
gredirons, garmshed with the like furniture, and for that they cried out
pitioussy, which thing troubled the Captain that he could not then sleep:
he commanded to strangle them. The Sergeant, which was worse then the hangman
that burned them (I know his name and friends in Seuill) would not have them
strangled, but him se^fe putting boulets in their mouths, to the end yt they
should not cry, put to the fire, until they were softly roasted after his
desire. I have seen all the aforesaid things and others infinite. And
forasmuch, as all the people which could flee, hid themselves in the
mountains, and mounted on the tops of them, fled from the men so without all
manhood, empty of all pity, behauing them as savage beasts, the slaughterers
and deadly enemies of mankind: they taught their hounds, fierce dogs, to
tear them in pieces at the first view, and in the space that one might say a
Credo, assailed and devoured an Indian as if it had been a swine. These dogs
wrought great destructions and slaughters. And forasmuch as sometimes,
although seldom, when the indians put to death some Spaniards upon good right
and law of due Justice: they made a Law between them, that for one
Spaniarde, they had to stay an hundredth Indians.

The realms which were in this I Will of Hispaniola.
THere were in this I Will Hispaniola, five great principal realms, and five
very mighty Kings, unto whom almost all the other Lords obeyed, which were
without number. There were also certain Lords of other several Provinces,
which did not acknowledge for sovereign any of these Kings: One realm was
named Magua, which is as much to say, as the kingdom of the plain. This
plain is one of the most famous and most admirable things of all that is in
the world. For it contains fourscore leagues of ground, from the South sea
unto the North sea: having in breadth five leagues, and eight unto ten.

It has in one side and other exceeding high mountains. There enters into it
above thirty thousand rivers and lakes, of the which twelve are as great as
Ebro, and Duero, and Guadalqueuir. And all the rivers which issue out of a
Mountain which is toward the West, in number about five and twenty
thousand, are very rich of gold. In the which mountain or mountains, is
contained the province of Cibao, from whence the mines of Cibao take their
names, and from whence comes the same exquisite gold and five of 24.
karrets, which is so renowined in these parts. The King and Lord of this
realm was called Guarionex, which had under him his Vassals and Lieges so
great and mighty, that every one of them was able to set forth threescore
thousand men of arms for the service of the king Guarionex. Of the which
Lords I have known some certain. This Guarionex was very obedient and
virtuous, naturally desirous of peace, and well affectioned to the devotion of
the kings of Castile, and his people gave by his commandment, every
housekeeper a certain kind of Dromme full of gold: but afterward being not
able to fill the Dromme cut it off by the midst, and gave the half thereof
full. For the Indians of that I Will had little or none industry or practice to
gather or draw gold out of the mines. This Caceque presented unto the king of
Castile his service, in causing to be manured all the lands from the Isavella,
where the Spanish first sited, unto the Town of Saint Domingo, which are
fittie leagues large, on condition that he should exact of them no gold: for
he said, (and he said the truth) that his subjects had not the skill to
draw it out. As for the manuring which he said he would procure to be
done: I know that he could have done it very easily, and with great
readiness, and that it would have been worth unto the king every year more
then three Millions of Castillans, besides that it would have caused, that, at
this hour there had bin above fifty Cities greater then Seuille.

The payment that they made to this good king and Lord, so gracious and so
redowbted, was to dishonor him in the person of his wife, an evil Christian,
a Captain rauishing her. This king could have attended the tune and
opportunity to avenge him self in leuying (...) draw him self rather, and
only (...) thus being banished from his real^e (...) of the Cignaios, where
there was a great Lord his (...). After that the Spaniardes were (...) of his
(...)* and ^ee could (...) himself (...) against the Lord which had (...)
and make great ^l^^ghters through the coun^^^y (...) they go, (...) they found
and took (...) a Ship, to carry him to C^stile: which ship was lost upon
the sea, and there were wi^h him drowned many Spaniardes, and a great quantity
of Gold, amongst the which also (...) the great (...) of Gold, (...) weying
three thousand* (...) GOD to wreake (...).

The other rea^^tie was called of Mar^^^, where (...) at this day the port at
one of the ^oundes of the play^^, (...) the North: and it is far greater then
the rea^^e of Portugal, (...) ^ of gold, and copper (...). The king was
called (...), which had (...) many great Lords* of the which I have known and
seen sundry* (...) first the (...) admyrall, when he ^^co^ered the I^dies,
whom at that time that he discovered the I Will, the said (...) so graciously,
bountifully, and (...) withal the Spaniardes who were with him, in (...) him
(...) ^ (which the Admiral was carried in) that he ^^ulde not have (...) (...)
made off in his own country of his own father. This did I ^nderstand of the
Admyrals own mouth. This king died, in (...) the slaughters and cruelties of
the Spaniards through (...), ^^^yng destroyed and ^epri^ed of his (...)* And in
the (...) Lords his subi^ctes died in the tyranny, and (...) that shall be
declared hereafter.

The third Realm and dominion was M^gu^^^, a country also admirable, very
healthsome, and very fertile, where the best (...)

The (...) was named (...) ^ m^^^es of his serui^^^* The Spaniardes ^ooke this
king with great subtlety* and malice, even as he was in his own house*
^ou^^^ng him of nothing* They (...) ^a ship to (...) other ship in the
port (...) vpsayle: Behold how God by his i^st ^u^g^ment, would decla^e
that i^ with other thinge^, was an exceeding (...) ini^u^tie and ^^iust, by
sending the same night a (...), which sunk, and drenched that (...) with the
Spaniardes that were within. There died also with them the (...) with ^oltes
and irons. This Prince (...) three or four brothers (...), and courageous ^
Lord and brother so against all equity, together with the w^^^s and
slaughters which the Spaniardes made in other realms, and specially after that
they had heard that the king their brother was dead* they put themselves in
arms to ^^^ounter the Spaniardes and to avenge the (...) who (...) the other
side ^eeting with them ^n ^orsebacke ((...) above all that may be to (...) the
India^^ with) so they rage in discomfitures and massacres* that the one (...)
of this Realm has been thereby desolate and dispeopled.

The fourth Realm i^ the some which is (...) of X^^agua. This Realm (...) or
to speak of, (...) the other Realms i^ language and polished speech, in (...)
and good manners, the be^^ composed and ordered* For as much as there were many
noble Lords and Gentlemen, the people also being the best made and (...)
be^^ifull. The King (...) to name (...) which had (...) called An^^^ona. (...)
two, the brother and sister* had (...) great services to the kings of Castile,
and great (...) to the Spaniardes, deliu^ring them from sundry dangers of
death.

After the (...) of Beh^^mo, An^^^^na (...) So^^raigne of the Realm. (...) the
G^^^^nour of this I Will with threescore Horses, and more then three hundre^^
footmen (the horsemen alone had been enough to spoil and ouerrunne not this
I Will alone, but all the firm land withal.) And so (...) being called, more
then three hundre^^ Lords (...), of whom the chiefest, (...) caused to be^
conveyed into a house of thatch, and (...). ^owe on this wise were these Lords
(...): all the rest of the Lords, with other folk infinite, were smitten to
^each with their spears and swords.

But the Sovereign L^die Anac^ona, to do her honor they hanged* It happened
that certain Spaniardes, either of (...) or of co^^^ousnesse, (...) detayned
certain young (...): because they would not (...) them slain, and (...) them
behind them on their horse backs: another Spaniarde came behind, whi^he
stabbed them through with a spear. If so be any child^ (...) boy tombled
down to the ground* (...) Spaniarde (...) and ^utte off his legs.

Some certain of these (...) which could escape this (...), passed (...) I Will
near unto the (...), within (...) eight leagues. The gouenour condemned all
those which had passed the (...) because they had (...).

(...) was called ^igney, over the which raigne^ (...), whom the Spaniardes
hanged up. The people were in^^nite whom I sa^^ (...) alive, (...) rent ^^
p^^^es, and tormented (...) and ^^raung^^y, and whom I saw made slaves, even
so many as they (...).

And (...) for as much as there are so many (...) those peoples, that they
can not conveniently be (...) in writing (yea I do verily believe that of a
(...) of things to be spoken of there can not be disciphered of (...)
thousand ^^^tes one:) I will only in that which (...) the wars (...)
mentioned conclude, auerre, and justify in conscience, and as before God, that
of all others, which I ouerpasse to speak of, or shall be able to speak of,
the Indians never gave no more occasion, or cause, then might a convent of good
religious persons well ordered, why they should be robbed and slain, and why
those that escaped the death, should be retained in a perpetual captivity
and bondage.

I affirm yet moreover, for ought that I can believe or conjecture, that,
during all the time that all this huge number of these Islanders have been
murdered and made away utterly, they never committed against the Spaniardes any
one mortal offense, punishable by the l^^ of m^n* And concerning offenses, of
the which the punishment is reserved unto God, as are desire of reuengement,
(...), and rancour, which these people might bear against enemies so capital
as were the Spaniardes, that very few persons have been attached with the
blemishe, and less violent and forcible did I find them, by the good
experience I had of them, then (...) twelve years of age. And I know for
certain and infallible, that the Indians had evermore most ^ust cause of war
against the Spaniardes: but the Spaniardes never had any just cause of war
against the Indians, but they were all (...) and most ^nrighteous, more then
can be spoken of any tyrant that is on the whole earth. And I affirm the
(...)other acts and gestes by them (...).

The wars (...), and all the men (...) to death thereby reserved (...) the
young (...), women, and children* (the which they departed among them, in
giving (...), to another forty, and to another an hundredth, or tow hundredth,
according as ^uery one had the (...) of the (...) Tyrant, whom they called the
(...)) they (...) Spaniardes upon that condition and color, that they would
teach them the Catholic faith, they themselves who took upon them this
charge of souls, commonly all idiots, or utterly ignorant persons, barbarous
men, extreemely covetous and vicious.

Now the carke and care that these had of them, was to send the men unto the
mines, to make them drein them out gold, which is an intolerable travel: and
the women they bestowed into the country to their farms, to manure and till
the ground, which is asore travel, even for the very men, the ablest and
mightiest. They gave to eat neither to one nor other, naught save grasses and
such like things of no substance: in such sort as the milk of the breasts
of the wives new delivered of their childbyrth dried up: and thus dyed in a
small season, all the little creatures their young children. Further, by reason
of the separation and not cohabiting of the men with their wives, the
generation ceased between them. The men died with toil and famine in the
mineralles: these the women died of the same in the fields. By these means
were consumed and brought to their ends so huge a number of the folk of this
Islande. By the like might be abolished and exterpate, all the inhabitants of
the world.

As touching loding, they laid upon them fourscore or an hundredth pounds
weight, which they should carry an hundredth or two hundredth leagues: The
Spanish also causing them selves to be carried in lytres upon men arms, or
beds made by the Indians, in fashion of nets. For they served their turns
with them to transporte their carriages and bagage as beasts, whereby they had
upon their backs and shoulders, w^i^es and galls as poor galled beasts. Also
as touching whippings, bastonading, buffeting, blows with the fist, cursing,
and a thousand other kinds of torments, which they practiced upon them during
the tune that they trauayled, of a truth, they can not be recounted in a long
season, nor written in a great deal of paper, and they should be even to
affright men withal.

It is to be noted, that the destruction of these isles and lands, began after
the decease of the most gracious Queen, da^e Isabell, which was the year, a
thousand, five hundredth, and four. For before there were laid waste in this
i will, but certain Provinces by unjust war, and that not wholly altogether*
and these for ye more part, or in a manner al were co^cealed from the knowledge
of ye Q. (unto who^ it may please god to give his holy glory) forasmuch as she
had a great desire, and a zeal admirable, yt those people might be saved and
prosper, as we do know good examples, the wc we have seen with our eyes, and felt
with our hands.

Further note here, yt in what part of ye Indies ye Spanishe have come, they
have evermore exercised against ye India^s, these innocent peoples, ye
cruelties aforesaid, and oppressio^s abominable, and inverted day by day new
torments, huger and monstrouser, beco^ming every day more cruel. wherefore god
also gave the^ over to fall headlong down with a more extreme downfall into a
reprobate sense.

Of the two Isles S. John. and Iamayca.
THe Spanish passed over to ye I Will of S. John, and to yt of Iamayca (wc were
like gardens for bees) 1509. setting beforethe^ ye same end which they had in
the I Will Hispaniola, and committing the robberies and crimes aforesaid,
adjoining thereunto many great and notable cruelties, killing, burning, rosting
and casting the^ to ye dogs: farthermore, afterward oppressing, and vexing
them in their minerals and other travel, unto ye rotting out of those pore
innoce^ts wc were in these two Isles, by supputatio^ 6. C. M. souls: yea I
believe, yt they were more the^ a milio^, although there be not at this day in
either I Will. 200. persons, and all perished without faith and without
Sacraments.

Of the I Will of Cuba.
IN the year 1511 they passed to ye I Will of Cuba, which is (as I have said) as
long as there is distance from Vall^d^l^^ to Rome* (where were great provinces,
and great multitudes of people) they both began (...) in the^ after ye (...)
far more cruelly. There came to pass in this Ila^d matters worth ye noting: A
C^cique named Hathuey, which had co^^eyed himself from ye I Will Hispaniola to
Cuba with many of his people, to avoid the calamities and (...) so unnatural of
ye spanish: when (...) certain Indians had told him (...) the Spaniards were
coming toward Cuba, he (...): Now you know that the Spaniards (...) this
(...) ye know also by experience how they (...) such and the people of (...)
(meaning (...)) (...) they come to do ye like here. Wot ye why they do it? they
answered no, unless (...) they are by nature void of humanity. He replied:
They do it not only for yt* but because they have a god whom they hono^ and do
demand very much and to yt end to have from us as well as others to honor him
wtall they do their uttermost to subdue us. He had the^ by him a little chestful
of gold and Jewels, and said, Behold here the God of the Spaniards, let us do
to him* if it so seem you good, A^^^os (which are windlesse^ and daunces) thus
doing, we shall please him and he will command ye Spaniards yt they shall do us
no harm: They answered all with a loud voice: Well said sir, well said. Thus then
they dau^sed before it, until they were weary, the^ quoth the L. Hathuey, Take
we heed howeuer y^ world go, if we keep him, to ye end yt he be taken away from
us in the end they will kill us: wherefore let us cast him into ye river:
whereunto they all agreed, and so they cast it into a great river there.

This L. and (...) went always fleeing ye spanish, incontinent as they were
arrived at ye i will of Cuba, as he wc knew the^ but too well* and defended
himself, when as he met the^. In ye end he was taken and only for because that
he fled from a nation so unjust and e^uel, and that* he defended himself from
such as would kill him, and oppress him even unto ye death, with all his folk, he
was burned alive. Now as he was fastened to the stake, a religious man of S.
Francis order, a devout person, spoke to him somewhat of God and of our faith
which thin^^ this said L. had never heard of, yet might be sufficient for the
time which ye hutchers gave him, that if he would believe those things which
were spoken to him he should go to heaven, where is glory and rest everlasting,
yt if he did not believe, he should go to hell, there to be tormented
perpetually. The L. after having a little paused to think of ye matter, demanded
of the religious man, whether yt the spaniards went to heaven? who answered,
yea: such of them that were good. The Cacik answered again immediately without
any further deliberation, that he would not go to heaven, but that he would go
to hell, to the end, not to come in the place where such people should be, and
to the end not so see a nation so cruel. L^^ here the praises and honor,
which God and our faith have received of the Spaniardes, which have gone to the
Iudes.

One time the Indians came to meet us, and to receive us with victualles, and
delicate cheer, and with all entertaynmene ten leagues of a great city, and
being come at the place, they presented us with a great quantity of (...),
and of bread, and other meat, together with all that they could do for us to
the uttermost.

See incontinent the devil, which put him self into the Spaniardes, to put
them all to the edge of the sword in my presence, without any cause
whatsoever, more then three thousand souls, which were set before us, men,
women, and children. I saw there so great cruelties, that never my man living
either have or shall see the like.

Another time, but a few days after the premises, I sent messengers unto
all the Lords of the province of Hauana, assuring them, that they should not
need to see are (for they had heard of my credit) and that without
withdrawing themselves, they should come to receive us, and that there should
be done unto them no displeasure: for all the country was afraid, by reason
of the mischiefs and murderings passed, and this did I by the advice of the
Captain him self. After that we were come into the Province, one and twenty
Lords and Cacikes came to receive us, whom the Captain apprehended
incontinent, breaking the safe conduite which I had made them, and intended
the day next following to burn them alive, saying that it was expedient so to
do, for that otherwise those Lords one day, would do us a shrewde turn. I
found me^ self in a great deal of trouble to save them from the fire:
howbeit in the end they escaped.

After that the Indians of this Islande were thus brought into bondage and
calamity, like unto those of the I Will of Hispaniola, and that they saw that
they dyed and perished all without remedy: some of them began to fly into the
mountains, others quite desperate hanged them selves, and there hung together
hu^sbandes with their wives, hanging with them their little children. And
through the cruelty of one only Spaniarde, which was a great tyrant, and
one whom I know, there hunge them selves more then two hundred Indians: and of
this fashion died an infinity of people.

There was in this I Will an officer of the kings, (...) whom they gave for his
share three hundred Indians, of whom at the end of three months there died
by him in the travail of the mines, two hundred and sixty: in such sort,
that there remained now but thirty, which was the tenth part. Afterward
they gave him as many more, and more, and those also be made havoc of in like
manner, and still as many as they gave him, so many he flewe until he dyed
him self, and that the devil carried him away.

In three or four months (me self being present) there died more then
six thousand children, by reason that they had plucked away from them their
fathers and mothers which they sent into the mines. I beheld also other
things frightfull.

Shortly after they resolved to climb after those which were in the
mountains, where they wrought also ghastly slaughters, and thus laid waste
all this I Will: which we beheld not long after, and it is great pity to see it
so dispeopled and desolate as it is.

Of the firm land.
IN the year one thousand five hundred, and fourteen, there landed in the
maine a mischievous governor, a most cruel tyrant, which had neither pity
nor prudencie in him, being as an instrument of the wrath of God, fully
resolved to set into this land agreat number of Spaniards. And howbeit yt
aforetime certain other tyrauntes had entered the land, and had spoiled,
murdered, and cruelly entreated very many folk: yet was it not but on the sea
coast that they spoiled, and robbed, and did the worst that they could. But
this surpassed all the others which came before him, and all those of all the
Islands, how cursed and abominable soever they were in all their doings. He
not only wasted or dispeopled the sea coast, but sacked also great realms and
countries, making hauockes by slaying and murdering of peoples, infinite to be
numbered, and sending them to hell. He over ran and herried most of the places
in the land, from Darien upward, unto the Realm and Provinces of Nicaragua
within being, which are more then five hundred leagues of the best and most
fertile ground in the whole world, where there were a good number of great
Lords, with a number of towns, borrowes, and villages, and store of gold in
more abundaunce then was to be found on the earth until that present. For
albeit that Spain was as it were replenished with gold, of the finest that
came from the I Will Hispaniola: the same had been only drawn out of the entrals
of the earth by the Indians, of ye mines, aforesaid, where they died as has
been said.

This governor with his men, found out new sorts of cruelties and torments,
to cause them to discover and give him gold. There was a captain of his,
which flue in one walk and course which was made by his commandment, to
rob and root out more then forty thousand souls, putting them to ye edge
of the sword, burning the^, and giving the^ to ye dogs, and torme^ting them
diversely: wc also a religious man of the order of S. Francis, who went with him,
beheld with his eyes, and had to name friar Francis of S. Roman.

The most pernicious blindness, wc has always possessed those who have
governed the Indians in stead of the care wc they should have for the conversion
and salvation of those people, (wc they have always neglected, their mouth with
painted fables speaking one thing, but their heart thinking another) came to ye
pass, as to command orders to be set down unto ye Indians to receive the
faith, and render themselves unto ye obedience of the K. of Castile, or
otherwise to bid the^ battle with fire and sword, and to slay the^ or make the^
slaves: As if ye son of God which died for every one of the^ had commanded in
his law, where he says, Go teach al nations, yt there should be ordinances set
down unto infidels, being peaceful and quiet, and in possession of their
proper land, if so be they received it not forth with, without any preaching or
teaching first had: and if yt they submitted not themselves to ye dominion of a
king, who^ they never saw and whom they never heard speak of, and namely such
a one as whose messengers and me^ were so cruel, and so debarred from all
pity, and such horrible tyra^ts, yt they should for ye lose their goods and
lands, their liberty, their wives and children, with their lives. Which is a
thing too absurd and fond, worthy of al reproach and mockery, yea worthy of hell
fire, in such sort as when this wicked and wretched governor had accepted the
charge, to put in execution the said ordinances, to the end to make them seem
ye more just in appearance. For they were of themselves impertinent, against
all reason and law, he commanded (or peradventure ye thieues, whom he
dispatched to do ye execution, did it of their own heads) when they were
purposed to go a rouing and robbing of any place, where they knew yt there was
any gold, ye Indians being in their towns and dwelling houses, without
mistrusting any thing, ye wicked Spaniards would go after ye guise of thieues,
unto within half a league near some town, borowe, or village, and there by
themselves alone, and by night make a reading, publication, or proclamation of
ye said ordinances, saying thus, Oyes Caciques and Indians of this firm land
of such a place: Be it known unto you, that there is one God, one Pope, one
king of Castile, which is L. of these lands: make your appearance, al delay
set aside, here to do him homage, etc. Which if you shall not accomplish: Be it
known unto you, yt we will make war upon you, and we will kill you, and make you
slaves. Hereupon at the fourth watch in ye morning, the poor innocents,
sleeping yet with their wives and children: these tyrants set upon the place,
casting fire on the houses which commonly were thatched, and so burn up all
quick men, women and children, more suddenly the^ that they could of a great
many be perceived. They massacred at the instant those that seemed the^ good,
and those who^ they took prisonners, they caused the^ cruelly to die upon ye
rack, to make the^ to tell in what places there were any more gold the^ they
found with them: and others which remained alive, they made them slaves, marking
them with a hot iron, so after the fire being out and quenched, they go seek
the gold in their houses. This is then the deportement in these affairs of
this mischievous person, with all the bond of his ungodly Christians, which he
trained from the fourteenth year, unto the one and twenty, or two and
twentieth year, sending in these exploytes six or more of his servants or
soldiers, by whom he received as many shares, over and beesides his Captains
Generalles part, which he levied of all the gold, of all the pearls, and of
all the jewels which they took of those whom they made their slaves. The
selfsame did ye kings officers, every one sending forth as many servants as he
could.

The Bishop also, which was the chief in the Realm, he sent his servants
to have his share in the booty: They spoiled more gold within the time, and
in this realm, as far forth as I am able to reckon, then would amount to a
million of Ducates, yea, I believe, that I make my reckoning with the least.
Yet will it be found, that of all this great thieuing, they never sent to the
king ought save three thousand Castillans, having there about killed and
destroyed above eight hundred thousand souls.

The other tyrant governors which succeeded after, unto the year thirty and
three, slew, or at least wise consented, for all those which remained to slay
them in that tyrannical slavery.

Amongst an infinite sort of mischiefs, which this gouernoure did, or
consented unto the doing during the time of his government, this was one: To
wit, that a Cacike or Lord giving him, either of his good will, or which is
rather to be thought for fear, the weight of niene thousand Ducates: the
Spaniardes not content withal, took the said Lord, and tied him to a stake,
setting him on the earth, his feet stretched up, against the which they set
fire to cause him to give the^ some more gold, The Lord sent to his house,
whence there were brought yet moreover three thousand Castillans. They go a
fresh to give him new torments. And when the Lord gave them no more, either
because he had it not, or because he would give them no more, they bent his
feet against the fire, until that the very marrowe sprang out and trylled
down the sowles of his feet: so as he therewith died. They have oftentimes
exercised these kind of torments toward the Lords, to make them give them
gold, wherewith they have also slain them.

An other time, a certain company of Spaniardes, using their theftes and
robberies, came to a mountain, where were assembled and hid a number of
people, having shunned those men so pernicious and horrible: whom incontinent
entering upon, they took a three or fourscore, as well women as mayds, having
killed as many as they could kill.

The morrow after, there assembled a great company of Indians, to pursue the
Spaniardes, warring against them for the great desire they had to recover their
wives and daughters.

The Spaniards perceiving the Indians to approach so near upon them, would not
so forgo their pray, but stabd their swords through the bellies of the wives
and wenches, leaving but one alone alive of all the fourscore. The Indians
felt their hearts to burst for sorrow and grief which they suffered, yelling
out in cries and speaking such words: O wicked men, O ye the cruel
Spaniardes: do ye kill Las Iras? They term Iras in that country the women:
as if they would say, To kill women, those be acts of abominable men, and
cruel as beasts.

There was a ten or fifteen leagues from Ioanama, a great Lord named Paris,
which was very rich of gold: The Spaniardes went thither, whom this Lord
received as if they had been his own brethen, and made a present unto the
Captain of fifty thousand Castillans of his own voluntary accord. It seemed
unto the Captain and the other Spaniardes, that he which gave such a great
sum of his own will, should have a great treasure, which should be the
end and easing of their traueyles. They make wise, and pretend in words to
depart: but they return at the fourth watch of the morning, setting upon the
town which mistrusted nothing, set it on fire, whereby was burnt and slain a
great number of people, and by this means they brought away in the spoil
fifty, or threescore thousand Castillans more.

The Cacik or Lord escaped without being slain or taken, and levied
incontinent as many of his as he could. And at the end of three or four
days, ouertaketh the Spaniardes which had taken from him an hundredth and
thirty, or forty thousand Castillans, and set upon them valiantly, killing
fifty Spaniardes, and recovering all the gold which they had taken from him.
The others saved them selves by running away, being well charged with blows
and wounded.

Not long after, diverse of the Spanishe return against the said Cacik, and
discomfite him with an infinite number of his people. Those which were not
slain, they put them to the ordiuarie bondage: in such sort, as that there is
not at this day, neither track nor token, that there has bin living there
either people, or so much as one man alone borne of woman within thirty
leagues of the land, which was before notably peopled and governed by diverse
Lords. There is no reconing able to be made of the murders which this caitiffe
with his company committed in these realms which he so dispeopled.

Of the province of Nicaragua.
THe year a thousand, five hundred, twenty and two, or twenty three, this
tyrant went farther into the land: to bring under his yoke the most fertile
province of Nicaragua, and so in thither he entered in an evil hour. There is
no man which is able worthily and sufficiently to speak of the fertiltie,
healthsomenesse, prosperity, and frequencie, of those nations that there were.

It was a thing wonderful to behold, how well it was peopled, having towns
of three or four leagues in length, full of maruilous fruits, which fruits
were also the cause of the frequencie of the people. These people, for as much
as the country was flat and level, having no hills where any might hide
them, and for that it was so pleasant and delectable, that the native
inhabitauntes could not abandon it but with great heart grief and
difficulty, for which cause they the rather endured and suffered grieuons
persecutions, supporting as much as they could, the tyrannies and seruitudes,
inflicted by the Spanishe. Also for that by their nature they were very soft
natured and peaceable people, these (I say) this tyrant with his mates made to
endure (that which he had used also to do to destroy likewise other realms)
so many damages, so many murders, so many cruelties, so many slaueries and
iniquities, that there is no humane tongue is able to discipher them. He sent
fifty horsemen, and caused to slay all the people of this province, (which is
greater then the countye of Rossillon) with the swoorde: in such sort, as that
he left alive, nor man, nor woman, nor old, nor young for the least cause in
the world: as if they came not incontinent at his command: or if they did not
bring him so many load of Mahis, which signifies in that country bread corn:
or if they did not bring him so many Indians to serve him and others of his
company: for the country lay level, as was said, and no creature could
escape his horses and diuelishe rage.

He sent Spaniardes to make out rodes, that is to say, to go a thieuing into
other provinces: and gave leave to those rouers, to carry with them as many
Indians of this peaceable people as they listed, and that they should serve
them, whom they put to the chain, to the end they should not give over the
burdens of three or fourscore pounds weight, wherewith they loded them,
whereof it came to pass oftentimes that of four thousand Indians, there
returned not home to their housen six on live: but even fell down stark dead
in the high way: and when any were so weary that they could march no farther
for the lieaft of their burdens, or that some of them fell sick, or fainted
for hunger or thyrst, because it should not need to stand so long as to
unlock the chain, and to make the speedier dispatch, he cut off the head
from ye shoulders, and so the head tumbled down one way, and the body
another. Now consider with your selves, what the other pore souls might think
the whiles, Certainly when as he used to speed out such voiages, ye Indians
knowing yt none in a manner ever returned home again, at parting one from
another they would weep and sigh, saying: such ways are ye same where as we
were wont to serve ye christians, and howbeit we traueiled sore there: yet that
notwithstanding we came home again to our housen, our wives and our children:
but now we go without hope ever to return again to see the^, and to live
together with them.

At a time when he would make a new sharing forth of the Indians, because his
pleasure was such, yea men say that it was in deed to rid the Indians, as
those to whom he meant no good at all, but to give them away to whom he saw
good: he was the cause that the Indians sowed not their grounds one whole
years continuance.

So as now, when they wanted bread, the Spaniards took away from the Indians
their Mahis, which they had in store for provision, to nourishe them and their
children: whereby there dyed of famine, more then twenty or thirty thousand
souls. And it came to pass, that a woman fallen mad with the famine, slew
her son to eat him.

Forasmuch as every towneshippe, and all other places inhabited that the
Spaniardes had in their subjection, was none other then a very garden of
pleasure (as has bin said) they kept them selves every one forsooth in the
place escheated to him in partition (or as they use to speak) given him in
command, and did their affairs, nourishing themselves with the goods and
provisions of the poor Indians. In this wise did they take the lands and
inheritaunces particular wherewith they sustained themselves, so as the
Spaniardes kept in their own houses, all the Indians, Lords, old men, women,
and children, causing them to serve them day and night without rest, even to
the infantes as soon as they could but go, to put them to the greatest thing
they were able to do: yea and to greater things then they were able to do.
And thus have they cousumed and abolished, and do yet every day unto this
present, consume and abolish the few remaining behind, not permitting the^ to
retayn house nor ought else that is their own. Wherein they may vaunt to have
surmounted them selves, in their own iniquities and vnrighteousnesses by them
wrought in Hispaniola.

They have discomfited and oppressed in this province a great number of people,
and hastened their death in cawsing them to bear boordes and timber unto the
haven thirty leagues distance, to make ships with: and sent them to go
seek honnie and wax amiddest the mountains, where the Tigres devoured them:
Yea they have laden women with child, and women new delivered or lying in,
with burdens enough for beasts.

The greatest plague which has most dispeopled this province, has been the
license which the governor gave to the Spaniardes, to demand or exact of the
Cacikes and Lords of the country slaves. They did give them every four or
five months, or as often times as every one could obtain license of the
governor fifty slaves: with threatninges, that if they gave them not, they
would burn them alive, or cause them to be eaten with dogs.

Now ordinarily the Indians do not keep slaves, and it is much if one
Cacike do keep two, three, or four: Wherefore to serve this turn, they went
to their subjects, and took first all the Orphelius, and after wards they
exacted of him that had two children one, and of him that had three, two: and
in this manner was the Carike, feign to furnishe still to the number that the
tyrane imposed, with the great weeping and crying of the people: for they are
people that do love (as it seems) tenderly their children. And for because
that this was done continually, they dispeopled from the year 23. unto the
year 33. all this realm. For there went for six or seven years space, five
or six ships at a time, carrying forth great numbers of those Indians, for
to sell them for slaves at Ioanama and Peru: where they all dyed not long
after. For it is a thing proved and experimented a thousand times, that when
the Indians are transported from their natural country, they soon end their
lives: besides that these give them not their sustenance, neither yet dimmish
they of their toil, as neither do they buy them, for ought else but to toil.
They have by this manner of doing drawn out of this province of the Indies,
whom they have made slaves, being as free borne as I am, more then sieve
hundredth thousand souls. And by the diuelishe wars which the Spanishe have
made on them, and the hidious thraledome that they have laid upon them, they
have brought to their deaths, other fifty or threescore thousand persons, and
do yet daily make havoc of them at this present. Al these slaughters have
been accomplished within the space of fourteen years. There may be left at
this day in all this provinces of Nicaragua, the number of a four or five
thousand persons, which they also cause to die as yet every day, through
bondages and oppressions ordinarily and personal, having bin the country the
most peopled in the world, as I have already said.

Of new Spain.
IN the year one thousand, five hundred and seventeen, was new Spain
discovered: at the discovery whereof were committed great disorders and
slaughters of the Indians, by those which had the doing of that exployit. The
year a thousand, five hundred, and eyghteene, there went Spanish Christians
(as they term them selves,) to rob and slay, notwithstanding that they said
they went to people the country. Sithence that year, a thousand, five
hundred, and eyghteen, unto this present the year a thousand, five hundredth,
forty two, the unjust dealings, the violencie, and the tyrannies which the
Spaniardes have wrought against the Indians, are mounted to the highest degree
of extremity: those self same Spaniardes, having thoroughly lost the fear of
God, and of the king, and forgotten themselves. For the discomfitures,
cruelties, slaughters, spoils, the destructions of Cities, pillages,
violences, and tyrannies which they have made in so many realms, and so great,
has bin such and so horrible, that all ye things which we have spoken of are
nothing in comparison of those which have bin done and executed from the year
1518. unto the year 1542. and as yet at this time, this month current of
September, are in doing and committing ye most grieuousest, and the most
abominablest of al: in such sort yt the rule which we set down before is
verified: That is, that from the beginning they have always proceeded from
evil to worse, and have gone beyond themselves in ye most greatest disorders
and devilish doings.

In such wise, as that since the first entering into new Spain, wc was on the
eight day of April, in ye 18. year, unto ye 13. year, which make 12. years
complete: the slaughters and the destructions have never ceased, which the
bloody and cruel hands of ye Spaniardes have continually executed in 400. and
50. leagues of land or there about in compass, round about Mexico, and the
neighbor regions round about, such as the which might contaynt 4. or 5. great
realms, as great and a great deal far fertiler then is Spain. All this
country was more peopled with inhabitants, then Toledo, and Seuill, and
Valadolyd, and Sauagoce, with Barcelona. For that there has not been commonly
in those cities, nor never were such a world of people, when they have been
peopled with the most, as there was then in the said country, which
contains in the whole compass more then one thousand eight hundred leagues:
during the time of the above mentioned twelve years, the Spaniardes have
slain and done to death in the said hundred and fifty leagues of land what
men, what women, what young and little children, more then four millions of
souls, with the dint of the sword and spear, and by fire, during (I say) the
conquests (as they call them) but rather in deed during the routes of
barbarous tyrants, such as are condemned not only by the law of God, but
also by alllaws of man, and are worser then those which are done by the Turk
to destroy the church of Christ. Neither yet do I here comprise those, whom
they have slain, and do slay as yet every day, in the aforesaid slavery and
oppression ordinary.

There is no tongue, skill, knowledge, nor industry of man, which is able to
recount the particularities of the dreadful doings, which these arrand
enemies, yea deadly enemies of mankind have put in ure generally throughout
and in diverse parts, and at diverse times within the said compass of ground,
specially some of the deeds done, because of their circumstances which make
them become the more heinous, can not be well as it ought to be disciphred by
any diligence, leisure, or quoting what soever that may be thereto employed.
Howebeit I will rehearse some things of certain parties, but under
protestation, and as if I were sworn solemnly to tell the truth, that is,
that I do believe that I shall not when I have all done, touch one only point
of a thousand.

Of new Spain in particular.
Amongst other murderers and massacres they committed this one which I am now
to speak of, in a great city more the^ of a thirty thousand householdes,
which is called Cholula: that is, that, coming before them the Lords of the
country and places nere adjoining, and first and foremost the Priests with
their chief high priest in procession, to receive the Spaniardes with great
solemnity and reverence, so conducting them in the midst of them, toward
their lodgings in the city, in the housen and place of the Lord, or other
principal Lords of the City: the Spaniardes advised with themselves to make
a massarre, or a chastise (as they speak) to the end, to raise and plant a
dread of their cruelties in every corner of all that country.

Now this has been always their customary manner of doing, in every the
regions which they have entered into, to execute incontinent upon their first
arrival, some notable cruel butcherie, to the end, that those poor and
innocent lambs should tremble for fear which they should have of them: in
this wise they sent first to sommon all the Lords and Noble men of the city,
and of all the places subject unto the same city: who so soon as they came to
speak with the captyne of the Spaniardes, were incontinent apprehended before
that any body might perceive the matter, to be able therevppon to bear
tydinges thereof unto others. Then were demanded of them five or six
thousand Indians, to carry the loadings and carriages of the Spaniardes: which
Indians came forth with, and were bestowed into the base courts of the Housen.
It was a pitiful case to see these poor folk, what time they made them ready
to bear the carriages of the Spaniarde. They come all naked, only their
secret parts covered, having every one upon their shoulder a net with a
small deal of victual: they how them selves every one, and hold their backs
cowred down like a sort of silly lambs, presenting them selves to the swords,
and thus being all assembled in the base court together with others, one part
of the Spanishe all armed, bestow them selves at the gates to hemme them in,
whiles the rest put these poor sheep to the edge of the sword and the
spears, in such sort, that there could not escape away one only person, but
that he was cruelly put to death: saving that after a two or three days, you
might have seen come forth sundry all couerred with blood which had (...) and
saved them selves under the dead bodies of their fellows, and now presenting
themselves before the Spaniardes, asking them mercy and the faiung of their
lives; they found in them no part, nor compassion any whit at all but were
all hewed in pieces.

All the Lords which were above and underneath were all bound, the Captain
commanding there to he brent quick being bound unto stakes pitched into the
ground. How be it one Lord, which might be peradventure the principal and
king of the country saved him self, and cast him self with thirty or
forty other men into a temple thereby, which was as good unto them as a
forte, which they call in their language, qewe: and there be defended him
self a good part of the day. But the Spaniards, whose hands nothing can
escape specially armed for the war, cast fire on the temple, and burned all
those which were within. Who cast out these voices and cries, O ye evil men!
O ye evil men! What displeasure have we done you? why do ye slay us? Go.
Go you shall come at Mexico: where our Sovereign Lord Mortensuma shall take
vengeance of you. It is reported that as the Spaniardes played this gay play in
the base court, putting to the edge of the sword a five or six thousand men,
their captain having his heart all in a Iollitie sang.

Mira Nero de Tarpeya a Roma como seardias
Gritos, dan ninos, y vie^os: y el de nada se dolia:
That is to say,

Fro Tarpey top, dan Nero began see Room all flaming brenne,
Both young and old cry out, the whiles his heart did never yerne.
THey made also another great butcherie in the City of Tapeaca; which was
greater and of more number of householdes, and more people inhabiting then in
the city before sor^e. They sieve here with the sharp of the sword, an infinite
number of people, with great circumstances and particularties of cruelties.

From Cholula they went to Mexico. The king Motensuma sent to meet them a
thousand of presents, and Lords, and people, making joy and mirth by the way.

And at the entry of the cawsie of Mexico, which reaches two leagues in
length, he sent also his brother; accompanied with a great number of honorable
Lords, bearing with them rich presents, gold, silver, and apparel: and at the
bars of the city, the king in person with all his great court, came to
receive them, being carried in a lighter of gold, and them accompanied unto
the palace which he had caused to be made ready for them.

The self same very day, as some have told me the which were then and there
present, they took by a certain dissimulation the great king Moteusuma, as he
mistrusted nothing, and ordained fourscore men to keep him. Afterward, they
put gives on his feet. But letting all this pass, in the which there were
notable points to speak of, I will only rehearse one which was singular
wrought by th^se tirantes. The Captain general of the Spanishe was gone to
the^ sea port to take another Spanishe Captain, which came against in war:
and having left another under captain in his room, with a few more then an
hundredth men to keep the said king Motensuma: these same advised with them
selves to do another thing worthy the note, to the end, to increase and
augment more and more in all those regions, the awe which they had of them: a
practice and stratageme which (as I said before) they have often used. All
this mean while the Indians, the common people, and the Lords of the whole
City sought none other thing, save only to show pleasure and pastime to
their Lord which was deteyned prisoner. And amongst other sportes which they
made him: were their friskes and daunces which they made in the evening
through out all the high streets and markette places, which daunces, they call
Mitotes, as in the isles they call them Areytos.

The do wear in these friskes all their rich furniture, their best gorgious
attire, and their jewels, despising them selves to liking in all things, for
these are the greatest signs of joy and festiuitie that they do use. Now at
this time, the nobilitis also, and princes of the blood royal, each one after
his degree kept their revels and feasts at the nearest unto the house where
was deceyned prisoner their sovereign. Joining unto the walls of the said
palace, were there more then two thousand youths, Lords children, which were
the flower of the nobility of all the state of Morensuma. Against those made
out the captain of the Spaniardes with a troop of soldiers, sending the
others unto other places of the city where the frisks and daunces were kept,
and all making wise only to go see them. The captain had given in charge,
that at a certain appointed hour, they should all cast them upon those
dauncers, and he himself for his own part, casting himself into the thronge,
the Indians mistrusting nothing, but only intending their disport, he says:
Saynttiago, let us amongst, them, and upon the^ sirs. And thus their arming
swords in their fistes, they began to rip these bodies naked and delicate, and
to shed that blood gentle and noble, in such sort, as that they left not a man
alive. The others performed the like in other places, a thing which set all
those realms and nations in a fright and extreme desperation, and whereof as
long as the world shall last, they will never lin (if themselves do not decay)
to lament, and record in their Areytos and solemn meetings, as in rhyme these
calamities, and the spoil of the spring of their ancient nobility, of the
which they are wont to vaunt themselves and glory very much.

The Indians seeing so great an iniquity, and a cruelty never heard of the
like, made against so many innocents without any cause: specially having put
up quietly the imprisonment and that no less wrongful of their sovereign
Lord, who also had commanded them not to make war upon the Spaniardes: all
the city put them selves in arms, whereupon the Spaniards being assaulted and
many of them hurt, with much a do might they escape, but set a dagger on the
chest of the breast of the prisoner Motensuma to kill him, if he laid not him
self out at a gallery or winddowe, to command the Indians that they should not
beset the house, and they should keep the^ quiet. The Indians taking no care
as then of obeying, advised the^ to choose a L. and captayn from amongst them
selves to conduct their battals. And for as much as the Captayn which was gone
to the haven, was returned victorious, leading with him more Spaniardes then he
had carried forth, and for that he was now near at hand, the combat
ceased about a three or four days, until such time as he was entered the
town.

Then the Indians assembled an infinite number of people out of all the
country, and skirmished in such wise, and so long a season, that the Spanish
thought they should al die on the place, wherefore they deliberated to abandon
the city for one night. That which their disseighu being known to the
Indians, they slew of them a great number upon the bridges of the Marshes in
a war most rightful, and most lawful for the causes most righteous which
they had as has been said: the which every reasonable and true dealing man
will mayneteyne for good. Soon after, the Spanishe having realied themselves,
the combat with the City renewed, where the Spaniardes made an horrible and
ghastly butcherie of the Indians, and slew an infinite of people, and brent
alive the great Lords.

After these great and abominable tyrannies committed in the City of Mexico,
and in other cities, and the country run, fifteen, and twenty leagues
compass of Mexico: this tyranny and pestilence advanced it self forward,
to waste also, infect, and lay desolate the province of Panuco. It was a thing
to be wondered at of the world, of people that there were, and the spoils
and slaughters there done. Afterward they wasted also after the self manner,
all the province of Tuttepeke, and the province of Ipelingo, and the province
of Columa: each province containing more ground then the realm of Leon and of
Castile. It should be a thing very difficulte, yea, impossible to speak or
recount the discomfitures, the slaughters, and the cruelties, which they there
committed: and would cause a great remorse unto the hearers.

Here is to be noted, that the title wherewith they entered, and began to make
havoc of all these harmless and silly Indians, and have dispeopled that
country, which should have caused a great rejoicing to all those which
should be in truth Christians, being so peopled as they were: was to say
that they should come and put them selves in subjection, to serve the king of
Spain, otherwise that they would kill them, or make them slaves. And those
which came not incontinent to satisfy their demaundes so unjust, and did not
put them selves into the hands of men so unjust, cruel, and beastly, they
called them rebels, as those which had lift up them selves against the kings
Majesty, and for such they accused them to the king our sovereign Lord: the
blind understandings of those which governed the Indians, being not able to
comprehend nor perceive this much, which in their laws is more clearly
taught then any other principle of Law, that is, that none can be reputed a
rebel, if first he be not a subject. Now let Christians, and those which
have any perceyuerance consider with them selves, if such cases can prepare
and inform the minds of any nations whatsoever living in their country in
assurance, and not thinking to owe any thing to any person, having their own
natural liege Lords whom they serve and obey, suddenly to come and tell them
tidings:

Put you under the obeisance of a king a stranger, whom ye never saw, nor
never heard of before: otherwise know ye that we will rent ye incontinent
all to pieces, specially when it is known by experience that they do it in
deed as soon as it is but said. And that which is far more frightfull,
they take those, which do yield them selves to obey, to put them into a most
grievous bondage, in the which there are toils incredible, and torments
greater and of longer continuance then those same of them which are excuted by
the swoorde, for in the end they perish, they, their wives, their children,
and their whole generation.

And put the case, that through the threats and frightes aforesaid, those
peoples, or any others whosoever do come to obey and acknowledge the dominion
of a stranger king: do not these blunderers see, being altogether benumbed
with ambition and deuelish covetousness, that they win not a mite of right,
forasmuch as so it is, that it is caused upon frightes and terrors which
might be able to slake men the constantest and the best advised: and that by
the laws of nature, man, and God, it has no more force then a handful of
wind, to make any thing auaylable to any purpose whatsoever, saving the
punishment and obligation which abides them in the bottom of hell. I pass over
the losses and damages which they do to the king, when as they spoil his
realms, and bring to naught (as much as in them lies) all the right which
they have in the Indies.

These are now the services, which the Spaniardes have done, and as yet do
at this hour unto the aforesaid kings, and sovereign Lords, under the
color of this gallant title, so rightful, and so smoothly garnished.

This Captain tyrant, with this gorgeous and pretended title, dispatched two
other Captains, as very tyrauntes and far more cruel, and less pitiful
then him self, into great realms most flourishing, and most fertile, and
full of people, to wit, the realm of Guatimala, which lies to the seawarde
on the South side, and the same of Naco, and Honduras, otherwise called
Guaymura, which coasteth on the sea on the North side, confronting and
confining the one with the other, three hundred leagues distaunce from Mexico.
He sent the one by land, and the other by sea: both the one and the other
carried with them a maynie of trowpes to serve on horse back and a foot.

I say the truth, that of the mischieues which these two have wrought, and
principally he which went to Guatimala (for that other dyed soon after of an
evil death,) there might be made a great book, of so many villainies, of so
many slaughters, so many desolations, and of so many outrages and brutishe
vniustices, as were able to affright the age present and to come.

For certain this man surpassed all the others, present, and gone before, in
quantity and in number, as well for the abominations which he committed, as
for the peoples and countries which he laid waste and desert. All the which
things were infinite.

He which went by sea committed exceeding pillinges, cruelties, and disorders
amongst the people on the sea coast: before who^ some coming with presents
from the realm of Yucatane which is the high way to ye aforesaid realm of
Naro and Guaimura, toward the which they went: when he came unto them he sent
captains, and a many of men of arms through all that land, which went
sacking, slaughtering, and destroying as many people as there were to be found,
and principally one, who with three hundred more, having mutined and rebelled,
and setting himself into the country toward Guatimala, went spoiling and
burning all the towns that he found, in killing and robbing the people
inhabitants of them. That which he did of a set purpose, in more then an
hundred and twenty leagues of the land, to the end, that if any had sent after
him, those which should come, should find the country dispeopled and
debelled, and that they were so slain of the Indians, in revenge of the
damages and spoils by them made. After whom have succeeded sundry others
most cruel tyrants, the which with their slaughters and dreadful cruelties,
and by bringing the Indians into thraldrome, whom afterward they soulde unto
those who carried them with their shippings of wine, garments, and other
things, and by reason of the tyrannical servitude ordinary, since the year a
thousand, five hundred, twenty four, until the year 1535. have laid waste
those same provinces and realms of Naro and Honduras, the which rese^bled a
paradise of pleasures: and were more peopled, frequented, and inhabited, then
any country of the world: and now of late we coming a long thereby, have
seen them so dispeopled and destroyed, that who so should see them, his heart
would cleave for sorrow, ware he never so flintie.

They have slain within these eleven years, more then two Millions of souls,
having not left in more then an hundredth leagues of the country square, but
two thousand persons, whom they slay as yet daily in the said ordinary
bondage.

Now let us return to write of the great tyrant and Captain, which went to
Guatimala, (who, as has been said, exceeded all the aforepassed, and is
comparable to all those, which are at this day) from the provinces near to
Mexico, (according as him self wrote in a letter to the principal tyrant
which had sent him) distaunte from the realm of Guatimala 400. leagues,
(keeping ye way by him traced) and as he went, slu, robbed, burned and
destroyed all the country, wheresoever he be came, under the shadow of title
above mantioned, saying: yt they should submit themselves unto the^, that is to
say, unto men so unnatural, so wicked, and so cruel: in the name of the king
of Spain, who was unto them unknown, and of whom they had never heard
speak: and the which those nations there esteemed more unjust and more cruel
then they his men were. And the tyrauntes giving unto them no respect of time
to deliberace, they fling upon the poor folk, in a manner as soon as the
message was done, putting all to fire and blood.

Of the Province and realm of Guatimala.
NO sooner arrived he into this said realm: but that he began with great
slaughter of the inhabitaunces. This notwithstanding the chief Lord came to
receive him, being carried in a lighter, with trumpettes and tabours,
reioycinges, and disportes, accompanied with a great number of the Lords of
the city of Vitlatan, head city of the whole realm, doing them also service
with all they had, but specially in giving them food abundantly, and
whatsoever they demanded besides. The Spanish lodged this night without the
city, forasmuch as the same seemed unto them strong, and there might be
thereby danger.

This Captain called to him the next morrow the chief Lord, with other
great Lords, who being come as meek sheep, he apprehended them al, and
commanded the^ to give him certain sums of gold. They answering that they
had none, forasmuch as the country yielded none: he commands incontinent
to burn them alive, without having committed any crime whatsoever, and without
any other form of process or sentence.

As the Lords of all these provinces perceived, that they had burned their
sovereign Lords, only because they gave them no gold, they fled all to
the mountains, commanding their subjects to go to the Spaniardes, and to
serve them as their Lords, but that they should not discover them, nor give
the^ intelligence where they were.

With this, lo all the people of the country, presenting them, and protesting
to be theirs, and to serve them as their Lords: The Captain made answer
that he would not accept of them, but that he would kill them if they told
not where were their Lords. The Indians answered, they could not tell ought:
but as touching them selves they were content, that they should employ them to
their service, with their wives and children: and that they should use their
housen, and that there they might kill, or do what so ever them pleased.

It is a wonderful thing, that the Spaniardes went to their villages and
borrowes, and finding there these silly people at their work, with their wives
and children, neither misdoubting any thing they pearsed them with their
Borespeares, and hackled them to pieces. They came to one borrowe great and
mighty, which held it self more assured then any other, because of their
innocence: whom the Spanishe laid desolate in a manner all whole, in the
space of two hours, putting to the edge of the sword, children, with women,
and aged persons, and all those which could not escape by flying.

The Indians seeing that by their humility, by their presents and patience,
they could not pacify nor mitigate the madmoode, and enraged hearts of their
enemies, and that without any reason, or show of reason, they were hackt in
pieces: and seeing likewise that they were sure to die ere long: they devised
to assemble and realye themselves to die all in war, and avenge themselves
the best that they could upon, enemies so cruel and diuelishe: knowing also
well enough them selves without weapons, stark naked, weak, and on foot, and
such as could by no means prevail or carry away the victory, but that in
the end they should be destroyed: they advised between them to dig certain
ditches in the midst of the ways, to make their horses tomble into, and
pearcing their bellies with pikes sharpened and brent at one end, there
bestowed of purpose, and covered over so orderly with green turfe, that it
seemed there was no such matter.

There fell in horses once or twice: for the Spaniardes afterward could
beware of them. But now to avenge them, they made a law, that as many Indians
as might be taken alive, should be flong into the same pittes. Hereuppon they
cast in women with child, and women new delivered of childbirth, and old
folk as many as they could come by, until that the ditches were filled up.
It was a lamentable thing to behold the women with their children stabbed with
these pickes. All besides, they slew with thrust of spears, and edge of
swoorde. They cast of them also to flesh fraunching dogs, which tare them
and devoured them. They brent a Lord at a great fire of quick flames: saying,
they would herein do him honor. And they persisted in these butcheries so
unnatural, about seven years, from the year 24. until the year 31. Let any
esteem, what may be the number of people: whom they might have slain.

Amongst an infinite of horrible acts which this cursed tyrant did in this
realm with his bands of soldiers, (for his under captains were no less
mischievous and insensate then himself, and withal likewise those that were
under them again to serve their turn,) this one was notable: That where as in
the province of Cuzcatan, where is at this hour, or near there aboutes the
city of Saint Savior, a country very fertile with all the sea coaste on the
Southe, containing forty or fifty leagues: and likewise in the City of
Cuscatan the mother City of the province, there had been made him a very great
entertaynement, of more then twenty or thirty thousand Indians attending
him, all laden with poultrie and other victuals: this Captain arriving, and
having received the presents, he commanded that every one of the Spaniardes
should take of this great number of people, such as should please him, to
serve him all the time that they should make their abode there, and that they
should constrayne them to bear for them, of their carriage all that should
be needful.

Every man took unto him other an hundred, or fifty, or as many as it seemed
suffised him to be well served. These poor lambelike innocents served the
Spaniards with all their power, that there wanted nothing, unless they should
do unto them godly honor. Mean while this captain demanded of the Lords
very much gold: for they were principally commen for that purpose.

The Indians answered that they were ready to give them all the gold they had:
and laid together a great furniture of batchets of copper and gylt, where with
they serve their own turns, the same resembling gold, as in deed it has in
it some little deal. The Captain causes to put to the touch: and as he saw
it was copper, he said to the Spaniardes, now the devil take such a
country: let us be gone hence, seeing here is no gold here: and every man
put the Indians which he has retained to serve him, to the hot irons, and
so to mark them for slaves.

That which they did, branding with the kings mark all that they might. I
saw the son him self of the principal Lord of this city, to be so
branded. The Indians which escaped, with all other of the Country seeing all
the mischiefs of the Spanishe, began to assemble, and put them selves in
arms: whereupon the Spaniardes work great discom fitures and slaughters,
returning to Guatimala where they builded a city, the which God of a just
judgment has renuersed with three over whelmings falling all three together:
the one was with water, the other with earth, and the third with stones, of
the bigness of ten or twenty oxen. By such like means all the Lords and
the men that were able to bear arms being slain: those which remained, were
reduced into the diabolical servitude before said, being made tributaryslaues
or villayns regardant, but giving for their tribute sons and daughters, for
they will have none other kind of bondimen. And so the Spaniards sending whole
ships laden with them to Peru to sell the^, with their other slaughters, have
destroyed and laid desert an whole Realm of an hundred leagues square or
about, a country the most blesseful, and peopled the most that might be in the
world.

For the tyrant him self wrote hereof, that it was more peopled then Mexico:
and herein he said the truth. He has done to death, with his consortes and
confrayryes, more then four or five Millions of souls in fifteen or sixteen
years space, from the year twenty four, unto the fourtieth year: and yet
at this hour they slay and destroy those that remain.

This tyrant had a custom, when as he went to make war upon any City or
Province: to carry thither of the Indians already under yoked, as many as he
could, to make war upon the other Indians: and as he gave unto a ten or
twenty thousand men which he led along no sustenaunce, he allowed them to
eat the Indians which they took: And so by this means he had in his camp
an ordinary shambles of man's flesh, where, in his presence they killed and
roasted children. They killed men, only to have off from them their hands and
their feet, which parts they held to be the dayntiest morcels. When the
nations of other countries understood of all those unnatural doings, they
could not tell what to do for frightfulness.

He was the death of an infinite sort of the Indians in making of ships, the
which he carried from the North sea unto the South, which are an hundred and
thirty leagues. He transported after this rate great store of artillery,
which he loded upon the shoulders of these poor folk going naked: whereby I
have seen very many fall down in the high way, by reason of their great
burdens.

He undid whole housholdes, by taking from the men their wives and daughters:
the which afterward he dispersed in gifts to his mariners and soldiers to
please them withal, who led them along with them in their nauies. He stuffed
all the ships with Indians, where they dyed for thryst and hungar. Certaynely
if I should stand to tell the particularities of these cruelties: I should
make a great book thereof, which should astonishe the world. He made two
nauies, either of a great number of ships, with the which he consumed as
with fire and lightning flashing from heaven all those peoples: O how many
poor children has he made fatherless Orphans. how many men and women
widowers and widows, bereeuing the^ also of their children! How many
adulteries, whoredoms and rapes, has he been the cause of! How many has he of
free made villanyes: How many anguishes and calamities by him have nombers
suffered: How many has he caused to shed tears, sighs and groninges: Of
how many desolations has he been the occasion in this life, and the means for
others to sall into everlasting damnation in the life to come, not only of the
Indians which are innumerable, but of the miserable Spaniardes, with whose aid
he has served himself in villainies so excessive, and sinues so enormous, and
abominations so execrable: I wish in God that he had taken pity of him: and
that he had been pleased in so evil an end as he sent him.

Of new Spain, and Panuco, and Xalisco.
AFter the exceeding cruelties and slaughters aforesaid, and the others which
I have omitted, which have been executed in the provinces of new Spain and
Panuco: there came to Panuco an other tyrant, cruel, and unbridled, in the
year 1525. Who in committing very many cruelties, and in branding many for
slaves, after the manner aforesaid which were all free, and in sending very
many ships laden to Cuba, and Hispaniola, where they might best make
Merchandise of them, he archieued the desolation of this province.

And it has come to pass in his time, that there has been given for one
Mare, eight hundred Indians souls partakers of reason. And this man from this
room was promoted to be president of Mexico, and of all the province of new
Spain, and there were promoted with him other tyrauntes, to the offices of
Auditorshippes: in the which dignities they committed so many ungracious
turns, so many sins, so many cruelties, robberies, and abominations, that
a man can not believe them to be such. And they set forward also this country
into so extreme a desolation, that if God had not kept them by means of the
resistance of the religious men of Saint Francis order, and if that there had
not been provided with all speed a court of audience, and the kings counsel
in those parts friend to all virtue, they had laid wast all new Spain, as
they have done the I Will of Hispaniola.

There was a man, amongst those of the company of this captain, who to the end
to enclose a garden of his, with a wall: kept in his works eight thousand
Indians, without paying them ought, nor giving them to eat, in manner that they
dyed, falling down sudde^ly, and he never took the more thought for the matter.

After that the chief Captain which I spoke of, had finished the laying waste
of Panuco, and that he understood the news of the coming of the kings
court of Audience: he advised with him self to proceed farther into the
innermoste parts of the realm, to search where he might tyrannize at his
ease, and drew by force out of the province of Mexico 15. or 20. Millions of
men, to the end, that they should carry the loades and carriages of the
Spaniardes which went with him, of whom there never returned again two
hundred, the others being dead on the high ways.

He came at the province of Mechuacam, which is distant from Mexico forty
leagues, a region as blissful and full of inhabitauntes, as is that of
Mexico. The king and Lord of the country went to receive him with an infinite
company of people, which did unto them a thousand services and curtisies.

He apprehended him by and by, for that he had the brute to be very rich of
gold and silver: and to the end, that he should give him great treasures,
he began to give him the torments, and put him in a pair of stocks by the
feet, his body stretched out, and his hands bound to a stake, he makes a
flashing fire against his feet, and there a boy with a basting sprinkle looked
in oil in his hand stood and basted them a little and a little, to the end to
well roaste the skin. There was in one side of him a cruel man, the which
with a crossebowe bente, aimed right at his heart, on the other side an other
which held a dog snarling, and leaping up as to run upon him, which in
less then the time of a Credo, had been able to have torn him in pieces: and
thus they tormented him, to the end he should discover the treasures which
they desired, until such time as a religious man of Saint Frauncis order
took him away from them, notwithstanding that he dyed of the same torments.

They tormented and slew of this fashion very many of the Lords and Cacikes in
these Provinces: to the end that they should give them gold and silver.

At the same time a certain tyrant going in visitation to visit the powches,
and to rob the gods of the Indians, more then for any care he had of their
souls, found, that certain Indians had hid their Idolles, as those which had
never been better instructed by ye cursed Spaniards of any better god, he
apprehended and detayned prisoners the Lords, until such time as that they
would give them their Idolles: Supposing all this while they had been of
gold or of silver: Howebeit they were not so, wherefore he chastised them
cruelly and unjustly.

But to the end he would not remain frustrate of his intent, which was to
spoil, he constrained the Cacikes to redeem their said Idolles, and they
redeemed them for such gold and silver as they could find, to the end, to
worship them for Gods, as they had bin wont to do aforetime. These be the
examples and deeds which these cursed Spaniardes do: and this is the honor
which they purchase to God, amongst the Indians.

This great tyrant and Captain passed farther from Mechuacham to the Province
of Lalisco, the which was all whole most full of people, and most happy. For
it is one of the most fertillest and most admirable country of the Indies,
which had borrowes coutaining in a manner seven leagues. As he entered this
country the L. with ye inhabitants, according as al ye Indians are accustomed
to do, went to receive him with prese^ts and ioyfulnes. He began to commit his
cruelties and mischieuousnes, wc he had learned and all the rest had bin
accustomed to practice, wc is to heap up gold wc is their god. He burned
towns, he took ye Cacikes prisonners. and gave them torments. He made slaves
all that he took.

Whereof there died an infinite number tied in chains. The women new
delivered of child birth, going laden with the s^uffe of evil Christian^, and
being not abie to bear their own children because of travel and hunger, were
feign to cast them from them in the ways, whereof there dyed an infinite.

An evil Christian taking by force a young Damsel to abuse her, the mother
withstoode him: and as she would have taken her away, the Spaniarde drawing
his dagger or rapier, cut off her hand, and slew the young gyrle with
flashes of his weapon: because she would not consent to his appetite.

Amongst many other things, he caused unjustly to be marked for slaves,
four thousand, five hundred souls as free as they, men, women, and sucking
babes, from of a year and a half old, unto three or four years old: which
notwithstanding had gone before them in peace to receive them, with an infinite
number of other things that have not been set down in writing.

Having achieved the diuelishe wars innumerable, and having in the same
committed very many slaughters, he reduced all that country into the ordinary
servitude, pestilential and tyrannical, into the which all the tyrant
Spaniardes which are in the Indies, are accustomed, or pretend to cast those
people* In the which country, he consented also, and permitted his Stewardes
and all others to execute torments never heard of before, to the end, to
draw from the Indians gold and tribute. His Stewardes slew very many of the
Indians, hanging them and burning them alive, and casting some unto the dogs,
cutting off their feet, hands, head, and tongue, they being in peace, only
to bring them into a fear, to the end they should serve him, and give him
gold and tributes: all this knowing, and seeing this gentle tyrant, even to
come to the whippes, bast onads, blows, with other sorts of cruelties
wherewith he vexed and oppressed them daily.

It is said of him, that he has destroyed and burned in this realm of
Xalisco, eight hundred borroughes, which was the cause that the Indians being
fallen desperate, and seeing those which remained, how they perished thus
cruelly: they lift up themselves, and went into the mountains, slaying
certain Spaniardes: how be it by good right. And afterward because of the
wickednesses and outrages of other tyrauntes now being, which passed by that
way to destroy other provinces (that which they call discovering) many of the
Indians assembled, fortifying them selves upon certain rocks. Upon the which
rocks the Spanishe have made, and yet at this present, and a fresh do make
so many cruelties, that they almost made an end of laying desolate all this
great country, slaying an infinite, number of people.

And the wretched blinderers forsaken of God, and given over into a reprodate
sense, not seeing the causes most just which the Indians have by the laws of
nature, man, and God, to hew them in pieces, if they had strength and
munimentes, and so to cast them out of their country: and not seeing the
wickedness of their own cause, over and besides so many violents and tyrannies
which they have committed in that sort, to move: war a new: they think,
speak, and write of the victories which they have over the poor Indians,
leaving them in desolation, that it is GOD which gives the same unto them, as
though their wars were achieved rightfully: thus they rejoice, vaune
themselves, and give thanks unto God for their tyrannies, as did those
tyrants and the eues of whom speaks the Prophet Zachary, in the eleventh
chapter: verse 4. saying:

Feed the sheep of the slaughter, they that possess them slay them, and are
not grieved, and they that sell them, say, blessed be the Lord, for we are
become rich.

Of the realm of Yucatan.
THe year one thousand, five hundred, twenty and six, was deputed over the
Realm of Yucatan an other caytise governor, and that through the lies and
false reports which himself had made unto the king: in like manner as has the
other tirants until this present, to the end there might be committed unto
thee^ offices and charges, by means whereof they might rob at their pleasures.
This realm of Yucatan was full of inhabitants: for that it was a country in
every respect wholesome, and abounding in plenty of victuals, and of fruits
more then Mexico: and singulerly exceeded for the abundance of honnie and wax
there to be found, more then in any quarter of the Indies, which has been
seen unto this present. It conteyneth about three hundred leagues compass.
The people of that country, were the most notable of all the Indies, as well in
consideration of their policy and prudencie, as for the vprightnes of their
life, verily worthy the training to the knowledge of God: amongst whom there
might have been builded great Cities, by the Spanishe, in which they might
have lived as in an earthly Paradise, if so be they had not made themselves
unworthy, because of their exceeding covetousness, hard heartednes, and
heinous offenses: as also unworthy they were of other more blessings a great
many, which God had set open in these Indies. This tyrant bean with three
hundred men to make war upon these poor innocent people, which were in their
houses without hurting any body: where he slew and ransacked infinite numbers.
And for because the Country yields no gold, for if it had yielded any, he
would have consumed those same Indians, in making them to toil in the mines:
to the end he might make gold of the bodies and souls of those for whom
Jesus Christ suffered death, he generally made slaves of all those whom he
slew not, and returned the ships that were come thither, upon the blowing
abroad and noise of the selling of slaves, full of people bartered for wine,
oil, vinegar, powdered Bacons flesh, garments, horses, and that, that every
man had need of, according to the Captains estimate and judgment. He would
let choose amongst an hundred or fifty young Damsels: bartering some one of
the fairest, and of the best complexion, for a caske of wine, oil, vinegar, or
for a york powdered. And in like manner he would let choose out a young
handsome stripling amongst two or three hundredth for the aforesaid
merchandise. And it has been seen, that a youth seeming to be ye son of
some prince, has been bartered for a Cheese, and an hundredth persons for an
horse. He continued in these voinges from the year twenty six, until the
year thirty three, which are seven years, desolating and dispeopling those
Countries, and killing the people there without pity or mercy, until the
time that the news came of the riches of Peru, and that thereupon the
Spaniardes hyed them thither, by occasion whereof this Devilish tyranny ceased
for a season. A few days after, his men returned, to do and commit other
heinous enormities, as robberies, and wrongful imprisonments, with offenses
great against God: neither do they cease as yet at this day to do them, but
have laid desert and dispeopled all those three hundred leagues, the which
were as well replenished and peopled, as has been said.

There is no man that can believe, or rehearse the cases particular of the
cruelties, which were of them committed. I will only rehearse two or three,
coming to my remembrance at this instant. As these cursed Spaniards, went
with their mad dogs a foraging by the tracke, and hunting out the Indian men
and women: An Indian woman being sick, and seeing she could not escape
their dogs, that they should not rent her as they did others: she took a
cord and hanged herself at a beam, having fastened at her foot a child
she had of a year old, and she had no sooner done: behold these Curres,
which come and dispatche this infaute, how beit that before it dyed, a
Religious man a Friar baptized it.

When the Spanishe parted out of this Realm, one amongst others said, to a
son of a Lord of some City of Province, that he should go with him: the
boy answered, and said, he would not forsake his Country. The Spaniarde
replied: Go with me, or else I will cut off thine ears. The young Indian
persisted in his first saying, that he would not forsake his Country. The
Spaniarde drawing out his dagger, cut off first one, and then his other ear.

The young man abiding by it still that he would not leave his country: he
mangled off also his nose, with the uppermost of his lips: making no more
scrupulositie of the matter, then if he had given him but a phillip.

This damnable wretch magnified him self, and vaunted him of his doings
villauously unto a reverend religious person, saying: that he took as much
pains as he could, to begette the Indian women in great numbers with child,
to the end, he might receive the more money for them in selling them great
with child for slaves.

In this realm, or in one of the provinces of new Spain, a certain Spaniard
went one day with his dogs on hunting of veuison, or else conies, and not
finding game, he minded his dogs that they should be hungry, and took a
little sweet Babie which he bereaved the mother of, and cutting off from him
the arms, and the legs, chopped them in small gobbettes, giving to every dog
his livery or part there of, by and by after these morsels thus dispatched, he
cast also the rest of the body or the carkase to all the kenell together.

By this ye may see how great the dull heartednes of the Spaniardes is in that
country, and how God has delivered them up into a reprobate sense; and what
accoumpt they make of those same nations which are created after the image of
God, and redeemed with the blood of his Christ. We shall see here after more
notable matter.

Leaving now the cruelties infinite, and never heard of the like, which in
this realm were done by those which call the^ selves Christians, and such as
no judgment of man can sufficiently imagine them: I will conclude with this
same: That is, that being now departed the realm all the devilish tyrants,
blinded with the couerousnes of the riches of Peru, yt reverend father, friar
James, with four other religious of S. Frauncis, was moved in spirit to go
into this realm to pacify them, and for to preach to them, and to win unto
Jesus Christ those which might be remaining of the butcheries and tyranuous
murders, which the Spanish had bin perpetrating seven continual years.

And I believe that these same were those religious persons, the which in the
year 34. certain Indians of the Province of Mexico, sending before them
messengers in their behalf, requested them that they would come into their
country, to give the^ knowledge of that one only God, who is God, and very
Lord of all the world: and for whose occasion the Indians held a council
sundry times, parlementing and informing themselves in their folk motes: to
wit, what kind of men those might be, which were called by the special name
of fathers and brethren, and what it was that they pretended, and wherein they
differed from the Spaniardes, of whom they had received so many outrages and
injuries: according in the end to admit them with condition, that they should
enter themselves alone, and not the Spaniardes with them, that which the
religious promised the^. For it was permitted them, yea, commanded them so to
do, by the Viceroy of new Spain, and that there should no kind of
displeasure be done unto them by the Spaniardes. The Religious men preached
unto them the Gospel of Christ, as they are accustomed to do, and as had
been the holy intention of the kings of Castile, that should have been done.
Howbeit, that the Spaniardes in all the seven years space past, had never given
the^ any such notice of the truth of the Gospel, or so much as that there was
any other king saving himself, yt so tyrannised over them, and destroyed them.
By these means of the religious, after the end of forty days that they had
preached unto them, the Lords of the country brought unto them, and put into
their hands their idols, to the end that they shoult burn them. After also,
they brought unto them their young children, that they should catechize them,
whom they love as the apple of their eye. They made for them also Churches, and
Temples, and houses. Moreover, some other provinces sent, and invited them, to
the end that they might come to them also, to preach, and give them the
understanding of God, and of him whom they said to be the great king of
Castile. And being persuaded and induced by the religious, they did a thing
which never yet before has been done in the Indies. (For whatsoever the
tyrants, some of those which have spoiled those Realms, and great Countries,
have contrived to blemishe and defame the poor Indians withal, they are
mockeries and leasings:) twelve or fifteen Lords, which had very many
subiecets and great dominion, assembling every one for his own part his
people, and taking their advise and consent, of their own voluntary motion,
yielded themselves to the subjection, and to be under the domination of the
kings of Castile: admitting the Emperor as king of Spain, for their liege
Sovereign. Whereof also they made certain instruments, by them consigned,
which I keep in my charge, together with the testimonies thereunto of the said
religious.

The Indians being thus onwarde in the way of the faith, with the great joy,
and good hope of the Religious brethren, that they should be able to win
unto Jesus Christ all the people of the Realm that were the residue, being
but a small number of the slaughters, and wicked wars passed: There entered at
a certain coaste, eighteen Spaniarde tyrants on horse back, and twelve on
foot, driving with them great loades of Idols, which they had taken in the
other Provinces of the Indians. The Captain of those thirty Spaniards, called
unto him a Lord of the country there aboutes as they were entered, and
commands him to take those idols, and to disperse them throughout al his
country, selling every idol for an Indian man, or an Indian woman, to make
slaves of them, with threatening them, that if he did not do it, he would
bid them battle. That said Lord being forced by fear, distributed those
Idols throughout all the country, and commanded all his subjects, that they
should take them to adore them, and that they should return in exchange of
that ware Indies and Indisses to make slaves of. The Indians being affeard,
those which had two children, gave him one, and he that had three gave him two.
This was the end of this sacrilegious traffic: and thus was this Lord or
Cacick, feign to content these Spaniards: I say not Christians.

One of these abominable chafferers, named John Garcia, being sick, and
near his death, had under his bed two packs of Idols, and commanded his
Indish maid that served him, to look to it that she made not away his idols,
that there were for Murlimeus, for they were good stuff: and that making bent
of them, she should not take less then a slave for a piece one of them with
another: and in fine, with this his Testament and last will thus devised, the
caytife dyed, busied with this deep goodly care, and who doubts but that he
is lodged in the bottom of hell*

Let it now be considered, and well weyed, what kind of advancement of
religion it is, and what are the good examples of Christianity of the behalf
of the Spanishe, that sail to the Indies? What honor they do unto God, how
they pain themselves to have him known and adored of those nations: what
carke and care the have of the doing of it, that by their means the rather the
sacred faith should be dispersed, increased, and enlarged in the free passage
thereof, amongst those silly creatures? And let it with all be discerned, if
the sin of these men be any whit less then the same of Jeroboam, Which made
Israel to sin, by making two golden Calves for the people, to fall down
before, and worship: or otherwise if it be not like to the treason of Judas,
and which has caused more offense.

These be the iestes of the Spaniardes, which go to the Indies, which of a
truth very many times, yea, an infinite sort of times, for couetyse, and to
scratche gold, have sold and do sell: have reneaged, and do reneage as yet
hitherto, and at this present day: Christ Jesus.

The Indians perceiving that, that, which the religious had promised them, was
as good as nothing: namely, that the Spaniardes should not enter those
Provinces: and seeing the Spaniards which had laded thither idols from other
places, there to make vent of them, they having put al their idols before into
the hands of the Friars, to the end they should be burned, and to the end
the true God should be by them adored, all the Country was in a mutiny, and
a rage against the religious Friars, and the Indians coming unto them, say:

Why have you lied unto us, in promising us by deceites that there should not
enter any Spaniardes into these Countries? And why have you burnt our gods,
seeing the Spaniards do bring us other gods from other nations? Were not our
gods as good, as the gods of other provinces? The friars pacified them in the
best manner that they could, not knowing what to answer them: and went to seek
out those thirty Spaniards, to whom they declared the evil which they had
done, praying the^ to get them thence. That which the Spaniards would not do,
but said to the Indians, that those religious men had caused them to come
thither themselves of their own accord, which was rightly an extreme
maliciousness. In the end the Indians deliberated to kill the religious men:
By occasion whereof, the Friars fled away in a night, having advertisement of
the case by some of the Indians. But after that they were gone, the Indians
better infourmed of the innocence of the religious me^, and of the
ungraciousness of the Spaniardes, the sent messengers after them, near hand
fifty leagues of, beseeching them to come again, and craving pardon of them.
The religious, as the servants of God, and zealous for the winning of their
souls, believing them, returned to them, and were received as it had been
Angels. And the Indians doing them a thousand services, abode with them four
or five months. And for because the Spaniards would never depart that
Country, and that namely the Viceroy with all that he could do, could not
draw them thence, new Spain being far of, howbeit, he had caused them to
be proclaimed traitors: And for as much as they never ceased to commit their
outrages, and griefs accustomed amongst the Indians, the religious perceiving
that sooner or later they should smell of the smoke, and peradventure the evil
light upon their heads: and specially that they could not preach unto the
Indians with quiet, and assurance of the India^s, and of themselves, by reason
of the continual assaults and lewd deportments of the Spanish, they
deliberated to leave ye realm: which in this manner was destitute of the light
and the doctrine: and those souls, abode under the darkness of ignorance, and
in the misery they were in, the remedy, and the watering of the knowledge of
God being bereaved them, already even at their best, and when as they began to
receive it with exceeding willingness: altogether like as if one should withdraw
the watring from tender plants, and new set into a dry ground, at a hot time
of the year: and this by the cursed ungraciousness of the Spanish.

Of the Province of Saint Martha.
THe province of Saint Martha, was a country where the Spaniardes gathered
gold in all plenty: the land being with the regions adjacent very rich, and
the people industrious to draw out the gold. Wherefore also from the year
one thousand, five hundred, forty two, infinite tyrants have made thither
continually with their ships, ouerrunning, and raunging along the country,
killing and spoiling those the inhabitants, and ramping from them that gold
that they had, with speedy return ever to their ships, which went and came
oftentimes. And so wrought they in those provinces great wastes, and slaughters,
and cruelties horrible, and that most commonly on the Sea coast, and certain
leagues within the country, until the year one thousand, five hundred, and
three. At what time there went Spanish tyrants to inhabit there. And for as
much as the country was exceeding rich as has been said, there ever
succeeded Captains one in another room, every one more cruel then other:
in such sort that it seemed that every one enforced himself, for the masterie
in doing of euilles and cruelties more heinous then had been done by his
predecessor. Wherefore herein is the rule verified that we have given before.
The year one thousand, five hundred, twenty and nine, there went a great
tyrant, very resolute, with great troops: but without any fear of God, or
compassion of the nature of man, who wrought such wastes, and slaughters so
great, that he exceeded all others that had gone before him, himself robbing
for the space of six or seven years that he lived, great treasures: save
after being deceased without confession, and fled from the place of his
residence: there succeeded him other murdering tyrants, and thieves, which
made an end of the rest of the people, whom the embrewed hands with blood,
and the caruing swoordes of the tyruntes his forerunners, could not extyrp.

They set themselves so forward in the country, in inuading and laying
desolate very many provinces, with killing, and taking prisoners those people,
after the fashion before practiced in other Provinces, causing the Lords
together with their Subjects to suffer grievous torments, both to make them
discover the gold, and the places where gold might be had: surmounting as is
said every way in number of mischievous doings, and in the manner of doing,
all that had passed before: that from the year one thousand, five hundred,
twenty and niene, unto this day, they have reduced into a wilderness in those
same quarters more then four hundred leagues of land, which was no less
peopled then the other countries which we have spoken of.

Verily if I had to make a bedrolle of the vngraciousnesses, of the slaughters,
of the desolations, of the iniquities, of the violencies, of the massacres, and
other great insolences which the Spaniardes have done, and committed in
those Provinces of Saint Martha against God, the king, and against those
innocent nations: I should write an history very ample. But that may be
done if God spare me life, hereafter in his good time: only I will set
down a few words of that which was written in a letter by a Bishop of
this Province to the king our Sovereign: and the letter bears date the
twentieth of May, 1541. The which Bishop amongst other words, speaks
thus: I say, sacred Majesty, that the way to redress this country, is that
his Majesty deliver her out of the power of Stepfathers, and give unto her an
husband which may entreat her as is reason, and according as she deserves:
otherwise, I am sure hereafter as the tyrauntes which now have the
government, do torment and tormoyle her, she will soon take an end, etc.

And a little below he says: Whereby, your Majesty shall know clearly,
how those which govern in those quarters do deserve to be disamounted, and
deposed from their government, to the end, that the commonweals may be
relieved. That if that be not done, in mine advise, they can never be cured of
their diseases. His majesty shall understand moreover, that in those regions,
there are not any Christians but devils, that there are no servants of God and
the king, but traitors to the state, and their king. And in truth the greatest
encombraunce that I find in reducing the Indians, that are in war, and to
set them at peace, and to lead those which are at peace to ye knowledge of our
faith, is unnatural and cruel entreaty, wc they yt are in peace do receive of
ye spanish, being so deeply altered, and lau^^ed, yt they have nothing in more
hatred and horror, the^ the name of christians, ye which in all these countries
they call in their language, yares, yt is to say, devils. For ye acts which they
committed here, are neither of christians, nor of me^ which have the use of
reason: but of devils. Whereof it comes to pass, yt the Indies which do see
these behauiors to be generally so far estra^ged from all humanity, and without
and mercy, as well in ye heads as in ye members: they esteem, yt the christians
do hold these things for a law, and that their God, and their K. are ye authors
thereof. And to endeavor to perswad the^ otherwise, were to endeavor in vain,
and to minister unto the^ ye more ample matter, to deride and scorn Jesus
Christ and his law. The Indians that are in war, seeing the entreaty used
toward the Indians that are in peace: would choose rather to die once for all,
then to endure sundry deaths, being under the command of the Spanish. I know
this by experience, most victorous Caesar. etc.

He says for a surcharge in a chapter a lttle lower, His M. has in these
parts more servants then it supposes. For here is not one soldier of so many
as are of them, that dare not say openly and publikly, yt if he roue, rob,
wast, stay, or burn the subjects of his M. to the end yt they give him some
gold, he serves there in your M. with this title, yt he says, thereof redoundeth
to his M. his part. Wherefore, most christian Caesar, it should be good, that
your M. gave them to understand, by chastising some severely, that it
receives no service in ought, whereby God is disobeyed and dishonored. All
the abouesayde are the formal words of the said Bishop of Saint Martha:
by the which may be seen clearly, what is done at this day amongst these
poor innocent peoples in those countries.

He calls the Indians in war, those which saved them selves by flying into
the mountains from the slaughters of the mischievous Spaniardes. And he
calls the Indians in peace, those which after having lost an infinite of
their people, by the massacres, have been thralled into the tyrannical and
horrible servitude aforesaid, and whereof in the end they have been fined
out, desolated, and slain, as appears by that which has been said by the
Bishop, which notwithstanding speaks but little, in comparison of that which
they have suffered.

The Indians in that country have accustomed to say, if when they are
trauayled and driven up the mountains laden, they happen to fall down, and to
fainte for feebleness, and for pain: for at that time they lay on upon them
blows with their feet and with their statues, and they break their teethe
with the pomelles of their swords, to make them rise, and march on without
taking of breath, with these words, out upon thee, what a villainy art thou?
they (I say) the Indians, for their parts are wont to say, I can no more: kill
me here right. I do desire to die here: and this they say with great
sighs, and being scarce able to speak, for having their heart drawn
together, declaring a great anguishe and dolor. But who were able to give to
understand the hundredth part of the afflictions and calamities, that these
innocent people do suffer of the cursed Spaniardes? God make them to take
knowledge of it, that are able and bound to redress it.

Of the Province of Carthagene.
THis Province of Carthagene is situate under, and a fifty leagues distant
from the same of Saint Martha, toward the West, confining with the province
of Ceu, unto the gulf of Araba: which are a hundred leagues all along the Sea
side, and is a great country within land toward the South. These Provinces
since the year 1498. or 99. until now have been evil entreated, martyred,
massacred, desolated like unto that of Saint Martha: and there has been in
these same done by the Spaniardes such cruelties, ransackinges, and pillagings
enormous: as the which to make an end the rather of this brief Summarie, as
also to make way to the rehearsal of their evil doings in other Provinces, I
will not stand to touch in particular.

Of the Coaste of Perles, and of Paria, and of the Isle of the Trinity.
FRom the coast of Paria, unto the goulph of Venesuela, without forth, which
are two hundred leagues: the Spanishe have wrought great and strange
destructions, rioting upon that people, and taking alive as many as they
could, to the end they might sell them for slaves: and oftentimes making them
prisoners against the assurance and the promise of friendship made unto them,
neither keeping with them their faith plighted unto them, ye friendly
entertainment which they had receiof those good people notwithstanding: having
been entertained and entreated in their houses, as parents and children, using
them to serve their turn withal, and inioying all that they had, and that that
they were able to do for them. It cannot be well told, nor particularly
expressed, the sundry kinds and grievous vexations, wrongs, hurtes, and
spoils, which those people endured at the Spaniardes hands, from the year
1510. until this present. I will only rehearse two or three acts, by the
which it may be judged of the rest, innumerable and excessive, and worthy all
torments and fire.

In the I Will of the Trinity, which is far greater and more fertile then the
Isle of Scicile, and joins with the firm land of the coaste of Paria, and
where the people are the dest disposed, and most inclined to virtue in their
kind, of all the Indians, as they went, there a captain Rouer in the year,
1510. accompanied with 60. or 70. other p^t^^ thieves well appointed: they
published among the Indians by proclamations, and other public sonmo^s, that
they should come and dwell and live with them in that I Will. The Indians received
them as their own bowels and babes: and as well the Lords as subjects served
them with exceeding readiness, bringing them to eat from day to day, as much as
might suffice to feed, as many more people. For this is the liberality of all
these Indians of the new world, to bestow on the Spaniards of all that they have
in great abundance. The Spanish build a great house of timber, in the which the
Indians should dwell all together: for the Spanishe would have it so, that
there should be one only house for all, and no more, to compass that, which
they had already premeditate to do, and did it. When they laid the thetch upon
the binding slaves or sparres, and had already covered to the height of two
men's length, to the end that those that were within might not see those that
were without, under color to hasten forward the work, yt it might be the
sooner dispatched, they set a great number of people within, the Spaniards
dividing themselves, the one part of them being bestowed without, compassing
the house round about with their weapons, because of those that might get
forth, the other part of them press into the house: Thus laying hands on their
swords, they began to threaten the Indians naked as they were, to kill them if
they did stir, and then bound them. And those which fled they hewed them in
pieces: Howbeit some of the Indies which fled, both of the hurt and not hurt,
with others that had not come within the house, took their bows and arrows
and assembled themselves in another house, about an hundred or two hundred
persons: And as they kept the gate, the Spaniards set fire on the house, and
burned them alive. After with their purchase, which might be of an hundred or
fourscore persons of them which they had bound: they get them to the I Will of
saint John, where they sold the one moitie, and thence to the I Will of
Hispaniola: where they sold the other moity. As I reprehended the captain for
this notable treason, at the same time, and at the same I Will of Saint John, he
made an answer: Sir, quiet your self for that matter. So have they commanded
me to do, and given me instruction which sent me: that if I could not take
them by war, I should take them under countenance and color of peace. And
in truth the Captain told me that in all his life, he never had found
father nor mother, but in this Isle of the Trinity, in respect of the friendly
courtesies the Indians had showed him. And this he spoke to his own greater
confusion and aggravating for the surcharge of his own offenses. They have
done other things semblable unto these infinite, in this firm land:
apprehending the poor people contrary to the safe conduct promised. Let it now
be weighed, what manner of doings these are, and whether the Indians in this
wise taken, might justly be made slaves.

At another time, the religious Friars of saint Dominicks order, being
determined to go preach, and to convert those nations, who had not the light
of the doctrine for to save their souls, as is the case at this day of the
Indians: they sent a religious man licentiate in divinity, a man virtuous and
holy, with a lay man of his order his companion, to the end he should take
a view of the Country, to trauerse acquaintance with that people, and search
out a place commodious to build monasteries. The religious being arrived: they
received them as Angels commen from heaven: and heard with great affection,
attention, and willingness such words as the religious at that time were able
to give them to understand, more by signs the^ otherwise, for they knew not
the tongue. It came to pass that there arrived there another ship, after that
the ship in which the religious men came was departed thence, and the Spanish
in this vessel, keeping their devilish custom, by suttelty without the
knowledge of the religious, carried away the Lord of the country called
Alfonso: were it y^ Friars had given him this name, or else others. For the
Indians love and desire to bear the name of ye Christians, desiring
inco^tine^t yt it may be given them even before they know any thing, yt they
may be baptized. They induced fraudile^tly this Don Alfonso to come aboard
their ship with the lady his wife, and other persons, making se^bla^ce to go
about to feast the^. In the end there entered seventeen persons, together with
the Lord and his Lady: the Lord trusting that the religious persons being
entered into his Country, would keep the Spaniardes from doing any wrong: for
otherwise he would never have put himself in the hands of the Spanish. The
Indians therefore thus being in the ship, the traitorous Spaniards hoysed
sails, and away they went to Hispaniola with them, there selling them for
slaves. All the Country seeing that their Lord and sovereign Lady were
carried away, they run to the religious men, purposing to kill them. The poor
men seeing so great a villainy, were of themselves at apoint to dye for sorrow:
and it is well to be believed of them, that they would rather have given their
lives in the quarrel, then to have accorded that any such injury should have
been committed: specially considering that was enough to hinder the course
begun, so as those poor Heathens should never, neither hear, nor hearing
believe the word of God. Howbeit, they appeased the Indians in the best manner
they could, saying that they would write to them at Hispaniola by the first
ship that went, and would take such care and order in the matter, that their
sovereign should be restored them again with those that were in his company.
God sent immediately upon a ship thither, no doubt for the greater confirmation
of the damnation of those which there governed, and they wrote to the Spanishe
religious men that were in the Isle of Hispaniola. They cry out, and call
heaven and earth to witness against them, both first, and sundry times after:
But the Judges of the audience, would never give them audience to do the^
justice, for because themselves had part in the booty of the India^s, which
the tyrants had so against all right and reason taken, The two religious men,
which had promised the Indians of the country, that their Lord Don Alfonso,
with others should come home* with the rest within four months, seeing yt they
came not neither in 4. nor 8. made themselves ready to the death, and to give
their life, which they had gaged before they came out of Spain, if need
should be, and in that sort the Indians took vengeance on the^ in killing
them justly, notwithstanding that they were innocent: for because that they
thought that the religious men had been the occasion of this treason, and for
because they saw that, that which they had certified and promised them, took
not effect: to wit, that within four months they should have home their
Lord: and for that, at that time they knew not, and now as yet they know
not in that country, that there is any difference between the religious well
disposed: and the tyrants, thieves, and robbers the Spaniardes. Those religious
men therefore right happy, suffered unjustly, and for the wrong so suffered,
there is no doubt but they are very martyrs, and do reign at this day with
God in the kingdom of heaven in bliss, who would that by their obedience
they should be sent thither, and should have an intent, to preach and spredde
the holy faith, and save all those souls, and suffer those afflictions, and
death it self when it should be presented unto them for Jesus Christ his
sake crucified.

An other time, by reason of the great tyrannies and execrable acts of the
cursed ones, bearing the name of Christians, the Indians slew other two
religious men of Saint Dominickes order, and one of Saint Frauncis. Whereof I
ran be a good witness for that I escaped at the time miraculously from the
same death, of the which it should be a hard matter to entreat, and would
be to amase men, by reason of the grieuousnes and horiblenesse of the case.
Wherefore I will not lay it abroad (for being too tedious) until his time, and
at the day of judgment it shall be more evident, when God shall take
vengeance of the theeueries so horrible and so abominable as are done by
those which bear the name of Christians against the Indians.

An other time in those Provinces at the Cape of the Codera (as they call it)
there was a town, the Lord whereof was named Higueroto, a name either proper
to the person, or it may be common to the Lords of the place. This Lord was
so bounteous, and his people so virtuous and serviceable, that as many
Spaniardes as came thither by ship, they found there good entertaynement,
meat, lodging, all cheering, and refreshing. This said Lord had also
delivered many from death of those which were fled thither out of other
Provinces, where they had ryoted and tyrannised, and come thither sick, and
half dead for hunger: whom they refreshed, and afterward sent them away safe,
to the I Will of Perles, where there were Spaniardes, and might have slain them
if he had would, without that ever any should have known it. And shortly
to say the Spanish did call the Subjects of Higurroto, the house and harbor
of every body. A caytife tyrant advised him self to outrage that people
also, when as they thought them selves sure enough: and getting him to a
ship, he had there invited a great number of people to come a boorde her as
they were accustomed to do, and to trust the Spaniardes.

A great number of people being entered into her, men women, and children, he
hoysed sails, and went to the I Will of Saint John, where he soulde them all for
slaves.

I came at the same instant to the I Will of Saint John, and I saw the tyrant,
and understood what he had done. He had destroyed all that towneship: whereby
he did great harm to all other his fellow tyrants, wonted to rob, and roue all
along those coasts, insomuch as they had in abomination this act so hydeous,
being bereft thereby of their harbor, and house of retire, as ordinary and
familiar unto them as it had bin their own home and house.

I deport me to recount the mischieues infinite, and cases abominable, which
have bin used in that country, and are used as yet.

They have singled out at times from all this coaste, the which was very well
peopled, unto the Isles of S. John and Hispaniola, above two millions of souls,
seized upon by their purchases in thieuing and robbing: which also every one of
them they have slain not long after, by thrusting them into the minerals and
other tormoyls, besides the great numbers there were there already before
time, as we have above said. And it is a pitiful thing, and able to make any
heart to cleave, were it never so hard, to see all this coast of a country
most fertile, to be left all naked and empty of people.

It is a tried case, that they never convey away their shippings of Indians so
robbed and purchased, as I have said, but that they cast the third part into
the sea, besides those which they slay, when they will sort the^ to themselves
for their chafer. The cause is, that when as they will by all means atteine to
the end which they have proposed to them selves: they have need of a great
number of people, for to draw a great deal of money, according to the
quantity of the slaves: and they prepare but a very small deal of sustenance
and water, to serve but a few persons: to the end that those tyrants whom they
call purueyghours of the ships should not spend them much. And there is but
even scarce enough, save to serve the Spaniardes turn which go a rouing and
robbing: and there is always wanting for the poor Indians. Wherefore also
they die for hunger and thirst: and then there is none other remedy but to
cast them over the board into the sea. And verily a man among them did tell me,
that from the I Will of Lucayos, where had been wrought great slaughters in this
manner, unto the I Will of Hispaniola, which are a threescore, or seventy leages,
there trended a ship all along, without that it had either compass or
mariners card, being guided only by the tracke of dead Indians carcasses,
flotting upon the seas, of them which had been cast in.

And after they be landed in the I Will, whither they bring them to make sale of
them: it is to make an heart to yearne of whosoever, have he never so little
compassion, to behold them naked and famished, fall down and faint for hunger
and thirst, women, and aged men, and children.

Afterward they soon after they separate them, as it were Lambs, the
fathers from the children, and the wives from the husbands, in making troops
of them of ten or twenty persons, and so cast lottes on them, to the end,
those cursed purnueighours should take their share, which are those who do
equipe or rig, and furnish two or three ships for the navy of those tirants,
pirates, and rouers, robbing by sea and land, seasing upon all they come by,
and pulling the poor men out of their own housen. And look when the lot
falls upon the flock where there were among the^ any old or sick person, ye
tyrant to who^ ye same escheated, would say: That the devil take the old
graybeard, why do thou give him me, to the end I should go bury him?
And this sick rascal, what have I to do that he should fall out to my
lotte: to the end, I should be his Physician to cure him? Hereby a man may
see, in what estimation the Spaniardes have the Indians, and how they
accomplish the commandment of God, touching the love of their neighbor, of
the which depends the law and the Prophets. The tyranny which the
Spanishe exercise over the Indians, to fish for Pearls, is one of the
cruellest and cursedest things that is in the world.

There is no hell in this life, nor other desperate state in this world, that
may be compared unto it: although that the trade of gold finding, be in his
kind, very grievous, and very miserable. They let them into the sea, three, or
four, or five fadome forth down right under water, from the morning until
sunnesette, where they are continually flitting without stint, to pluck
oysters, in the which are engendered the pearls. They surge up above the
waters, with a net full of oysters to take breath: where stands ready a
Spanishe tormentor, in a little cock boat, or a brigantine, and if the poor
wretches stay never so little while, to rest them selves: they all to be buffet
them with their fistes, and draw them by the hair into the water to return to
their fishing. Their sustenaunce is fish, and the same very fish which
contains the pearls, and the bread Cacabi, or some Mahis, which are the
kinds of bread of that country: the one of very slender nourishment, the
other is not easy to be made into bread, of the which also, they never give
them their belly full.

The beds that they lodge them in a nights, is to set them by the heels,
their bodies requoyling on the could ground, in a pair of stocks for fear
of running away. Sometimes they are drowned in the sea, and at their fishing
and travail of piking of pearls, and never rise up again above the water:
because the Bunches and Whirlepooles (they call them Tuberones and Maroxos) two
kind of monsters of the sea most cruel, which devour a man all whole, and
those do kill them and eat them.

Let it now here be considered, whither in this purchase of Pearls, the
commandments of God, touching the love of God, and our neighbors be kept, or
not: when they throw those people into danger of bodies and souls. For they
slay their neighbors by their covetousness, without that they receive, or
faith, or sacraments, or else they prolonge them in a state of life so
horrible, that they bring them to their end, and consume them in a few days.
For it is impossible, that men should be able to live any long season under the
water without taking breath, the continual cold percing them: and so they die
commonly, parbraking of blood at ye mouth: because of the kitting together of
their chestes, or bulk of the breast arising thereof, that they are so
continually without breathing under the water, and of the blooddy flux, caused
by the cold. Their hairs, which by nature are cole black, alter and become
after a branded russette, like to the hairs of the seawolues. The salt peeter
breaks out of their shouldiers, in such sort, that they seem to be a kind
of monsters in the shape of men, or else some other kind of men. They
dispatched in ridding about this insupportable travail, or rather to speak
rightly, this devilish torment, all ye Lucayan Indians which were in the Isles,
having sauoured this gaynes, and every Indian was worth unto them a fifty, or
an hundred Castillans. They made an open mart of them, notwithstauding it were
inhibited them, by the magistrate otherwise unmerciful: for the Lucayens were
good swimmers. They also, about these things have slain a number of the
people of other provinces.

Of the river Yuia Pari.
THere runs through the province of Paria, a river named Yuia Pari, more
then two hundred leagues within land from the head. There entered the same
river, an unlucky tyrant, a great many leagues upward, in the year, one
thousand, five hundred, twenty and niene with a four hundred men or more:
which there wroght great slaughters, burning alive, and putting to the edge
of the swoorde, an infinite sort of Indians, which were in their lands and
house^ doing hurt to no creature, and therefore secure, and mistrusting nothing.

In the end he dyed an evil death, and his Navy was disperaged: albeic that
other tyraunts there were which succeeded him in his mischieuousnesses and
tyrannies: and yet at this day thither they go, destroying, and staying, and
plunging into hell the souls for whom the son of God shed his blood.

Of the realm of Venesuela.
THe year 1526. the king our Sovereign, being iuduced by sinister
informations and persuasions dammageable to the state, as the Spaniardes have
always payned them selves to conceal from his Majesty the damages and
dishonours which GOD and the souls of men, and his state does receive in the
Indies: granted and committed a great realm, greater then all Spain, that
Venesuela, with the government and entier jurisdiction, unto certain Dutch
Marchaunts, with certain capitulations and conuentions accorded beetweene them.

These same entering the country with three hundred men: they found the people
very amiable, and meek as lambs, as they are all in those parties of the
Indies, until the Spanish do outrage them. These see upon them without
comparison a great deal more cruelly, then any of the other tyrauntes, of the
which we have spoken before: showing them selves more unnatural and fierce,
then raging tygars, or wolves, or ramping Lions. For they had the jurisdiction
of the whole country, possessing it with more freedom, and using it with a
greater care, and starker blind madness of couetyse, serving their own turns
with all practices and cheuisaunees, to get and gather gold and silver, more
then all they of whom has bin spoken heretofore: having wholly shaken off all
fear of God, and of the king: yea, having forgotten themselves to be men.

These devils incarnate have said desolate and destroyed, more then four
hundred leagues of most fertile land, and therein, of provinces exceeding and
wonderful, fair vayles, to the breadth of forty leagues, and hournes very
great, full of people, and of gold. They have slain, and wholly discomfited
great and diverse nations, so far forth as to abolishe the languages wonted
to be spoken, not leaving alive that could skill of them: unless some one or
other, who had hid them selves in the caves and bowels of the earth,, flying
the dint of the sword, so raging and plaging. They have slain, destroyed, and
sent to hell by diverse and strange manners of cruelties and vngodlynesses, more
(I supposse) then four or five millions of souls: and yet at this present,
they cease not to do the same, by infinite outrages, spoils, add slaughters,
which they have committed, and do commit daily unto this present. I will only
touch three or four, by the which it may be judged of others, which they used
to accomplish their destructions, and disolations above mentioned.

They took the Lord sovereign of all the province without all cause, only to
bereeue him of his gold, giving him also the torture: which Lord unbound
himself, and escaped from them into the mountains, wherefore also the
subjects rose and were in a mutiny, hiding the^ selves upon the mountains,
amongst the hedges and bushes. The Spaniardes make after to chase them, and
having found them, commit cruel massacres, and as many as they take alive,
they sell them in port sale for slaves.

In diverse provinces, yea in all where they became before that they took the
Sovereign Lord, the Indies went to receive them with songs, and daunces, and
with presents of gold in great quantity.

The payment made them, was, to be put to the edge of the sword, and hewn in
pieces. One time, as they went to receive the Spanishe in the fashion
abouesayde: the Dutche Captain tyrant, caused to be put in a thatched house
a great number of people, and hackled in pieces.

And being on high, near the top of the house certain beams which diverse
had got upon, avoiding the blooddy hands and swords of those people (O
merciless beasts) the diuelishe man, sent to put to fire, whereby as many as
there were, were burned alive. By this means the country remained very
desert, ye people flying into the mountains, where they hoped to save
themselves.

They came into another great province, in the confines of the province and
realm or Saint Martha, where they found the Indians peaceable in their
boroghs, and in their house^, doing their business, they continued a long time
with them, eating their store, and the Indians served them, as if they had to
receive of them their life and safegarde, supporting their continual
oppressions, and usual outragiousnesses, which are intolerable: besides that
one Spanishe glutton, eats more in one day, then would suffice an whole
household of more then ten Indians. They gave them at that time, a great
quantity of gold, of their own good will, over and besides, other services
innumerable, which they did unto them. At the end as these tyrants would
depart the place, they advised to pay them for their lodging, in this manner.

The Almain tyrant governor, commanded to take such Indians as they could,
with their wives and children, and that they should shut them up within an
enclosure, wounded in of purpose, letting them know, that who so would come
forth, and be let go free, that he should redeem himself at the pleasure of
the unjust governor: in giving so much gold for himself, so much for his
wife, and so much for every polle of his children. And yet to press them the
more, he commanded to give them nothing to eat, until such time as they had
performed the quantity of gold inflicted them for their ransom. Many sent to
their housen for gold, and bought out themselves as they were able, and those
same were delivered, and went abroad about their business to get their living.
The tyrant sent certain Spanish thieues and robbers, to go take them again the
second time, after they had bin redeemed. They are carried to the perclose, and
there wrung with hunger and thirst, to the end, that they should yet once
again pay for their freedom. And there were many amongst them, which were taken
and ransommed two or three sundry times. Others which had not to give, for
because they had all they had, he let them within the toyse dye for hunger.

And in this manner has bin destroyed a province very rich of people and
gold, the which has a vale or bourne of forty leagues, where has been
brent a borough of the receite of a thousand housholdes.

This Tyrant resolved with himself to pearce farther into the country, with a
great desire to discover on that side, ye same hill of Peru. By occasion of
which accursed voyage both he and others carried forth with them, Indians
infinite, laden with two or three quintalles weight, and being enchained. If
any were weak or weary, fainting for hunger, or traveling, they cut
incontinent his head off even with the collar of the chain that yoked them:
because they should not need to vnhamper the others that went with the same
collers about their necks, and so tombled the head on the one side, and the
body on the other. And the load of him that had so failed was distributed and
bestowed upon others. To tell of the Provinces, which he has laid desert,
and the towns and places which he has brent, for all the houses are
thetched, and to number the nations which he has slain, and the cruelties,
and murders particular, which he has committed by the may, it would be a
thing scarce credible: howbeit very true and wonderful. In this same very
course and steps marched sithence the other tyrants, who came from the said
Venesuela, and others of the Province of S. Martha, with the self same holy
intention to discover the same sacred golden palace of Peru: and found the
whole country in length more then two hundred leagues so burned, dispeopled,
and spoiled, having been before most notably peopled and most fertile, as has
been said, that themselves as very tyrants and savage beasts as they were,
wondered and stood astonished to see the trackes of the destructions so
lamentable, wheresouer he had passed.

All these things have been given in evidence with the depositions of many
witnesses by the Attorney of the council of the Indies, and the evidences are
kept amongst the Records of the same council: and yet have they never burnt
alive, any of those execrable tyrants. And this is nothing of all that which
has been proved, of the great outrages and mischieues which these have
committed. For as much as the ministers of justice, which until this time have
him in the Indies, by reason of their great wilful and damnable blyndnesse,
have never troubled themselves to examine the offenses, spoils, and murders,
which have been wrought, and yet presently are wrought by the tyrants in the
Indies: save only they will say, because such has cruelly entreated the
Indies, the king has lost of his reuenews so many thousand Castilians in
rent, and this little verdict over general and confused, must suffice for the
disclaim of so many villainies. And yet that little which they take upon them,
they do not auerr, nor deuiur upon, as they ought to do. For if they had
regard of their duty to God and the king, it would be found, that those
Almaine tyrants have robbed the king of above three thousand Castillans of
gold. For those provinces of Venesuela with the others which they have laid
waste, and dispeopled more then four hundred leagues forthright, as has bin
said, is a region the most blisfull, and the richest of gold, and was the
best peopled of any in the world: in such sort, that they have disturned from
the kings cofers, and occasioned the loss in this Realm of above two millions
of rent, within seventeen years sithence by past, that these enemies of God
and the king have begun to destroy it: neither is there any hope that ever
those losses will be repaired as long as the world shall endure: unless it
be, that God should myraculously raise as many millions of souls as are
deceased. It shall not be out of the way to consider, of what sorts and how
excessive have been the damages, dishonours, blasphemies, and infamies, which
God and his law has received: And wherewithal may be recovered and
recompensed the loss of so many souls as burn in hell fire through the
avarice and cruelty of those tyrants Almains, shall I say, or All^uains?

Only I will conclude the discourse of their ungraciousness and cruelty
heerewith. That is, that sithence they entered the country unto this present,
that is to say, these seue^teene years they have sent by Sea a great number of
ships laden and stuffed with Indians, to make sale of them as slaves at S.
Martha, at the Isles of Hispaniola, and of Iamayca, and at Saint John's Isle,
more then one million: and do send daily, as now this year one thousand,
five hundred, forty two: the Court of the Audience royal notwithstanding
stablished, for, and at Hispaniola, right well seeing all this, and dissimuling
to see it, yea, favoring and supporting all the matter: as likewise they have
had their eyes bended at all the other tyrannies and ransackings infinite,
which has been done in all this coast of this firm land which are about four
hundred leagues, the which have been and now are under their jurisdiction,
like unto Venesuela, and saint Martha: all which the said court might very well
have empeached and remedied. There is none other cause of putting all these
Indians under yoke of bondage, save the only perverse, wilfully blind, and
obstinate greedines, and insatiable wretchedness of these most covetous
tyrants, and all to have, and heap up goods like as has had all the rest
throughout all the Indies, ramping these silly lambs and sheep out of their
houses, and carrying their wives and children in the manners of proceeding so
cruel and execrable as has been said, branding them with the kings mark, to
make them vendible for slaves.

Of the Provinces of the firm land, or quarter that is called Florida.
INto these Provinces went three tyrants at three diverse times since the year
1510. or 1511. there to put in ure the acts which others, and two of them from
among themselves have committed in other quarters of the Indians: to the end to
aspyre to high degrees, in no respect convenient to their persons, higher then
their merits in the common wealth could conceive, with the blood and
destruction of their neighbors: and they are dead all three of an evil death,
and their houses likewise have been destroyed with them, the which they had
builded in times past, with the blood of mankind, as I can be a sufficient
witness of all three, and their memory is now abolished from of the face of
the earth, as if they had never been in this world. They left all this
Country in disorder, and confusion, and their own manners in infamy and
horror, for certain slaughters which they did there, notwithstanding not so
many, for as much as God plagued them with death before they could do any
more, and kept them from this outrage in this place, for the evils for I know,
and have seen that they did in other parts of the Indies.

The fourth tyrant, that came last in the year. 1538. cunningly advised, and
being fully furnished: it is three years since there is no tidinges
concerning him. We are certain that incontinent after his entry thither: he
has behaved himself cruelly, and since has been as a man vanished. That if
he be alive, he and his mainies have destroyed these three years a great many
mighty peoples, if he has found any in his enquest as he has gone: for
sure he is one of the notoriousest and best experimented amongst them that
have done the most hurts, mischieues, and destructions in many Realms with
their consorts: wherefore I believe that God has given him like end unto the
others.

Three or four years after the writing of the above written, came out of the
Florida the head of the petie tyrants which went thither with this captain
tyrant, that there left his bones: of whom we understood the cruelties and
euilles, which there during his life time principailly, and under his conduct
and government, and since after his cursed death, the unnatural men have
executed against the Indians innocent, and harmeful to none, to verify that
which I had prognosticate before, they being so excessive, that they have the
more confirmed the rule by me set down before at the beginning, that the
farther they proceeded to discover, destroy, and to waste countries and lands:
the more cruelties and notorious wickednesses they would do against God, and
against their neighbors. It loatheth me to recount those acts so cursed,
ghastly, and bloody, not of men but of savage beasts: and therefore I would
not trouble my head to stand rehearsing those which followed afterward.

They found many great nations, and wise commonweals well instituted for
policy and ordinances. They executed upon them great slaughters after their
custom, to the end to imprint in their hearts an awe. They martyred and
murdered them, and loded them with weighty packes like beasts. And when any
was foreweeried or forespent, to the end they should not need to loose the
chain. in the which they were giued in collers, before they come at him that
fainted, they pare off the head from the collar brymme, the Troncke tombling
one way, and the chain another: as we have before recounted to have been used
otherwise.

Entering a borough, where they were received with joy, and the Indians giving
them to eat their fill, and giving them of Indians more then six hundred to
carry their fardels, carrying the heafte of beasts in their service, and
dressing their horses: the tyrants being departed thence, a captain kinsman of
the principal tyrant returned to rob the people, being without distruste and
without fear, and slew with the thrustes of Lance the Lord and King of the
Country, executing besides other cruelties.

In another borough, forasmuch as it seemed them that they were a little too
near neighbors, and stood more on their ward, for the acts villainous and
infamous, which they had heard of them: they put to the edge of the sword and
lance, young and old, great and little, subject and sovereign, taking to
mercy no creature whosoever.

The head tyrant caused to pare off the nose and lips down to the chin of a
great number of Indians, yea, more then 200. (as is said) yt they had caused to
be sent for from a certain borough, or it may be came of their own good
will. And thus in this estate so rufull, and in these sorrows and anguishes of
blood streaming down, they sent them away: to the end they might go carry
news of the holy works and miracles, which these preachers of the sacred
catholic faith, and baptized, had wrought.

Let it now be judged, what kind of people these were, what love they bear
to the Christians, and how they do believe that God is, whom they say to be
perfectly merciful and righteous, and that the law and the religion, of the
which they make profession, and do vaunt themselves, is without blemish. The
mischiefs are exceeding sore and strange, which those ungracious caytiues,
children of perdition there committed. And thus the desperate and unlucky
Captain dyed without confession: and we need not to doubt but that he lies
buried in hell: if algates God of his infinite mercy secretly dispensed in his
hidden wisdom has not prevented him, not dealing with him, after his
demerites, in respect of his vngracions lewdnes.

Of the river of la Plata, that is to say, of silver.
SIthence the year, one thousand five hundred, and two or three and twenty:
certain Captains made three or four voyages up the River of Plata, where
there are great Provinces and Realms, and nations well ordered and endued with
understanding. In general we understood, that they have made there great
butcheries and invasions: but like as this Country is far discoasted from
the Indies most famous, so we are not able, to quote the notablest points in
particular. We doubt no whit notwithstanding, but that they have done and do
keep as yet at this hour the same order of proceedings as has been kept,
and are in other quarters: for they be the selfsame Spaniardes, and there are
amongst them of those same, which have trauersed in other acts and exploites
such as has been specified. Moreover, their going thither, is to become rich
and great Lords as well as others: that which cannot be done without
spoiling, robbinge, slaying, and extirping the Indians, in manner and order
holden by the others.

After the writing the abouesaid, I have understood, that of a truth, they have
wasted and dispeopled great Provinces and Realms in that Country, exercising
strange slaughters and cruelties upon these poor people there, for the which
they have abled themselves as forward in wickedness, or forwarder then any
other, as having the commodity by the greater distance from Spain, to sin
the Freer, and by occasion there of have lived the more disordered and farthest
off from justice: howbeit that in all the Indies, there has been no regard
of Justice, as appears sufficiently, by that which has been above said.

Amongst an infinite sort of other things we read at the counsel table for
the Indies, these also which shall be spoken of hereafter. A tyrant governor
gave in command to certain his bands to go assault the Indians, and that if
they gave them not to eat they should kill them al. They went armed with this
authority. And for because the Indians would give the^ none as being open
enemies, more for fear of the sight of them, as flying from them then for
want of liberality, they put to the edge of the swoorde more then five
thousand souls.

Item a certain number of the folk of the Country came to put themselves
into their hands, and presented them their service, whom at adventure they
had sent for: and for because they came not so soon, or for because they
would after their accustomed fashion, engraue in them an horrible and
astonishable terror: the grouernour commanded that they should put them into
the hands of other Indians, whom they hold for their enemies: whereupon they
came weeping and crying, and beseeching them that they would slay them,
themselves, and not deliver them into the power of their enemies, and having no
mind to yeede out of their houses where they were, they were cut in pieces,
crying, and saying: We come to serve you in peace, and do you slay us? Our
blood remain imprinted on this wall, for a witness against you of our unjust
death, and your barbarous cruelty. Certes, this was an act of special mark,
worthy to be remembered, and much more to be lamented.

Of the mighty Realms, and large Provinces of Peru.
IN the year 1531. went another great tyrant with certain other consortes, to
the Realms of Peru, where entering with the same title and intention, and with
the same proceedings as all the rest before gone, forasmuch as he was one of
them, which had of long tune been exercised in all kinds of cruelties and
murders, which had been wrought in the firm land sithence the year one
thousand five hundred, and ten, he took encouragement to accrewe in
cruelties, murders, and robberies: being a man without loyalty and truth,
laying waste Cities and Countries, bringing them to naught, and utterly
vndoeyng them by slaying the inhabitaunts, and being the cause of all the
evils, which ensued in that Country: that I am right well assured, that there
is not a man that can recounte them and represent them to the eyes of the
Readers, as is requisite, until such time that we shall see them and know
them at the day of judgment. As touching my self, if I would take upon met,
to recounte the deformity, quality and circumstances of some one, I were not
able to decipher them, acording to that which is convenient.

He slew and laid waste at his first arrival with a mischief certain
boroughes, from whom he pillaged a great quantity of Gold. In an Island
near to the same provinces, named Pagna, well peopled and pleasant, the Lord
thereof with his people received them as it had been Angels from heaven: and
six months after, when as the Spanishe had eaten up all their provision:
They discovered also unto them the corn which they kept under ground for
them selves, their wives, and their children, against a dry time and barren:
making them offer of all, with teers plentiful, to spend and eat at their
pleasure. The recompense in the end which they made them, was, to put to the
edge of the sword and lance, a great quantity of those people. And those
whom they could take alive, they made them slaves: with other cruelties great
and notable which they committed, dispeopling as it were all that I Will.

From thence they make to the pronince of Tumbala, which is in the firm
land, where they slay and destroy as many as they could come by. And because
all the people were fled as affrighted by their horrible acces, they said that
they made an insurrection, and rebelled against the king of Spain. This
tyrant had this policy, and kept this order of proceeding, that, unto all
those whom he toake, or unto others which presented him with gold or silver,
or other things which they had: he commanded them to bring more, until such
time as he perceived that either they had no more, or that they brought him no
more. And then he would say, that he accepted them for the vassals and
lieges of the king of Spain, and made much of them: and would cause it to
be proclaimed at sound of two trompettes, that from thence forth they would
take them no more, and that they would do them no manner harm at all: setting
it down for good and lawful, all that whatsoever he had robbed from them.

And that he put them in fear with news so abominable which he spredde
amongst them, before he received them into the safegarde and protection of the
king, as though that after they were received under the protection of the king,
they would not oppress them, rob them, lay them waste and desolate any
more, yea and as though he had not destroyed them.

A few days after, the king and Emperor of those realms, named Atabaliba,
came accompanied with a number of naked people, bearing their ridiculous
armor, not knowing neither how swords did carue, nor spears did pearce, nor
horses did run, nor who or what were the Spaniardes: who if the diuelles had
any money, would set them selves in enquest to go rob them. He comes to
the place where they were, saying: Where are these Spaniardes? Let them come, I
will not stir a foot, till they satisfy me for my subjects whom they
have slain, and my boroughs which they have dispeopled, and for my wealth,
which they have bereeued me.

The Spaniardes set against him, and slew and infinite sort of his people:
they took him also in person, who came carried in a litter born upon men's
shouldiers. They treat with him, to the end that he should ransom
himself. The king offers to perform four millions of Castillans, and
performs fifteen, they promise to release him: notwithstanding in the end,
keeping nor faith nor truth (as they never kept any in the Indies unto the
Indians) they laid unto his charge altogether untruly, that by his
commandment the people assembled.

The king answered, that in all the country there moved not a leaf of a
tree, without his good will: that if there assembled any people, they were to
believe that it was by his commandment, and as touching himself that he was
prisoner, and they might slay him.

All this not withstanding, they condemned him to be brent alive: but at the
request of some certain, the Captain caused him to be strangled: and being
strangled, he was burned.

This king understanding his sentence, said: Wherefore will you burn me?
What trespass have I done ye? Did not you promise me to set me at liberty,
if I gave you the gold? and have I not performed more then I promised?
Seeinges you will needs have it so? send me to your king of Spain: speaking
other things, to the great confusion and detestation of the great
wrongfulnesse that the Spaniardes used, whom in the end they burned. Here let
be considered the right and title of this warfare, the imprisonment of this
prince, the sentence, and the execution of his death, and the conscience,
whereby they possess great treasures, as in deed they have robbed in those
realms from this king and other several lords infinite.

As touching the innumerable cruelties, and notable, for ye mischiefs and
enormities withal committed in the rooting out of those peoples by them, who
call them selves Christians: I will here rehearse some certain, the which a
friar of S. Frauncis order saw at the beginning, and the same certified under
his name and sign: sending them into all those quarters, and amongst others
into this realm of Castile, whereof I retain a copy in my keeping in the
which it is thus written:

I Friar Mark, of the order of Saint Frauncis, commissarie over the other
friars of the same order in the provinces of Peru, and who was one of the first
religious men, with entered into the said provinces with the Spaniardes: do say,
bearing true testimony of certain things, the which I have seen with mine
eyes in that country, namely, concerning the entreating and conquestes made
over the natural inhabitaunts of the country: first of all, I am an eyed
witness, and have certain knoweledge, that those Indians of Peru, are a people
the most kind hearted that has been seen among all the Indians, being
courteous in conversation, and friendly unto the Spaniardes.

And I saw them give to the Spanishe in abundaunce, gold, silver, and
precious stones, and all that was asked them, and that they had, doing them all
kind of service lawful. And the Indians never ye ded forth to war, but
kept them in peace so long time, as they gave them not occasion, by their evil
entreating of them and their cruelties, but contrariwise received them with all
amity and honor in their boroughes, in giving them to eat, and as many
slaves mankind and women kind, as they demanded for their service.

Item I am witness, that without that the Indians gave occasion: the Spanish
as soon as they were entered the land, after that the great Cacike Atabaliba,
had given to the Spanish more then two millions of gold, and had put into their
power the whole country without resistance, incontinent they burned the said
Atabaliba which was Lord of the whole country.

And after him they brent his captain general Cochilimaca, who had come to
the governor in peace with other Lords. In the like manner, also a few days
after they burned a great Lord named Chamba, of the province of Quito, without
any fault at all, and without having given the least occasion that might be.

In like manner they burned unjustly Schappera Lord of the Canaries. Also they
brent the feet of Aluis a great Lord amongst all those which were in Quito,
and caused him to endure sundry other torments, to make him tell where was the
gold of Atabaliba: of the which treasure as it appeared, he knew nothing.

Also they brent in Quito Cosopanga, who was governor of all the provinces of
Quito, which upon the request to him first made by Sebastian of Bernalcasar
Captain under the governor, was come to them in peace: and only because he
gave them not gold so much as he demanded of him their burned him with very
many other Caciks and principal Lord* And for ought that I can understand,
the intent of the Spaniards was, that there should not be left alive one
Lord in the whole country.

Item I certify, that the Spaniardes caused to assemble a great number of the
Indians, and socked them up in three great housen, as many as could be pored
in, and setting to fire, they burned them all, without that they had done the
least thing that might be, or had given to the Spanishe the least occasion
thereof whatsoever. And it came to pass, that a priest, who is named Ocanna,
drew a young boy out of the fire, in the which he burned, which perceiving an
other Spaniarde took from out of his hands the boy, and flunge him into the
midst of the flames, where he was resolved into ashes together with others.
The which Spaniarde returning the same day to the camp, fell down dead
suddenly, and mine advice was he should not be buried.

Item I affirm, to have seen with mine own eyes, that the Spanishe have
cut the hands, the noses, and the ears of the Indians, and of their women,
without any other cause or purpose, save only that so it came into their
fantasy, and that in so many places and quarters, that it should be too
tedious to rehearse. And I have seen, that the Spanishe have made their
Mastiues run upon the Indians to rent them in pieces. And moreover, I have
seen by them brent so many houses, and whole borughes, or towneshippes, that I
am not able to tell the number. Also it is true, that they violently plucked
the little infants from the mothers dugges, and taking them by the arms, did
throw them from them as far as they could: Together with other enormities
and cruelties without any cause, which gave me astonishment to behold them,
and would be to long to rehearse them.

Item, I saw when as they sent for the Cacikes and other principal Indians,
to come see them in peace, and assurance to them made, promising them safe
conduct: and incontinent as they were arrived, they burned them. They burned
two whiles I was present, the one in Andon, and the other in Tumbala: and I
could never prevail with them to have them delivered from burning, preached I
unto them never so much. And in God and my conscience, for ought that ever I
could perceive, the Indians of Peru, never lift themselves up, nor never
rebelled for any other cause, but for the evil entreating of the other side,
as is manifest unto every one, and for just cause: the Spaniardes destroying
them tyrannously against all reason and justice, with all their country,
working upon them so many outrages, that they were determined to die, rather
then to suffer much an other time.

Item I say, that by the report of the Indians themselves, there is yet more
gold hidden then is come to light, the which because of the vniustices and
cruelties of the Spaniardes, they would not discover, neither ever will
discover, so long as they shall be so evil entreated, but will those rather
to die with their fellows.

Wherein GOD our Lord has been highly trespassed agayinst, and the kings
Majesty evil served, having been defrauded in that, that his highness has
lost such a country, as has been able to yield sustenaunce to all Castile:
for the recovery of which country, it will be a matter of great difficulty,
dispense, and charges.

All these hitherto are the formal words of the said religious person: the
which are also ratified by the Bishop of Mexico, which witnesses that the
reverend father has to his knowledge affirmed all the above said.

It is here to be considered, that the good father says, that he saw those
things. For that, that he has been fifty, or an hundred leagues up into
the conntrey, for the space of niene or ten years, and that at the very
beginning, when there were not as yet but very few of the Spaniardes: but at
the ringing of the gold, there were quickly gathered and fleeked thither four
or five thousand, which shed themselves forth over many great realms and
provinces, more then five hundred or six hundred leagues, the which country
has been thoroughly destroyed, they executing still the self same practices,
and others more barbarous and cruel.

Of a verity from that day unto this present, there has been destroyed and
brought to desolation more souls then he has compted: and they have with
less reverence of GOD or the King, and with less plttie then before,
abolished a great part of the lineage of mankind.

They have slain unto this day in these same realms (and yet daily they do
slay them) more then four millions of souls.

Certain days passed, they pricked in shooting with darts of reeds to death
a mighty Queen, wife of Eling, who is yet King of that Realm, whom the
Spaniardes by laying hands upon him compelled to rebel, and in rebellion he
persisteth.

They took the Queen his wife, and so as has been said, slew her against
all reason and justice, being great with child as she was, as it was said
only to vex her husband withal.

If it should be expedient to recounte the particularities of the cruelties
and slaughters that the Spanishe have committed, and yet daily do commit in
Peru: without all doubt they should be so frightfull, and in so great number,
that all that we have hitherto said of the other parts of the Indies, would
be shadowed, and it would seem a small matter in the respect of the
grieuousnesse and great number hereof.

Of the new realm of Grenado.
Within the year 1539. there took their flight together sundry tyrants,
flocking from Venesuela, from Saint Martha, and from Carthagene, to search for
the Perous: and there were also others which came down from Peru it self to
assay, to make a glade farther into the country: And they found from beyond S.
Marthas and Carthagene, 300. leagues up into the country,, fertile lands, and
admirable provinces, full of infinite people, kind hearted like the rest, and
very rich, as well of gold as of precious stones, which they call emeraldes.

Unto the which Provinces they gave the name of New Grenado: For because that
the tyrant which came first into this country, was a grenado, borne in our
country. And for because that diverse wicked men and cruel of those which
roaued over this part, were not orious butchers, making it as occupation to
shed man's blood, having the practice and experience of the great fellonies
aforementioned in most part of the other regions of the Indies: it is the
cause why their diuelishe works have been such, and in so great number,
which the circumstaunces do make appear so monstrous and odious, that they
have far exceeded the others, yea all the gests that have gone before, done
by others, or by them selves in other Provinces.

I will recounte some one or other of an infinite whereof they are giultie, as
done by them within these three years, and which yet they, cease not to
commit. That is, that a Governor, for as much as he which robbed and
slew in the new Realm of Grenado, would not admit him for consorte with
him to rob and sley as did he: he procured an inquiry, and thereby
evidence came in against him with sundry witnesses, upon the fact of his
slaughters, disorders, and murders which he had done, and does as yet unto
this day, the process of which inquiry, together with the evidences was read,
and is kept in the records of the counsel of the Indies.

The witnesses do depose in the same inquiry, that the said whole realm was
in peace, the Indians serving the Spaniards, giving them to eat of their
labor, and laboring continually, and manuring the ground, and bringing them
much gold and precious stones, such as are emerauldes, and all that which
they could and had: the towns, and the Lordeshippes, and the people being
distributed amongst the Spaniardes every one his share: which is all that they
study for, for that, that it is their mean way to attain to their last end
and scope, to wit gold,

And all being subdued to their tyranny and accustomed bondage, the tyrant
the principal Captain which commanded over that country, took the Lord
and King of the country, and detayned him prisoner six or seven months,
exacting of him gold and emerauldes without cause or reason at all. The said
king, who was named Bogata, for fear which they put him in, said that he
would give them an house full of gold: hoping that he should escape out of
the hands of him which tormented him. And he sent Indians which should
bring him gold, and by times one after an other, they brought in a great
quantity of gold and precious stones. But bec ause the king did not give an
whole house full of gold, the Spaniardes did kill him: sethence that he did
not accomplish that which he had promised.

The tyrant commanding that this king should be arraigned before him self:
They sommon and accuse in this order the greatest king of all that country,
and the tyrant gives sentence, condemning him to be racked and tormented, if
he do not furnishe forth the house full of gold.

They give him the torture and the strapado with cords: they flinge burning
sewe^ upon his naked belly: they lay on boltes upon his feet, which were
fastened to one stake, and gyrd his neck fast unto another stake, two men
holding both his hands, and so they set fire unto his feet: and the tyrant,
coming up and down, now and then, wills him to have his death given him by
little and little, if he made not ready the gold. Thus they dispatched and
did to death that noble Lord in those torments, during the execution whereof,
God manifested by a sign, that those cruelties displeased him, in consuming
with fire all the town where they were committed. All the Spaniardes to the
end to follow their good Capataine, and having none other thing to do, but
to hackle in pieces those poor innocents do the like, tormenting with diverse
and savage torments every Indian, both Cacike or Lord of every people or
peoples, with all their flocks, that were committed to their charges: those
said Lords with all their subjects serving them, and giving them gold and
emerauds as many as they could, and as much as they had: Tormenting them
only to the end they should give them more gold, and rich myneralles: thus
they broyled and dispatched all the Lords of that Country.

For the great fear of the notorious cruelties, that one of the petie tyrants
did unto the Indians, there transported himself unto the mountains, in flying
so great cruelty, a great Lord named Daytama, with many of his people. For
this they hold for their last remedy and refuge, if it might have prevailed
them ought: and this the Spaniardes call insurrection and rebellion. Which the
Captain head tyrant having knowledge of he sends supply of soldiers unto
the said cruel man: (for whose cruelties sake, the Indians that were peaceable,
and had endured great tyrannies and mischiefs, were now gone into the
mountains:) to the end he should pursue them. Who, because it sufficed not
to hide them in the entrals of the earth, finding there a great multitude of
people, slew and dispatched the^, above 500. souls, what me^, what women, for
they received none to mercy. Also the witnesses depose, that the said Lord
Daytama^, before that the Spaniards put him to death, came to the cruel man,
and brought him four or five thousand Castillans, the which notwithstanding he
was murdered as is above said.

Another time many Indians being come to serve the Spaniardes, and serving
them with such humility and simplicity, as they are accustomed to do,
reputing themselves assured: behold, the captain of the town where they
served, who comes by night commanding that those Indians should be put to
the edge of the sword, when they had supped, and whiles that they were a
sleep, taking their rest after the toil which they sustained the day time.
And this he did, for that it seemed him necessary to do this massacre, to the
end to engraue an awe of himself in the hearts of all the peoples of that
country.

Another time the captain commanded to take an oath of the Spaniardes, to
wit, how many every one had in his service of the Caciks, and principal
Lords, and India^s of the meaner sort: that incontinent they should be
brought to the most open place of the city, where he commanded that they
should be beheaded: thus were there at that time put to death a four or five
hundred souls.

Moreover these witnesses depose concerning another of the petty tyrants, that
he had exercised great cruelties in slaying, and chopping off the hands and
noses of many persons, as well men as women, and destroying very much people.

Another time the captain sent the self same cruel man with certain
Spaniardes into the Province of Bogata, to be informed by the inhabitants what
Lord it was, that was successor unto the chief Lord, whom he had made to
die ye cruel death in those torments spoken of before: Who running along the
country throughout sundry places, took as many Indians as he could come by:
And for that he could not learn of them, what he was that succeeded that Lord,
he mangled off some hands, he bid cast others, men and women unto hungry
mastiues, who rend them in pieces. And in this manner have been destroyed very
many Indies, and Indesses. One time at the fourth watch of the night, he went
to ouerrunne Caciks or governors of the land, with many of the Indians, which
were in peace, and held themfelues assured (for he had given them his faith,
and assurance that they should receive no harm nor damage) upon credit
whereof, they were come forth of their holes in the mountains, where they had
been hid, to people the plain, in the which stood their city: thus being
commen without suspicion, and trusting the assurance made, he took a great
number, as well men as women, and commanded to hold out their hands stretched
against the ground, and himself with a woodknife cut of their hands, telling
them that he did on them this chastisement, for that they would not confess,
where their new Lord was, which had succeeded in the charge of government of
the Realm,

Another time for that the Indians gave him not a cofer full of gold, that
this cruel captain required them: he sent men to war upon them: who cut off
the hands and noses of men and women without number. They cast others before
their dogs being hunger bitten, and used to the feate of feeding on flesh, the
which dispatched and devoured them.

Another time the Indians of that Realm perceiving, that the Spaniards had
brent 3. or 4. of their principal Lords, they fled for fear up into a
mountain, from whence they might defend themselves against their enemies so
estraunged from all humanity. There were of them by the testimony of the
witnesses a four or five thousand Indians. This above said Captain sent a
great and notable tyrant, which exceeded far most of those to whom he had
given the charge to ransacke and waste, together with a certain number of
Spaniardes, to the end that they should chastise the Indian rebels: as they
would seem to make them for that they were fled from a pestilence and
slaughter so intolerable: and as though it apperteined unto them, to chastise
and punish them as malefactors themselves in deed being worthy of all torment
without that any body should have of them pity or compassion, being so deuoid
thereof, as appears by the handling of those poor innocents of that fashion.
Well, so it is that the Spanish by force prevailed to get up to the
mountain: for the Indians were naked without weapons. And the Spaniardes cried
peace unto the Indians: assuring them, that they would do them no harm: and
that they of their parts should not war any longer. Straight way as the
Indians stinted from their own defense, the vile cruel man sent to ye
Spaniardes to take the fortes of the mountain, and when they should get them
to enclose within them the Indians. They set then like unto Tigers and Lions,
upon these lambs so meek, and put them to the edge of the sword, so long
that they were feign to breath and rest themselves. And after having rested a
certain season, the captain commanded that they should kill and cast down
from the mountain, the which was very high, the residue that were alive: that
which was done. And these witnesses say, that they saw as it were a cloud of
the Indians cast down from the mountain, to the number by estimation of seven
hundredth men together, where they fell battered to pieces.

And to atchieue all his great cruelty, they searched all the Indians that were
hid amongst the bushes: and he commanded to cut of their heads, at blocks
ends: and so they sieve them and cast them down the mountain: yet could not
he content him self with those said things so cruel but that he would
make himself a little better known, augmenting his horrible sins, when as
he commanded that all the Indians men and women, which some private persons
had taken alive (for every one in those massacres is accustomed to cull out
some one or other mankind and womankind, to the end to become his servants)
should be put into a strawen house, saving and reserving those, which seemed
necessary to be employed in their service, and that there should be put to
fire: thus were there burned forty or fifty. He caused the rest to be flong
to the carrion kind dogs, which rende them in pieces, and devoured them.

Another time the self same tyrant went to a City called Cotta, and took
there a great number of Indians, and caused to be dismembered by his dogs, a
fifteen or twenty Lords of the principal, and cut the hands of a great
multitude of men and women: which said hands he hanged one by another on a
pole, to the end the other Indians might see that, which he had done unto
them. There were so hanged one by another threescore and ten pair of hands. He
slysed off besides from many women and children their noses.

No creature living and reasonable, is able to decipher the mischiefs and
cruel dealings of this fellow, enemy of God. For they are without number,
never otherwise heard of, nor seen: those, I mean, which he has done in the
land of Guatimala, and all about where he has become, for there are a good
many years passed, in the which he has been professed in the mystery, to
bereave that land, and those people.

The witnesses say for a surcharge, that the cruel dealings and slaughters
which have been committed, and are yet in the said Realm of new Grenado, by
the captains themselves in person and by their consents given unto all the
other tyrants, wasters, and weeders of the nature of man, which were in his
company, and the which has laid all the country wild and waste, are such
and so excessive, that if his majesty do not take some order therein in some
time (albeit that the slaughter and discomfiture of ye Indians is done only to
bereave the^ of their gold, the which they have none of, for they have
surrendered all that which they had) they will in a short time make an end of
them so in such sort, that there will be no more Indians to inhabit the
land, but that it will remain in a wilderness without being manured.

Nay, we must note here the cruel and pessilent tyrrannie of these cursed
tyrants, how raging and devilish it has been, that in the space of two or
three years, sithence that this realm has been first discovered (which as
they say both those that have been there, and those which depose as witnesses,
was the most peopled of inhabitants, as possibly might be any Country in
the world,) they have rased and emptied it with slaughters, declaring
themseues so far removed from pity, and the reverent fear of God and the
Prince, that the opinion is, without the present succor of his Majesty, to
stay these unnatural and devilish tyrannies, there will not remain as much as
one man alive, and I verily believe it. For I have seen with mine own eyes that
in these parts, they have destroyed and dispeopled in a small time, great
countries.

There are other great Provinces, which bound upon the said Realm, of new
Grenado, which they call Popay an and Cali, and three or four others, which
contain more then 500. leagues of ground, which they have destroyed and
desolated in the same manner, as they have done others, robbing and slaying with
torments, and the enormities before spoken of. For the land is very fertile, and
those that come from thence now daily, dot report, yt it is a rufull thing to
see so many goodly towns burned and said desolate, as they might behold
passing up and down that way: so as there, where there was wont to be in one
town a thousand or two thousand householdes, they have not found fifty, and
the rest utterly ransacked and dispeopled. And in some quarters they have found
two or three hundred leagues of land dispeopled and burned, and great cities
destroyed. And finally, by that, that si thence into the Realms of Peru, of
the Province side of Quito, are entered far into the Country sore and fell
tyrants, as far as to the said Realm of Grenado, and of Popayan, and of Cali
by the coast of Carthagene, and Araba, and other accursed tyrants of Carthagene
have gone to assault Quito, and moreover, afterward of the river side of S.
John, which is on ye south side, all the which have met to join hands
together in this exployte: they have rooted out and dispeopled above six
hundred leagues of land, with the loss of an infinity of souls, doing still
the self same to the poor wretches that remain behind, howsoever innocent
they appear to be.

Thus then is the rule which I set down at the beginning, by them verified:
that is, that the tyranny, rage, and ungraciousness of the Spanishe, has
always proceeded increasing in their cruelty, unnaturalness, and
mischiuousnes amongst those so sweet lambs. That which is continued at this
present day in those Provinces, amongst other their doings worthy the fire and
torment, is this which follows.

After the ends of the slaughters and massacres of the wars, they bring the
people into the horrible bondage above said, and give them to the commaundment
of Devils, to one an hundred Indians, to another three hundred. The ce^maunder
Devil commands, that there come before him an hundred Indians, which
incontinent present themselves like lambs. He causing a forty or fifty
amongst them to have their heads cut off: says unto the other there present,
I will serve you of the same sauce, if you do not me good service, or if so
be, that you go out of my sight without my leave.

That for the honor of God, all they that have read this piece of work, or
shall give it a reading, consider now, whether this act, so hideous, fell and
unnatural, do not exceed all cruelty and iniquity, that may be imagined,
and whether the Spaniardes have any wrong offered them when a man calls them
Devils, and whether were better, to give the India^s to keep to the devils in
hell, or the Spaniards which are at the Indies.

After this I will rehearse another devilish part, the which I cannot tell
whether it be less cruel and deuoide of manhood, then are those of savage
beasts: that is, that the Spanish which are in the Indies, do keep certain
dogs most raging, taught and trained wholly to the purpose, to kill and rende
in pieces the India^s. That let all those yt are true christians, yea, and also
those which are not so, behold, if ever there were the like thing in the whole
world: that is, to feed those dogs, they led about with them wheresoever they
go a great number of Indians in chains as if they were hogs, and kill them,
making a shambles of man's flesh. And the one of them will say to another, Lend
me a quarter of a villain, to give my dogs some meat, until I kill one
next, altogether as if one should borrowe a quarter of an hog or mutton.
There be others which go forth a hunting in the morning with their curres,
the which being returned to eat, if another ask him: How have ye sped to
day, they answer, very well: for I have killed with my dogs to day, fifteen
or twenty viliacoes. All these Diabolical doings, with others like have been
proved in the suits of law, that the tyrants have had one of them against
another. Is there any case more ouglie or unnatural?

I will here now deport me of this discourse, until such time, yt there come
other news of things, in ungraciousness more notorious and remarkable (if it so
be, yt there can be any more grievous) or until such time as we may return
thither to behold them our selves anewe, as we behold them for the space of
42. years continually with mine own eyes: Protesting in a good conscience
before God, that I do believe, and I hold it for certain, that the damages
and losses are so great, with the distructions and overthrows of Cities,
massacres and murders, with the cruelties, horrible and ougly, with the rauins,
iniquities and robberies, all the which things have been executed amongst
those people, and are yet daily committed in those quarters: that in all the
things, which I have spoken and deciphered, as I was able the nearest to the
truth: I have not said one of a thousand, of that which has been done, and
is daily a doing at this present, be it that you consider the quality, or be
it, that ye consider the quantity.

And to the end that all Christians have the greater compassion of those poor
innocents, and that they complain with me the more their perdition and
destruction, and that they detest the greediness, loftiness, and felnesse of
the Spanish: that all do hold it for a most undoubted verity, with all that
has been above said, that sithence the first discovery of the Indies until
now, the Indians never did harm unto the Spanishe in any place wheresoever,
until such time, that they first received wrongs and injuries, being robbed
and betrayed: but indeed did repute them to be immortal, supposing them to
be descended from heaven, and they received them for such, until such time
as that they gave it forth manifestly to be known by their doings, what they
were, and whereto they tended.

I will adioyne hereunto this, that from the beginning unto this hour, the
Spaniardes have had no more care to procure that unto those people should be
preached the faith of Jesus Christ, then as if they had been curre dogs, or
other beasts: but in lien thereof, which is much worse, they have forbidden by
express means the religious men to do it, for because that that seemed unto
them an hinderance likely to be, to the getting of their gold, and these
riches which their avarice foreglutted in. And at this day there is no more
knowledge of God throughout the Indies, to wit, whether he be of timber, of
the air, or the earth, then there was an hundred years ago, excepting ^ewe
Spain, whether the religious men have gone, which is but a little corner of the
Indies: and so are they perished, and do perish all without faith, and
without sacraments.

I brother Bartholomewe delas Casas or Casaus, religious of the order of S.
Dominicke, which by the mercy of God am come into this court of Spain, to
sewe that the hell might he withdrawn from the Indes, and that these
innumerable souls, redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, should not perish
for evermore without remedy, but that they might know their creator and be
saved: also for the care and compassion that I have of my country, which is
Castile, to the end that God destroy it not for the great sins thereof,
committed against the faith and his honor, and against our neighbors: for
certain men's sakes notably zealous of the glory of God, touched with
compassion of the afflictions and calamities of others, followers of this
court: howebeit, that I was purposed to do it, but I could not so soon have
done it, because of my continual occupations, I achieved this treatise and
summarie at Valencia, the 8. of December, 1542. the force being mounted to the
highest type of extremity, and all the violences, tyrannies, desolations,
anguishes, and calamities above said, spread over all the Indies, where there
are any Spaniardes, although they be more cruel in one part then they be in
an other, and more savage, and more abominable.

Mexico and her confines are less evil entreated. In truth, there they can
not execute their outrages openly, for that there and not elsewhere, there is
some form of justice, as slender as it is. For because that there also they
kill them with diuelishe tributes: I am in good hope, that the Emperor and
King of I pain, our liege Sovereign Lord, don Charles the fifte of that
name, who begins to have understanding of the mischieues and treasons that
there have been, and are committed against those poor people, against the will
of God, and his own, (for they have always cunningly concealed the truth
from him) will root out those euilles, and take some order for this new
world that God has given him, as unto one that leueth and does justice:
whose honor and prosperous estate Imperial, God almighty vouchsafe to bless
with long life, for the benefit of his whole universal Church, and to the
saluauen of his own royal soul. Amen.

After having couched in writing the premises, I understood of certain laws
and ordinances, which his Majesty has made about this time at Barcellone,
Anno. 1542. in the month of November, and the year following at Madrill: by
the which ordinances, there is order set down, as the case them seems to
require: to the end, to cut off the mischeieues and sins which are committed
against God and our neighbors, tending to the utter ruin and perdition of
this new world. His Majesty has made these laws, after having holde^ many
assemblies of persons of authority, of learning and conscience, and after
having had disputations and conferences in Valladolyd: and finally with the
assent and advise of al those others which have given their advise in writing,
and have been found nearest approaching unto the law of Jesus Christ, and
withal free from the corruption and foil of the treasures robbed from the
Indians: the which treasures have soyled the hands and much more the souls of
many, over whom those treasures and avarice have got the maisterie, and where
hence has proceeded the blinding, which has caused so to mar all without
remorse. These laws being published, the creatures of those tyrants, who then
were at the court, drew out sundry copyes thereof (for it grieved them at the
hearts: for that it seemed them that thereby there was a door shut up unto
them against their rauine and extortion before rehearsed) and dispersed them
into diverse quarters of the Indies. Those which had the charge to rob, root
out, and consume by their tyrannies, (even as they had never kept any good
order but rather disorder, such as Lusifer himself might have held) as they
read those copies before the new judges might come to execute their charge,
knowing it (as it is said, and that very exediblie) by those who until this
time have supported and mayntayned their crimes and outrages, to be likely that
such execution should be used of those laws: they ran into a mutiny in such
wise, as that when the good Judges were come to do their duties, they advised
with them selves (as those which had lost the fear and love of God) to cast
off also all shame, and obedience which they owe to the king, and so took unto
them the name of open and arrant traitors, behauing them selves as most cruel
and graceless tyrants: and principally in the realm of Peru, where presently
this year 1442. are committed acts so horrible and frightfull, as never were
the like, neither in the Indies, nor in all the world besides, not only
against the Indians, the which all or in a manner all are slain, all those
regions being dispeopled: but also betwixt themselves by a just judgment of
God, who has permitted that they should be the butchers one of an other of
them. By means of the support of this rebellion, none of all the other parts
of this new world would obey those laws: But under color of making
supplication to his Majesty to the contrary, they have made an insurrection
as well as the others. For that it irketh them to leave their estates and goods
which they have usurped, and to unbind the hands of the Indians, whom they
detayne in a perpetual captivity. And there where they cease to kill with the
swoorde, redily and at the instant, they kill them a little and a little, by
personal slaueries, and unjust charges and intolerable. That which the king
could not hither unto let: for because that they all, great and little, roue and
rob, some more, some less^* ^ome ouertly, and some covertly, and under the
pretense of serving the king: dishonor God, and rob the king.

The Author his words farther to king Philip, then at the time of writing
thereof, Prince of Spain.
THat which follows hereafter immediately: is a part of a Missiue or letter
sent, written by one, who him self was a party in these voiages: recounting
the works the which a captain did, and consented to the doing in the
country, all the way as he passed. And albeit so, that the said missiue
being put to binding in one book with other papers, the binder either forgot,
or lost a leaf or two: notwithstanding, forasmuch as the said missiue
contained things fearful, even to astonishement, the which one of them that
had done them had given me: and that I had them all in my keeping: I thought
good to present you therwithall, such as it is now, though without beginning
or ending. For that this fragment remaining of the whole, is full of notable
points: and therefore being resolved that it should be so printed, trusting
that it will cause no less compass on and horror in your highness mind, then
the other matters before mentioned, with a desire forthwith to provide for the
redress.

The Missiue.
He gave license to put them to the Chain and in bondage: That which they
did: and the Captain led after him three or four droues of these persons
enchayned: and in this doing, he procured not yt the country should be
inhabited and peopled (as had been convenient should have been done) but
robbing from the Indians all their victuals they had, the inbornes of the
country were reduced to such an extremity, that there were found great
numbers dead of famine in the high ways. And the Indians coming and going too
and fro the coast, laden with the carriage of the Spaniardes, he was the death
by these means of about ten thousand. For not one that arrived at the very
coast escaped death: by reason of the excessive heat of the country.

After this following the same tract and way, by the which John of Ampudia was
gone, he sent the Indians which he had purchased in Quito, a day before him,
to the end they should discover the bourges of the Indians, and should
pillage them, that when he came with his maynie, he might find his booty
ready.

And those Indians were his own mates: of the which such a one had two
hundred, such a one three hundred, and such a one a hundred: according to the
haggage that every one of them had: which Indians came to yield them selves to
their masters with all yt they had robbed. At doing whereof they committed
great cruelties toward young children and women: and so had he used before to
do in Quito, in burning the whole country, and namely the garners where the
Lords kept their Mahis in provision.

He suffered to be done great outrages, in slaying the sheep with the which
they nourished and entertained for the most part, both the Spanishe, and the
natural inhabitauntes of the country. And only to have the brains and the
sewet he permitted that there should be killed two or three hundred wethers,
of the which the flesh was feign to be cast away. And the Indians friends to
the Spaniardes, and the which went with the Spaniardes, only to eat the
sheep hearts, killed a great number, for as much as they eat none other
thing.

And two men in one province, named Purua, killed 25. wethers and sheep fit for
carriage like our horse, and the which were worth amongst the Spaniardes
twenty, and five and twenty duckates a piece, only to have to eat the
brains, and the sewet. So as by this disorder of exceeding slaughter of
beasts, have been lost above an hundred thousand head of cattle. By occasion
whereof also, the country came into a great necessity: the native of the
land miserably dying of famine. And Quito, which was furnished of so great
store of Mahis, that it can not be well spoken, was by this means so
assaulted with famaine, that a strike or bushel of Mahis, was raised to the
prise of 10. ducats, and a sheep to as much.

After that the said Captain was returned from the coast, he determined to
depart from Quito, and to go seek the Captain John de Ampudia, leaving
thereto more then two hundred of foot men and horse men, amongst whom were a
great many inhabitauntes of the city of Quito. Unto those inhabitaunts the
captain gave license to carry with them the Cacikes, that were escheated them
in sharing, with as many Indians as they would. That which they did: and
Alfonso Sanches Nuita carried forth with him his Cacike, with more then an
hundred Indians besides: and in like manner Peter Cibo and his cousin: and they
led out more then an hundred and fifty with their wives: and sundry also sped
out their children, because that in a manner every one died for hunger. Also
Moran inhabitant of Popaian, carried out more then two hundred persons. And the
like did all the rest, citizens and soldiers, every one after his ability:
the soldiers craving that they might have license given them to captive those
Indians men and women, which they carried forth: the which was granted unto
them until the death of the said captives, and those deceased, to take as
many more: for if the Indians were subjects of his Majesty, so likewise were
the Spaniardes that died in the wars as well as they.

And after this manner departed the said Captain of Quito, going to a city
called Otaba, the which he held at that hour for his share: and demanded of
the Cacike, that there should be given him five hundred men to lead to the
wars: which were given him with certain principal persons of the Indians.
He departed some of those people amongst his soldiers, and led forth the
rest with him, some laden, and some chayned, and some unbound to serve him,
and to bring him meat.

Thus carried he his soldiers some pinniond in chains, and some in coardes.
When they departed out of the Province of Quito, they carried out more then six
thousand Indians, men and women, and of al those there never returned home
into their country twenty persons. For they dyed all thorough the great and
excessive travel, which they made them endure in those br^^ling countries
contrary to their nature. It happened at that time that one Alfonso Sanches,
whom the said Captain sent for chieftayne over a certain number of men into
a Province there, met with a good company of women, and young boys laden with
victuals: who stayed waiting for them without moving from the place to give
them of that which they had, and having so done, the captain commanded that
they should be put to the sharp of the sword. There happened here a
mayuailous thing: which was, that a soldier striking an Indesse woman, his
sword brake a two in the midst, at the first blow, and at the second blow
there remained naught in his hands, but the pomell hauft without that the
woman was hurt. And an other soldier, willing to strike another Indesse woman,
with asquare dagger he had, the dagger brake at the first choppe, the length of
four fingers, and at the second, there remained unto him no more save the
hauft.

At the same time the said Captain yeeded forth of Quito, and drew out a
great number of the natural inbornes, vnmarriyng them, and giving their young
wives unto his Indians whom he led along, and the others wives he gave to
others which remained in the city, for that they were too old.

There followed out of Quito a woman with a little child in her arms, crying
after him, and entreating him, that her husband might not be forced to go
with him, for that she had three little children, the which she could not
nourishe but were ready to dye for hunger:

And as the Captain gave her a churlishe answer at her first suit, she
returned the second time with greater cries, saying, that her children dyed
for hunger.

And seeing that the Captain gave her the repulse, and that he would not
restore her, her husband: she beat the childs head against the stones, and
slew it.

It came to pass also, that at the time that the said Captain came into the
prouice of Lili, to a town called Palo near unto the great river, where he
found the Captain John de Ampudia, which was gone before to discover, and
pacify the country: the said Ampudia kept a city by him provided of a
garriso^ in the name of his majesty, and of the marquis Frauncis of Pizarro:
and had set over them for governors ordinary, one Petre Solano of Quennoues,
and 8. counselors, and all the rest of the country was in peace and shared
out amongst them. And as he knew that the said captain was in the said river,
he came to see him with a great number of the inhabitants of the country, and
peaceful Indians, laden with victuals and fruits. Shortly after also all the
neighbor Indians came to see him, bringing him food. There were the Indians of
Xamundi, and of Palo, and of Soliman, and of Bolo.

Now because that they brought no Mahis which he would have, he sent a great
number of Spaniardes with their Indians, to go search for Mahis: commanding
them to bring some wheresoever they found any. So went they to Bolo, and to
Palo, and found the Indians men and women in their housen in peace: and the
said Spaniards with those that were with them, took them and robbed their
Mahis, their gold and couerings, and all that they had, and bound many.

The Indians seeing that they entreated them so evil, went to complain unto
the said Captain, requesting that all which had been bereft them, might be
restored them: But the Captain would restore them none, and forbid them to
come at him any more. Notwithstanding four or five days after the Spaniardes
estsoones return to fetch Mahis, and to pilladge the Indians native of the
soil as before time. Wherefore, they seeing that the Captain kept no faith
with them: all the Country arose and revolted from the Spanishe, whereof
ensued great damage, and GOD and the kings majesty offended: and by this
means the country remained dispeopled: for yt the Olomas and the Manipos
their enemies which are mountain people, and warlike, descended daily to take
and rob them, when they perceived the city and places of their abode left
destitute. And amongst them, he who was the stronger, did eat up his fellow,
for all dyed for famine. This done, the captain came to the city of Ampudia,
where he was received for general, and seven days after from thence he
departed to go toward the harbor of Lili and Peti, with more then two
hundred horsemen and footmen. After this, that said is, the said chief
governor sent his captains of one side and other, to bid cruel battle to
the native India^s: staying a great number of them as well men as women: burning
also their houses, and spoiling their goods. This endured a good many days.
And the said captain was gone toward a city named Ye, withal the Indians
whom they had taken in Lili, without releasing any one: and being come to the
said Ye, he sent incontinent Spaniardes to pilladge, take and stay all the
Indians men and women, that they could take: thus they burned more then an
hundred. From this place they go to a City called Tukilicui, from whence the
Cacike of the place yeeded forth incontinent in peace, a number of Indians
going before him. The captain demanded gold of him and of his Indians. The
Cacik told him that he had but a small deal, and that which he had should be
given him: and immediately al began to give him all that they had. Whereupon the
said captain gave unto every of them a ticket, with the name of the said
Indian for a testimonial that he had given him gold: affirming that he
which should have never a ticket, should be cast to the dogs to be devoured,
because he gave him no gold. Whereupon the Indians for fear yt they were put
in, gave him all the gold that they were able: and those which had none fled
into the mountains and other towns for fear to be slain. By reason whereof
perished a great number of the native inhabitants of the country. And shortly
after the said captain commanded the Cacike to send two Indians to another
city named Dagna, to will them that they should come in peace, and bring him
gold in abundance bundance. And coming to another city, he sent that night
many Spaniardes to take the Indians, and namely of Tulilicui. So as they
brought the next morrow above an hundred persons: and all those which could
bear burdens, they took them for the^ selves, and for their soldiers, and
put them to the chain, whereof they dyed all. And the said captain gave the
little children unto the said Cacik Tulilicui that he should eat them: and in
truth the skins of those children are kept in the house of the said Cacik
Tulilicui full of ashes: and so departed he from thence without an
interpreter, and went toward the Provinces of Calile, where he joined
himself unto the captain John de Ampudia, who had sent him to discover
another way, doing both of them great outrages, and much mischief unto the
inhabitants of the country where they became. And the said John de Ampudia
came unto a City, the Cacik and Lord whereof called Bitacur had caused to
make certain ditches to defend himself, and there fell into the same two
horses, the one of Antonie Rodondos, the other of Marc Marquesis. That of
Marcos Marquis died, the other not. For which cause the said Ampudia commanded
to take all the Indians men and women that might be: And thereupon took and
laid together more then an hundred persons, whom they cast alive into those
ditches and slew them, and brent withal more then an hundred houses in the said
city. And in that manner met in a great City, where without sommoning (the
Indians being at peace, and without any spokesman to go between them,) they
slew with their spears a great number of them, making on them mortal war.
And as it is said, soon after they were met, the said Ampudia told the
Captain what he had done in Bitaco, and how he cast so many into the
ditches: and the said captain answered, that it was well done, and that he
for his part had done as much at the river of Bamba when he entered the same,
which is in the Province of Quito, and that he had flong into the ditches more
then two hundred persons, and there they stayed warring on all the country.
Soon after he entered into the Province of Bitu, or Anzerma: in making cruel
war with fire and blood till they came as far as unto the salt houses. And
from thence he sent Frauncis Garcia before him to pilladge, who made cruel
war on the natural inhabitants of the Country as he had done before him.
The Indians came unto him two and two, making signs, that they demanded peace
on the behalf of the whole Country: alleging that they would afoord him,
all that he could reasonably demand, were it gold, or women, or victuals,
only that they would not kill them, as indeed it was a troth. For themselves
afterward confessed it to be so. But the said Frauncis Garcia, bid them get
them packing: Telling them moreover that they were a sort of drunkardes, and
that he under stood them not, and so returned he to the place where the said
Captain was, and they made a complot, to ouerrunne all the Province, making
cruel war on all the Country, in spoiling, robbing, and slaying all: and
with the soldiers, which he brought with him drew thence more then two
thousand souls, and all those dyed in the chain. Before departing the place
which he had peopled, they slew more then five hundred persons. And so returned
to the Province of Calili. And by the way if any Inde or Indesse were weary, in
such sort that they could not pass any further, they did incontinently head
them, paring it off from the shoulders even with the chain, to the end not to
take the pains to open the lock thereof: and to the end that others which
went the same way should not make wise to be sick, and by this means dyed
they all: and in the high ways were left all those people which he made his
purchase of out of Quito, and of Pasto, and of Quilla Cangua, and of Para, and
of Popayan, and of Lili, and of Cali, and of Anzerma, and a great number of
people dyed. Also immediately upon their return unto the great City, they
entered into it, staying all that they could: taking in that day more then three
hundredth persons.

He sent from the Province of Lili, the said Captain John de Ampidia, with
very many soldiers unto the lodgings and peopled places of Lili: to the end
that they should take all the Indes and Indesses they could: And that they
should bring them unto him to serve for loadyng: for because that al those
which he brought him before time from Anzerma and from Alli, were dead, which
were great numbers. And the said John de Ampudia brought more then a thousand
persons, and sieve very many. The captain thus took as many as he needed to
serve his turn, and gave the rest unto the soldiers, which confined them to
the chain in which they dyed. So dispeopling the said city of Spaniardes and
inbornes of the country, both in so great a number, as appears by the
fewness of the folk, that are remanent: he departed thence to go to Popayan,
and left in the way a Spaniarde named Martine Aguirr, who was not able to
follow the rest. And being come to Popayan, he placed there a garrison, and
began to root out and rob those Indians there, in the order that he had kept
elsewhere. And he erected there a mynt royal, melting all the gold he could
come by, with all that, that John de Ampudia had before he came unto him, and
without keeping any other audit or reckoning, and without giving any part to
any soldier, taking the whole to his own use, except a little as came in his
head to give unto such as had lost their horses. And this done, bereauing the
kings Majesty of his fifth part, said he went to Custo, there to give in his
account and audit unto the governor. But in deed he went to Quito, taking by
the way very many Indians, men and women, which all dyed by the way, or at the
place at Quito. Over and besides that, he altered the coin royal of the mynt,
which he had made. Here is to be remembered a word, which this man spoke of
himself, as one not ignorant of so many evils and mischieues, which he
wrought. Fifty years hence, those the which shall pass by this way, and here
speak of these things, shall say, This way went a Tyrant

Your highness may know and be well assured, that these entries and assaults
made unto these realms, and this manner of visiting the Indians, which lived in
security in their regions, and the ungraciousness which he did in those same,
have been practiced and executed by the Spaniards, which have always followed
the same train and manner of doing, from the time that they first began to
discover unto this present day, throughout all the I^de^.

To the Reader.
AMong diverse the remedies by Friar de lat Casas Bishop of the royal town
called Chiapa, propounded in the assembly of sundry prelates named Parsons, by
his majesty's commandment gathered together in the town of Valladolid the
year of our Lord 1542 for order and reformation to be observed in the Indies:
the eight in order was this ensuing, which consists upon twenty reasons and
motions, whereupon he did conclude, That the Indies ought not to be given to
the Spaniardes in Commendam, fee farm, or vasselage, neither under any other
title whatsoever: if his majesty will according to his desire ease them of
such tyrannies and losses as they do sustain, delivering them as it were out
of the Dragons throat: least they do wholly consume and slay the^, and so all
that world remain desert and void of the natural me habitants, wherewith we
have seen it replenished.

THe eight remedy, is among all other principal and most in force, as without
which all the rest are to no purpose, for that they all have relation thereunto,
as every motion to his proper end, in whatsoever touches or is of any
importance unto your Majesty, which no man can express: in as much as
thereupon depends at the least the whole loss or preservation of the Indies.
And the remedy that I speak of is this, that your Majesty do determine,
decree, co^^^d, and sole^nely in your sovereign courts ordein by pragmaticall
sa^ctions and royal statuts yt all the Indies as well already subdued, as
heerea^^^^ to be subdued, may be inserted, reduced, and incorporate into the
royal crown of Castile and Leon, to be holden in chief of your majesty as
free subjects and vassals, as they are. Likewise that they be not given in
commenda^ unto the Spaniards: but that it stand as an inviolable constitution,
determination and royal law, that they never, neither at this time, neither
hereafter in time to come, may be alienated or taken from the said royal
crown, neither that they be given, commanded, demised in see farm, by depost,
commandment or alienatio^, either under any other title or manner what soever,
and be dismembered from the royal crown, for any whatsoever the service or
desert of any, either upon any necessity that may happen, or for any cause or
color whatsoever that may be pretended. For the inviolable observation, or
establishement of which law, your majesty shall formally swear by your faith,
and on your word and royal crown, and by all other sacred things, whereby
Christian Princes do usually swear, that at no time neither your self,
neither your successors in these 10. Dominions, or in the Indies so fair as
in you shall he, shall revoke the same: and you shall further set down in
express words in your royal will and testament, that this decree be ever
kept, maintained, and vpholden: also that so far as in your self or in them
shall lie, they shall confirm and continue the same: And for porofe of the
necessity hereof, there be twenty reasons to be alleged: out of which
twenty we have drawn and put in writing so many as may seem to serve to our
purpose.

Extract out of the second reason.
THe Spaniardes through their great avarice and covetousness to get, do not
permit any religious persons to enter into their towns and holds which they
possess, alleging that they receive double loss by them. One and the
principal is, that religious persons do keep the Ind^es occupied when they
gather them togethar to their Sermons, so as in the mean time their work is
omitted, while the Indians being (...), laboure^: yea, it has so fallen out,
that the Indians being in the Church at the Sermon, the Spaniarde coming in in
the face of all the people, has taken fifty, or a hundred, or so many as he
has needed to carry his baggage and stuff, and such as would not go, he has
l^den with stripes spurning them forth with his feet, thereby to the great
grief both of the Indians and of the (...) persons ^^oubling and molesting all
that were present, and so defeating the^ al of the benefit of their salvation.
Their other hinderance that they say they do sustain, is, that after the
Indians are taught and become Christians, they take upon them as masters,
pretending more knowledge then they have, and therefore will not be so
serviceable as before.

The Spaniards require no more of the Indians but authority to command them,
and that they worship them as Gods.

The Spaniards openly and of set purpose, do hinder the course of the gospel,
and keep the Indians from Christendom.

Sometime it falls so out, that a town or borow is given between three or
four Spaniardes, to one more, to another less, so as sometime one has for
his portion the husband, another the wise, and the third the children as they
were swine. Thus do they possess the Indians. One appoints them to labor a
piece of land: another sends them to the mines laden like beasts: another
hyreth them by two and two as they were moyles to carry burdens thirty,
forty, fifty, a hundred or two hundred miles out right. And this have we seen
to be a daily use: hereof comes, it that the Indians cannot hear Gods word,
or be instructed in Christian faith: they make them of free me^ very strange
bondslaues. They have subverted and dispersed great towns, and a whole world
of people, so as they have not left any houses standing together, no not so
much as the children with the fathers. The Spaniards make no more account,
neither have any more regard of converting the Indians, then if al those
reasonable souls should perish with the bodies, and were not hereafter to
receive immortal life, glory, or pain, no more then beasts.

Out of the third reason.
THe Spaniards are charged to instruct the Indians in our holy catholic says:
whereupon on a time when we examined John Colmenere of S. M^r^he, a fantastical
ignorant, and foolish man, who had gotten a great town in commendam, and had a
charge of souls, he could not (...) how to bless himself: and asking him
what doctrine he taught the Indians committed to his charge, he said, he gave
the^ to the devil: also that it was enough for him to say Per signim sanctin
Cruces. How can the Spaniardes that travail to the Indies, how noble or
valiant so ever they be, have any care of the souls, when the most of them
are ignorant of their Creed and ten commandments, and know not the matters
perteining to their own salvation, neither do travail to the Indies for any
other purpose but to satisfy their own desires and covetous affections, being
for the most Part vicious, corrupt, dishonest, and disordinate persons: so as
he that would way them in an equal balance, and compare them with the Indians,
should find the Indians without comparison, more virtuous and holy then them.
For the Indians what infidels soever they be, do nevertheless keep them to
one and their own wife, as nature and necessity teaches, and yet we see some
Spaniarde have fourteen or more, which Gods commandementes do forbid. The
Indians devour no man's goods, they do no man wrong: they do not vex,
trouble, or slay any, where them selves do see the Spaniardes commit all
sins, iniquities, and treacheries, that man can commit against all equity
and justice, To be brief, the Indians do not believe any thing, but do
mock at all that is showed them of God, being in truth fully rooted in this
opinion of our God, that he is the worst, the most unjust and the most wicked
of all Gods, because he has such servants: also concerning your majesty, they
think you the most unjust and cruel of all kings, because you do both send
thither and keep here such evil subjects, supposing that your majesty does
feed upon humane flesh and blood. We know these things to be very new and
strange to your highness, but yet there they be very usual and ancient. Many
like matters which with our eyes we have seen might we speak of, but they
would be offensive to your majesty's ears, and would besides fear men,
forcing the^ to wonder that ever God stayed so long from plaging Spain in the
bottomless pit. This title, to give the Indians to the Spaniards in co^meda^,
was never invented to any other end but only to find occasion to bring them
into bondage. One Spaniard being Lord, or having the charge of some town or
village, will do more harm by his example and wicked life, then a hundred good
religious persons can do good by edifiyng or converting.

Out of the fourth reason.
THe Spaniardes having authority to command, or particular interest in the
Indies, can not by reason of their great covetousness abstain from afflicting,
troubling, disquieting, vexing, or oppressing the Indians, taking away their
goods, lands, wives, or children, and using among them many other kinds of
iniquity, for the which they can have no redress, sanction, or warrant at
your Majesty's chief justice, because the Spaniardes do make them afraid:
yea sometimes do kill them, least they should complain, as we have had
certain notice: and thereupon it is evident, that they can have no rest or
quiet, to tend to matters pertaining God, but do sustain a thousand lets,
anguishes, torments, sorrows, afflictions, heauinesses, and cares, hating your
Majesty, and abhorring Gods law, which they find so heavy, bitter, and
intolerable: as also your Majesty's yoke and dominion so insupportable,
tyrannous, worthy to be rejected and cast off, that they curse God and fall
into desperation, attributing to him all the aforesaid evils, because that
under the color and title of his law, they do receive such mishappes, which
he does bear withal, and does not correct or chastise those which boasting
to be his seruanntes, do put them to all this. They do night and day mourn
after their gods, thinking them to be better then ours at whom they sustain
such harms, while contrary wise of their own they reap there so many
commodities: and there is nothing that troubles them so much as the Christians.

Out of the fifth reason.
WE can show to your Majesty, that the Spaniardes have within 38. or 40.
years slain of just account, above 1^. Millions of your subjects. I will not
say how mightily this world of people might have multiplied. This country
being the fertilest, whether for cattle, or mankind, that is in the world:
the foil being for the most part, more temperate and favorable to human
generation. All these innumerable (...), and all these people have the
Spaniards slain, to the end to (...) sway, govern, and command over the rest
and when in iniust wars they have slain them, then do they use the rest who
(...) ^aue withstood them, in drawing gold and silver, yoking them together
like beasts, to make them carry their burdens, (...) burdening them withal
that they can gain, and (...) one to them, so that they may (...) but the
truth, and yet do leave out much unspoken o^ that (...) world knows: and
whosoever would otherw^^e persuade your Majesty, or would endeavor to excuse
those offenses, we will even by force of the truth, dr^ue him to knowledge
(...) guilty of treason, and that he is partaker in these murders and roberies
committed in the Indies, or else (...) so to be.

What plague of pestilence, or mortality could there have fallen from heaven
that had been able to consume or make wast about 2500 leagues of flat country
replenished with people, and would not have left either trauailer or inhabitant?

Out of the sixth reason.
THe Spaniardes only for their temporal commodity, have blemished the Indies
with the greatest infamy, that any man even among the most horrible and
villainous persons in the world, could be charged withal, and whereby they have
sought to take the^ out of the degree of mankind: nam^ly that they all were
polluted with the abominable sin against nature: which is a wretched and
false slander. For in all the great Isles. Hispaniola, S. Io^^, Cuba, and
Lama^^a: Also in the 60. Isles of (...) which (...) inhabited with an infinite
number of people, the same was never thought upon, or once mentioned, as
ourselves (...) who made diligent inquisition and search, ever from the
beginning. Moreover, through all Peru, there is no such (...) neither is there
any one India^ thoughout ye whole realm that crime, neither generally
throughout all the Indies saving that in some other part there is a voice of a
few: for whose (...) all that world is not to be (...). We may say as much of
the eating of man's flesh, which likewise those places that I have named are
free of: although that in other places they do it in deed. They be also charged
with their idolatry, as if for being idolaters, men should take upon them to
punish them, and not refer them to God only, against who^ they sin, whiles
they have both lands and dominions several to them selves, which they hold not
of any other the^ their natural Lords: besides that our ancesters were also
idolaters before the faith was preached unto them, and that all the world was
gathered to Christ. The Spaniardes have purposely, and effectually hindered the
teaching of the law of God and Jesus Christ: with all other virtues among the
Indians, and driven away the religious persons out of towns and fortresses,
least they should see and disclose their tyrannies: yea, they have by their
evil example, infected and corrupted the Indians, teaching them many odious
behauiours and vices, which before they knew not, as blaspheming the name of
Jesus Christ, practicing of usury, lying, and many other abominations wholly
repugnant to their nature. Again, to commit the Indians to the Spaniards, or to
leave them in their hands, is undoubtedly as much as to give or leave them to
these that will destroy and bring them to naught, as well in body as soul.

The Spaniards having fraudulently persuaded K. Ferdinand, he suffered the
Indians to be tra^sported out of the Isles of Lucayos into Hispaniola, and so
contrary to all reason, either natural or divine, dispossessed them of their
own houses and lands, whereby there perished above 50000. souls: so as in above
50. Isles, whereof some were greater then the I Will of Canary, which before were
replenished with people man Ante heap, afterward there were to be found not
above eleven persons as our selves can testify. To let your Maie^tie (...)
dealing of the inhabitants of the said (...) the slaughters, cruelties, and
spoils that (...) Spaniardes, these good christians made among them, (...)
make your royal ears to gloe, and your (...), and to your self to depart.
That the Spaniardes have warred upon the Indians, that they have killed them,
taken away their wiue^, ch^ldren, (...), and kindred. also that they have
robbed them of all their goods, is already sufficiently proved, as also the
country being utterly dispeopled and desert, does show it: the world cries
out upon it: the Angels do bewail it, and God himself does daily teach it us
by the great punishments that he lays upon us.

Out of the seventh reason.
THe Spaniardes do suck from the Indians the whole substance of their
bodies, because they have nothing el^e in their houses. They make them spitte
blood: They exhibit them to all dangers: They lay upon them sundry and
intolerable travails: and more then all this, They load them with torments,
beatings, and sorowings: To be brief, they spoil and consume a thousand
manner of ways.

To put the Indians into the Spaniardes hands, is, to give the childs throat
to a frantic and mad man when he has the rasor in his hand: or it is as much
as to deliver men into the power of the furious or capital enemies, who long
time have very desirously waited to put them to death. It is as a man should
commit a fair young virgin to the guiding of a young man snared, transported,
and doting in her love, whereby she should be spoiled and deflowred, unless
she were miraculously preserved. To be brief, it were as good to throw them
among the horns of wild Bulls, either to deliver them unto hunger starued
Wolves, Lions, and Tygres, and as much good should they get by any laws,
precepts, or threats made to the said hungry beasts, for the forbidding of
them to devour them, as much do we say and affirm will any laws, threats,
or precepts, stay the Spaniardes, when they have authority over the Indians
from murdering them for their gold. Yea by great and long experience that we
have, we do certify our highness, that notwithstanding you should
command to set up a G^bbet before every Spaniardes gate, and swear by your
Crown, that for the first Indian that should be missed or slain, you would
have them all hanged, yet would they not for fear thereof abstain from
slaying the Indians, in case your Majesty should grant or give them supreme
power and authority over them, or otherwise howesoeuer.

Out of the eight reason.
BEsides all that the Indians do endure in serving and pleasing the Spaniarde,
there is yet a butcher or cruel hangman, to keep them in awe appointed in
every town and place, and is termed Estanciero or Calpisque: who has
authority to lay his claws upon them, and to make them labor, and do what
the Lord Commander, or chief thief will. So as if in hell there were no
other torment, yet were this incomparable. This hangman whippeth them, he
ladeth them with stripes, he basteth them with scalding grease, he afflicts
them with continual torments and trauelles, he forces and defloureth their
daughters and wives, dishonouring and abusing them: he deuoureth their hens
which are their greatest treasure, not because them selves do eat them, but
that of them they offer presents and service to their greatest Lord and chief
tyrant: he vexes them with innumerable other torments and griefs: and least
they should complain of so many injuries and miseries, this tyrant puts
them in fear, saying: that he will accuse them, and say that he see them
commit idolatry. To be brief, they must please and content above twenty
disordinate and unreasonable persons: so as they have four Lords and
masters. Your Majesty, their Cacique, him that has them in commendam, and
the Estanciero of whom I last spoke, which Estanciero is to them more grievous
to bear then a quintall of lead, among which we may also in truth add all the
Mochachos and Mores, that do serve the commander and master, for they al do
molest, oppress, and rob these poor people.

Out of the tenth reason.
IT is greatly to be feared, least God will lay Spain desolate, even for those
horrible sins that this nation has committed in the Indies, whereof we do
evidently behold the scorge, and all the world does see and confess that
already it ha^geth over our heads, where with God does afflict and show that he
is highly offended in those parts through the great destruction and wast of
those nations, in that of so great tresures as have bin transported out of the
Indies into Spain (the like quantity of gold and silver, neither K Salomo^,
neither any other worldly prince ever had, saw, or heard of) there is none
left, besides yt of that that was here before the Indies were discovered, there
is now none to be found, no never a whit. Hereof it comes that things are
thrice dearer then they were, the poor that have want do suffer great
miseries: and your majesty can not dispatch matters of great importance.

Out of the eleventh reason.
SO long as Lares bare sway and ruled, that was ix. years, there was no more
care of teaching or bringing the Indians to salvation, neither was there any
more labor employed, or once thought of, to that purpose, then if they had
been trees, stones, dogs, or cats. He wasted great towns and fortresses, he
gave to one Spaniard 100. Indians, to another fifty, to another more or less,
as every man was in liking or favor, and as it pleased him to grant. He gave
children, and old men, women with child, and in childbed, men of countenance
and commons, the natural Lords of the towns and countries, he parted them
among those to whom he wished most wealth and commodity, using in his letters
of command this speech following: To you such a man, are given so many Indians
with their Cacique, them to use in your mines and affairs. So as all, great
and small, young and old, that could stand on their feet, men, women with
child, or in childbed, one or other, travailed and wrought so long as they had
any breath in their bodies. He gave leave to take away married men, and to make
them draw gold, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or eighty leagues, or
farther. The women remained in farm houses and graunges, in great labors
about gathering of great heaps for the making of the bread that they do eat,
which is, to heap together the earth which they do dig, and raise four
handful hie, and twelve foot square, that is a giaunts labor, namely to
dig the hard earth, not with mattockes or shouels, but with In other places
they spinne cotton, and do such other work, as are most meet for gain and
raising of coin, so that the man and wife should not see one another in 8. or
10. months or a whole year. And at their meeting they were so worn with
labor and hunger, that they had no mind of cohabitation, whereby their
generation ceased, and their poor children perished, because the mothers
through hunger and travail had no milk wherewith to nourish them: This was a
cause that in the I Will of Cuba, one of us being there, there perished in the
space of three months for hunger 7000, children, some desperate women
strangled and killed their own children, others finding them selves with
child, did eat certain herbs thereby to loose their fruit, so that the men
died in the mines, the women perished in the farm houses, their whole
generation in a short space decayed, and all the country lay desolate. The
said governor, to the end without release to keep them in continual
labor, still gave them away, and yet besides their great labors he suffered
them rigorously, and very austerely to be misused. For the Spaniardes that had
them in command, appointed certain hangmen over them, some in the mines whom
the termed Miniero, other in the farms, that were called Estanciero:
unnatural and pitilesse persons that beat them with slaves and cords, boxing
them, pricking them with needles, and still calling them dogs: neither did they
ever show any sign of humanity or clemency, but all their dealings did
consist of extreme severity, rigor, and bitterness, so as in troth it might
be thought great cruelty so to entreat or govern the very Moors, being the
cruellest of all others, for all the damage that they have done to the
Christians: where the Indians are more treatable, courteous gentle, and
obedient, then any other nation in the world. Farther, when because of these
Estancieros and Minieros, together with such labors as they put them unto,
some of them fled into the mountains, as making full acco^mpt to be killed,
the Spaniardes chose certain officers who^ they termed Alguazil del Campo,
that should pursue and hunt them out of the mountains.

The governor had also in the Spanish towns and fortes, certain of the most
honorable and principal persons about him whom he called Visitors, unto
whom also besides their other ordinary portions that he had given them, he
gave in respect of their offices 100. Indians to serve them. These in the
towns were the greatest executioners, as being more cruel then the rest,
before whom Athuaziles del campo brought all such as had bin taken in this
chase. The accuser, he that had them in command, was present, and accused
them, saying: This Indian or those Indians are dogs, and will do no service, but
do daily run to the mountains, there to become loyterers and vagaboundes: And
therefore required they might be punished. Then the visitor with his own hands
bound the^ to a pale, and taking a pitched cord, in the Galleys called an Eele,
which is as it were an iron rod, gave them so many stripes, and bet them so
cruelly, that the blood running down diverse parts of their bodies, they were
left for dead. God is witness of the cruelties committed among those lambs: I
am persuaded that of the thousand part I can not rehearse one, neither can any
other tell it as it ought. The labor that they were put unto, was to draw
gold, whereto they had need have men of iron. For they must turn the
mountains 1000. times vpside down, digging and hewing the rocks, and
washing, and clensing the gold it self in the rivers, where they shall
continually stand in the water until they brust, and rent their bodies eue^ in
pieces. Also when the Mines peradventure do flow with water, then must they
also besides all other labors, draw it out with their arms. To be brief,
the better to comprehend the labor that is emploid about gathering gold and
silver, it may please your Majesty to consider, that the heathen Emperors
(except to death) never condemned the Martyrs to greater torments, then to
mining for metal: sometimes they were kept a whole year at the mines: but
afterward perceiving how many perished there, they decreed that they mine for
gold but five months, which was forty days in melting, during which time
they took some rest.

And what was their rest? They during those forty days, made heaps of that
which they should eat, that is, they dug the earth, and cast it on heaps
as is aforesaid, which labor does exceed, dressing of vines, or tilling of
the earth. Throughout the year they never knew holiday, neither might be
suffered from labor little or much. Besides that during all this toil, they
never had sufficient food, no not of Cacabi which is the common country
bread, and being made of roots does but smally nourish except there be some
fish or flesh to eat withal. Moreover, they gave them of that country pepper,
and Aies, which be roots like unto nauetes, roasted or sodden. But some
Spaniarde, peradventure meaning to seem liberal in their diet would weekly
kill a hog for 50. Indians, whereof the Aliniero would consume two quarters,
and part the other two among the Indians, giving daily to every man as great a
piece as the Iacekins do give of holy bread in their Churches. Some there were
that through nigardlinesse wanting meat to give them, would send them two or
three days abroad into the fields and mountains, to feed where they might
satisfy themselves with such fruit as hang on the trees, and then upon the
force of that which they brought in their guts, would force them to labor
two or three days more without giving the^ any one morsel to eat. For the
love of God therefore, let your Majesty think what substance or strength
those bodies naturally so delicate and feeble, and now almost consumed and
oppressed with these travails, could gather of this food: also how it were
possible for those that lived so sorrowful, heavy and woeful alife, in such
labor without food should live long. The governor commanded they should be
paid their day wages and expenses for any labor or service that they should
do to the Spaniarde, and their wages was three blanckes every two days,
which in the year amounted to half a Castelin, that is worth 225 Maruedies:
wherewith they might buy a Comb, a looking glass, and a pair of blew or
green beads. Yea, many years they had nothing at all paid them, but hunger
and stripes did so abound, that the Indians regarded none of this, neither
sought any more but even once to get a good meals meat, or to die for all, as
wishing to forsake so desperate a life. He deprived them of their liberty,
suffering the Spaniards to keep them in such bitter bondage and prison as no
man that had seen it, would or could once think for: not leaving them any
thing in this world free to use at their pleasures: yea, notwithstanding the
beasts have some time rest, and be suffered to feed abroad in the fields,
yet would not these Spaniards that we speak of, grant the Indians any time
or leisure so to do: but the governor himself would force them to an
obsolute, perpetual, forced, and unwilling bondage. For they never had their
free will to do any thing at al of themselves, because the Spaniards
covetousness, cruelty and tyranny, was still forcing them to some labor, not
as captives, but as beasts, that are led bound to do whatsoever man will
appoint. Again, if at any time they were suffered to depart to their houses to
rest them, then should they there find neither wife, children, nor food: as
also although they had there found any meat, yet should they not have had time
to make it ready: so that there was no remedy but death. Thus grew they into
sickness through long and grievous travails, and that was sone caught among
the^ as being (as is aforesaid) of a very delicate and tender co^plection, and
much against their nature it was to be thus suddenly, contrary to their wont,
and unmercifully put to such labors, and to be beaten with staves, and spurned
at, besides the calling of the^ at every word Villacos, and vpbraiding the^,
that they counterfeated sickness like loytering losels, because they would not
labor. When the Spaniards perceived the sickness increase, so as there was no
profit or service to be looked for at their hands, then would they send the^
home to their houses, giving the^ to spend in some 30 40. or 80. leagues
travail, some half dosen of Radish or Refortes, that is a kind of nauet
root, and a little Cacabi, where with the poor men travailed not far before
they should desperately die, some went 2 or 3. leagues, some 10. or 20. so
desirous to get to their own home there to finish their hellish life that they
suffered, that they eue^ fell down dead by the ways: so as, many times we have
found some dead, others at deaths door, others groaning and pitifully to their
powers pronouncing this word, hunger, hunger. Then the governor seeing that
the Spaniard had in this wise slain, half or two 3. parts of these Indians,
who^ he had given them in command, he came a fresh to draw new lottes, and
make a new distribution of Indians: still supplying the number of his first
gift, and this did he almost every year.

Pedrarias entered into the firm land, as a woolfe that had long been starued
does into a flock of quiet and innocent sheep and lambs: and as Gods wrath
and scourge, committing infinite slaughters, robberies, oppressions and
cruelties, together with those spaniards whom he had levied, and laid wast so
many towns and villages, which before had bin replenished with people, as it
were an^ hills, as the like was never seen, heard of, or written by any that
in our days have dealt in histories. He robbed his majesty and subjects with
those whom he took with him, and the harm that he did amounted to above four,
yea six millions of gold: he laid above 40. leagues of land desert, namely
from Darien, where he first arrived unto the province of Nicaraga, one of the
fruitfullest, richest and best inhabited lands in the world. From this cursed
wretch sprang first the pestilence of giving the Indians in command, which
afterward has infected al those Indies where any Spaniards do inhabit, and
by whom all these nations are consumed: so that from him and his commandes,
have proceeded the certain waste and desolation that your majesty have
sustained in these so great lands and dominions since the year 1504.

When we shall say that the Spaniards have wasted your majesty's, and laid you
desolate seven kingdoms bigger then Spain, you must conceive that we have
seen the^ wonderfully peopled, and now there is no body left, because the
Spaniards have slain all the natural inhabitants by means aforesaid, and
that of the towns and houses there remains only the bare walls: even as if
Spain were all dispeopled, and that all the people being dead, there remained
only the walls of cities, towns and castles.

Out of the 13. reason.
YOur majesty have not out of all the Indies one maruedie of certain
perpetual and set rent, but the whole revenues are as leaves and straw
gathered upon the earth, which being once gathered up do grow no more: Even so
is all the rent that your majesty has in the Indies, vain and of as small
co^tinua^ce as a blast of wind, and yt proceeds only of yt the spaniards have
had yt Indi in their power: and as they do daily slay and roast the
inhabitants, so must it necessarily ensue that your majesty's rights and
rentes do waste and diminishe.

The kingdom of Spain is in great danger to be lost, robbed, oppressed and
made desolate by foreign nations, namely by the Turks and Moors, because
that God who is the most just, true, and sovereign king over all the world,
is wrath for the great sins and offenses that the Spaniardes have committed
throughout the Indies, by afflicting, oppressing, tyrannous dealings, robbing
and slaying such and so many people without law or equititie, and for the
wasting of such and so large lands in so short a space, whose inhabitants had
reasonable souls, and were created and framed to the image and likeness of
the sovereign trinity, and being gods vassals, were bought with his most
precious blood, who keeps account, and forgets not one of them: but had
chosen Spain as his minis^er and instrument, to illuminate and bring them to
his knowledge, and as it had bin for a wordly recompense, besides the eternal
reward, had granted her so great natural riches, and discovered for her such
and so great fruitful and pleasant lands, and with all such artificial
treasure, together with so many incomparable mines of gold, silver, stone, and
precious pearl, with infinite other commodities, the like whereof were never
seen ne heard of: all which notwithstanding, she has showed herself so
unthankful, in yielding evil for so many benefits which she had received.
And God ordinarily uses this rule in executing his justice and punishment,
that is, that he chastizeth sin with the same, or with that which is quite
contrary to that wherewith the sin is committed.

The destructions, griefs, violences, injuries, cruelties, and murders done
and committed against those people, are so great, horrible, public and
evident, that the tears, lame^tations and blood of so many innocent persons
do ascend to the high throne of heaven, and do not return before they have
sounded in yt very ears of God, from whence they after descend, and straying
over the face of the earth do ring in the ears of al foreign nations, so
horrible and inhumaine as may be: whereupon ensues among the hearers great
offense, horror, abomination, hatred and inf^mie toward the kings and commons
of Spain, whereof in time to come may ensue great damage.

Out of the said Bishop and authors protestation.
THose losses and detrimentes that by these occasions the crown of Castile and
Leon, together with the rest of spain have sustained, as also such other
spoils and slaughters as hereafter will be committed throughout the whole
Indies, both the blind shall see, the deaf hear, the dumb publishe, and the
wise shall judge. Further in as much as our life is short, I do take God to
witness with all the Hierarchies and thrones of Angels, all the saints of the
heavenly court, and all the men in the world: yea, even those that shall
hereafter be borne, of the certificate that here I do exhibit? also of this
the discharge of my conscience, namely that if his majesty grants to the
Spaniards the aforesaid devilish and tyrannous partition, notwithstanding
whatsoever laws or statutes shall be devised, yet will the Indies in short
space be laid desert and dispeopled, even as the I Will of Hispaniola is at this
present, which other wise would be most fruitful and fertile: together with
other the Isles and lands above 3000. leagues about, besides Hispaniola it self
and other lands both far and near. And for those sins, as the holy
scripture does very well inform me, God will horribly chastize, and
peradventure wholly subvert and root out all Spain. Anno, 154^.

The Prologue of Bishop Bortholomewe de las Casas or Casaus, to the most
mighty Lord and Prince of Spain, Don Philip our good Lord.
MOst high and mighty Lord, of late I was moved and by the kings most
vigilant counsel for the Indies, upon their zeal and honor that they bear
to our Lord God; as also hearty loyalie, wherewith they be adorned for his
majesty's service, forced in writing to set down such matter as to your
person by mouth I have heretofore reported: namely, what I thought touching the
title and claim that the kings of Castile do make to the sovereign and
universal principality over the Indians: notwithstanding, some did arise, who
misliking that I dealt and travailed with his majesty and your highness, about
the discomfitures and losses compassed and performed against the people of
those countries, and reported that in as much as I did so far detest and with
such bitterness and sharpnes did abhor them: as also I will still do, so
long as I live, I do call in doubt, and somewhat deminish the said royal
title and right.

In which deed, as a testimony what I did think, and in truth according to
God and his holy law do still hold, I exhibited 30. propositions, deuoid of
all other proof then what each of them in it self did contain, the one of
necessity following the other, because I was driven to send them to his
majesty under pretense of the great counsel that then was holden.

Afterward proceeding and persisting in desire to serve god by (...) felling
some men's slanders, who either for want of comprehending the truth, or else
having some other purposes and contrary meanings, do presume under a fained
and counterfeit kind of service to the kings (who of themselves naturally are
endued with courteous and simple minds and hearts, judging and measuring all
other by themselves) to present unto them, a poisoned, bitter, and peradventure
a mortal drink which does not only waste kingdoms and common wealths, in
procuting their careful calamities and dolorous destruction. but also do
bring even the kings own persons to the pit of manifest danger and
irreparable detriments and losses. With which frandulous counsails they do
infect so much as in the^ lies, the good and godly affections of kings, and do
subvert all the princes virtuous devises and studies. Hereof did sometime that
most mighty king Artaxerxes otherwise termed Assuerus complain, as appears
in the book of Hester. I have so endeavored my self (most mighty Lord) that
now I have set in hand the proof of the said 30. propositions and some more,
comprehending the whole in this brief summarie, which is taken out of a greater
volume, wherein every article is more perticulerly expounded: herein setting in
sight only the 17. and 18. proposition, because the whole substance of this
matter may be reduced to these two propositions as to the principles and ends.

The title here of should in my opinion have been: A probatorie tretise of the
sovereign Empire, and universal principality, which the kings of Castile have
over the Indies: As presupposing that it is manifest and proved, in that the
Apostolic sea has granted it, and that there needs no other opening of the
reasons whereupon the grant of this empire consists.

I purpose in this treatise chiefly to discharge my conscience, using that
mean which it seems that Gods providence has appointed me. My great age
(for I am above 50.) being the cause of my large knowledge and eye experience
of the Indian affairs, also to give notice of that which passed in these
parts, as also what was to be done, ever referring my self to the like desire
that the disorders that I have there seen practiced might be redressed. And the
rather because those that hinder this redress and are most hurtful to those
lands, are such as being deuoid of truth and justice, do indeuout by
counteseating and mingling that which is false and untrue, and withal seeming
to do it for your majesty's service, especially coloring your right to this
new world, are in truth altogether withstanders of your service and weal,
either spiritual or temporal (as every true christian and wise man will
grant) The other benefit that I hope to obtain and reap by this treatise,
is, that I shall detect and unfold those men's errors, who rashly dare affirm
that the right and principality of the kings of Castile over the Indians is,
or should consist of arms and great force, entering upon them even as Nemrod
who was the first hunter and oppressor of mankind did ever, and establishe
his principality, as the holy scripture testifies: either as great Alexander
and the Romans, and all other cotable and famous tyrants, do lay the
foundation of their Empires: also as the Turk does now adays invade,
trouble, and oppress christendom: and yet have not any of them once approached
the spanish tyrannies.

How far those men that do pronounce such a sentence do evil service, and
offend the sincertie and love of the king of Castiles justice, is here very
easy to be judged.

Who for proof of their matters do commit error upon error, and so do heap
together other things both absurd, wicked and unworthy to be once heard from
these men which be taken either for Christians or for reasonable persons. For
usually such as stray from virtue and truth, in excusing one fault, or
mainteining one error, do run headlong into many. Others there are that do
color them with fairer and honester titles, who also deserve to be rejected,
reproved, and laughed at: as those that say, because we have more wit, or that
we border nearest up on them, either for that the Indians are infected with
such and such vices, we may subdue them: with other like colors wherewith they
be so far from upholding or confirming that which they ween to strengthen and
fortify, that finally they lay all in the dust. To the end therefore that his
majesty may be certified of all aforesaid, and as a most Christian and just
prince, may discern between the pure and corrupt: also between right and
wrong, and withal that he may know who serves him faithfully, and those
that hang upon him only to satisfy their own affections: and for their
private profit do invent and devise new titles for his Indies, which be
neither probable nor of any effect, and so do hope to come to do their duties
before that I were able. Further for that offering this treatise to your
highness, his majesty shall be served thereby, since himself shall have such
lettes there as he goes, I do most humbly beseech your highness in his name
to accept it: also to examine, discern, and understand it with such wisdom
and clemency as you hold of his majesty, and as himself would do, seeing
it is so, that Gods providence has appointed your highness to inherit, as we
do hope the same right in the empire and principality of the^: besides if it
seem necessary to be published in other places out of this realm I will, if
your highness so command me, put it in latin: and although it should not deserve
to bed spersed either in latin or otherwise, yet were not the loss great, in
that I caused it to be printed only to the end your highness might with more
ease read the same, whose glorious life and royal estate, the Lord increase
and prosper, Amen.

The sum of the disputation between Friar Bartlemewe de las Casas or Casaus,
and Doctor Sepulueda.
DOctor Sepulueda the Emperors chronographer having information, and being
persuaded by certain of those Spaniardes, who were most guilty in the
slaughters and wastes committed among the Indian people, wrote a book in
Latin in form of a Diologue very eloquently, and furnished with all flowers,
and precepts of Rhetoric, as in deed the man is very learned and excellent
in the said tongue, which book consisted upon two principal conclusions: The
one, that the Spaniardes wars against the Indians, were as concerning the
cause and equity that moved the^ thereto, very just: also that generally the
like war may and ought to be continued. His other conclusion, that the Indians
are bound to submit them selves to the Spaniards government, as the foolish
to the wise: if they will not yield, then that the Spaniards may (as he
affirms) war upon them.

These are the two causes of the loss and destruction of so infinite numbers
of people: also that above 2000. leagues of the maine land, are by sundry
new kinds of Spanish cruelties and inhumaine dealinges bin left desolate in
the Islands: namely by conquestes and commaundes as he now names those which
were wont to be called Partitions.

The said Doctor Sepulueda colors his treatise, under the pretense of
publishing the title which the kings of Castile and Leon do challenge in the
government and universal sovereignty of this Indian world, so seeking to
cloak that doctrine which he endeavors to disperse and scatter as well in
these lands, as also throughout the kingdoms of the Indians. This book he
exhibited to the royal counsel for the Indies, very earnestly and
importunately lying upon them for license to print it, which they sundry times
denied him in respect of the offense, dangers, and manifest detriment, that it
seemed to bring to the commonwealth.

The Doctor seeing that here he could not publishe his book, for that the
counsel of the Indies would not suffer it, he delte so far with his
friends which followed the Emperors court, that they got him a patente,
whereby his Majesty directed him to the royal counsel of Castile, who knew
nothing of the Indian affairs: upon the coming of these letters the court and
counsel being at Aranda in Duero, the year 1547. Friar Bartholomewe de las
Casas or Casaus, Bishop of the royal town of Chiapa, by hap arrived
there, coming from the Indians, and having intelligence of Doctor Sepulueda
his driftes and devises, had notice also of the contents of his whole book:
but understanding, the authors pernitions blindness, as also the irrecouerable
losses that might ensue upon the printing of this book, with might and maine
withstood it, discovering and revealing the poison wherewith it abounded, and
whereto it pretended.

The Lords of the royal counsel of Castile, as wise and just judges,
determined therefore to send the said book to the Universities of Salamanca
and Alcala, the matter being for he most part therein Theologically handled,
with commandment to examine it, and if it might be printed, to sign it:
which Universities after many exact and diligent disputations, concluded, that
it might not be printed, as containing corrupt doctrine. The Doctor not so
satisfied, but complaining of the Universities aforesaid, determined,
notwithstanding so many denia^les and repulses at both the royal counsels,
to send his treatise to his friends at Rome, to the end there to print ^^,
having first transformed it into a certain Apology written ^o the Bishop of
Segouia, because the same Bishop having perused the treaty and book
aforesaid, had brotherly and charitablie as his friend by letters reproved
and counsayled him. The Emperor understanding of the impression of the said
book and Apology, did immediately dispatche his letters patents, for the
calling in and supression of the same, commanding likewise to gather in again
all copies thereof throughout Castile, for the said Doctor had published also
in the Castilean language a certain abstract of the said book, thereby to
make it more common to all the land: and to the end also that the commons,
and such as understood no latin, might have some use thereof, as being a
matter agreeable and toothsome to such us coueted great riches, and sought
ways to clyme to other estates, then either themselves, or their predecessors
could ever attain unto without great cost, labor, and cares, and often times
with the loffe and destruction of diverse.

Which when the Bishop of Chiapa understood, he determined also to write an
apology in the vulgar tongue, against the said doctors summarie, in defense
of the Indies, there in impugning and undermining his soundations, and
answering all reasons, or whatsoever the doctor could allege for him self,
therein displaying and setting before the peoples face the dangers,
inconveniences and harms in the said doctine contained.

Thus as many things passed on both sides, his Majesty i^ the year 1550.
called to Valadolid, an assembly of learned men, as well Divines as Lawyers,
who being joined with the Royal counsel of the Indies should argue, and
among them conclude, whether it were lawful without breach of Lustice, to
levy wars, commonly termed conquestes, against the inhabitants of those
conneries, without any new offense by them committed their infidelity
excepted.

Doctor Sepulued a was summoned to come and say what he could, and being
entered the counsel chamber, did at the first session utter his whole mind.
Then was the said Bishop likewise called, who for the space of five days,
continually did read his Apology: but being somewhat long, the Divines and
Lawyers there assembled, besought the learned and reverend father Dominicke
Soto his Majesty's confessor, and a dominican Friar, who was there present, to
reduce it into a summarie and to make so many copies as there were Lords, that
is fourteen, to the end they all having studied upon the matter, might
afterward in the fear of God say their minds.

The said reverend father and Master Soto, set down in the said summarie,
the doctors reasons, with the Bishops answers to the same. Then had the
doctor at his request a copy delivered him to answer: out of which
Summarie he gathered twelve against him self, whereto he made twelve
answers, against which answers the Bishop framed twelve replies.

Doctor Sepulueda his prologue to the Lords of the assembly.
MOst worthy and noble Lords, since your Lordshippes and graces have as judges
for the space of five or six days heard the Lord Bishop of Chiapa read that
book, whereinto he has many years labored to gather all the reasons that
either himself, or others could inue^t to prove the conquest of the Indies to
be unjust, as seeking first to subdue barbarous nations before we preach the
Gospel unto them, which have been the usual course correspondent to the
grant made by Pope Alexander the sixth, which all kings and nations have
hitherto taken and observed: it is meet, and I do so desire you, that I who
take upon me to defend the grant and authority of the Apostolic sea,
together with the equity and honor of our kings and nation, may have the
like grant, and that it may please you diligently to give me audience, while
briefly and manifestly I do answer his objections and subtilties: so do I
hope in God, and the truth which I take upon me to defend, that I shall
plainly set before your eyes, and show you that al yt is spoken on the
contrary part before so noble and wise judges, who are not any way to be
suspected of preferring whatsoever may be alleged before truth and equity
which are of such importance, does consist only upon friuelous and vain
reasons. I will therefore, cutting off my speech come to the purpose. For it is
small honor or courtesy to use tediousnes among such persons, being occupied
in weighty affairs, namely, in the government of the common wealth.

The Bishop of Chiapa his prologue to the Lords of the assembly.
MOst worthy and noble Lords, right reverend and learned fathers, hitherto in
whatsoever I have read, or in writing exhibited in this so notable and
honorable assembly, I have generally spoken against the adversaries of the
Indian enhabitants of our Indies that lie in the Occean sea, not naming any,
although I know some, who openly do seek to write Treaties thereof, and
frame their ground upon an excuse and defense of such wars as were, are,
and yet may be prosecuted against those people, which have been the occasions
of so much mischief, so many overthrows, losses, and subuersions of such
and so great kingdoms, together with many towns and infinite numbers of
souls. Also that they subduing of those nations by wars before they have by
preaching heard of the faith or name of Jesus Christ, is a marter conformable
to our Christian law: also that such wars are just and lawful, whereof it
seems that the reverend and worthy Doctor Sepulu^da has now opened and
declared him self the principal vphoulder and defendour, in that he
answers to those reasons, authorities, and objections, that be to the
contrary: which in detesting the said wars, and to the end to show that
the same being by another name called conquestes, are wicked and tyrannous, I
have drawn into this our Apology whereof I have read part unto your
excellencies and Lordeshippes.

And seeing he has sought to disclose him self, and feared not to be taken
for the author of so execrable impiety, which do redownde to the slander
of the faith, the dishonor of the name of Christianity, and the damage as
well spiritual as temporal of the most part of mankind: I thought it very
meet, as it is, so openly to impugn it, and for cutting off of the poisoned
cancker which he seeks to disperse abroad in these countries, to the
destruction and subversion of the same, to set my self as an adversary and
party agaynll him.

Wherefore I beseech your noble Lordeshippes graces and fatherhoodes, to way
this so weighty and dangerous matter, not as any peculiar cause, for I
pretend no farther, but to defend it according as becomes a Christian, but
as apperteining to God his honor, the universal Church, and the estate as
well temporal as spiritual of the kings of Castile, who are to give accoumpt
of the loss of souls already perished, and hereafter to perish, unless the
gate be shut up against this heavy course of wars, which Doctor
Sepulueda endenoureth to justify. Also that this honorable assembly admit
no Sophistry by him used to cover and cloak his hurtful opinion, whereby he
shows a pretense to color and defend the authority by him called
Apostolic, and the Empire, which the kings of Castile and Leon have over
these Iudians. For no Christian can lawefully and honestly confirm and defend
the authority termed Apostolic, either the soueraignetie of any Christian
king by unjust wars, by filling hills and valyes with innocent blood, either
with the infamy and blaspheming of Christ and his faith:

But the Apostolic sea is rather by such means defamed and loses her
authority, the true God is dishonored, and the true title and right of a king
is lost and perishes, as every wise and Christian man may easily gather by
that which Doctor Sepulueda him self has propounded.

This title and right is not founded upon the entry into those countries, and
against those people to rob, slay, and tyrannosly to rule over them, under
pretense of preaching the faith, as those tyra^ts entered and have done, who by
an vniuersallmassa cre and slaughter, have murdered such a multitude of
Innocents: But it consists of a peaceable, loving, and gentle preaching of
the Gospel, and of an unfeigned introduction and foundation of faith, and of
Christ's principality. Yea who so ever goes about to give our Kings and
Lords any other tide, whereby to obtain the sovereignty and principality
over those Indians, is stark blind, offends God, is a traitor to his king,
and an enemy to the Spanish nation, whom he abuses and most pernitiously
deceives, seeking to replenish hell with souls.

Least therefore any of your Lordshippes graces or fatherhoods should stay upon
these damnable humors, it were mee^^ as becomes most christian and wife men:
yea; and very expedient to put to silence so hurtful and abhomnable an opinion.
And although in our Apology, we may seem to have satisfied, and at large
answered whatsoever may be brought in defense of the said Apology, yet because
the doctor has once again propounded his defenses, by parting father Sotoes
summarie into twelve objections, reason wills me to reply and show that his
objections are frivolous, and to no purpose.

Out of which replies, here follows the abstract of two that stand us in
st^^^^.
THe report is vnture that the Indians did yearly sacrifice in now Spain
^0000 persons* either one 100. or 50. For had that been so, we could not now
have found there so much people: and therefore the Tyrants have invented it,
thereby to excuse and justify their tyrannies also to deteine so many of the
Indians as escaped the oppression and desolation of the first vintage, in
bondage and tyranny. But we may more truly say, that the Spaniards during
their aboade in the Indies, have yearly sacrificed to their so dearly beloved
and reverend Goddess Covetousness more people, then the Indians have done in a
100. years. This do the heavens, the earth, the elements, and the stars
both testify and bewail: the tyrants, yea, the very ministers of these
mischiefs cannot deny it. For it is evident how greatly these countries as
out first entry swarmed with people, as also how we have now laid it waste,
and dispeopled the same: we might even blushe for shame, that having given
over all fear of God, we will yet nevertheless seek to color and excuse
these our so execrable demeanours: considering that only for getting wealth and
riches, we have in 45. or 48. years, wasted and consumed more land then all
Europe, yea and part of Asia, do in lengih and breadth con^aine, robbing and
usurping upon that with all cruelty, wrong, and tyranny, which we have seen
well inhabited (...) people among whom there have been slain and destroyed
20. millions of souls.

In the last and twelfth reply as follows.
THE Spaniardes have not entered into India for any desire to exalt Gods honor,
or for zeal to christian religion, either to favor, and procure the salvation
of their neighbors, no neither for their princes service, whereof they do so
vainly brag: but conetousnes has brought them and ambition has allured
them to the perpetual dominion over the Indies, which they as tyrants and
devils, do covet to be parted among them: and to speak plainly and flatly,
do seek no other but to expel and drive the kings of Castile out of all that
world and themselves seazing thereupon, by tyranny to usurp and take upon
them all royal sovereignty.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson, for
William Broom. 1583.


