STRANGE NEVES.



At London printed for G. Vincent and W. Blackwal and are to be sold at
Guildhall gate.

To the Reader.
WHAT Credit this strange Report may purchase (Gentle reader) is a thing I
greatly respect not, and much less contend for: yet, thus much let me tell
thee, it had th'pprobation of some, both of good judgment, and staide
discretion, and of such Place and Condition, as may superseede all suspicion of
vain or idle impositions. And for my part, this I dare assure thee, it agrees
in all points, with the High Dutch Coppie, whence it was translated: first
printed at VIENA in Austria, which for my better satisfaction I caused to be
brought unto me, and diligently conferd them together, before resolved
Opinion, being no less scrupulous then any to give furtherance to any matter,
either of false or frivolous import, a thing neither suting the state of these
times, not sorting mine own condition. Now for my opinion herein; The
playnesse of the Style wherein it ^^ written, void of Ambages, Amplifications,
and all other. Vain flourishes (such as nimble wits, might very easily have
invested such a Subject withal) is to me no small argument of the verity
thereof: The prodigjes themselus also, just as well in matter as manner sorting
the nature and disposition or these times, both touching their generation and
form, and apt representation of the Events by them presignified.

But admit the verity and strangnes too (as indeed it is both strange and
horrible) yet so long, has bin the conti^ante of happy and acceptable times,
without any great or notable taste of contrariety, that we think they will
never have end, neither fearing chaung, nor crediting any thing that may give
occasion of such doubt: not much unlike the Isralites, (God in mercy a little
differing the'xecution of his judgments denounced by the Prophets Jeremy and
Ezekiel) growing into so constant conceit of settled security, that they
neither credited vision, nor feared the event thereof: holding for undoubted
truth, that neither was such visions of any effect, nor any such thing should
happen unto them, or like those in the Apostles time, who because they saw
neither chaung, nor likelihood of chaung of times, before or after them, could
hardly entertain the credit of such things as was spoken touching the
mysteries of man's redemption. But this is to abuse times bounty, and the long
suffering of the great God of heaven, who a^ he answered the one, the days are
at hand, and the effect of every vision: there shall be no more such a proverb
amongst you, for no visions shall be any more in vain, nor diuinations
miseffectuall: The Other. There was an age before them, for like sin and
corruption destroyed and perished by the general deluge, so will he quit our
misconstruction of his loving kindness and good patience with some ^odayne and
imminent vengeance, an argument whereof may be this, and many more prodigious
Ostenrs partly past and many more yet to come, and some now imminent. and
surely this I dare be bold to say. If these mundane and moveable bodies be
mutually impressiue and impressible, nature constant in her Periods and reason
experience and Iugme^t in man, be of any power or credit. The great conjunction
of ye two superior bodies Saturn and Jupiter, constipated with so many
several conjunctions and radiations of other planets, and in the same place
very near, in parle together as it were for some strange decree of great
consequence. The Earth's and Moons late and horrible obscurations, the
frequent Ecclipsations of the fixed bodies; by the wandering, the fixed stars, I
mean with the planets, within these few years more then ordinary, shall
without doubt (salued divine inhibytion) have their effects no less admirable,
then the positiues unusual. Which PEVCER with many more too long to reharse
out of continual observation and the consent of all Authors noted to be, new
Leagues, Traiterous Designements, Catching at Kingdoms, translation of Empire,
downfall of menn in Authority, aemulation, Ambition, Innouatious, Factious
Sects, Schisms and much disturbance and trobles in religion and matters of the
Church, with many other things infallible, in sequent such orbicall position
and Phaenomenes. Examples and instances whereof he sets down many both out
of his own experience and histories of diverse ages, wherein Mirald us also is
so constant, that he peremtorily concludes, Regnorum fatales mutationes,
effectus grandes, et casus notabiles nunquam contigisse, quin causa aliqua
coelestis, et praemonstratio ceu de classico ill^s notis ante ce^inerint, et
quasi digito ostenderent, and MANILIVS nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus aer.

Seeing then yt so many praemo^stracio^s of fearful event, as these straung
dispositions of mundane bodies, this and many more prodigious ostents, some
past, and more to come (as I said (are yet as it were before our Eyes, it shall
not be amiss with the provident and vigilant Ante, whilst it is yet Summer
and Harvest, to provide for the necessity of Winter, least, with Salomons idle
fool, whilst we sleep and slumber, and fold our hands: yet a little, and
yet a little, in the affiance of our misconceiued security, misery come upon
us, as one traveling by the way, and necessity like an armed man.

And thus commending all to thy best construction, I rest

From my house the George next Dyers Hall in Thames street. London February 11
1605.

Thine in all honest offices, Ed. Gresham.

STRANGE fearful and true news, which happened at CARLSTADT, in the kingdom of
CROATIA.

DECLARING HOW THE Sun did shine like Blood nine days together, and how two
Armies were seen in the Air, the one encountering the other.

And how also a Woman was delivered of three prodi gious sons,, which
Prophisied many strange and fearful things, which should shortly come to
pass, All which happened the twelfth of June, last, 1605. which is the 2 day
of the month, according to our computation.

Translated out of the Dutch Coppie, Printed at VIENNA in Austria.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for G. Vincent and VV, Blackwall, and are to be sold
over against Guild Hall Gate.

NEWS From Carlstadt, in the Knigdome of Croatia in Germany.
MARK and consider well with your selves dear Christians (both Rich and Poor)
of what estate or degr^e s^^^^^ you ^e, and sake all the mean ^^ that possible
y^^ ^an to a(...)nd ^our li^es: for that the Lord ab^^^, (...) ^^yl^ ^hr^^ten
us more and more, and shows us his (...) h^^^y ^^d which he intends to
punnish us withal, for our most foul and wicked sin^ which we c^^ti^^ally
(...)to more and m^^e, but we reg^^d it not any ^^ing at all.

I(...) Y^^^^ of (...) GOD, 160^. The Inhabitants of Carl^^adt were much (...)
in great perple^^^ie: for t^^t the Sunn^ ^^^ ^^ ri^^ and (...)d right ^^^^
their Church, ^he sa(...) about (as it plainly appeared (...)) (...) (...) and
fearfu^^ sight, was (...) of many people.

Oh, dear Breethren and Christians all, let v^ h^^^ ^^spect to (...) ^hic^ GOD
has (...) days together, as it were in red blood, having on the one side
Moons and Turkish S^bells: and on the other side great Ordinance.

The Citizens of Carlstadt were mightily affrayde at the sight hereof, which
happened on a Sunday, (being the t^elfth of June as aforesaid) On which day also,
was seen too great Armies of men of war, encountering one another in the Air,
with such wonderful noyce, that the same was heard upon the Earth, as
sounding of Trumpets, and such like. And had their Ensigns and Standers with
Stars and half Moons as the Turks do use.

The whole Commonaltie both great and small, did wring their hands at the
sight hereof, so did they also, that dwelled far of, and then presently was
seen a great Army of Christians in ye Air, ready to resist the Turks.

No Emperor or King, did ever fight such a battle as there was seen in the
Air: There were Spiritual men seen in the Christian Army, and many flaine of
the Turks and Infidels.

There a man might have seen such running and Ryding of the Turks, that the
people were al astonished, for all the Turkish horses did run up to the knees
in the Christians blood.

But behold the wonderful works of Almighty God, for when the battle
began, [which was from the Evening, till thr^e of the Clock in the Morning]
and then the Moon did lose her light and the Horsemen vanished quite away. But
yeat mark what happened more.

A Woman was heard in the same Citiy to travel in (...)earing of child (...)
together: And then a strange thing was seen in the Air, for she was delivered
of three Sons, as in the Picture is to be seen.

The first of theyse Prodigious Children had four heads, which spoke and
vttred strange things. The second Child was black like a More, and the third
Child like unto Death.

The Child with four heads, began to cry a loud, and many women rann to hear
it, one of the heads said with high voice: There shall shortly many Hungarians
be slain by the Turks.

The second head said: All the wonders of the Turks which you have seen in the
Air: Shall all come too pass.

The Turk with many Tartars, shall overcome all Hungary, even to Austria, and
Morauia.

The third head said. The Emperor, Kings Earls and Lords, shall then arise,
and shall put the Turk to flight. The fourth head said, before that come to
pass, strange wonders shall appear.

The black Child began to cry a loud, a time of dearth is at hand, both here
and in other places, which shall not escape you, men shall perish for hunger,
and great want shall be of corn and grain.

The third Child began to cry, repent and amend your lives, before death do
catch hold on you, this Child was like unto Death to see to, and said for
certain great death and mortality shall come over poor and Rich.

Come hither both young and old, said the black child, remember these words
here spoken and conceals them not, many great wonders shall be seen, before
one thousand and ten be written: Shall all come to pass.

These three Children, having spoken these things, died anon after. Every man
wondered, and the people were altogether astonished, and moved to the heart,
with the strangenes of this Prophecy.

Let us pray to God for grace, and call upon his holy name, both e^rly and
late, that we abstain from sin, and amend our lives, for the d^y of the Lord
is at hand.

FINIS.

