A brief Catechism, containing the most principal, grounds of Religion.
Question. WHo created you, and all creatures?

Answer. GOD.

Quest. What is the duty of you and all creatures unto God?

An. To set forth his glory.

Quest. How is that done?

An. By keeping his word and commandment, whereby we declare that he is our
sovereign Lord, and have authority ever us to command us obedience.

Quest. How do the dumme creatures keep Gods commandment?

An. By continuing in that order and state, whereto the Lord by his word
first assigned them.

Quest. Has man done so from the beginning?

An. No. For our first parents brake Gods commandment in eating the
forbidden fruit.

Quest. What befell of that?

An. They became sinful, and have left unto us being branches of the same
root, the inheritance of sin, which we call Original sin, or sin which
we have by nature and kind.

Quest. What evil come thereof?

An. This Original sin is a very plague infecting all our deeds, so that
they be all transgressions of Gods Law.

Quest. What does the Law of God require of us?

An. That we should love the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul, and
strength: and our neighbor as our self.

Quest. Are we not able to perform this?

An. No, In no wise.

Quest. Why was it then commanded of God?

An. Because it is the rule of perfect righteousness, agreeing unto the nature
of God, able in itself to be observed and to give life: but of us unable,
because of our sinful inabilitie.

Quest. What profit receeyue we then by it?

An. This, that we being convict of our sin more manifestly by the Law,
wherein as in a glass, we behold the same, we might be ashamed of our selves,
and fear Gods wrath, and so be co^streyned to seek for remedy of our misery
other where, namely in Christ.

Quest. You say that in all our doings we transgress Gods Law, what call
you that transgression?

An. Stane.

Quest. what is the desert of sin?

An. Gods curse and fierce wrath, to the utter spoiling of soul and body by
everlasting death, whose justice thereupon calls for the execution of this
punishment.

Quest. What follows thereon?

An. Then they whose eyes God do open to see their misery, behold them
selves lost, and confounded: yea even plunged with the waves of woo unto death.
Then they repent and loath their former sin, which have brought upon them this
condemnation, and humbly crave pardon, appealing from justice to mercy. Then
do Christ Jesus take them by the hand, give them ease of their burden, and
quicken them by his comforting spirit, restoringe them from death to life. So
are they then made new borne children.

Quest. By what means can Christ rescue us from his fathers justice?

An. Because he offered a sacrifice of his own body and blood to his Father,
to make the atonement for us. And he being perfect man, suffered death: and
being perfect God, sustained him self to break the bands of death.

Quest. And how do we attain to everlasting life, having escaped death?

An. Christ also has fulfilled perfect righteousness, which he does impute to
us: and of the fulness of the spirit which he have received, he sanctifies us,
and so present us to his Father, craving that we may be partakers of his glory
with him.

Quest. How do we receive and apply to us Christ Jesus, and all this which
he have done for us?

An. By faith.

Quest. What is Faith?

An. A spiritual gift given of GOD, even the hand of our soul which we
reach out, to draw unto us, all good things which are offered and promised.

Quest. How is this Faith wrought in us?

An. By the inward means of the spirit, and the outward means of the hearing
the word taught.

Quest. What outward means has the Lord given, for the strengthening of our
faith, that we may with more full assurance receive* his promises?

An. The two Sacraments, Of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which we call
seals unto the handwriting of the Lords promise of our salvation.

Quest. What is a Sacrament?

An. It is an outward visible sign, by the confirmation of the word applied
thereto representing spiritual graces unto us, for the testifying of Gods
goodness toward us, and confirming our Faith.

Quest. What is Baptism?

An. The seal of our receiving into Gods house, being before the heirs of
hell: and this is done by a great alteration in us, namely, dying to sin,
and living again unto righteousness, which is our new birth. Which grace this
Sacrament do represent, both in that it signify a spiritual washing from our
sin by Christ his blood: And also a drowning and passing through death, that
we might escape a more grievous death, and live for ever.

Quest. What does the Lords Supper represent unto us?

An. Our continual nourishing, after we be received into Gods family, with
the living bread, and the living water, the body and blood of Christ, whereon
we feed by faith, and grow together into one with him.

Quest. What seal and mark can we find in our selves that we have this faith
and be in Christ? For all can say, they believe.

An. The spirit which Christ Jesus do give, as a pleadge of our adoption, is a
certain seal. Which spirit it it dwell in us, the fruit thereof, as the
heat of a tornate, will break forth Love to the Lord and his word will
appear, And charity to our neighbor. Generally a full alteration we must
spy in our selves, that we are dead to sin, wherein we lived in times past,
and now we have pleasure to exercise our selves in meditating the Law of
God, in Prayer, thanks giving, and all the exercises of Christianity, wholly
leading a new life, and holding the agreement of godly fellowship with the
rest of the members whereof Christ is the head. And always having our
conversation in heavenly things, that our light may shine, and our life may
express the praise and glory of him, and our thankefulnes toward him, who
have redeemed us unto the hope of eternal life.

FINIS.

