THE ANSWER OF MASTER ISAAC CASAVBON to the Epistle OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS,
and most reverend Cardinal PERON.

Translated out of Latin into English. May 18. 1612.

LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON, for William Aspley. 1612.

TO SIR THOMAS EDMONDS HIS MAJESTY'S Legier in France. ISAAC CASAVBON wishes
Health.
Honorable Sir, the importunate curiosity of men has at length overcome my
purpose, which would not suffer neither this answer, nor the Epistle that gave
the occasion of it to keep private with other scroles in the desks of the
owners. As for me, how unwilling I have been from the beginning and ever since
to have it published, both you well know, and others of worth can witness, who
have earnestly requested that of me, yet did not prevail. But now seeing so
great a man forced to yield unto other men's desire, let none marvel that I
also have done the same. And although this Answer was not written to the end
that it should be published; yet if they into whose hands it shall come, be
equal and moderatly minded, not servile to affections, there will prove no
cause (I trust) that I should repent of publishing it, or they of reading it.
It shall be known to honest men, and such as be desirous of public agreement
amongst Christian people, (as I have observed the most to be on both sides,
that are good men, and intelligent in matters Divine) that they have his
excellent Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN, joining with them in their most holy
wish, yea, with most earnest desire. Who although he have just cause to be
persuaded that his words, his writings, and his actions heretofore have made
manifest to the whole Christian world the excellency of his mind in this
behalf; yet he thought good not to despise this occasion happened also of
declaring the same. Who is there so void of al sense of piety, which does not
embrace, and admire this affection in so mighty a Prince? Who so savage and
barbarous as otherways to interpret it, or to make doubt whether this answer
of the King did proceed from a vehement desire of concord? Religious and wise
men shall further understand what manner of peace, and concord in the Church
this most pious Prince wishes: and upon what terms and conditions his
Majesty is ready to make covenant. For this answer is tempered with such
moderation, that the zealous endeavor by all good means to make up peace,
appears not to be inferior to the Zealous endeavor of defending the truth.
And this surely is the Kings opinion, this his firm sentence, that it is but
vain for such men to think, or talk of the peace of the Church, which are
not afraid to separate and disioyne this celestial chariot, which ought in no
wise to be discoupled. That in vain therefore do they vaunt of the truth of
their opinion, who maliciously interpreting all the sayings of other men, and
deducting thence such absurd consequences as they list, giving bad example of
such perverse (...)
industry, do prove themselves destitute of charity, which is the mother of
unity. That in vain also do they usurp the golden names of Charity, and
Unity, which are not willing to admit of Truth, which is the foundation of
piety that is sincere. It was of old excellently spoken by S. Hilarie:
Beautiful is the name of peace (says he) and fair is the opinion of unity;
but who may doubt, that that only is the peace of the Church, which is the
peace of Christ? The peace of Christ, which alone is taught by this most holy
father to be approved off in the Church, it is that, by which the doctrine of
Christ, which he taught his Apostles, and his Apostles taught the primitive
Church, does remain safe defenced, and unshaken. Let those to whom it
belongs, who challenge the principal places in the Church, offer unto his
Majesty such a peace, and straightway the discord is ended. Let them
ingeniously and faithfully separate humane matters from divine, things
superstitious from things religious, novelties, and late-borne devices from
such matters as be truly ancient, lastly, the nothing or less necessary, from
the necessary: and I say again, and I cry aloud, that all may hear, on his
Majesty's part, and for the Church of England, the discord is at an end Now, to
come unto so great a benefit, there lies but one Kings street, as it were,
which from the entrance of the Church has been beaten by our ancestors, namely
the free celebration of a General Council: wherein the complaints of all
Nations may be heard, wherein controversies may be determined, and peace for
the time ensuing, by Gods mercy be established. For the rooting of bad
opinions out of men's minds, and for the reconciliation of nations divided by
dissension, the Church in all ages knew no other course but this, nor used
other but this; they used not violence nor arms. But seeing by reason of the
general sins of us all, there appears no hope of a General Council, yet
it would be some ease of this evil, if the great liberty, or rather unbridled
license of daily writing and publishing books of Divinity, were by severe
laws on both sides restrained. For now what hope can remain, when throughout
all Europe every where, ever now and then, new writers come abroad, such as be
ready to power oil into the fire, rather then by casting on water to
extinguish the flame. Gregory Nazianzen, that admirable Divine, could not
endure in the men of his time, the curiosity in disputing of divine matters:
and in diverse places of his writings he affirms that the only cause almost of
the evils which that age suffered, not unlike to ours now adays, was this:
because men, void of Gods spirit, commonly and promiscuously did dispute of
spiritual things, and convert Theology into technology, that is, make no
other use of Divinity but as a matter (...).
of learned, or artificial discourse, as they talk of other arts and sciences
out of humane reason. From this license, which now almost every where bears
sway rise so many new terms, and such diversity of forms of speech, and
(...).
sentences which daily more and more breed dissension in the Church of God.
Away then with this liberty of prophesying, which is so pleasing unto some of
these times, if they understand thereby a license of broaching new devices, and
departing from the doctrine which has been received by consent of all men in
the ages of the primitive Church. What should I tell here of those unsavory,
and unlettered writers, which are scarcely perfect in the first elements of
Christian religion, which daily come forth of those places especially, where,
without any difference made of good or evil demeanours, without respect of
knowledge or ignorance, to the hurt of the common good, rewards are propounded,
unto any one that being grown impudent can set out a book against the adverse
part, though it be full of rage, and empty of all learning. But what good can
be hoped for from such, as make the knowledge of Divinity a trade of living, a
help or way to get money? whom neither the glory of God does move to write,
nor the love of truth, nor the edification of the Church, much less the desire
of godly and holy peace: but reward only, and base hire, or the tickling of
vain glory? Here it will be good to blaze the impudency of one amongst many
of the scriblers (...).
of this garb, of whom I will let you know what is his Majesty's judgment. He
whom I mean, whom I am ashamed to name, such is the baseness of this new
Doctor, is a common vagrant Peltmonger, an idiot, an illiterate fellow, that
neither has Greek, nor Latin, without science and without conscience, borne
to trouble honest men, and to spend sustenance, and naught else good for. He,
because amongst women he is held a petie Master, and well tongued in his mother
language, has taken upon him of late to censure all the writers of both sides.
Which he has undergone more willingly, because two years ago being deeply
indebted, having got a pension of seven hundred Crowns, that he might wipe off
the old debt, and have annual pay (I speak nothing but truth, and what he
himself told me) changde sides, and fled unto the adverse part. So he, which
amongst those whom he forsook, lived in famous for suspicion of being an
Atheist, hateful to all honest men that knew him nearly, now, forsooth, must
needs approve the fervor of his new Zeal to those to whom he has fled,
that is, whom he has deceived. Wherefore Pelt: being now a Doctor of his own
or eating, daily writes, or rather vomites out new books. First, two years
since he laid the rudiments of his new profession, when he put forth a book
against the Preface of his excellent Majesty, that most learned Prince,
himself being the basest of petifoggers, an unlettered book-maker, the very
(...)
dregs of ignorance: in which book (if you except a very few things) there
is nothing but triuiall stuff, uttered a thousand times before, nothing but
what is drawn out of the lees. And as for those few things excepted, there is
no learned man in Paris but knows, and I am certain from whom he stole them.
For we are not ignorant under whose table he gathers those crummes which
furnish out his dishes. This Pelt: having some few months since assaulted a
man of great fame, and nobility, vouchsafed me also the honor to be thought
worthy of the censure of this new Aristarch, this pillar of wisdom: but by
the way, and as it were passing by, lest if he should have done otherways,
some honor (believe it) had accrewed unto my name from the worthiness of so
great an adversary. I published not long before an Epistle written to Fronto
Ducaeus, a Divine of the society of Jesus, wherein was contained a true
historical declaration of some things done in this kingdom by certain of
that Society. This Epistle Pelt: in his book above mentioned refuteth not,
(how could he?) but stabs it with one sharp censure: after that converting his
speech unto his Majesty, requests him not to believe any of those things which
he beheld with his own eyes, which the whole kingdom saw, which are laid up
in the public records, which the universal world now knows to be most true.
All these things my Pelt: dare call false, and fained through flattery; yea,
and says it to the King: as if the most gracious and clement Prince were one,
whose ears lie open for such information as may destroy the innocent. What
halter, or what gallows are condign punishment for this crime? When his
excellent Majesty read those things, and showed me them, who had not seen
them before: I saw him herein detest the strange boldness and impudence of this
Pelt. And whereas he would have me thought a cunning flatterer, herein he
wrongs egregiously the King, rather then me.

-- (...)
(...),
(...).
-- for sooner down
Shall the stars fall, and the earth clime up to the sky,
Then I meet any man with terms of flattery.
Further, Pelt says that when I wrote that Epistle I was led with a spirit of
giddiness. I wondered then what he called the spirit of giddiness: for he
which makes a true relation of things done, or rather transcribes them out of
public records, who will say that he is carried with the spirit of
giddiness, but such a fellow as himself, which is possessed with the spirit
of error. But afterward, some (...).
three days ago I light upon another book of Pelts, written against a very
learned man, in the end whereof he has another blow at me, and says that I
am led with the spirit of reformation. So the spirit of reformation, and the
spirit of giddiness are one, and the same, as this mischief would make them.
Then all those men of diverse ages past, which have earnestly desired the
reformation of the Church, and have left us many books for witnesses of their
desire, all were giddie. What? were the Fathers of the Tridentine Council led
with giddiness, which make so often mention of reformation? In the same book
Pelt: warnes me to take heed of writing any thing that may displease him:
otherways I shall smart for it, he will run me through. O zealous man for the
house of God! which shootes forth his zeal as far as things that are not.
Happy I; if I may fall by the hand of this great Aeneas. Only this scruple
troubles me sore: how will he do to confute my writings, who is not able to
understand them? for I write not books for the women of France to read. Well,
I will give Pelt: one advice, which will free both me and him from this
scruple. Let him remember the old precept; Quam quisque norit artem in hac se
exerceat: Let every man practice that art, wherein he is skillful. Therefore,
which thing only he has learned, wherein only he is able, curet cuticulam, let
him care for his pelt, and leave these learned conflicts unto those that have
learning. Neither let him be so high minded, as to think that I will ever make
any other account of him then of a barking dog, or a wincing ass. I am not
wont to be so prodigal of good hours, that he may hope I will ever turn the
point of my style upon him. You see (honorable Sir) what kind of Divines
spring of late, which like to Mushroms grow great in one night, whom therefore
the Greek Divine wittily terms sown Divines, and worthily (...).
debarreth from the handling of sacred things. But I return to this Answer,
which having found published corruptly in the parts beyond sea, I reutewed it,
and corrected it. And this I send to you for a testimony of my love, and
service, which I know will be welcome to you.

London, April 10. MDCXII.
Farewell.
THE ANSWER OF Mr. ISAAC CASAVBON TO THE Epistle of the most illustrious, and
most reverend Cardinal PERON.
MOst illustrious, and most reverend Lord, I have learned (as I think) by use,
and experience, that there is no evil so great, out of which, or by occasion
whereof some good may not arise. And as it is an usual speech that honey
breeds gall; so it may be said not unfitly, that sometimes out of pure gall
comes pure honey. Not to seek any further proof of this, the lewd book of
that debosht cauiller, which gave me first occasion by his excellent Majesty's
command, of writing to your illustrious Honor, it was pure gall, and that
most virulent. But both your letters, which upon that occasion you sent me,
seasoned with singular courtesy, humanity, and prudence, witnessing the fair
ingenuitie of the author, were sweeter to me then any honey. Wherefore I was
not afraid to show them unto his Majesty, and his Majesty, although he
approved not of all that was in them, (for that could not be) yet he refused
not, but was willing to read them both. It delighted him very much, that yet
he knew one Divine of your side, a man of chief place, of honorable
estimation, and excellent learning, which handling the controversies of these
times, appeared to be of a moderate, and quiet disposition. For, with what
spirit the most are led, which now adays set out books of this argument,
there needs no more sufficient declaration then out of those writers which
hitherto have oppugned his Majesty's Apology. All of them (if you except one
or two) filling their unhappy leaves with lies, reproaches, and foul language.
But especially the words in your last letters did delight his Majesty, whose
mind is enflamed with the zeal of sincere piety, whereby you seemed to put
him in hope that this friendly communication concerning matters of religion was
like not to prove fruitless. Which thing as it pleased the King marueilously,
who is ready upon this condition to undergo any pains, so, if there remain
no hope hereof; neither is there any just cause why his Majesty, or your
Honor should trouble your selves. Surely I hope, if your Worthiness will take
serious care of it, that with the helpeof almighty God, you may effect, by the
authority which you have amongst your own, and the report of learning, and
wit amongst all, that by these mutual writings, some good profit may redownd to
ye Church of Jesus Christ. As for his most excellent Majesty of Great
Britain, in whose Court I have now lived a whole veere and more, I dare
promise you, and with all manner of asseueration confirm, that he is so
affected, and that the course of his whole life has bin so ordered, that all
men may easily understand there is nothing dearer to him then the careful
endeavor for religion. Neither private business, nor the public cares of his
kingdom do usually so affect his Majesty, as a kind of unmeasurable desire
by all means to promote religion, and (which consideration most beseemes so
great a King) an exceeding affection by all right and honest means to procure
peace amongst the dissenting members of the Church. And this care so fitting a
Christian Prince, the most pious King has not confined within the bounds of
his own kingdom, though very large, but remembering that he is styled the
Defendour of the faith, he has thought good, not out of any curiosity, but a
vehemency of zeal to extend it beyond the limits of his own little world:
that his Majesty's wisdom and authority might be beneficial also to the
Churches of other Countries, if occasion were offered: and that daily it might
be more apparent in the sight of God, and men, that his chief care is the
preservation of Christian religion. Of late therefore, and about the time when
I showed you his last letters, his Majesty gave this great experiment of this
his devout mind: which, as it is most worthily approved, and commended (...).
here of all good and godly men, so, I hope, most illustrious Cardinal, that
the knowledge of it will be delightful to you. When the right Honorable and
most reverend Prelate, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, by letters
certified his Majesty, that there came unto his hands a book brought out of
some part of Germany, or the Low Countries, containing doctrine concerning the
nature of God, which was new, perverse, and in some points repugnant to the
faith of the Catholic Church; and withal desired his Majesty that for the
repressing of this mischief, which was lately sprung up, he would show forth
the zeal of the Defendour of the faith, and intercede with the Magistrates of
that place where the author lived, desiring of them not to suffer so prodigious
doctrine to be (...).
brought into their Churches, and Universities, and that the inuentor of this
profane novelty might not pass unpunished: the King, as he came out of
coach, after a tedious hunting, as soon as he had received the letters, and
the book, noted, and marked in sundry places by that most vigilant Prelate,
without any delay thought it a business worthy to be taken notice of. And
although at that time his body was faint with exercise, and fasting, yet what
he had begun, he went through at once, as it were with one continuance and
heat of endeavor: neither could he be entreated by the Nobility which stood
about him to have any respect of himself, until after a good long
consideration of the whole matter, with the right reverend Bishop of Lichfield
and others of the Clergy, and a perfect understanding thereof, he most
accuratly discharged, as much as appertained to him, and as piety commanded.
The book was condemned, and it was determined that all the copies of it should
be burnt in London, and in both the Universities. Which afterward was
performed. Letters were immediately dispatched (the King himself dictating) unto
his Majesty's Legier there lying, to testify what was the judgment of the
King, and the Church of England concerning this new doctrine. Withal, order
was given to acquaint the Magistrates with the matter. Let them look to it, to
whom the care of removing that evil does belong, what account of their delay
they can make unto the immortal God, if (which we hope cannot come to pass)
neither of their own accord, nor after so notable example, they undergo the
patronage of the truth with less zeal and endeavor then they ought. His
Majesty at the first receiving of the news was so moved, that he thought
he should commit a grievous offense, if he gave any indulgence to his body,
before he had fully performed this office of piety. I doubt not (most
illustrious Cardinal) but you will greatly approve of, and praise this deed. I
have made relation to you of what was done, not to the intent I might commend
his Majesty unto you, but to let you understand how fast he holds the
ancient faith, and how stout and earnest a Defendour he is of the opinions of
the true Catholic Church, whom notwithstanding most of your Catholics will
not have to be accounted and called a Catholic, yea many, not a Christian.
His Majesty at the first thought the strife about those names not to be
material, whilst he held that which was meant by them, which his Majesty
desires to do, and fully trusts in the mercy of God that he does. But
because the common sort of men do thus interpret, that to be deprived of such
names, is all one as to be deprived of the things understood by those names:
therefore he does not think it wisdom to take no notice of this wrong. As
concerning the name of Christian, there is no strife, no controversy betwixt
you and him. For neither of your Epistles does deny this title to be due unto
him. The question is then concerning the title of Catholic. For after that,
according unto your excellent eloquence, in your first Epistle you had
signified that you acknowledged in the King of Great Britain the perfect and
absolute Idea of the greatest Prince; in the end, you put this exception, if
unto the other gifts of his mind the glorious name of Catholic might be
added: and when, by his Majesty's commandment, it was answered, that that
title could not be denied to him, which acknowledged the three Creeds of the
Church Catholic, and the four first general Councels: and which believed all
things that were believed as necessary to salvation in the four first ages:
with this answer in your last accurate and subtle letters you appeared not to
be so well satisfied. Those letters persuade your self that they were not read
hastily, and cursorily, for he read them through, and examined the weight of
your reasons with wonderful equity, and gentleness of mind. But, whereas,
after the reading of your answer, he departs not from his former opinion,
and yet nevertheless, by the help of Gods grace, trusts he is a true
Catholic, his Majesty would have you know what reasons he has for this
resolution. Wherefore, most illustrious Cardinal, receive this short answer
to your last letters, which receiving from his Majesty's own mouth, I was
commanded to comprise in words, and to send unto you. I will not now request of
you, that in the reading of these you would use such equity, as he did in the
reading of yours. I know full well your excellent wisdom and moderation
worthy of all praise. The whole disputation in your last letters consists of
two parts. In the former part are brought five reasons, which do illustrate and
show the acception of this thesis, in what sense you would have it taken. This
thesis; Catholici appellatio, etc. The name of Catholic can be denied to none
which admits of the three, namely, the Apostles, the Nicene, and the Athanasian
Creeds: and of the four first general Councels, the Nicene, the
Constantinopolitane, the Ephesine, and that of Chalcedon: lastly, which
believes all those things that were thought necessary to be believed to
salvation in the first four ages. This thesis, in the Kings answer, has the
place of the mayor proposition. The second part of your disputation brings in
four instances against the hypothesis, or assumption.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe name of Catholic does not simply signify faith, but also a communion
with the Catholic Church. Therefore the ancients would not have them called
Catholics which departed from the communion of the Church, albeit they
retained the same faith. For they said, there was but one Church Catholic, out
of which a man might have the faith and Sacraments; but salvation he could not
have. To this purpose you bring many things out of S. Augustine.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
TO believe the Catholic Church, and to believe the communion of Saints, are
set down in the Apostles Creed distinctly, as two diverse things. And the
former of these two articles seems to be inserted especially, to the end that
a difference might be made betwixt the Jewish Synagogue, and the Christian
Church. Which was not to be confined within the bounds of one nation, as that
was, but to be scattered far and wide through all the regions of the world.
Wherefore there is no manifest reason, why in the beginning of this observation
the name of Catholic should be said to signify communion. Indeed these two
are very near joined, but they are two diverse things, as I have showed. Now
his Majesty believes unfeignedly, that there is but one Church of God, truly,
and in name Catholic, or universal, diffused over the whole world, out of
which he affirms also that no salvation is to be hoped for. He condemns,
and detesteth those which either long since, or more lately have either
departed from the faith of the Catholic Church, and so become heretics, as
the Manichies, or from communion, and so have become schismatikes, as the
Donatists: against which two sorts of men chiefly al those things were written
by S. Augustine, which are brought in this observation. Likewise his Majesty
commends the wisdom of those godly Bishops, which in the fourth Council of
Carthage, as is here well observed, did add unto the form of examination of
Bishops, an interrogation concerning this point. Neither is the King ignorant,
that ye fathers of the ancient Church did oftentimes many things by way of
condescent, pro bono pacis, as they ysed (...).
to say, that is, for desire of maintaining unity, and for fear of breaking
mutual communion. Whose example he professes himself ready also studiously
to imitate, and to follow in the steps of those that follow after peace, ad
aras vsque to the altars, that is, as far as he may (considering the state of
the Church in these days) with the safety of a good conscience. For he is as
much grieved as any man, for the distraction of the members of the Church, so
much abhorred by the holy Fathers: and as earnestly desires to communicate, if
it were possible, with all that are members of the mystical body of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, his Majesty thinks that he has most just cause
to dissent from those, which simply, without any distinction, or exception, do
perpetually urge this communion. He acknowledges it to be very necessary, and
one of the proper notes of the Church: yet does not account it for the true
form of the Church, and that which the Philosopher calls the essential being.
His Majesty has learned by his reading (...).
of the holy Scriptures (according to the mind of all ancient fathers) that
the true and essential form of the Church is this, that the sheep of Christ
hear the voice of John 10. 3.
their shepherd, and that the Sacraments be rightly and lawfully administered,
namely as the Apostles have given example, and those which followed near to
the Apostles times. Those Churches which are thus instituted, they must needs
be linked together by a manifold communion. They are united in Christ their
head, who is the fountain of life, whereby all live, whom the Father has
chosen to be redeemed by his precious blood, and to be rewarded with eternal
life. They are united in the union of faith, and doctrine, in such chief
points as are necessary to salvation. For there is but one saving doctrine,
there is but one way to heaven. They are united in conjunction of minds in
true charity, and the duties of charity, especially of mutual prayers.
Lastly, they are united in the communion of one hope, and expectation of
promised inheritance; knowing, that before the foundations of the world they
were predestinate (I speak of the elect) to be fellow heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers of the promise of God in Christ through the Gospel, as
says the divine Apostle. Yet Ephesians. 3. 6. (...).
his Majesty adds further, that the same Church, notwithstanding if any
member thereof depart from the rule of faith, will more esteem of the love of
truth, then the love of unity. He knows that the supreme law in the house of
God is the sincerity of celestial doctrine: which if any man forsake, he
forsakes Christ which is Truth it self: he (...). 1. Tim. 3. 15
forsakes the Church, which is the pillar and establishment of truth, and by
this means cease to appertain unto the body of Christ. With such Apostates,
a true Catholic neither will nor can communicate: for what concent betwixt
Christ and Belial? Wherefore the Church will fly from communion with these,
and will say with Greg Nazianzen, 2. Cor. 6. 15 (...). De Pace. Orat. 1. (...).
In Oratione habita in Council. Constantin.
that disagreement for godliness is better then ill affected concord. Neither
will he doubt, if need be, to say with the same blessed father, that there is a
holy contention. Now that such a necessary separation should sometimes be in
the Church, both we are taught in other places of holy Scripture, and that
admonition also of the holy Ghost, not without cause given to the Church, does
openly declare: saying, Go out of Babylon, my people, lest you communicate
Apoc. 18. 4.
with her sins. What that Babylon is, whereout the people of God are
commanded to depart, the King disputes not in this place, nor affirms he any
thing concerning it: yet thus much the matter it self does plainly show, that
whether some private Church be understood in that place by the name of Babylon,
or the greater part of the whole, it was before this a true Church, with which
the religious might religiously communicate: but after it was more depraved,
the religious are commanded to go out, and to break off communion. Whereby it
may be easily understood, that not all communion with those that be called
Christians is to be desired of the faithful, but that only which may stand
with the integrity of doctrine revealed from heaven. Now, to come nearer to
the purpose, his Majesty denies those places of S. Augustine to belong at all
to him. For he affirms that all those testimonies do euince this only; that
there remains no token of salvation for them which depart from the faith of
the Catholic Church, or from communion with the same Church. Which thing (as I
said before) the King willingly grants. But here his Majesty desires of you
(most illustrious Cardinal) that you would call to mind, and perpend, what
great difference there is betwixt the times of S. Augustine, and these of ours.
How much the Church now called Catholic differs from the ancient; how the face
of the Church is changed, and the outward form, to say nothing of the inward.
For then the Church Catholic was like a city seated upon an hill, which, as
Christ says, cannot be hid, known to all, conspicuous Matthew. 5. 14
and certain, whereof no sound mind could make question. Which was not (as
the foolish Donatists prated) lying I know not where, in the South, driven into
some corner of the world, but diffused far and wide through the whole earth
flourishing under the Emperors, whose dominion extended from the East to the
West, and from North to South. You might see the Bishops of the East and West
daily communicating, and when need required assisting one another. For that
which is written in the Constitutions of Clement, that the Catholic Church is
the (...).
charge of all the Bishops, and by that means that every one is an
Oecumenicall Bishop, we wonder now when we read it, neither can we believe
it, which then daily practice did show to be most true, and may easily be
demonstrated out of history, by infinite examples. There were then also in
frequent use literae formate, that is, demissatie or testimonial letters; by
commerce whereof, and as it were by tokens, communion was held amongst the
members of the Church, although far removed by distance of place.
Furthermore, when it stood in need, they had Councels truly Occumenicall, not,
as since we have seen; Occumenicall in name only, but indeed assembled out of
some Provinces of Europe. And in those ancient times this was the fastest bond,
whereby all the members of the Catholic Church were knit together in the
ioynture of one body; which body was for that cause very eminent,
conspicuous, and in the fair view of all, which no man could choose but know.
There was one faith, one state, one body Catholic, frequent mutual
visitation, wonderful consent of all the members, a wonderful sympathy. Was
any man lapsed by heresy, or schism from the communion of any one Church: I
speak not of any one of the chief, which were the seats of the four
Patriarchs: but of any one much smaller? that man as soon as it was known,
was held to be excluded from the communion of the whole Catholic Church. For
whereas we meet with some examples observed to the contrary, that was not
right, but usurpation. Was any man bold to corrupt the truth a little, by being
of another opinion? it was easy even for a child to deprehend (...)
him. Wherefore such a steale-truth being once discovered, all the shepherds
of the whole world, if need was, were raised, and were never quiet until they
had rooted out this evil, and provided for the security of Christ's sheep. By
these signs and marks the Church at that time was conspicuous: but this
happiness continued not many ages. For, after that the Empire was ouerturned,
and the form of the Commonwealth altered, there sprung up many new states,
differing as well in manners and language, as in ordinances, and laws. Then
upon the distraction of the Empire followed the distraction of the Catholic
Church: and by little and little all those things ceased, which had been before
of singular use for the preservation of union and communion in the outward
Catholic body of the Church. From that time the Catholic Church has not
ceased to be, for it shall continue ever, neither shall the gates of hell at
any time prevail against it, seeing it is founded upon Christ the true rock,
and upon the faith of Peter and the rest of the Apostles; but it began to be
less manifest, being divided into many parts, which, as touching external
communion, were quite separated from one another. Then (which is chiefly to be
lamented) it came to pass by this dissipation, that there was less strength
in the parts, then before in the whole body to resist the enemy of mankind,
who is ready at al times, as our Savior teaches, to scatter tares amongst
the good seed. And considering, in these times we see with our eyes that this
is come to pass, and it is so gross that we may almost grope it with our
hands, it is ridiculous, and most absurd to dispute whether this thing could
heretofore happen, or has now happened. Therefore the Church of Rome, the
Greek Church, the Church of Antioch, and of Egypt, the Abyssine, the
Moschouite and many others, are members much excelling each other in sincerity
of doctrine, and faith: yet all members of the Catholic Church, whose
ioynture, in regard of the outward form was long since broken. For which cause
his Majesty does much wonder, when he considers how some Churches, which
heretofore were but members of the body once entire, do now ingrosse all the
right of the whole, and appropriate to themselves the name of Catholic:
excluding from their communion, and affirming boldly, that they belong not to
the Catholic Church, whosoever do dissent from them in anything, or refuse
the yoke of their bondage. Neither do you only challenge to your selves this
right: there are others that do the same. For, (his Majesty speaks it with
grief) there are at this day many private Churches, which believe that they
only are the people peculiar, which they call the Church. Give (...).
them that strength which the Church of Rome has, and they shall do the same
with her, and pronounce of all others as hardly as she does. What shall we
say? are there not sundry sects now adays, which are certainly persuaded that
they only have insight into the Scriptures, and, (as the Poet says) that they
only are wise, that all others walk (...).

(...)


like shadows? It is true, indeed, that in every age there were conuenticles
of sectaries, and dissemblies, which did boast themselves of the Catholic
Church, and by this provocation did allure many unto them: but it is the
peculiar and famous calamity of these latter times, that the Catholic Church,
unto which of necessity a man must adhere, either really, and actually, or at
the least in will, and vow, is become less manifest then it was of old, less
exposed to the eyes of men, more questionable and doubtful. For (...).
which cause his excellent Majesty thinks that he ought more carefully in
such a deluge of variable opinions to betake himself to the mountains of the
sacred Scripture: and as S. Augustine gave counsel to the Donatists to seek
the Church of Christ in the words of Christ. And so S. Chrysostom, both
elsewhere, and of purpose in his 33. Homily upon the Acts of the Apostles,
handling the question, How the true Church might be discerned amongst many
Societies which challenge to themselves that name: teaches that there be two
means of deciding that question: first, the word of God, and secondly,
antiquity of doctrine, not invented by any new author, but always known from
the birth, and beginning of the Church. These two trials the King, and (...).
Church of England embracing, do avouch that they acknowledge that doctrine
only for true, and necessary to salvation, which flowing from the fountain
of sacred Scripture, through the consent of the ancient Church, as it were a
conduit has been derived unto these times. Wherefore to make an end of this
observation, his Majesty answers, that it is faulty many ways, and cannot
stand with the hypothesis propounded. Because (says he) the Church of England
is so far from forsaking the ancient Catholic Church, which she does
reverence, and admire: that she departs not from the faith of the Church of
Rome, in any point wherein that Church agrees with the ancient Catholic. If
you question the succession of persons, behold the names of our Bishops, and
their continuance from the first without any interruption: if the succession of
doctrine, come, make trial: let us have a free Council which may not depend
upon the will of one. The Church of England is ready to render an account of
her faith, and by demonstration to euince, that the authors of the reformation
here, had no purpose to erect any new Church, (as the ignorant and malicious
do cavil) but to repair the ruins of the old, according to the best form:
and in their judgment that is best which was delivered by the Apostles to the
Primitive Church, and has continued in the ages next ensuing. His Majesty
grants, that his Church has departed from many points of that doctrine, and
discipline which the Pope of Rome now stiffly defends: but they do not think
this to be a reuolting from the Catholic Church, but rather a returning to the
ancient Catholic faith, which in the Roman Church by new devices has been
manifoldly, and strangely deformed; and so a conversion to Christ the sole
Master of his Church. Wherefore if any man grounding upon the doctrine of this
observation, will infer from it, that the Church of England, because it
reiects some ordinances of the Roman, has therefore departed from the ancient
Catholic Church: his Majesty will not grant him this, until he prove by
sound reasons, that all things taught by them of Rome, especially those which
they will have to be believed as necessary to salvation, were allowed of from
the beginning, and established by the ancient Catholic Church. Now, that no
man can ever do this, at least never yet has done it, his Majesty, and the
reverend Bishops of the English Church, do hold it to be as clear as when the
Sun shines at midday. Lastly, his Majesty thinks it a great offense to
forsake the Church, but he utterly denies that he, or his Church are guilty
of this crime. For, says his Majesty, we depart not voluntarily, but we are
driven away. And your Non fugimus, sed fugamur.
Honor well knows how many, and how excellently learned and godly men, for
these five hundred years at the least, have wished the reformation of the
Church, both in the head, and members. What grievous complaints have been often
heard of worthy Kings and Princes, lamenting the estate of the Church in their
times? But what auailed it? for unto this day we see not any one thing amended
of all those which were thought most needful of reformation. Wherefore the
Church of England in this separation fears not any fellowship with the
Donatists, if the matter be debated by ingenuous men. They willingly and
without cause left the Catholic Church, which at that time the consent of all
nations did approve, whose doctrine or discipline they could not blame: but
England being enforced by great necessity, separated her self from that
Church, which innumerable Christian people did not grant to be the true
Catholic, and universal Church: nay more, which many of your own writers
have heretofore ingenuously confessed to have varied much from the ancient
Church in matters of faith, and discipline; to have patched many new things to
the old, and evil to the good: which indeed, is now better known to the
universal world, then that any man can deny, or be ignorant of it.
Furthermore, the Church of England for some ages past had felt the yoke of the
Roman servitude so cruel, being afflicted with their often new vexations, and
incredible exactions, that if there were no other cause, yet that alone might
suffice before equal judges to free them from the suspicion of schism, and as
S. Augustine speaks of the Donatists, iniquae discissionis, of an unjust rent,
or distraction from the Church. For the English did not depart from brotherly
charity upon a humor, as the Donatists did, nor, as the ten tribes of the
Jews, for fear of imminent evil: but after the patience of many ages, after
unspeakable miseries, at length they withdrew their necks, and shaked off the
intolerable burden, which neither were they able longer, nor would their
conscience suffer them to bear. Besides this, the ancient Church, to the end
that she might draw the refractarie Donatists to communion, was wont with
admirable charity to provide for the temporal commodities of the Bishops, and
others that were reconciled: but the Church of Rome (being desirous of amity
with England) what does she? first, thunders out her Bulls, then uses violence,
open, and secret: then receives into her bosom, and still cherishes
detestable traitors, evidently condemned of plotting the desolation of their
Country: lastly, numbreth amongst Martyrs those which suffered for the same
crimes, and daily defends their innocence against all laws both divine and
humane. Cardinal Bellarmine (...).
himself (I am loath to speak, but I speak the truth) is become a principal
patron of these parricides: who of late also (that he might draw on his
Majesty) has used this argument of wondrous efficacy to persuade; that the
kingdom of England belongs to the Pope, and that his Majesty of England
even in temporalties is his subject, and holds his kingdom of him. I omit
other grieuances of the King and Church of England both ancient and modern,
which are not to be rehearsed in this place.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
BEsides those that are necessary to salvation, there are two kind of things,
which the ancient Church believed: whereof one is, things profitable to
salvation, the other, things lawful, and not repugnant to the same. Therefore
if a man will embrace the faith of the ancients, he must also embrace those
things, and esteem them as the ancient Church did.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
THose things which were held by the holy Fathers, as not absolutely necessary
to salvation; but only profitable, or lawful, they ought to be esteemed little
more then indifferent. For the use of them being as things not simply
necessary, in the beginning was free. In such things therefore to devise any
necessity at all, it seems unjust: for by and by there will follow a
necessity of using them: as we fee it is come to pass in the Church of Rome:
which observes at this day many things as simply necessary to the integrity
of faith, which the ancient Church scarce knew, much less used as matters of
necessity. I will allege four examples of many. It is manifest that in the
primitive Church confession of sins was used, but far otherways then now.
For, that auricular confession in that manner which you have it was in use in
the primitive ages, I think, no man will affirm. His Majesty grants that the
Fathers which did first ordain it, had their reasons why they thought that
such manner of confession would further the easier attaining unto salvation:
but they held it not for a thing necessary absolutely, much less for a
Sacrament: or at least not all the Fathers thought so. For as touching S.
Chrysostom, it is plain that he required not of his people auricular
confession. But the matter is now come to that pass, that there is little
less attributed to this confession, then to the precious blood of Christ,
whereby we are redeemed: the absolute necessity thereof is so precisely
urged. Whence by little grew up that doctrine in the Church of Rome, of not
disclosing the secret of confession upon any occasion soever. For, because they
believed that it was impossible without this confession to attain unto the
haven of salvation, therefore they thought it necessary to remove all
impediments that might hinder it. Wherefore in time this doctrine has
proceeded so far, that now to murder Kings, or suffer them to be murdered,
seems to be no sin, in comparison of breaking the seal of confession: which
many of your Divines, especially the expounders of the Canon Law have in their
books published. Moreover, Binetus a Jesuit, did avouch as much to me at
Paris, in the same terms, which I remember yt I told you afterward. We know
also, neither perhaps is your Honor ignorant of it, yt there is another Jesuit
in France, which of late was bold to say, That if our Lord Jesus Christ were
living upon the earth, subject to death, and some man had told him in
confession, that he would kill him, notwithstanding, rather then he would
reveal that confession, he would suffer (I tremble to speak it) Christ Jesus
himself to be murdered. Which horrible blasphemy you see whence it took the
original. In like manner, abstinence from wine, and dainty cheer, set times
of fasting, xerophagiae, or, eating dry meats, the ancient Church reckoned
amongst such things as were profitable to the easier obtaining of salvation:
neither does his Majesty deny it, giving a convenient interpretation
according to the intention of the primitive Church: but, by your leave, he
likes not that the observation of these things should be more strictly
required, then of such as are expressly contained in holy Writ. Again, single
life in the Ministers of the Church, was in old time commended, but now it is
commanded, and exacted as a matter of absolute necessity: whereof you shall
hear more hereafter. So, whereas S. Paul says, that he does afflict his
body, and make it serviceable, his Majesty 1. Cor. 9. 27
honors, and calls them blessed that follow this example of the divine
Apostle: but he detesteth those which reckon sackcloth, and Lacedemonian
whippings, and such vexations Laconicas (...).
of body, or, as they call them, satisfactions, amongst the causes of
salvation: or at least so highly prize them, that they make account of
slouenrie, and whatsoever nastines, as of sanctimonial perfection. But of al
such his Majesty does especially abhor them, which after the manner of the
priests of Baal, rending their bodies with scourges, would make us imagine God
to be desirous, and thirsty for man's blood, like Bollona the Pagan Goddess.
Only, he commends their wisdom, which hiring others to be whipped for them,
do purchase the merit of those punishments which they have suffered. So, it
comes to pass, that the rich offend, and the poor are punished: that
penalty pursues not the guiloie, but him that is in poverty and want.
Wherefore, his Majesty, as he thinks it unlawful to condemn those things
which the Fathers of the first age by unanimity of consent did hold for things
expedient, or lawful: so he cannot endure to be bound with any peremptory
necessity of using the same. For he holds Necessary and Indifferent to be
of a contrary nature. But of these more largely in the Observation following.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
SEeing in the matter of religion there is more then one kind of necessity,
we must take heed when we speak of things necessary to salvation, that we be
not deceined with the ambiguitie of the term. For there is necessity
absolute, and upon condition: a necessity of the mean, and of the precept.
There is also a necessity of believing, which binds all Christians without
exception and another which does not generally bind all. Lastly, there is a
necessity of action, and a necessity of approbation.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
THe doctrine in this Observation, wherein the diverse kinds of necessity are
learnedly, and very accurately declared, his excellent Majesty is so far
from disliking, that on the contrary, he thinks, if these distinctions be
taken away, a manifold confusion would follow in matters of religion. For what
can be thought more dangerous then that things absolutely necessary should be
held as necessary only upon condition, or contrariwise? and that other
distinction which serves for the right, and orderly disposition of all things
in the house of God, is no less profitable. Likewise, in your examples, his
Majesty observes nothing greatly to be disallowed. But in your explication of
things absolutely necessary, he commends the truth of that speech: that
there is no great number of those things which be absolutely necessary to
salvation. Wherefore his Majesty thinks that there is no more compendious
way to the making of peace, then that things necessary should be diligently
separated from things not necessary: that all endeavors might be spent about
the agreement in the necessary, and as touching the not necessary, that a
Christian liberty might be granted. Simply necessary, his Majesty calls
those things, which the word of God expressly charge to be believed, or
practiced: or which the ancient Church by necessary consequence, has drawn
out of the word of God. But such things, which out of the institution of men,
although with a religious, and wise intent, yet besides the word of God, were
received, and used of the Church for a time, those he thinks may be changed;
or relaxed, or abolished. And as Pope Pius the second said of the single life
of the Clergy, that there was good right in times past to ordain it, but now
there is better to disanull it: his Majesty thinks that the same speech may
be used in general of the most Ecclesiastical observations, which are brought
into the Church without any precept of Gods word. If this distinction were used
for the deciding of the controversies of these times, and if men would
ingenuously make a difference betwixt divine, and positive law, it seems that
amongst godly and moderate men, touching things absolutely necessary, there
would be no long, or bitter contention. For both (as I said even now) they are
not many, and they are almost equally allowed of by all which challenge the
name of Christian. And his excellent Majesty does hold this distinction to be
of such moment for the diminishing of controversies, which, at this time do so
vex the Church of God, that he judges it the duty of all such as be
studious of peace, diligently to explane it, to teach it, to urge it. Now will
we address our selves to speak of some examples which are proposed in this
Observation. Amongst the things absolutely necessary, yet not simply, but in
respect of divine institution, you reckon the baptism of infants, which we
(say you) do refer unto this kind of necessity. Afterward you bring a
place out of S. Augustine, wherein the possibility of salvation of children
not baptized is precisely denied. Here, first, his Majesty professes that
himself and the Church of England do allow the necessity of baptism, in
respect of divine institution, as well as you. The Church of England does not
bind the grace of God to the means, which is contrary even to the doctrine
of the better sort of schoolmen: yet because God has appointed this for the
ordinary way to obtain remission of sins in his Church, and Christ himself
denies the entrance into the kingdom of heaven to those which are Job. 3. 5.
not borne again of water and the Spirit: therefore it is carefully provided
here by the Ecclesiastical laws, that parents may have baptism for their
children at any time, or place. Wherefore, that which Tertullian says of the
primitive Church, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons did baptize: and lastly,
that the same was lawful for lay men also in case of extreme necessity; the
same, as concerning Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, is at this day practiced in
the Church of England, without any rigid or inviolable observation of
whatsoever time or place. But for the baptism of lay men or women, as by the
laws of the Church it is forbidden to be done; so being done according to the
lawful form, in a manner it is not disallowed, the Church pronouncing it to
be baptism, although not lawfully administered. But his excellent Majesty does
so highly esteem of this Sacrament, that when some Ministers in Scotland,
pretending I know not what ordinances of new discipline, refused, upon the
desire of the parents, to baptize infants ready to die, he compelled them to
this duty with fear of punishment, threatening no less then death if they
disobeyed. Wherefore the words of S. Augustine, which do precisely exclude the
not baptized from eternal life, if they be understood of the ordinary way
thither, and the only way that Christ has taught us, his Majesty has nothing
to object against that opinion: but if it be simply denied that almighty God
can save those which die unbaptized, (...).
his Majesty, and the Church of England abhorring the cruelty of that
opinion, do affirm that S. Augustine was an unnatural and hard father unto
infants. Undoubtedly (...).
his Majesty thinks, that both these extremes are with the like care to be
eschewed: lest if we embrace this rigid sentence, we abbreuiate the power of
God, and offer wrong to his infinite goodness: or, whilst, as some do, we
reckon baptism amongst such things, the having, or forgoing whereof is not
much material, we should seem to make light of so precious a Sacrament and
holy ordinance of God. S. Augustine was a worthy man, of admirable piety, and
learning, yet his private opinions his Majesty allows not as articles of
faith, neither do you allow them; for example, Saint Augustine believed, as
did Innocentius the first before him, that the receiving of the blessed
Eucharist by infants was no less necessary to their salvation then baptism,
and this he avouches in many places of his writings: yet you believe it not,
neither has the Church of England changed this point of doctrine which she
received from you. Amongst those things which impose necessity of action upon
some persons, you number marriage. Siquis sobolem tollere voluerit: If any man
say you desire to have issue. Again, soon after, when you declare the
necessity of approbation, you reckon the choice of living in virginity or
single life: which things when his Majesty read, he disallowed them not, yet
he thought that unto both examples, something might conveniently be added: for
upon the former it seems to follow, that there is no other necessary cause of
marriage, save hope of issue. But the Apostle S. Paul does teach us in express
terms, that they also are bound to provide for marriage which want the gift of
continence. If they contain not, says he, let them marry. This 1. Cor. 7. 9.
addition is of no small moment. For who knows not what occasion is daily
ministered in the Church of Rome, of many and horrible crimes, through the
contempt of this Apostolic rule, through the neglect of this necessary
remedy? Wherefore in continent persons his Majesty exceedingly commenceth the
living in the estate of virginity, or single life: and being by the singular
mercy of God more familiarly acquainted with the sacred Scripture, then most
Princes are, be knows S. Paul's sentence of the whole matter, and the
examples extant in both Testaments, and the rewards proposed to them that
contain. But whereas your Diuices do commonly teach, especially the Doctors of
the Canon Law, that fornication, whoredom, (...).
and other foul sins not to be named, are more tolerable in Ministers of
the Church, then lawful marriage, and the bed undefiled: that his Majesty
accounts a most detestable crime, and most worthy of the hatred of God, and
men. His Majesty opposes against all the cauils of Sophisters, yea against
all humane authority whatsoever, that oracle, of the holy Spirit, pronounced
by the mouth of the Apostle; It is better to marry then to burn. For as a
wise Captain ought to be more afraid of receiving overthrow, or loss to
himself, then of weakening his enemy: so in the election of a man's life,
whether he would lead it married, or single, his Majesty thinks that godly men
ought in the first place to decline the transgression of Gods law, and then on
Gods name, if any man have the power, let him use that benefit of nature. It is
a thredbare cavil, that England is not a lawful Church, because here wants
the practice of such vows. But what can the want of vow hinder, as long as we
are not destitute of that which is vowed? For here are many Bishops, and other
Pastors of the Church, who without ostentation of vow do abstain from marriage,
and yet lead their lives chastely, and saintly, without any taint of common
sinister report. Moreover, for the Monasteries themselves, his Majesty (as he
is most earnestly affected unto piety and goodness) would not have dissolved
them, or not all of them, (as I have heard him often protest) if he had found
them uncorrupted, and observing the Canons of their first institution. But his
excellent Majesty often wishes that the Tridentine Fathers, which could not
be drawn by the entreaties of great Kings and Princes to provide for public
honesty on this behalf, would consider with themselves, from what fountain
this doctrine did flow. For whereas at the first, single life was placed
amongst profitable orders, and counsels: afterward vows were annexed, at
length men came to this absolute necessity, which now reigns amongst you,
the law of God being abandoned, and most vilely disgraced. Now whereas in the
end of this observation it is added, that they which allow of some, and reject
other of those things which the ancient Church believed as necessary to
salvation, although under diverse kinds of necessity, have no reason to
affirm that they retain the same faith and discipline with the ancient
Catholic Church; his Majesty well enough perceives the drift of that speech.
He answers therefore, that he will not extol his own Church, by comparing it
to a glass without spot, or to a face perfectly fair without wrinkle, or
blemish: he leaves such Pharasaisme to others. Yet that this he knows
evidently, that if question be made concerning the essential marks of the
Church, or if you look at those things which are plainly necessary to
salvation, or respect order, and decency in the Church; you shall not find a
Church in the whole world (God be praised for it) more approaching to the faith,
and fashion of the ancient Catholic. His Majesty excepts none, no not the
Church of Rome: which by new inventions devised for increase of superstition,
and for the establishing of her dominion over Princes, and people, has
manifestly turned, and changed the faith, and discipline of the ancient
Catholic, and swarued infinitely in many things from the purity and
simplicity of the primitive Church.

THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
WHen question is made touching the faith of the ancient Church, there be same,
which do limit antiquity within one, or two ages after the Church was
founded: but it stands with equity for examination of the controversies of
these days to insist upon that time, wherein al parties grant that the Church
was not only a true Church, but then also most flourishing, and possessed of
that glory and brightness, which the oracles of so many Prophets had promised.
And that is the time wherein the four first general Councels are included,
from Constantine the Emperor unto Marcion. And there is the more equity in
this, because there be so few monuments extant of the former ages, but very
many of this time wherein the Church flourished. So that the faith, and
discipline of the ancient Catholic may easily be known out of the writings of
the Fathers of that age.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
THis condition will seem unreasonable to them which would have the universal
history of the primitive Church, concluded within the Acts of the Apostles,
which is but one little, though most sacred and divine book. The most equal
and prudent King is far from this opinion: who in his Monitorie Epistle has
ingenuously declared how highly he esteems of the Fathers, which lived in the
fourth, and fifth age. Neither does his Majesty doubt to pronounce with S.
August* that look what the Church has duly observed from her first original
unto those times, and for any man to offer to reject that as impious, it is a
point of most insolent madness. For his Majesty heretofore has unfeignedly
protested, that he approoueth of those marks of truth given by Vincentius
Lirinensis: a principio, vbique and semper: that is, from the beginning, every
where, and ever. Wherefore, the King, and the Church of England, in that they
admit of the four first general Councels, therein they sufficiently declare
that they conclude not the time of the true, and lawful Church within the
compass of one, or two ages: but that they extend it much further, comprising
the time of Marcion the Emperor, under whom the Council of Chalcedon was kept.
But whereas in this observation you more esteem the times after Constantine,
then the times going before, that his Majesty thinks somewhat strange, and
indeed does not allow it. He grants that the Church of the fourth age
flourished above the former in external glory, and splendure, in wealth, and
plenty of learned men: but that the Church of the former ages was equal with
it, or excelled as touching the orthodoxall rightnesse of faith, and sincerity
of incorrupt discipline, he is persuaded that none can make any doubt. We find
every where in the holy Fathers of the fourth age, Basil, Nazianzen, Jerome,
Chrysostom, Augustine, and others, most grievous complaints of the faults and
sundry deprauations of their Churches. Neither can it be doubted, that the
further men lived from the first original, the further also they departed from
the original purity, and sincerity. Wherefore when there is a serious
purpose to cleanse, and to sweep the house of God, why should not an especial
regard be had to the time of the Apostles, or the times near the time of the
Apostles? It is true indeed, that for the greatest part of that time the godly
Christians did live in obscurity, in poverty, and misery, by reason of
perpetual persecution: yet consider well, if in this sense also it be not
better to go into the house of mourning, then into the house of mirth.
Poverty and misery are called the sisters of good mind: riches, and Eccl. 7.
3.
glory have not that honorable report. And although many of the writers of
those times be lost, yet some are extant, and those worthy of regard. S.
Cyprian, that holy Martyr of Christ, he alone, if there were none else, can
better inform us in the government and discipline of the primitive Church,
then many others which lived in the fourth age. Wherefore the sum of his
Majesty's answer unto this observation, is: that he is well content there
should be arguments brought out of the writings of the Fathers of the fourth,
and fifth ages; but with this caution, and condition, that those things be
allowed for ancient and necessary to salvation, which had not their beginning
then, but which may be clearly proved to have been continually observed from
the first original of the Church until those times.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
WHen there is question made about the unanimity, and consent of Fathers, some
will have it then to be manifest, when the matter controuerted is found in all
the Fathers in express terms: whose opinion being manifestly unjust, it is
more equity for knowledge of consent of Fathers, that these two rules be used.
First, that the consent of Fathers should then be thought to be sufficiently
proved, when the worthiest of every nation do consent in the auerring of any
thing, and that no man accounted orthodoxall does oppose them. So S. Augustine
when he had praised eleven of the principal writers of former times; and the
Fathers of the Ephesine Council, when they had brought out ten against
Nestorius, they all thought that they had given sufficient testimony
concerning the consent of the ancient Church. The second rule is this: When the
Fathers do not speak as Doctors, nor say that this, or that is thus to be
done, or thus to be believed: but when as witnesses of those things which the
universal Church of their times believed or practiced, they affirm this to be
the faith or practice of that Catholic Church through the whole world: then
they are so much to be honored, that such an affirmation must be held
sufficient to prove the unanimity, and consent of the Church.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
IT is an equal demand, that the parties which contend in these times should
consent and agree, how they may use profitably the authority of the ancient
Fathers. For if the testimony and authority of the primitive Church be taken
away, his Majesty freely confesses, that on man's (...).
part, the controversies of these times can never have an end, nor by any
disputation be determined. Wherefore that it may be agreed upon what and how
much is to be attributed to the Fathers, and how far their authority is to
take place, it will not be amiss that certain rules be composed by the
mutual consent of the parties, prescribing the manner hereof. Amongst many
other profitable and necessary rules for this purpose, his Majesty thinks
that these two which you have noted, may have their place. But because the
controversies of these days are not about ceremonies, and other matters of
lighter moment, but about some articles of faith, and opinions appertaining to
salvation: therefore his judgment is that above all there be a general
agreement upon this rule, that opinions concerning matters of faith, and
whatsoever should be believed as necessary to salvation, ought to be taken
out of the sacred Scripture alone, neither must they depend upon the authority
of any mortal man, but upon the word of God only, wherein he has declared
his will unto us by his holy Spirit. Because the Fathers, and the ancient
Church had authority of deducting articles out of the sacred Scriptures, and
explaning, but of coining new articles of their own they had no authority.
This foundation being laid, both, the majesty of the Scriptures inspired by
God shall remain (...).
inuiolated, and that reverence shall be given to the holy Fathers which is
due. That this was the mind of all the Doctors of the ancient Church, it may
be easily demonstrated out of their own writings. For what words more frequent
in their works then these? That the doctrine which is taught in the Church of
God, ought to be taken out of the (...).

(...).


word of God. And these: For controversies in matters of religion let the
Scripture be judge. Or who knows not the golden words of S. Basil the Great,
in his book De Fide? It is a manifest fall from faith, and argument of
presumption to reject any thing of the written word, or to bring in any thing
which is not written, seeing it is the speech of our Lord Jesus Christ, My
sheep hear my voice. And thus much be spoken concerning the observations
proposed.

Now follow the four instances. For your illustrious honor (...).
being come to the hypothesis, to the end that you might euince that his
excellent Majesty does not believe those things which the Catholic Church did
anciently believe, you go about to demonstrate it by four arguments, drawn
from such things as concern the outward worship of God, or the liturgy and
matters of daily practice in religion: and afterward you give this reason, why
especially you bring these instances, because if there were agreement
concerning these, the rest would be easily agreed upon. His excellent Majesty
(most illustrious Cardinal) could wish that this might be hoped for: but
considering with himself what it is which at this day is urged by your writers
with chief care, and eager contention: there appears no great hope of peace,
no not if there were agreement about these four heads which you have proposed.
For now adays, there is as eager contention about the Empire of the Bishop of
Rome, as for these or any other points of Christian religion. This alone is now
made the article of faith whereon all the rest do depend. Wherefore what hope
remains but in the goodness, and mercy of God, to whom only it belongs of
right to cure the maladies of his Church? in him let us hope, though against
hope, he will effect it. To return to the purpose, the Instances (...).
which you bring against the Liturgy of the English Church, they be these.

1. They believe not the real presence of Christ in the sacred Eucharist. 2.
They reject the doctrine of the sacrifice of the Christian Church. 3. They pray
not for the dead. 4. They condemn the invocation of Saints which are in
heaven.
Unto these four his Majesty answers in few words.

To the first Instance concerning real presence.
IF in the sacred mysteries of Christian religion, the faithful should be
thought to believe nothing but that, which they perfitly understand according
to the manner, then surely they would be found to be unbelieving in many
things, which now they doubt not but that they do most firmly believe. That
Christ our Lord is the Son of God the Father, begotten of the Father before
all worlds: that the same Christ being very God, did assume humane flesh in the
womb of the blessed Virgin: that he was borne of her without any violation of
the virginity of this mother: that the divine nature is united in the same
person with the humane: these things, I say, and the like, all Christians do
make profession to believe: of whom notwithstanding if you demand the manner
how they are done, they will answer that faith in matters of Theology is one
thing, and humane science is another: and they will religiously allege Galen,
who otherways is no good Master of religion: whose excellent words in his 15.
book De vsu partium, are these: How this was done, if you enquire, you will be
taken for one that has no understanding neither of your own infirmity, nor
of the power of the Creator. And as for the Fathers, (...).
how often they dehort us from this question of the manner, and from curiosity
of explaning the manner in divine (...).
mysteries, I should be too long if I should go about to rehearse. You know
the words of Gregory Nazianzene in his first oration, De Theologia: You hear
the generation of the Son, be not curious to know the manner. You hear that
(...).
the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, be not busy to enquire how: and
the same author in another place: Let the generation of God be honored with
silence: it is much for thee to have learned that he was begotten, as for the
manner how, we grant it not to be understood by the Angels, much less by
thee. Gregory had to deal with the Arrians, those perverse heretics, whose
impious curiosity he goes not about to satisfy with subtlety of
disputation, but forbids them to search into the manner of so great a
mystery, and enioyneth them silence. Now if his Majesty, and the Church of
England do use this godly moderation about the mystery of the sacred
Eucharist, I pray you who ought to envy it? We read in the Gospels that our
Lord instituting this Sacrament, took the bread, and said, This is my body:
but that our Lord did so much as by one word explane how it was his body, we
do not read. The Church of England does religiously believe that which she
reads, and with the same religion she is not inquisitiue into that which she
reads not. They acknowledge, and teach that this is a great mystery which
cannot be comprehended, much less declared by the faculty of man's wit: but
concerning the power and efficacy of it, their opinion is with all sacred
reverence. They command those which come unto this holy table diligently to
search all the secret corners of their consciences: to make confession of their
sins unto God, and if need be to the Priest also. They carefully warn the
comers that they compose their minds unto all humility, and devotion: they
receive the Communion of the body of Christ upon their knees: and they do not
only divide the mystical bread amongst the faithful in their public
assemblies, but they give it also to those which be toward death, pro viatico;
that is, for victuals in their journey, as the Fathers of the Nicene Council,
and all antiquity do call it. Lastly, his Majesty, although he would have
his to abstain from all manner of curiosity, yet allows also of whatsoever
the holy Fathers of the first ages have spoken in the honor of that
unspeakable mystery. Neither does he reject the words of the Fathers, as
transmutation, alteration, transelementation, and such like, if they be
understood (...).
and expounded agreeably to their intention. If this doctrine of his Majesty,
and the Church of England do not give you satisfaction, then what remains but
that he yield unto the opinion of Transubstantiation, if he will be friends
with you? But that is not piously to believe the verity of the thing, but with
importunate curiosity to decree the manner thereof: which the King and his
Church will never do, will never allow. But his excellent Majesty wondreth,
that whereas your Honor grants that you require not primarily the believing
of Transubstantiation, but that there be no doubt of the truth of the presence,
(...).
yet the Church of England has not satisfied you in this point, which in
public writings has so often avouched her belief hereof. Wherefore that you
may certainly know what is believed, and what is taught in this Church
concerning that matter, I have here set down a whole place out of the right
reverend the Lord Bishop of Ely his book against Cardinal Bellarmine, which
some few months ago he published. Thus he says in the first chapter: Our
Savior Christ said, this is my body, not, after this manner is my body:
whereof the Cardinal is not ignorant unless willingly, and wittingly. We
agree with you concerning the object, all the strife is about the manner.
Concerning this is, we believe firmly that it is: concerning after this
manner it is, to wit, that the bread is transubstantiate into his body, after
what manner it is done, whether by, or in, or under, or beyond, there is not a
word in the Gospel: and because there is no word; therefore we have reason to
banish it from belief. We number it per adventure amongst the decrees of the
school, but not amongst the articles of faith. That which Durandus is reported
to have said, does not dislike us: we hear the word, we perceive the sound, we
know not the manner: we believe the presence, we believe, I say, the true
presence as well as you: concerning the manner of the presence we do not
unadvisedly define. Nay more, we do not scrupulouslie enquire: No more then we
do in Baptism how the blood of Christ cleanses us: no more then we do in the
incarnation of Christ how the divine nature is united in one person with the
humane. We reckon it amongst the mysteries (and indeed the Eucharist is a
mystery) the remainders whereof should be consumed with fire: That is, (as the
fathers do elegantly understand it) which should be adored by faith, not
debated by reason. This is the says of the King, this is the faith of the
Church of England. Who (that I may summarily comprise the whole matter) do
believe that in the Supper of the Lord they are made really partakers of the
body and blood of Christ, (as the Greek Fathers speak, and as Bellarmine
himself confesses) spiritually. For by faith they apprehend, and eat Christ:
and they belecue that there is no other kind of eating profitable to salvation,
which all your men also have confessed.

To the second Instance concerning the sacrifice in the Christian Church.
HIs Majesty is not ignorant, neither does he deny, that in place of the
manifold sacrifices of the Mosaicall law, the ancient Fathers did acknowledge
one sacrifice in the Christian religion. But this he avouches to be nothing
else but the commemoration of that sacrifice which Christ did once offer to his
Father upon the cross. Therefore S. Chrysostom, which makes mention of this
sacrifice as often as any, upon the ninth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
after he has called it a sacrifice, straightwaies adioyneth by way of
explication, or correction, or rather commemoration of that sacrifice. That
term, or rather, what (...).
force it has you know very well. And often has the Church of England
protested, that they would not contend about the word, so they might obtain of
you to have the ancient says restored. And that these things which you
practice contrary to the custom of the ancient Church, might be abolished.
For it is certain that the celebration of the Eucharist without any
communicants, and all that merchandise of private Masses, condemned by many of
your own Divines, took their original from the perverse doctrine concerning
this sacrifice. And whereas for the delivering of the souls of the deceased
from the flames of Purgatory, the necessity of many Masses is urged, his
Majesty doubts not, but that this is a dotage of idle brains, and such as
for their own gain do wickedly abuse the simplicity of the people. Remove
those, and the like gross and soul abuses which reign amongst you, and the
Church of England, which in her Liturgy makes express mention of a
sacrifice, can be well content to rest in the custom of the ancient Church.
Wherefore his excellent Majesty being lately informed that not long ago, at a
famous assembly of Dominican Friars, you disputed learnedly concerning a
double sacrifice, of Expiation and of Commemoration, or religion, has
affirmed, in the hearing of many, that he approved that distinction, and
commands me now to signify so much unto you.

To the third Instance of prayer for the dead.
THat it was a very ancient custom in the public prayers of the Church to
make commemoration of the deceased, and to desire of God rest for their souls,
which died in the peace of the Church, few are ignorant, much less is it
unknown unto his Majesty. Neither is there any doubt but that this custom
sprung from a vehement affection of charity. Likewise the ancient Church
hereby gave testimony of the resurrection to come. This custom, although the
Church of England condemns not in the first ages, yet she thinks not good
to retain it now for diverse and weighty causes, some whereof I will touch
here. First, because she is verily persuaded that without any precept of
Christ, the supreme Lawgiuer of his Church, this custom was introducted,
neither could the contrary hitherto be demonstrated by any of your Doctors.
Wherefore, although his Majesty does not take upon him, as he has protested in
his Monitorie epistle, to condemn an ordinance which is approved by ye
practice of the ancient Church, yet he is undoubtedly persuaded that his Church
is not bound by any necessity to observe it. For whatsoever the ancient
Christian Fathers have done on this part, all that his Majesty reserreth unto
the head of things profitable, or lawful: of which we have spoken in the
second observation: neither can it be proved that this custom is to be
referred unto those things which are of absolute necessity. For whence should
this necessity spring? not from the law of God, for he never commanded it: and
if it flow not from that fountain, it is no necessity. For we have already
laid this ground, that nothing ought to be accounted necessary to salvation,
which is not either expressly contained in Gods word, or thence by necessary
consequence deducted. And we have declared, that such things as the ancient
Church believed, or practiced without necessity, the same ought now also to be
left with liberty unto us. A second reason is, that although his Majesty
acknowledges the authors of this custom to have been very ancient, yet no man
hitherto could prove, that such was the use in the beginning, and in the
Apostolic times, which is the fountain of all antiquity in the Church.
Besides that, the prayers then used do much differ both in their end, and
manner, from these which are now practiced, and taught. A third reason is added
by his Majesty, that when once prayer for the dead took place amongst Church
rites, not long after a rout of shameful errors, and doting superstitions did
band together, and break into the Church. Now let indifferent arbitratours
judge to whom the name of Catholic should be denied: whether to the King, and
his subjects, which by reason of errors ensuing have left off, or think it
not lawful to use a custom grounded upon no necessity: or to your men, which
by sophistical cauillations, and incredible obstinacy had rather maintain,
then reform all the errors of former ages, though never so gross, and
pernicious.

To the fourth Instance concerning the invocation of Saints.
COncerning the invocation of Saints, his Majesty's answer is the same with
his former touching prayers for the dead. From a small beginning (as all men
know) it grew to such greatness, that in former ages (and I wish it were not
so now in many places) Christian people have put more confidence, and hope of
present aid in Saints, then (o horrible impiety) in our Savior himself: who
being in the (...).
form of God, that he might bring salvation unto us which were his enemies,
did empty himself by taking the form of a servant, and humbled himself
being obedient unto Philip. 2. 7.
death, even the death of the cross. And when this blessed Savior, according
to his never enough admired goodness and clemency, does inuit miserable
sinners with these sweet words of his Gospel, Come unto me all you that are
Mat. 11. 28.
weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you: yet some have endeavored by
the perverseness of their wit to frustrate this gracious inuitation: and painting
Christ, who is our only Advocate to God the Father, always terrible, and
unmerciful, they would persuade poor souls that there is no way to Christ
but through the mediation of many Saints. Moreover, some others have openly
taught, that our Savior Christ has reserved the severity of justice unto
himself, but indulgence and mercy he has granted to the blessed Virgin.
Again, how have they distributed offices, and powers of healing amongst the
Saints with wonderful curiosity, or rather detestable superstition? And
heretofore their suffrages only were desired, that being gracious with God
almighty they would make intercession for men: but afterward, the world was
filled with books concerning the proper service of this, or that Saint, and
peculiar forms of prayer to be made unto them. Wherefore in place of that
divine book of the Psalter, which the ancient Christians never laid out of
their hands; which was the solace of men and women, young and old, rich and
poor, learned and unlearned, there have succeeded the Hours of our Lady, and
Legends; or rather impious, and doting fables (I speak not of the true
histories of Martyrs) and such vile stuff. And yet further, as if it were not
injury enough to rob Christians of so necessary and divine a book, one of
your men has turned all the Psalms to the honor of the blessed Virgin,
attributing unto her (as if there were no difference betwixt the creature and
the Creator) whatsoever was prophesied concerning the only Son of God. His
excellent Majesty does extol the happiness of the most glorious virgin
mother of our Lord, affirming that she is elevated unto the highest degree of
honor, which God the Creator could impart to any humane creature: he rejoices
also that the Church of England upon set days in the year does solemnize the
honored memory of that most blessed Virgin: but the Sophisters of these times
can by no cunning ever persuade him to allow, or endure that Psalter of our
Lady. For as touching Cardinal Bellarmine, which has lately defended it, his
Majesty is persuaded that he is distasted of your own, as many as have but
any small sense of piety. Considering then that the Church of Rome is almost
deadly sick of such inward diseases, his Majesty wondered (most illustrious
Cardinal) when he read in your epistle that the invocation of Saints, as your
men do now practice it, is the same which was in use in the primitive Church.
Wherefore his Majesty answers in few words: First, it cannot be proved that
in the beginning of the primitive Church, any other but the almighty God was
inuoked: secondly, that there is no precept in the word of God for it, no one
footstep of any example: God only was adored, God only was implored through
the intercession of his only begotten Son, the one and only Mediator
betwixt God and man. Afterward was brought in the use of praying at the
sepulchers of Martyrs: then began the making of apostrophees unto Saints,
besides the worship of God: then the making of vows, and prayers, not
primarily to pray them, but that they should pray God. Yet if these new
examples had gone no further, his Majesty would not greatly have reproved the
custom of those times, at the least not so much condemned it as the abuses
which hereupon ensued. For his Majesty does honor the blessed Martyrs, and
other Saints which now reign with Christ the head of both Churches, triumphant
and militant: neither doubts he of their continual prayers for the
necessities of the Church, believing steadfastly the benefit thereof: but he
confesses ingenuously that he knows no reason whereby any man can promise
or warrant us that they hear our prayers, and that we should account them as
our household gods; and protectors. Wherefore he exceedingly disliketh that
which followed in after-ages. For by degrees it came to that which I have
showed, which the Church of England affirms to be impious in the extreme.
And if there be examples extant in the Fathers of the fourth age for this
invocation (as no doubt there are, neither does the King deny it) yet this is
a testimony of the decay of ancient simplicity, and of an evil then growing;
but in no respect comparable with that which in the Church of Rome at this day
is openly practiced, tolerated, and defended. Lastly, although the holy Fathers
did allow the custom of that time amongst things profitable, or lawful, yet
they never accounted of it as a thing necessary to salvation, which is the
present argument of our speech. And thus much concerning the four objections
against the English Liturgy.

Now his Majesty commends your judgment, that amongst all the things which
you dislike in his religion, you have made choice especially of those which
concern matters of Church assemblies, and divine service. For the communion of
the faithful consists much in the public exercises of piety: and this is
the chief bond of union so much desired by good men. Wherefore if Christians
could but agree about this, why might not all Europe communicate together?
only, granting a liberty to schoole-Diuines with moderation to debate other
opinions. Which were a thing much to be wished, and that foundation once laid,
by the help of God, much hope might be conceived of the rest. For this cause
his excellent Majesty greatly commending your judgment herein, has himself
likewise here delivered, what things in your Liturgy he thinks worthy to
be reproved. But if, for the want of these four things in the English
Liturgy, you think there is just cause, that they which use it should neither
be accounted, nor called Catholics: then consider, I pray you, what his
Majesty may pronounce of the Church of Rome, in whose Liturgy (for he
passes other points of your religion) godly men have observed so many things
manifestly repugnant to the word of God, and the ancient Catholic faith. Which
things nevertheless the Pope had rather maintain, then reform, when the
truth now shines so clearly. And here although his Majesty could easily
rehearse many grievous abuses in the Roman Liturgy; yet it pleases him to
name only four, which he opposes to the other four named by you. The first
is the use of an unknown tongue, contrary to the precept of S. Paul, and the
practice of the primitive Church, to whom in their assemblies nothing was
dearer then the good, and edification of the hearers. Wherefore the Fathers
provided the translation of Scripture into all languages: and, as Epiphanius
notes in the end of his third book, they had their Interpreters, who, if need
were, did translate one language into another, in their (...).
readings, as he speaks, that is, when the Scriptures were read unto the
people. Surely, that the things read were generally understood, this alone is
sufficient proof, that in most of the Homilies of the Greek and Latin
Fathers, we meet with these words, vt audistis legi, or, vt hodie lectum est:
as you heard it read, or as it was read to day. Which if your preachers should
say, were it not ridiculous? when the poor people understand nothing that is
read out of the Scriptures, notwithstanding they have more need then the people
of old time. For the ancient Doctors urged every one to read the Bible
diligently in their houses, which now under pain of excommunication they are
forbidden to touch; unless they obtain a dispensation. So that the sacred
word of God (I tremble to speak it) has now the first place in the catalogue
of books prohibited. His Majesty knows that amongst you there may be found
some Bibles translated into vulgar languages: but the English Priests at Do
way, which turned the Scripture into English, have taught him thus much, that
you were constrained against your wills to make those translations,
importunitate haereticorum, by the importunity of the heretics, as they of Do
way speak. For it is heresy with these men to be desirous to read the word
of God with sobriety, and reverence. Neither is his Majesty ignorant, when
Renatus Benedictus Priest translated the Bible into French, how the Popes of
Rome troubled him for that fact, and how by their letters they commanded the
Bishop of Paris to endeavor that all the French translations might be extorted
from the people. Which without fail they had effected, if there had been no
Protestants in France. His Majesty has read of late also in a book of a
certain English Pontifician Priest, that prayers uttered in an unknown tongue
have a kind of greater efficacy in them, then if they were understood. Which
senseless dotage was an old heathnish conceit, and is not the singular folly
of this Priest alone. So the Valentinian heretics did use Hebrew names in
their superstitious mysteries, that they might amaze the ignorant multitude:
and, as Eusebius speaks in the fourth part of his History, the more to
astonish those that were initiated in their (...).
superstitions. The second abuse is, the diminishing of the holy Sacrament,
contrary to the institution of Christ, the example of S. Paul, and the
practice of the Church, for the space of one thousand years at least, as
Cassander a learned man confesses. In the third place are private Masses,
where are no communicants. I have said before that these things had their
beginning from that perverse doctrine concerning the sacrifice in the Christian
Church. Restore us the ancient faith, and the ancient practice. In the fourth
place his Majesty obiecteth the present use and adoration of Images. The
Council of Trent confesses an abuse, and the Roman Catechism gives some
profitable admonition on this behalf. But what are we the better? the abuse
remains, it is approved, maintained, and increases daily. His Majesty
omitteth the adoration, and invocation of Saints: which as it is now practiced,
neither can, nor ought to be excused. He omitteth also the religious adoration
of relics, which at this day is taught and commanded as a thing necessary,
or at least very profitable to salvation. Beside the intolerable absurdity:
as when false or ridiculous relics are obtruded, as the tears of Christ, and
the milk of our Lady, and such like. He omitteth the licentious boldness of
your preachers, when they stray from the word of God; who ought to be
restrained from propounding any doctrine to the people as necessary to
salvation, which is not drawn out of the divine oracles, and agreeable to the
ancient faith. For that is the wholesome doctrine which the Apostle so often
commends. If there were such a restraint, many things now practiced in the
Church of Rome, would fall down of their own accord. As the doctrine of
Indulgences: as that foppish device of the intensiue pains in Purgatory: by
virtue of which intension many thousand years are contained in one minute: as
those battologiae, or idle repetition of heedlesse prayers, unpleasing to our
Savior, as he himself witnesses. Then it would no longer be accounted great
merit to repeat the Rosarie, or other prayers, and Psalms twenty, or fifty,
or an hundred times. If these and such like impediments were removed, religious
men should peradventure find no just cause to abstain from your communion.
There is another thing which his Majesty thought good not to omit, which is
written in the end of your Epistle: that you will be silent concerning the Pope
of Rome, because it is manifest, to those which have but mean skill in
Ecclesiastical history, that the Fathers of the first ages, the Councels, and
Christian Emperors in all business appertaining to religion and the Church,
gave him the pre-eminence, and acknowledged him the chief. That this is all
for this point, which your Church requires to be believed as an article of
faith, by those whom you receive into communion. To this his Majesty makes
answer: and, appealing to your own impartial mind, he desires you to
consider the actions of Roman Bishops for almost seven hundred years past. He
is loath to stir the remembrance of things noisome, yet gladly would he have
you know, that he is most certain of this: that the late Bishops of that sea
are so unlike unto the ancient Popes in sincerity of faith, in manner of life,
and in the whole course and end of their government, that it is altogether
unjust, things being in this state, to draw arguments from the former ages, and
applic them to this present time. Let the form of the ancient Church be
restored, and many new laws heretofore not heard of be abolished. In brief,
let the Bishop of Rome declare evidently by his actions that he seeks Gods
glory, not his own; that he has a care of the peace, and salvation of his
people: then his Majesty, as he has protested before in his Monitorie
Epistle, will acknowledge his primacie, and be willing to say with Gregory
Nazianzen, that he has the care of the (...).
whole Church. But at this time what the Church of God, especially Kings and
Princes, ought to think concerning that sea, his Majesty dare refer it to
your own judgment to determine. For you know what a number of books come
abroad daily from Rome, and almost all the corners of Europe, in defense of the
Popes temporal power, or rather omnipotency, his dominion, and monarchy over
all the Kings, and people of the whole earth. You know that Cardinal
Bellarmine has of late written concerning that argument, and soon after the
death of Henry the Great, has been bold to publish that, which all honest men
of your own side do detest. I say, all honest men: for the accomplices of that
conspiracy do heartily embrace, and to their power defend it as an oracle
from the mouth of the Pope, which cannot err. Wherefore the Jesuits of
Ingolstade in a book lately published against Master John Gordon, the Deane of
Salisburie, a man nobly borne, and very learned, do cite testimonies out of
this book of the Cardinals, as if it were the constant opinion, and consent of
all Catholics. But I desire your Honor to consider whether the ancient Church
ever did the like to this, and what will be the issue of this madness.
Consider into what danger of utter ruin they bring the Church of Christ, which
do approve, or suffer such things as are now practiced, and taught. For, to
conclude, as long as matters stand thus with you, and yet you deny that you
have been the cause of the division, it were mere doltishnes, and folly to
imagine any reconciliation amongst the divided members of the Church. The last
point in your letters was this: that you are able to demonstrate clearly what
good consent there is betwixt the Church of Rome, and the seas of the other
Patriarchs in these points which are now in controversy. But his Majesty
thinks that you may spare that labor. For he knows, and so do others
that are desirous to pry into such matters, that not the West Church alone,
but the East also, the Churches in the South and North parts of the world have
degenerated far from the golden sincerity of former ages, and peradventure
further then might seem possible: but that the reuolting from the ancient
faith must come to pass of necessity, being foretold by the oracles of God.
He knows also how those nations have daily heaped ceremonies upon ceremonies,
and how for more then these thousand years superstitious men have been too
presumptuous in that kind. But when we treat of reforming the Church of God,
the question is not what the East Church, or the Moscouites Church do
practice, or believe: but this is the question, what the Apostles have taught
from the beginning, and what the Catholic Church has practiced in her times,
and in the ages next following. That, that, is the pattern which the King does
ingenuously, and from his heart confess that he would imitate without all
exception. Nevertheless, such as are skillful in Ecclesiastical matters, they
will not grant you this neither: that the doctrine of the Roman Church does
agree in all points with that which is taught in the Churches of other
Patriarchs. For to omit your worshipping of Images, your fire of Purgatory,
your precise observation of single life, and the infinite power of the Pope,
even above Councels: to say nothing of these, and other articles: yet it is
manifest that in the celebration of the sacred Eucharist, the Grecians do much
differ from you Romans. In so much that Marcus the Archbishop of Ephesus
speaking of the Roman Mass, does affirm that in matters of greatest moment
it is contrary to the word of God, and the ancient Liturgies. It is manifestly
repugnant (says he) to the axpositions and interpretations which we have
received by tradition, and to the words of our Lord, and to the meaning of
those words. And of those which defend the Roman rites concerning this matter,
the same Marcus pronounces, that they deserve to be pitied both in regard of
their double ignorance, and their profound sottishness. But thus much is
enough for this present. Now you have heard (most Illustrious Cardinal) the
reasons wherefore his excellent Majesty of great Britain; after the reading
of your letters, does, nevertheless trusting in the mercy of God, believe,
and maintain that he, and his Church are Catholic. Who if he were not
inflamed with an infinite desire of furthering the public peace, or if he
supposed that you were otherways affected, he would have spared the labor of
this answer. Especially, because his Majesty calling to mind the daily
writings and practices of your men, is now (as I said before) steadfastly
persuaded that through their dealings there remain no means or hope of
reconciliation. For they are resolved to defend all; and not to grow better, or
by the serious reformation of things depraved to win the minds of the godly.
In which resolution as long as they persist, and will not yield one jot to
antiquity, and truth, his Majesty professes once for all that he regards
them not, neither will he ever have any communion with the Church of Rome. So
his Majesty humbly prays to our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would vouchsafe
to direct those excellent gifts of mind, which he has plentifully bestowed
upon you, to the honor of his name, and the benefit of his Church. And I
humbly take my leave of your Honor.

London 9. of November. MDCXI.
Faults escaped.
Page 4. lin. 14. read. with no less. page 9. lin. 14. for token, read hope.


