A TREATISE OF USE AND CUSTOM.

(...).

LONDON Printed by I. L. Anno. Dom. M.D.C.XXXVIII.

Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

(...).

Arist.
Mandetur typis hic liber, cui titulus est [A Treatise of Use and Custom,]
modo intra 3. Menses proxime sequentes imprimatur.

Ex aedibus Londin. Apri: 26. 1638. Sa. Baker.

A TREATISE OF USE AND CUSTOM.
THat man is not made and brought forth into the World, to eat and drink, and
to take his ease, but for some better thing, is acknowledged by all men, who
have any thing left in them of men, (that is, of rational creatures;) and have
not wholly degenerated into brutes. But whether Action, or Contemplation, be
the thing, wherein man's chiefest happiness in this world does consist, has
been a question of old, and is yet disputed of on both sides. To omit the
ancient Fathers, because our purpose is not to insist long upon this point,
(whose opinion nevertheless if any desire to know, let him read them upon the
words of Christ unto Martha, Luke x.41, 42.) Aristotle and other Philosophers,
that are for Contemplation, go upon this ground: That the nearer every man
comes unto God, by way of imitation, (as far as by nature he is capable of
it:) the more happy he is: that God does enjoy himself in the fruition and
contemplation of his own goodness, infiniteness, eternity, and the like; and
not in, or by any thing external, that he does cause, or produce without
himself. On the other side it is alleged, That man, naturally, is animal
politicum; that is, borne and brought forth into the World, not every man for
himself only, but for the good of others also; and that it is one of the
fundamental principles of all publike-weales and societies of men, that the
public is always by every man, to be preferred before his own private,
whether profit, or happiness. Both which opinions may easily be reconciled,
if both be acknowledged (as I think they must of necessity:) in their
several respects to be true. For certainly, if man be absolutely and barely
by himself considered, as a rational creature, then Contemplation; if, as
naturally sociable, having relation to the World as a City, then Action is his
end. Action then his end; yet, even then, not action, without all manner of
Contemplation. For as we commonly say of the Sciences, that some are
speculative, and some practical; so is it of contemplation too: Some
contemplation is merely speculative; and so it is opposed to Action: some may
be termed (though there may seem to be some contradiction in the terms:)
active, or practical, because it is the ground and foundation of all actions,
that tend to happiness. For they are not all actions in general, that make
men happy; but such only, as are good and virtuous. Which are such, and which
are contrary, cannot be known without the knowledge of good and evil.
Neither is this knowledge (in this state of corruption:) to be attained unto
without much study and contemplation. And this, all Divines and Philosophers
assent unto, that it is not enough, that what we do be laudible of it self,
and as the School men speak, materially good; except we know it to be so,
and do it upon that ground. Then, and not till then, is our action, as it is
ours, truly good and commendable. Hence it is, that in the opinion of
Aristotle, (the great wonder of Nature:) a learned and well grounded Physician,
though missing of his end, is more praise worthy, then an ignorant Empiricke
that has good success; because, says he, in his Metaphysickes, The one
understands what he does, and goes upon warrantable grounds, though the
ignorance of some particular outward circumstance may hinder the good event:
The other does he knows not what, nor upon what grounds, but altogether
ventureth upon former experiments. Now experience, we know, is the mistress, as
of men, so of brutes too: which, though they be irrational, yet are capable of
that knowledge that comes by bare experience; and cannot therefore be the
proper commendation of those creatures, which are naturally rational. So that
what once a grave Senator (Plin. Sec. in Panegyr, ad Traja:) spoke of one
particular virtue, ambitio and jactantia, and effusio, and quidvis potius quam
liberalitas est dicenda, cui ratio non constat; that that liberality, that is
not grounded upon reason, is rather ambition, vain glory, profuseness, or any
thing else, what you will, then true liberality: is as true of any other
particular virtue, and appliable to virtue, in general; to wit, That Virtue is
not Virtue properly, but as it is the fruit and effect, of true knowledge and
sound reason. Which also made Aristotle to maintain in his Ethics ( Lib. v.
cap. 9.) that justa facere was no very hard thing, and incidentall unto all
men; but justum esse, that is, to do just actions, upon grounds of reason and
no otherwise; to be a matter of very great difficulty. For which reason also,
Socrates before him maintained, that Truth and Virtue, were but one thing. And
truly in the Scriptures, they are often taken for one thing. Hence those
phrases, To do the Truth, To commit a lie, and the like. To which if it be
opposed, that truth and virtue must needs differ as much as the will and the
understanding, truth being the proper object of the one, and virtue of the
other; it might easily, according to the authority of Aristotle, and other
great Philosophers and School men, be replied, That although the will and the
understanding be not all one essentially, yet in matter of action, they come
all to one; since that, as they maintain, voluntas necessario determinatur ab
intellectu, the will of man is wholly ruled and governed, by the motions and
prescripts of the understanding. Whence is that of Aristotle in the same
Ethics, lib. vi. that (...), that it is not possible, that he that is truly
wise and prudent, should be naught or vicious: And that (...), that no man is
evil, but through ignorance of that which is most expedient, which is there
and elsewhere at large discussed by him and prooved; as it is to this day
maintained by many accute writers.

But not to engage my self into these deep mysteries of profoundest
Philosophy, which may be thought perchance more abstruse then useful, and
admit of variety of opinions; all that I shall infer upon these premises,
which no man, I think, will deny, is but this; That Truth and Virtue are of
such affinity, that without some more then ordinary insight (by virtue of
knowledge and contemplation:) into the one, the other cannot be practiced as
it should; either to afford that inward content and satisfaction to the
conscience, which is the best reward of a virtuous life in this World; or to
deserve that commendation from others, (though this be least of all to be
stood upon:) that otherwise would be due unto it.

Now the knowledge of Truth being a matter of such moment to happiness, as we
have said; it is much to be lamented, that the search of it should be so
difficult, as it is: so beset with sundry rubbes and impediments; so shadowed
with many false colors and lineaments, as it is to be feared, that many men,
after no small pains and study to find out what Truth is; in stead of finding
what might satisfy them concerning the nature of Truth, begin to doubt whether
there be any such thing, in rerum natura; and by consequent, whether any such
thing truly and really, as Virtue and Justice: according to that miserable
complaint (though uttered by him upon another occasion:) of dying Brutus,
(...). O wretched virtue! hitherto have I carefully exercised thee as a thing
true and real; but now I see, that thou art mere words and wind. And in very
truth if a man shall as it were from some higher place, raised with the wings
of philosophical contemplation, as an indifferent judge, or but spectator,
take a general view of the surface of the earth; diligently observe and look
into the actions and endeavors of mortal men, he shall clearly see, that
that which all ingenuous men aim at, and most (even wretched worldlings:) do
pretend unto, is truth: but that truth so generally professed, both by the one
and by the other, for truth, in some, (whose gross and earthly temperature is
most incapable of heavenly both thoughts and hopes*) to be nothing else, but
mere policy, and private secular interests* in many others (of a purer mould
or metal, whose meaning is good and sincere:) nothing else, in effect, but
mere partiality, prejudice, presumption, resolute obstinacy, and the like;
being all the fruits and effects of either blind ignorance (the more blind, the
more confident, always:) in too much heat, and eagerness; (the natural
distemper of most men:) or lastly, (if not of all these together, yet of some
one of them especially:) of long use and custom. Shows, and colors, and
appearances, and pretenses of truth in great store every where; real and solid
truth, he shall see but little any where: and that too, in many places, either
silenced, or forced by unjust violence into corners.

Upon one of these impediments, that I have mentioned, I purpose at this time
to fix my contemplation; being one of the chiefest, (if I be not much
mistaken my self:) of those many things, that cause truth to be mistaken by
men; and that is, Custom.

That men both in their actions, and in their judgments, are most swaied by
custom, has been the observation of many wise men of old, and is most
apparent by daily experience, to them that shall observe it with diligence. Non
ratione componimur, sed consuetudine, says Seneca (Epist. 123 and elsewhere)
speaking of the actions of men. As those things are, which men are used unto,
so are their judgments, says Aristotle in his Metaphysics, lib. 1. part 2.
c. 3. Rabbi Ben Maimon, (commonly called Rambam; the most judicious Rabbin,
that ever was known to the Christian World;) in his excellent book, called
More Nevokim, having insisted out of Alexander Aphrodisaeus, as he professes
himself, of three maine particulars, which usually hinder men from the
knowledge of truth; adds a fourth of his own observation, as considerable in
his judgment, if not more, then any of the former: and that is, says he,
(...), Custom and Education. What word was used by the Author himself, I know
not. For he wrote this book in Arabic; and the Hebrew is but a translation.
But the word (...) here used by the Hebrew translator for custom, is very
proper in this place; coming from a simple. Verb, which, among other things,
signifies, fallere, dolose agere; which is the very thing the Author does here
charge custom of. Amant enim homines, (says he;) natura id ad quod sunt
assuefacti, and propendent ad illud. And then after some instances taken from
daily experience, goes on thus, (as the late Latin Translator renders him,)
Idem plane accidere solet homini insententiis and opinionibus, quibus
innutritus est, ut pro amore illarum, ab illis dimoveri nequeat. Quae causa
est, ut homo saepe non possit apprehendere veritatem, quia scilicet illa
sequitur, quibus assuefactus est, etc.

Neither is there want of many plausible pretenses to make this power, or
tyranny rather (as Saint Chrysostom does usually style it:) of custom, to
seem as reasonable, as it is general. For first, Naturalists tell us, that,
Consuetudo tanquam altera natura; so Aristotle: and Gallen, elegantly, (...),
Custom is an adscititious Nature. Both Civilians and Canonists tell us, not
only that consuetudo optima legis interpres, (that is much that it should be
so:) but plainly, that consuetudo derogat legi, abrogat legem; yea some of
them, that, consuetudo, illicita, licita facit. (...), was the resolution of
the Council of Nice in matters of the Church; and to enquire of the former
age, and, to stand upon the ways, and there to look for the good old ways,
is the way that the Prophet does teach us both to truth and righteousness; to
wit, to consult with Antiquity; which is nothing else, but a continued
custom; as custom is nothing else, but actus saepius multiplicati; as it is
defined by Lawyers and Schoolmen. Besides, Philosophers tell us, that, (...);
that which is in being, and that we call Truth, are all one. And what is
custom, but that which is in being? And if any, to show a difference, shall
add, that Truth is that, which is, has been, and shall be; which is as
much, as to say, that it is eternal; wise Solomon seems to say as much of
custom, when entreating of the variety of men's labors and actions, he uses
these words, The thing that has been, is that which shall be; and that which
is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the
Sun. Is there any thing whereof it may he said, See this is new? It has
been already of old times which was before us. So another, a King too, and as
wise a King (of a heathen) as Solomon, He (says he) that sees the things that
are now, has seen all that either was ever, or ever shall be. For all things
are of one kind, and all like one unto another. And in another place, (...),
What ever it be that is now done here, is the same that has always been,
and ever shall be, and is now done in all places: which is spoken by him, as
appears there, not of things natural, (lest any man should mistake.) but of
men's actions and fashions. Anto. vi.34.x.12.

To these things if any shall reply, that consuetudo, quae non est
rationabilis, is not properly consuetudo, but corruptela; and no wonder, if
consuetudo rationabilis, be granted to be aequivalent to reason, right, or
truth: This, if it be well considered, will rather puzzle the more, then
satisfy. For the Custom of men, which they live and are guided by, being
different according to differences of places and nations; yea so changeable and
variable; (I speak it of Customs, in point of right and Justice, as well as
of others:) in the same place, as we see they are in all places: if it shall
be said of all such generally, as of particulars it is commonly by them that
are used unto them, that they are rationabiles; will it not hence necessarily
follow, that what is right in one place, is in another wrong: what at one time
is reason and Truth; at another time is both false and absurd? And what is
this, but to make Truth changeable, Protheus like; and appliable to all times
and places? That is, in effect, to say with Archilaus, that (...), but (...),
that nothing is right or wrong, but by custom and the ordinances of men only:
or with Epicurus, that (...), that righteousness of its self is nothing, but
that whatsoever is expedient for the present, as long as it is expedient, it is
just; and no longer just, then it is expedient.

Besides these and the like arguments, taken from the things themselves, some
thing may be inferred even from the words, whereby those things are usually
expressed. For words have usually some foundation in the nature of things, and
therefore (as wisest men, Aristotle and others, have thought:) in all disputes
of the true nature and use of things, much observable. Now in most Languages,
right and custom, are expressed by the same words. As for example to instance
in the three chiefest; in Hebrew, (...), signifies properly judgment, but it
is as often used for custom. So that Interpreters are sometimes put to it, not
knowing, or at least not agreeing among themselves, by which of the two it
should be rendered. As for example, Sam. 8.9. show them the manner, etc. and v.
11. This will be the manner, etc. In the Hebrew it is (...), which some with
the Vulgar and the Septuagint, render jus; others, as we, rationem; the manner
or custom. The Chaldey paraphrase expresses it by the Greek word (...), which
is ambiguous both in the Original Greek (the ambiguitie whereof has caused
errors and mistakes of Interpreters not a few in diverse ancient Greek
Authors:) and in the derivative Chaldey, for either right or custom. Hence are
variety of opinions, as amongst the Jews, so amongst the Christians, about
the true meaning. But I meddle not with that. Only this I observe, that Homer
upon this very subject, speaking of Kings, uses the very word (but that the
one is Greek, and the other is Hebrew:) that Samuel does; This also, as
ambiguous in the Greek, as the other is in the Hebrew. His words are Odyss.
iv. (...). Where the Scholiast has noted (...). i. (...). But Eustathius,
Archbishop of Thessalonica, more fully, (...), ((...)) (...). Aemilius Portus
translates it, quod tamen Licet divinis Regibus. And certainly in those words
of the Poet in another place, (...), Gallen did understand by the word (...),
somewhat more, then custom, as should seem by him in his de Valetudine
conservanda, where he quotes them more then once. Now as in these words, both
Hebrew and Greek, right is taken for custom; so in the Latin, is custom
taken for right, or Law. Witness, not only the word consuetudo, in latter
ages, whereof we shall have occasion to speak more afterward; but also mos,
of old. So Virgil. Aenid. vi. -- pacisque imponere morem, i. Legem pacis, says
Servius. As also in the Civil Law, jus and mos, are often joined together to
express right; though sometimes opposed, I know. Neither are these two Latin
words, mos and consuetudo, used in Latin for right and Law only; but also for
nature her self; custom, as it seems, pretending as much to nature, as it
does to right. So mos by the best Latin Authors, often; and so consuetudo, by
sacred authors, sometimes. As for example, Genesis 31.35. (...), which by the
Chaldey paraphrase, by the LXX. and the Vulgar, is rendered, consuetudo; the
custom of women. Which word consuetudo, made Augustine the Monk (a very
pardonable mistake in a Monk:) to think worse of women, then they had
deserved, imputing that unto them as a fault, or voluntary vice, which is their
nature. At least he was so understood by Saint Gregory; who therefore both by
many reasons, and diverse examples, prooves unto him at large, that that
consuetudo mulierum, though called consuetudo, is in very truth, infirmitas
naturae; or naturae superfluitas, rather; and therefore not culpa, quia
naturaliter accidit; no voluntary thing in women, but happening by necessity of
nature, and by consequent, no sin; no more then either to eat, and drink;
or to be weary, cold; and the like. Greg. Epist. lib. xii. Ind. vii. Epist.
31. ad August. resp. 10.

By these things that have hitherto been spoken, it should appear, that
custom of it self has no small affinity with Truth and right: and it is but
too apparent, that they are, by most men, taken for one and the same thing; as
has already been said.

But on the other side, we shall find in ancient, both Philosophers and
Fathers, as Justin. Mart. Cyprian, Greg. Nyss. and others, many serious caveats
and admonitions to them that seek the truth, to beware of custom: and to this
purpose Tertullian would have us to remember, that Christ called himself
veritatem, non consuetudinem: truth, not custom, be it never so general, or
so ancient.

Having therefore oftentimes (not by way of curiosity, but as one that thinks
himself bound, to propose unto himself right and reason, to the utmost of his
power, in all his actions:) had occasion to meditate upon those things, viz. of
the power, variety, validity, of custom in things either natural, civil,
(for all those have some relation, and mutual dependence; neither can
thoroughly be understood, if separated,) or Divine: and what in all those is,
(...) (as an ancient Philosopher speaks:) (...), the speculation of Truth; I
have here put most of those things, that did offer themselves to my
consideration, together: persuading my self, that if men spent less time
about particular Questions; as concerning the right or truth of sundry
particulars, in point of either Religion or Philosophy; and more time in the
due and rational consideration of those general either helps, or
hindrances, that offer themselves unto men in the search of what is Truth and
right; that there would be, both far less contention, and far more truth in
the World, then is at this day. For my part, I shall be careful not to vent
any new conceits, or opinions of mine own unto the World. It is too full
already of such phantasticks, who both in their lives and in their opinions,
affect nothing more then singularity. Only what I have met with in best
authors concerning this subject, the consideration whereof I thought might be
useful unto others, I shall here set down; and this, rather by way of
proposition, then peremptory determination.

TO begin with the power of Custom in things natural, I will first speak
of some parts and faculties, which have been formerly, and may yet through use
and custom be attained unto, though not contrary to nature, yet so rare and
extraordinary, as in the judgment of common sense, and for want of experience,
they might seem altogether unpossible. By Custom, we understand practice and
exercise, as usually others do upon this occasion. So (to instance in one),
Plutarch, where he disputes of the power of custom in point of education,
(...), says he, (...), by custom I mean use and exercise; and afterward
he calls it (...); all which words are by him there used as synonima's, or
words of the same signification. Now to speak of the power of custom in this
kind, and to set out the marveilous efficacy of it, I know not whom we should
more properly begin with, then with those, whom the Grecians properly called,
(...), or wonder-workers; men, whose profession it was to amaze the people with
strange sights and wonders, (so called ordinarily by Greek Authors, properly
and absolutely, (...), wonders:) proceeding for the most part from
extraordinary either strength, or agilitie, or both. I shall mention them the
rather, because it is a speculation that diverse Philosphers and Fathers, (but
especially Saint Chrysostom:) in their moral exhortations often fall upon,
and make very good use of it. Hero an ancient Greek Author has written a
whole book of that subject, but I have not yet seen it. And because the word
(...), is somewhat general, and may comprehend them that bring strange things
to pass, by the help either of natural, or superstitious Magic, as well as
others; I will therefore here set down the definition of such as we
understand here properly by the word; as I find it in Nicephorus Gregoras; by
which they may be discerned from all others, that have any plea to that common
name, He therefore in his eight Book of his Roman History, treating at large
(...), of some wonder-workers that came to Constantinople, gives the definition
of them, and of their art: (...). Those things (says he:) that were done by
them, were prodigious indeed, and full of wonder; yet far from Diabolical
enchantments, but mere exercises of a dextruous nature, long practiced and
accustomed unto those things.

First then to begin with agilitie, Saint Chrysostom in his nineteenth Homily
ad populum Antiochenum, has these particular instances, (...), and (...), to
run upon the ground, all parts of the body turning circularly, like a wheel:
to draw ones self up and down by the motion and agitation of the arms only,
as if it were with wings: (...): to cast up diverse swords one after another
into the air, and to receive every one by the handle: (...): expressed by him
again in another place, (...): which, in plain English, is no more, as I
conceive; then what we commonly say, to dance upon the rope; or, ire (...) the
said (...), or ordinary wonderworkers of his time. He does insist upon this
particular at large, calling their heads, (...), nailed heads, or heads stickt
all over with nails. And least any should either mistrust the truth of the
relation, (though to prevent this I have purposely made choice of such a one as
Saint Chrysostom for my warrant:) or at least suspect (as I see diverse do
without cause in other matters like unto these; because not acquainted with the
power of custom in things of this nature:) some imposture in the actors, I
will confirm this last instance of nailed heads, with two pregnant testimonies
of approoved and unquestionable experience of latter times: the one taken from
Augerius Busbequius, and the other from Johannes Leunclavius; men of good
worth, both; and as good credit, among the learned Cum jam esset in conspectu
Buda (says Busbequius in his fourth Epistle:) veniunt nobis obviam jussu
Bassae ex ejus familia aliquot, cum plerisque* Chiaussis; sed in primis visenda
juvenum in equis multitudo propter novitatem ornatus, qui erat hujusmodi. In
aperto capite, quod eis plerumque rasum est, cutem longa linea inciderant, cui
vulneri plures pinnas cujusque generis inseruerant: ipsi stillantes cruentis
guttis, dissimulato dolor veluti sensus expertes, laeti and hilares
ferebantur. Ante me proxime pedites aliquot ambulabant; horum unus veluti
ansatus subnixis brachiis ingrediebatur, quorum utrumque supra cubitum cultello
(quod genus nos Pragenses vocamus:) transfixum habebat. Alius a superiore part
umbiculo tenus, nudus incedebat, sic scissa duobus locis infra supraque
lumborum cute, ut illac trajectam clavam, tanquam e cingulo pendentem haberet.
Alius in vertice capitis, equisoleam pluribus clavis fixerat. Sed id vetus
erat, clavis ita cum carne coalitis, ut nihil moverentur.

The passage out of Leunclavius is this: Hos sequebantur tres lymphatici
robusti homines, caligis tantum induti, caetera nudi; nisi quod capitis vertex
parvo pileolo rubro, and humeri nudi superinjecta, deque collo pendente pelle
tigridis, exornabantur. Hi ad concentum Zinganorum tripudiabant, tenentes
singuli vexillum Turcicum rubri coloris, cujus hastile intra cutem and abdomen
ventris, emanante multo sanguine, defixum erat. Hos duo pueri sequebantur, qui
cuti frontis perforatae pennas gruis insertas ferebant. Secundum pueros
incedebant quatuor virorum paria, pervulneratis lateribus. Primi duo clavas
ferreas, quas pusdiganos dicunt: proximi duo nudos acinaces, per cutem
transfixos, gestabant. Rursus alii duo sequebantur, quorum unus securim
militarem Vngaricam (schacanam vocant) alter oblongum Genizari sclopetum
apertis lateribus in transfixo corpore portabat. Vltimo loco viri duo robusti
spectaculum hoc claudebant, qui tempora rectis, latis, and oblongis ensibus,
quos Vngari palastos vocant, transfixerant. Horum capulos manibus tenebant: In
ensium cuspide pomum erat adfixum, and pomo, penna gruis inserta.

I shall forbear more particular instances concerning the many wonders
recorded by the ancients, of those wonder workers: And the rather indeed,
because diverse examples in this kind may be excepted against, as examples
rather of strange natures, or natural properties; then instances of the power
of custom. For though the art, generally, be adscribed by the ancients to
(...), or (...) (which gave occasion to Arrian the Stoic Philosopher to
mention some of them by the way in his chapter (...):) that is, to use and
practice; yet in some of them (for ought we know:) it might be nature; or at
least, nature concurring. So of prodigious eaters, for example; Suetonius tells
us of one, much admired by Nero the Roman Emperor, who by custom had brought
himself, crudam carnem, and quicquid daretur manducare; to eat any kind of
thing: And doubtless it stands with reason that custom may do much in this
kind, as generally in point of eating and drinking: whereof learned Physicians
treat at large. Yet that a man should ( uno die aprum integrum, centum panes,
vervecem and porcellum: in one day (if not at one meal:) eat a whole boar, a
hundred loaves, one weather, and a hog, as we read of one in Aurelians time:
I dare not adscribe this unto custom only: no more then, to devour nettles,
thistles, the pith of artichockes, raw and living birds and fishes with their
scales and feathers, burning coals and candles, etc. and all these in very
great quantity, as Karew in his Survey of Cornwall, records of one John Size
of Cornwall. That which makes me to doubt the more, is, because I read in
Columbus, a famous Anatomist, of one Lazarus in Venice, surnamed Vitrivorax, or
the glass eater, who made a trade of it, mercede proposita, vitrum, saxa,
lapides, ligna, viva animalia, carbones, pisces e vivario extractos adhuc
salientes, lutum, lineos laneosque pannos, etc, vorare. Now this man falling at
last, after his death, to the hands of Columbus to be dissected by him, he
did his best (as he professes:) by observing all things in him with more then
ordinary curiosity, to find out a reason in nature of this so strange and
unnatural quality. And his conceit is, that he did find it; wherein I will
not interpose my judgment, but leave the further examination thereof, to
professed Anatomists and Physicians. But generally, of such particular examples,
so extraordinary and beyond all example prodigious, I hold it (as I have
already said) most safe, to take in nature and custom, as concurring. As
expressly, for example, we read in Suidas of one Marcellus, who being by
nature very watchful, by long use and custom had brought himself to that
pass, as to live without sleep; or at least, with so little, as could hardly
be observed by any others. For the better satisfaction therefore of the
Reader, that he may certainly know what custom alone in this kind, can do,
in point of either agilitie or strength; a sure way will be to consider some
particular performances in either kind, that have been more common and
general, as either to whole Nations, or to certain professions, together and
at one time; and not proper to some few persons, at some times, only.

In point of agilitie, Caesar in his Commentaries testifies of the old
Britans, that usu quotidiano and exercitatione, they had attained to that
perfection of horsemanship, ut in declivi ac praecipiti loco incitatos equos
sustinere, and brevi moderari ac flectere; and per temonem percurrere, and in
jugo insistere, and inde se in currus citissime recipere consueverint. This is
much, and more perchance then some will easily believe, that have seen no such
examples of activitie in these days. Yet more then that in the same kind of
exercise, is averred to be true of some people to this day, by Authors of good
credit and authority. So elegant Maffaeus of certain people Occidentalis
Aethiopiae, which he calls Ialaphos: Hist. Indicae, lib. 1. Exhibitique (says
he:) per eos dies public ludi, convivia, venationes, and spectacula
equestria; In quibus Ialophi desultoria art and peritia ita se admirabiles
praebuere, ut Numidis ipsis (quorum in celeritate motuque corporis praecipua
laus est:) agilitatis palmam omnium judicio consensuque eripuerint. Si quidem
tanta erant membrorum vel dexteritate vel robore, ut equi incitatissimi
ephippiis nulla omnino cursus intermissione tum recti insisterent, corpusque
circumagerent: tum repent insiderent, dispositosque humi lapillos ad unum inde
colligerent; tum etiam momento desilirent, resilirentque.

But if any shall desire to understand the utmost that long use and exercise
can attain unto in this kind of Agilitie, let them read what Martinus a
Boumgarten, (no obscure man and of good credit every way;) relates at large in
his perigrinations, of the sundry acts and exercises of Chivalrie, performed by
the Mamaluques before their Sultan. Certainly had they had wings, I do not
know what they could have done more in that kind, either upon, or about horses.
But because the book is not very common to be had, nor perchance very
commonly known, I shall not do amiss I think, to insert here some part of
that his relation, His words are:

Alii in pleno cursu equi, ter desilientes: itemque (equo a cursu suo non
cessante:) conscendentes, nihilo minus omnes illos scopos sagittis tangebant,
nec vel aliquatenus aberrabant: Alli sellis non sedentes, sed stantes, licet
equi volarent, singulos scopos feriebant. Alii inter plenum and jugem equorum
cursum ter arcus remittentes, ter eos loco flagelli capiti circumdantes, ac
rursum ter intendentes, aeque tamen ut and caeteri singulos scopos jaculis
verberabant. Alii in jugi equorum cursu, licet ad utramque partem desilissent
non tamen obmittebant, quin and omnes scopos ut and reliqui, singillatim
percuterent. Alii ter per equorum terga retro desilientes, ac rursum currente
semper equo, insilientes, a sagittandi munere ad singulos scopos non cessabant.
Alii sellis more solito colligatis sedentes, eas interim equo currente, ter
solvebant, ac post solutionem sagittantes, ter rursum eas dorso equi
colligabant, terque jaculis scopos haud gravatim contingebant. Alii in sellis
more consueto insidentes, extra sellam retro se concite locabant, ac capite
deorsum misso, rursus erecti, sellas insidebant, hocque ter facto, toties etiam
scopos jaculis appetebant. Alii in sella just sedentes, caput in equi ponebant
tergum, ac apprehensa equi cauda, dentibus eam ingerebant, atque illico se
erigentes, scopos nequaquam jaculis praeteribant. Alii post singulos jactus
sagittarum, ensem evaginatum circum caput minitabundi rotabant: quo mox vagina
recondito, nullum scopum a jaculis esse sinebant immunem. Alii inter nudos and
acutissimos enses a dextra ternos, laeva ternos, in tenuissimo amictu ita
sedebant, ut enses illi (si quo minus immoderate se movissent:) corpora eorum
crudeliter configerent: tamen ante and retro admirabili pernicitate and art
ita se vibrabant, ut prae se, and post tergum (quasi discriminis obliti:) nulli
scopo parcerent. Inter hos talia agentes tyrones, unus solus repertus est, qui
super duos pernicissima velocitate equos currentes, solutis staret pedibus, ac
ternas uno impetu, ante and retro simul funderet sagittas. Iterum erat alius,
qui itidem solus ex omnibus equo non sellato nec fraenato sedens, ad singulos
scopos se in pedes erigens stabat, perculsoque scopo dextra laevaque, iterum
sedebat: donec ad secundos and tertios scopos veniens, iterumse in pedes
erigeret, ac sagittandi munus egregie and mire expleret. Item and alius insuper
repertus est, qui solus ex reliquis equo insellato and nudo sedens, ubi ad
scopos venisset, in tergo equi supinus jacens, utrumque pedem in sublime
porrigebat, sicque concite erectus sagittandi officium impigre complebat:
Again, Et operae pretium erat videre tyrones illos, corpore proceros, vestitu
armisque decoros, gestu ipso admirabiles, ea in rapido equorum cursu agere quae
etiam in terra stantibus and factu difficillima, and visu stupenda, denique and
enarratu incredibilia pene viderentur, etc.

And that the unexpert may the better be satisfied, that these things are not
altogether impossible to men, who by their profession make it their constant
study and practice; I will add by the way what some ordinary men of our own
Country with a little practice, have performed in our days. In the year of
our Lord 1611* in the month of August, the Bishop of Ely (I think I may call
him the Bishop of Ely, (...), and do none of his worthy predecessors any
wrong; but, the Bishop of Ely that then was:) going to Wisby in Cambridg-shire,
and accompanied with many horses; there met him upon the ways a plain
Rustic, standing upright upon his horses bare back; and in that posture did
he gallop so fast, that none of the company could outgoe him, or so much as
keep pase with him. One that was then present made a Memorandum of it in these
words: Die primo itineris occurrit nobis rusticus, qui equi sui nudo dorso
insistens vehebatur tanta confidentia, ut admitteret ad cursum, neque aliquis
nostrum posset consequi eum ita currentem.

In point of strength, first active, the Turkish archer shall be my instance;
A strong Turkish bow (such you must understand as they generally used in former
times before they had so much degenerated from their ancient discipline:) the
string whereof a lusty strong man ( qui non assueverit, says Busbequius in
his Epistles:) that has not been used unto them, shall not be able to stir
with all his might so far, as to loozen a piece of money thrust at one of the
extremities between the string and the steel; a well practiced archer of that
Country and discipline, will make nothing to draw to his ear. And such is the
strength of one of those bows, (says learned Barclay, in his Icon animarum,
and professes to have seen it done,) that with a little arrow it will pierce
through chalybem tres digitos altum (I durst not English it, but that I know
the Author to be a man famous, and of good credit, in things of this nature at
least:) a steel three fingers thick; and even dart an arrow that shall want a
head with such force into a reasonable big tree, that the end of it shall be
seen on the other side. I bind no man to believe it, that has not seen it*
yet I know the Authors credit will go very far with them that have known
him; and that he is not the only that has reported it.

As for strength passive, I will content my self with that common example of
the Lacedemonian boys, and youths; the more common and the better attested,
the more uncontrollable and the fitter for our purpose. One of their solemn
yearly exercises, that their laws did oblige them unto, was their (...), as
they called it; that is, a public whipping of all their youths at a certain
place, to wit, ad aram Dianae Orthiae. Their youth (says Plutarch:) being
whipped and scourged all day long at the altar of Diana Orthia, (...), are wont
to endure it, even unto death, oftentimes, with joy and exultation, eagerly
striving one with another, who shall hold out longest and suffer most. Tullies
relation goes yet beyond this. For having said, as Plutarch, ad necem usque,
even unto death; he adds, quorum non modo nemo conclamavit unquam, sed ne
ingemuit quidem; that none of them (during the time of this bloody exercise:)
was ever known, either to cry, or so much as to groan. And both these, in
other places, profess to have been eyewitnesses of their patience, (...),
says Plutarch; We have seen our selves many of them dye at the very Altar,
with extreamitie of scourging. Adolescentium greges Lacedaemone vidimus ipsi,
(says Tullie,) incredibili contentione certantes pugnis, calcibus, unguibus,
morsu, denique ut exanimarentur, priusquam se victos faterentur. But to speak
truth, there is nothing more obvious in all Greek and Latin Authors that are
ancient: and therefore these two may well suffice. But this is not all that is
to be wondered at in this matter; but this also, that whilst these boys were
so used, their parents and dearest friends would look upon them with joy and
pleasure, yea exhort them themselves unto patience: adstantibus parentibus and
propinquis, says Tertullian, and uti perseverent adhortantibus. The word that
is used by Plutarch in his Lycurgus, speaking of these things, (...), practice
and exercise, puts me in mind of the ancient Christian Asceticks, of whom no
less in point of patience, if not more by far, might be related, but that I
would not be long.

In all these several general instances, it is out of all question, and all
Authors that write of them are of that opinion, that Custom and long practice,
is to be looked upon, as the only cause. The use (which I mentioned before,
and therefore will briefly set down here, though it be not the thing that I
aim at especially:) that diverse ancient Fathers, Philosophers and others make
of these and the like instances, is this: That those great insuperable
difficulties, that men usually pretend to meet with in the way that leads
unto Virtue and godliness, are rather vain pretenses and (...) (as Saint
Chrysostom in a thousand places:) that is, mere want of courage and
resolution, then difficulties really hard and insuperable: (...) (as Polybius
in a place, very elegantly and fully:) (...), And therefore that men must not
start back from the prosecution of any thing that is good and profitable by
reason of those seeming difficulties, but betake themselves to the power of use
and custom, by which all that good is and laudible, is made possible unto man.

Now in all these it is apparent, that custom is rather supra naturam, then
contra naturam, directly. We shall therefore in the next place consider the
power of it, even in those things, wherein it is directly opposite unto Nature.
The discussion of these things at large, I leave unto professed Naturalists and
Physicians. Some few instances will serve my turn, and will sufficiently
afford unto them, that are both capable and curious, (I take it in the better
sense:) matter of further speculation.

(...): all excess is against nature. So Philosophers and Physicians. Yet what
excess so unnatural, that a man, by custom, may not bring himself unto?
Yea, if a man have once used himself unto excess, it is dangerous for him to
return unto nature and mediocritie, because he has used himself unto
excess. For even things naturally and of themselves hurtful, through use and
custom become expedient and necessary. Therefore says Hippocrates, (...),
Those things that we are used unto, though worse of themselves, use to be
less dangerous then better things that we are not used unto. And Aristotle
does instance in Dionysius the Tyrant, who in a dangerous siege having forborne
for a while his riot, fell into a consumption, of which he could not be cured,
until he returned unto his former custom.

What more contrary to Nature then poison; which therefore among other names is
called (...), as the greatest enemy of Nature? Yet by custom in diverse ages
both men and women have been known to bring themselves to this pass, as not
only to take most dangerous poisons without hurt, but also to feed upon them
and to receive nourishment from them. We read of some that have lived upon
nothing else. Whereof you may read in Gallen de Simpl. Med. lib. 3.18. Sennert.
lib. iv. c. 3. And lib. iii. de Febrib. And although in some of these there
might sometimes concur some secret of Nature in the proper constitution
(whereof see Libavius de Venenis, and Gallen 3. de Sim. Med. who shows a
reason in Anatomy, why that poison which kills men, is a food unto the
Stares:) or otherwise; yet generally (which suffices us:) that this is
adscribed unto custom as the cause, I appeal unto the forenamed Authors, and
diverse others that have treated of it.

What more natural unto man, then to live upon the Earth, the natural mother
(both in regard of their beginning and of their ending:) of all men? Yet we
read of some, who by custom of often swimming and conversing in the waters,
have made the waters so natural unto their bodies, that they could hardly
endure the land, and not without present danger of their health. Iovianus
Pontanus, writes of one Colon of his times (as I conceive:) a notable Vrinator
or diver, who could not indeed continue long together out of the sea, and would
swim a hundred miles together and above, from one shore to another, and from
one Country to another, with great speed, and at all times of the year. But
this I must confess I take upon trust; for I have not read it in the Author
himself; but in our learned John Barnes a Benedictine, in his contra Aequivoc.
35.323. Neither do I know whether he had brought himself to this by custom
only or no. But if this story be not to my purpose, this other is I am sure,
which I shall now produce out of a certain Commentator upon Aristotle his
Axiomata: who upon that saying of Aristotle, Consuetudo est altera natura: has
these words: Alibi quanta sit vis consuetudinis explicatiori sermon proditum
est: Illis tamen hoc velim additum, quod prae sua novitate and infrequenti
similis rei eventu pene incredibile erit, hominem quendam patria Syculum, a
puero ita natandi consuetudine usitatum, ut deinceps piscium more sub aquis
longo tempore versaretur; quibus cum exiret, ut communi hominum usu frueretur,
tanto ventriculi dolor angebatur, ut valetudinis nanciscendae causa, ad aquas
esset redeundum. Quibus rursum immersus, ludi and recreationis gratia, si
quando naves mari volarent, in eas saliebat, atque post sumptum cibum, iterum
descendebat, ubi ad multam usque aetatem vitam protraxit. Whether he means it
of the same as Pontanus does, because I have not Pontanus at this time, I
cannot tell. To some such kind of men it is not unlikely, that Saint
Chrysostom did allude in one of his Homilies (the sixteenth as I remember:)
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he tells rich men of their
unmercifulness and want of compassion, whose curiosity to satisfy with
strange spectacles, among other inventions poor men were driven (...), to
search and ransacke the deepest parts of the Ocean; that some way or other they
might extort somewhat from them. But Seneca directly, speaking of the strange
inventio^s of the (...), or wonder-workers of his days, reckons among the
rest, in immensam altitudinem mergi, ac sine ulla respirandi vice perpeti
maria; and again not long after, penetrare in imum mare; which may give much
light to that passage of Saint Chrysostomes. And among the sundry kinds of
exercises Artis Gymnasticae, I find that one was, continere spiritum; to hold
and keep in their breaths: it being one of those things (it seems:) which use
and custom can do much in, as well as in other things.

But it would be infinite to treat of the power of custom from all particular
examples and instances that occur in diverse writers, Historians,
Philosophers, and others, both old and late. The truth of some of them
perchance may be questioned. I deny it not: though I read not scarce any thing
in any of them so strange in this kind, but might be averred and paralelled, if
not as certainly true, at least as possible, by manifest experience, either in
the same kind or very like, even in our days.

Yet it is not granted by all men, that custom is of such power and efficacy
in things natural. Aristotle seems in some place to be one of them, that
will not grant it. (...), says he in a place, (...). One custom may be
remooved and taken away by some other custom, but nothing can ever prevail
against Nature. And again in his Ethics, Lib. ii. c. 1. as peremptorily
(...), Nothing that is natural can be altered by custom. Others, though they
speak not so peremptorily of it, yet they restrain the power of it very much.
So Alex. Messaria, a famous Physician, in his Treatise of the plague,
Consuetudinem (says he) plurimum posse negandum non est; sed ita tamen, ut ne
limits naturae transcendat, etc. And Sennertus, (an exact judicious writer, as
most of that profession,) more punctually yet, Pract. Medicinae lib. iii. part
1. sect. ii. c. 2. de longa abstin. Consuetudinis (says he:) maximam vim esse
certum est, non tamen in omnibus locum habet: sed certa saltem opera sunt, in
quae jus habet consuetudo. Etenim in sensus actiones nullam potestatem habet,
neque quis potest assuescere, ut non olfaciat, sentiat, vel non respiret, etc.

To this many things might be opposed, from certain experience. In this very
point de longa abstin. that Sennertus speaks of, Ancient Histories afford
examples to the contrary. We read of one Iul. Viator, who to save his life
having by little and little used himself to abstain from drinking as, being
far gone in a dropsy, naturam (says Pliny:) fecit consuetudine, did at
last turn custom into nature, and in senectam potu abstinuit, and so lived to
be an old man without drink. And Pliny says, scimus, as of a thing commonly
known and not doubted of by any. And Seneca as peremptorily, that assidua
meditatione (that is, by custom) quidam omni humore interdixere corporibus.
And Lipsius there averreth, that even in our age, there have been examples of
such absolute forbearance, from all manner of drink. Then for the senses; what
shall we say to Appianus, who tells us of one Geta, a Citizen of Rome, who in
the time of the Civil wars, being one of them that was marked and sought
after to death, to the end that he might the better disguise himself, among
other things counterfeited himself to be blind of one eye, and wore I know not
what over his concealed eye some years. And then his danger being over, when
he thought to have restored his long captive eye to his former liberty, he
found the eye there indeed, but the sight was gone; and so continued blind of
that eye to his dying day. And Appianus says directly that it was (...), for
want of use of his eye (that is, because he did use himself not to see with
it) that he lost it.

But to leave particular instances; how much the ancients did attribute to the
power of custom upon the senses, may appear by that opinion which we find in
many of them, of the Music of the Sphaeres, caused as they conceived, by
their circumvolution; audible as they affirmed, but not heard, or rather not
discerned, because we heard it always. What good grounds they had for this
opinion, is not to my purpose to enquire at this time. I dare not say that
Saint Ambrose was of that opinion; but that he did not think there was any
impiety in it, may appear by his Preface upon the Psalms. But Saint Anselme
plainly, Septem coelestes orbs cum dulcisona Harmonia volvuntur, ac
suavissimi concentus eorum circuitione efficiuntur, etc. de Imagine. mundi. But
that which from that opinion is here pertinent to my discourse, is, that they
that maintained it, were also, most of them, of opinion, that the reason why
we did not hear it, was merely (...), because our ears were accustomed unto
it, as you shall find expressly in Heracledus Ponticus, in his Homericall
Allegor. In Aristotle de Coelo. ii.9. and others. Tullie also aimed at the same
reason, in his Somn. Scipion. when he says, Hoc sonitu oppletae aures
obsurduerunt: though his next words adscribe it rather to magnitudini sonitus,
then consuetudini; which would import a total destruction of the sense; and
not a deficiencie of it to one particular object only. This indeed is another
consideration, but apparently false; since that upon that ground, all hearing
would be quite taken away; as Pliny in his History, Seneca in his Natural
Questions expressly affirm of those inhabitants about Nilus, that he speaks
of there; to wit that they are quite deaf. I know there are others yet, that
have maintained this celestial Harmony upon other grounds. Philo Iudaeus
says directly that it is not audible (to us men, that is:) that it does not
reach unto the ears; and the reason why God would not have it audible he
says, is, lest men ravished with the sweetness of it, should give over all
care and thought of worldly affairs. Yet for the most, as I have already said,
that they grounded, if not their opinions, yet their answers to usual
objections against it, upon the power of custom, let Saint Basil tell them
that shall make any question of it; Whose words are these: (...), etc. But when
they that maintain this opinion are required to make it good by some sensible
evidence, what say they? Why, this they say; that our ears being used to this
noise from our first entrance into the world, through this long use and custom
from the beginning they have lost the sense of it. As they who live in Smiths
forges, whose ears are perpetually, etc. Which is quite contrary to that of
Sennertus, that consuetudo in sensus actiones nullam potestatem habet. And now
since that upon this subject of Custom, I have had occasion to say so much
concerning the supposed Celestial Harmony of the Sphaeres, I shall willingly
impart unto others what I have met with about it in the written Adversaria (for
in any printed Book I have not as yet, that I remember:) of a man well known
unto the world by his writings; though at this time, for some reasons, I shall
desire to spare his Name.

Harmonia coelestis (...) viridis supra fidem senectus ultra annum centessimum.
Obtulit mihi more gentis suae and Germanorum, libru^ suum amicoru^, Ieremias
Plancius Plancii F. qui nunc Amsterdami ministrum agit verbi divini: sed
editione chartarum Geographicarum nomen suum fecit celebre. In eo libro inveni
haec verba manu Roberti Constantini scripta.

Robore and constantia.
Robertus Constantinus Baro Gymatius, and in Academia Montalbanensi Professor
Graecarum literarum, Idemque experientia quotidiana 24. annorum, assertor (...)
vocalis audibilisque contra Aristotelem naturalis Philosophiae facile principem
omnium, haec (...) occupatiss. exaravi in gratiam hospitis mei, and Auditoris
D. Ieremiae Plancii, viri tum pietate, tum doctrina spectabilis. Montalbani
anno Domini 1605. Aetatis nostrae (summo Dei beneficio hucusque tam animo quam
corpore ad miraculum integrae:) centessimo, ut (...), tum amici, tum invidi
dinumerare sunt consueti. Senex autem nondum est victus, qui virilia munera
(...) obire possit, and viriliter exercere.

Erat manus illius and elegans and firma, ac plane ejusmodi qualem verisimile
est fuisse in ipso aetatis flore. descripsimus vero heic, and quod invenimus in
alio libro simili de causa nobis allato.

(...).
Robertus Constantinus Baro Gymatius and Professor Graecarum literarum in
Academia Montalbanensi, Idemque assertor audibilis coelestisque harmoniae
experientia quotidiana plusquam viginti annorum.

Haec raptim exaravi in gratiam amiciss. viri atque eruditiss. D. Iohannis
Davini. Montalbani 24. Febr. Anno 1605. Robore and constantia.

Hic est Rob. Constantinus, qui olim apud Iulium Caesarem [Scaligerum] vixit,
and postea Lexicon publicavit. Caeterum de hac longaevitate ipsius, haud satis
fidem illi habeo, nam video ipsum non plane affirmare. Quare more senum
indulget sibi, and annorum suorum numerum, nisi fallor, aliquot supra fidem
adauget.

So far those written Adversaria. Of this Constantinus you may read in
Thuanus tom. v. of his great age and good worth as a scholar; and that he was
( summus Bezae amicus:) one of Beza's chiefest and dearest acquaintance. But of
this pretended sensible knowledge of the Celestial Harmony, not one word
there; which has made me the more willing to insert here, and make public,
what I had elsewhere in my private possession about it.

And so much shall suffice at this time concerning the power of custom in
things natural; historically. Now, Philosophically, and speculatively, we
thus proceed.

First that it is not without danger, nor according to exact Truth, to say that
Nature is alterable. For what is Nature properly, but the Order of God? If that
be mutable and violable; then is no more this World a (...); or orderly piece,
but a mass of confusion; and that is it, that the Atheists, and the opposers
of a Providence would have. Neither can there be any truth properly in those
things, the nature whereof is altogether uncertain; therefore uncertain,
because unconstant. And where there is no Truth, there can be no knowledge. As
to the World therefore, confusion; so to the understanding, ignorance, from
this uncertaintie and inconstancy must necessarily ensue. As for Miracles,
though above nature, yet are they not properly against nature, since they are
his proper work, who is the Author of nature, and therefore originally, and
sutably to his Nature, did reserve unto himself a power to dispense with his
own laws whenever he thought fit. All Gods works of themselves, and in
regard of God, are equally natural, though not in regard of us.

We say therefore that custom is not always to be considered as opposite unto
Nature, since it is the nature of sublunarie things, to be altered by custom.
And when custom has once through continuance naturalized her self into any
of them, then custom (to speak properly:) is no more custom, but Nature:
according to that of old Evenus in Arist. (...), that long use and exercise,
becomes at last nature. Nature then we say, by the ordinance and appointment of
its first Author, is twofold; original, and secundarie or adventitious, and
so Gallen plainly, (...), custom is a kind of adventitious, or, adscititious
nature. Neither is custom, when it is once become natural, though
adventitious, less natural in regard of the common Nature of the Universe,
from which at first it received the power and propriety, to turn, in time,
into nature; then that original nature: though in regard of the particular
subject, that it has wrought upon, it be but adventitious. When therefore it
is commonly said, that such or such a thing has lost its nature; it must be
understood of that particular nature and propriety which it had at the first;
not absolutely, as though it had departed from the law of Nature in general;
since that Nature it self has made it so alterable. As of death we say
vulgarly, that it is against nature; though it be as properly, and truly the
work of Nature, as birth or generation is; and as natural to the nature of
the Universe. And so is that true of Aristotle (which we have spoken before:)
that (...), Nature cannot be driven away, being understood of Universal
Nature.

Gallen, a great admirer of Nature, and much to be admired himself, for his
painful travels in the search of it, has another way to reduce custom unto
Nature. His opinion is, that any man's nature may be known, or at lest,
probably guest at, by those things that he is used unto. And therefore prefers
those Phycsiians that allow unto their patients whatsoever they have been used
to, though contrary to art; before them who keep them strictly to the general
prescripts without respect to their proper constitution: (...), says he,
(...). That is, Most men that use themselves to any thing, whatsoever it be,
they must be conceived to pitch upon such things, as are most suitable to their
own Nature; for that finding hurt by those things that are contrary unto it,
they are forced to forbear them speedily. Yea plainly, that none can (...),
long continue in an evil custom contrary to their proper constitutions, who
are not extremely mad and senseless. By this, custom and Nature should be
all one: or at least custom for the most part, nothing else but the fruits and
effects of original Nature. For my part I should easily grant that any man's
present constitution (which you may call his Nature, for the time, though
improperly:) may not unlikely be judged of, by those things that are
customarie unto him. But that a man's original temper and constitution (which
is it that Gallen there speaks of:) may so be known, except we shall extend
madness, and senslesnesse very far, common experience will disproove. For what
generally more natural unto all men, then temperance and sobriety? And what
more generally practiced in the World, among all sorts of men, then excess,
and riot, and intemperance, in some one kind or other, if not in all? But by
the way; If in the judgment of Gallen a heathen, all such are to be reputed as
mad men, because they respect their health and corporal welfare no more; what
would he have said of them, had he been a Christian, for their wilful
casting away of their souls (so much more precious then the body, by how much
Heaven does excel the earth:) by the said courses? Certainly madness is a far
more general evil, then most men think. But this, by the way only. When
Philosophers dispute (as many do:) whether Nature or education, that is,
custom, be more powerful to frame and fashion a man's life; it would be but an
absurd question, scarce fit to be proposed by any sober man, much more unfit to
be so seriously disputed of by learned Philosophers, if nature and custom in
this sense come all to one. But I shall here appeal from Gallen unto Gallen
himself, whose words in his (...). upon Hippoc. Prognost. (treating there of
the proper and most natural time of sleep*) are these: (...), etc. In the
days of Hippocrates indeed, that which is according to nature, and that which
is according to custom, was all one. But now it is quite otherwise, etc. And
presently again, (...) (...), etc. In these days, custom is of more power
then nature, etc.

Tullie also his conceit in his Tusculans is not to be omitted; who having
spoken of some that had hardened themselves to endure great extremities of
heat, and of cold; as also bodily pains in other kinds, intolerable unto
others; all this with either no sense; or at least, most wonderful patience;
whereas other men adscribe all this unto custom, he would have it to be
Nature, even common Nature. For says he, Nunquam naturam mos vinceret; est
enim easemper invicta: It is not a thing possible that custom should prevail
against Nature; for nature it unconquerable. How then, say we, comes it to
pass that other men cannot endure the said extremities, if not against nature?
Because, says he, we have through custom used our bodies to tenderness, and
so made that intolerable unto them, which by nature is very tolerable; His
words are, Sed nos umbris, deliciis, otio, languore, desidia animum infecimus,
opinionibus maloque more delinitum, mollivimus, etc. We with our shades and
other wanton inventions and uses; with our idleness, looseness, long
continued laziness, have corrupted our minds, and through the power of false
opinions and bad customs have softened and effeminated our selves into this
tenderness: etc. There is certainly, though it seems not perchance so
plausible at first, much truth in this opinion. I appeal unto them, (and they
are not a few:) that have maintained, that Nature has sufficiently fenced man
(as well as other creatures:) against all excess of either heat or cold; and
that clothes seem now necessary, custom to be the cause, not nature.
Synesius a learned Philosopher, at first; and afterward a worthy father of the
Church, also; in his de Calvitio, or, commendation of baldness, seems to be
of opinion (seriously; though his subject may seem but jocular:) that if men
did wear neither hats nor hayres upon their heads, their sculs used to the
Sun and to the weather, would in time grow to that hardness, as to become
almost impenetrable. To this purpose he first brings a testimony of
Herodotus, of the difference of Egyptian and Persick sculs, observed by
Herodotus himself by the direction of the natives of the Country; the one
being so hard, (...), that a stone thrown against them would hardly crack
them; the other so brittle, that the least knock would break them; this
difference being conceived both by the inhabitants themselves, and by
Herodotus, to proceed from this cause, because the one were wont to go bare
headed, and shaven from their youths; and the others (...) (to use his own
elegant expression:) (...), sheltered from the Sun, with hats and other
head-attire. This he further confirms by an example of his times, there being
then (as Synesius relates it:) in the town, a certain poor bald pate (not by
nature, but art:) who did use to go up and down the streets, and to show
himself at all ordinary great concurses of people, as at the ordinary races of
the Circus, and the like; so that no man was better known in the whole town.
This man with his bare head, would butte with a ram (were he never so stout:)
and put him to the worst; suffer tyles to be thrown at his head, and make them
fly in pieces: as also endure scalding pitch to be powered upon his head.
This, and the like, to show (to the great astonishment of the beholders:) the
stoutnesse and unsensiblenesse of his headpiece. But it might be so naturally;
you may think perchance. No; it was by custom; or rather if you will (which
is that Tullie would have:) naturally; but no otherwise naturally in him, then
in other men that would use the means. For Synesius says expressly, that
himself could for a need have wrought his own head to this, in case he had no
other means to subsist by; but therefore gives God thanks, that he needed it
not. I say therefore, to return unto Tully, that there is a great deal of
truth in that opinion of his. Yet to stretch nature so far, as he does there,
even to them, qui cum ad flammam se applicuerint, sine gemitu aduruntur; who
can suffer their bodies to be burnt by degrees, and yet not seem to feel it;
(of whom Lucianus in his Peregrinus speaks, as more particularly, so more
incredibly; and yet, I think, truly enough:) and the like; I cannot hold that
to be according to truth. Neither I think would Tullie (as excellent a
Philosopher every whit; as he was an excellent Orator:) have affirmed it, but
upon such an occasion, having taken upon him in that place, the defense of that
unnatural paradoxe of the Stoics, That no extremity of bodily pain and
torments, could hinder or lessen a wise man's happiness in this world; glad
therefore of any thing, that had but some color of truth, though not so solid
otherwise. And thus much by the way of Gallen and Tullie their opinions
concerning the power of custom.

Secondly, that Nature in a general sense is not mutable, that is, cannot
exorbitate or go beyond the bounds that were at first set unto it by its
author, may appear, first by those laws and orders that God has set
inviolably to some sublunarie things* as to the Sea, so that it shall not
overflow the Earth, Job 38.8, etc. and to the World in general concerning the
seasons of the year, that they shall never fail, Genesis 8.22. but especially,
by those that it has set to those purer bodies above, which as they are not by
nature changeable; so do most firmly and constantly continue in their first
office and form. For as for such alterations, that even in them some
Astronomers tell us of, till they be better known and agreed upon, we shall
not need to take any notice of them; neither indeed are they such alterations,
as would cross, but rather confirm, what we shall here say.

Sol and Lunasuo lustrantes lumine circum
Perdocuere homines annoru^ tempora verti;
Et certaratione gerirem, atque ordine certo: says old Lucretius. Even they
who by reason of the frailty and mutabilitie of sublunarie things called this
world in scorn, (...), and (...), a mere hotch pot, a mass of confusion, and
the like; yet when they looked up, and observed there such glory, such order;
such constancy, such immutabilitie; they were driven to acknowledge a
rational power and providence over the Whole. And even this (...), this (...),
this mingle mangle, or what ever they will, of sublunarie things; had they well
viewed it with more rational eyes, then they did; as Pliny well in a place
speaking of the gnat (If my memory fail me not,) nusquam natura magis tota,
quam in minimis; that the power of Nature was greatest in her lest works; so
would they with admiration have said of it, that nusquam potentior natura, quam
in maxim fragilibus; or if you will have it in the words of Saint Paul (that
ye may know God to be the same God in things natural, as he is in things
spiritual, as in truth, there is but one truth both of things spiritual and
natural:) that (...) (...), that it is the height and perfection of the
divine power to show it self most powerful in those things that are most
weak.

Thirdly, it is further to be considered, that where custom makes an
alteration, and becomes (...), ascititious nature; yet does it seldom so
overcome nature original, but that it has some force and secret operation in
and upon the subject; the less visible, the more powerful; yea the more
dangerous; as it prooves oftentimes. So through custom a man may bring
himself to an habit of intemperance, that it shall not be in his power, nor
safe for his body, perchance to return unto sobriety. Yet neither is it at
first without danger (it is death unto many to attempt it:) and (if Gallen may
be credited:) it is a great chance, if at the last (though the inconvenience of
it be not presently perceived:) it do not prove some way or other
pernicious. What, if some intemperate men attain to 60. or 80? They may thank
the strength of their nature for it, which bad custom could no sooner
overthrow* and had they been sober men, it is more then likely, their life how
long soever, might have been longer by 20. years at lest. So, a man through
continual labor and industry may do much in the pursuit of some art or
science; yet if he have not a genius to it, a natural aptitude and
disposition, he shall never attain (be his labor never so great:) to any
great perfection: whereas less labor in a way more suitable to his nature,
might have made him excellent. Hence is that Praecept of the Poet, Tu nihil
invita, dices faciesque Minerva; that we do nothing invita Minerva, that is,
as Tullie does interpret it in his first de Offic. adversante and repugnante
natura. I omit many pregnant passages to this purpose of the two great
Naturalists, Hipocrates and Gallen; which you may read, either in themselves;
or, if that will serve your turn, in Huart, his Examen des Ingenios. They are
all for original nature, and without it they think all labor is lost. So
says Seneca too: Inclinandum quo te vis ingenii defert. Male enim respondent
coacta ingenia, reluctante natura irritus labor est. I must confess, I am not
altogether of their opinion; neither was Plutarch I am sure; and examples there
be (if we were now to argue the case) good store to the contrary.
Nevertheless, their admonitions, I acknowledge, are to good purpose, that
Parents and Masters should carefully observe the natural inclination of
youths, before they design them to any particular profession. This for the
most part is the safest way. That Is enough, though we say no more.

Fourthly, besides, in many things, when a man has done all that art can, and
industry; yet cannot he be secure, but that nature Original may return and
show her self upon the sudden; and that to his cost, as it may prove. As
for example, we read of diverse, that have taken great pains to tame wild
beasts, that they might use them as familiarly, as we do commonly those,
which are tame by nature. And we read withal of diverse who have found by
woeful experience, that forced nature is of those things, which by a wise man
may not be trusted. Witness he of whom Martial speaks, ii.75. Verbera
securi solitus Leo far magistri,
Insertamque pati blandus in ora manum:
Dedidicit pacem, subito feritate reversa,
Quanta nec in Lybicis debuit esse jugis:
and, de spectac. x. Laeserat ingrato Leo perfidus ore magistrum,
Ausus tam notas contemerare manus, etc.
The Poet therefore had some reason, (though it hold not in all things
equally:) when he said, Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurret,
Et mala perrumpet furtim fastidia victrix.


Fifthly, it has been observed of some free stones, that when they are used
in a building if they be laid in that proper posture, which they had naturally
in their quarries, they grow very hard and durable against both time and
weather; if that be changed, that they consume and moulder away in a short
time. Certainly, art may do much, and custom much; but to follow nature
(where nature herself has not degenerated:) is always both the surer, and
most commendable. And so I shall conclude this part of the power of custom in
things natural, with the words of a Heathen, but such as may become a
Christian, (...). O nature, from thee are all things, in thee all things
subsist, and to thee all tend. What ever it be that fits thee well, fits me
likewise, as being part of thee. Nothing that thy seasons bear, is to me, (as
either too forward, or too backward,) unseasonable, etc.

THe ancient Greek Philosophers said, (...), This world is but a change; and
the Apostle speaking of the World, very elegantly and emphatically calls it,
(...), rather then (...), intimating thereby, that this World, to speak of it
truly and properly, is rather a matter of fashion, then of substance. (...)
(says Theophylact upon the place, lately most elegantly printed in London, as
the happy first fruits of a greater harvest of Greek Manuscripts to be set
out here in England, to the great honor of this Realm, and the no less
contentment of all true lovers of learning:) (...). He calls it (...), or
fashion, to teach us, that all the things of this present world, are but
objects of the eye only, and serve but for a show, as things merely
superficial, without any either stabilitie, or substance in themselves. It is
so, if we consider those things, which, both in regard of their form and
matter, are merely natural, and it is so if we consider those, which have
their existence in, and from the will of man. The body of man is not so
mutable, as his will is: nor the persons and outward features of men, so
different one from another, as their minds. Nova vita, novos mores postulat,
says the Comic. We have more reason to say, Novus dies, novos mores. And yet
that is more then we can truly say of many, who in one day shift themselves
often, and are not the men that they were; neither in regard of their mind, nor
happily of their fashions. (...) (says excellently Saint Nazianzene to this
purpose. Orat. de Spir. Sancto.) (...). We are not mixed creatures only, but
also contrary; both to others and to our own selves: not continuing truly
and entirely the same, not so much as one day, much less our whole lives: but
both in regard of our bodies and in regard of our souls (or minds:)
perpetually flowing and perpetually changing.

From this mutabilitie and inconstancy of man's will, we may first deduce
Variety of fashions and customs. But secondly, differences of places and
times cause difference of fashions and customs; and this of necessity. For it
is not possible for many reasons, that men that live under different clymates,
should all live after one fashion: nor that the inhabitants of one place (the
state of things altering often as it does:) should always live after one sort.
Hence are in different places and Kingdoms, at all times; and in the same
places and Kingdoms, by certain revolutions of times, sometimes longer,
sometimes shorter, different fashions, different customs, different laws. Old
fables tell us of one Epimenides, who after a continual sleep of fifty
years awaked with amazement, finding a new world, every where (as of men, so
of fashions:) since he had seen it last. Let this long sleep go, as well it
may, for a fabulous thing: the effects of it, I am sure; (his amazement, I
mean) might have been credible enough, though the sleep had been shorter by
many years. In some Countries (for all Countries are not equally light and
phantasticke; and they are happy Countries, that are lest:) if men should but
put on those clothes that they left of but four or five years ago, and use
those fashions that then were in use, they would seem, even unto themselves,
ridiculous; and unto many, little less then monstrous.

The consideration of this variety affords, as unto the Naturalists, matter of
speculation, how even herein nature delights in variety; so unto the Divine,
matter of indignation, to see the vanity of mortal men, who for the most part
spend themselves wholly, their wits and their lives, upon things so
transitory; and spend little or no time at all, upon the only (...), (as both
Philosophers and the Scriptures are wont to speak:) God, that is, and his
service, and the Knowledge of his Truth; which are the only things that are
permanent, and have realitie of existence in this World; and therefore
commended unto us by Christ, as the (...) of all our many cares and businesses
in this World; the one only thing that is profitable and necessary. But to
forbear that which I find already done by diverse Divines, Naturalists, and
others fully and sufficiently: I shall here only observe the power and
providence of Almighty God, who as he can out of darkness bring forth
light, so can turn these wretched effects (in themselves:) of man's frailty
and corruption, to be the means, in part, of his happiness. I say therefore,
that what in the Heavens, the Sun and the Moon, diverse Stars and Planets
are, for the natural division of times, to divide the day from the night, to
be for signs and for seasons, and for days, and for years, Genesis i.14.
without which division of times and seasons, there would be no living in this
World: so variety of fashions and customs, serve unto man for the Civil or
politic distinction of the several times and ages of the World, without
which there would be little certain knowledge, and little or no truth amongst
men. By variety of customs, I here understand also variety of languages, and
dialects, and words, (all which depend of custom as much, if not more then any
other thing of the World besides; as elsewhere shall be showed*) as conducing
to the knowledge of the Truth in this World, no less then variety of manners.
Now to make this good that I have said, I must first of all suppose, which I
think no man will deny, that by books especially we come to the knowledge of
Truth. Of truth in general, by books especially; in some peculiar objects of
Truth, as in matters of History we have them only to trust to. And in matter
of books, the Authors of the books, and the times when the Authors lived, is
mainely considerable. For accordingly do we give credit (especially in point
of History and truth of religion:) to the Books themselves, more or less,
for the most part. In many things, this alone, to know the Author of the book,
is enough to decide many controversies. But what if the Title deceive us, and
some (...) of some idle brain of our age, represent it self unto us upon the
stage under the gray hairs of authenticke antiquity? Have there not been
such impostors at all times, who have attempted (would I could say, they have
attempted it only:) to abuse the World with supposititious Titles and Names?
What profession so sacred, or so vulgar, that has not suffered in all ages, by
this kind of men? Divines, Lawyers, Phisicians, Philosophers, Historians, have
in all ages complained of them: and in those ages, when by reason of the
ignorance of the times, men have not been able to discover them, what errors
and absurdities, both in matter of knowledge and practice, both in the Church
and in the Commonwealth, have ensued thereupon, to those that are learned, is
not unknown, I am sure; and I may not so far digress at this time, to
satisfy the ignorant. Of all noble Impostors in this kind, I will instance but
in one. Annius Viterbiensis, a Monk by profession, who lived some two hundred
years ago, having attained to more then ordinary knowledge both of the
tongues and Histories, applied himself by his knowledge and proficiencie, not
to help, but to cheat the World. To that end he counterfeited diverse ancient
Historians of best note and greatest antiquity, as Berosus, Manetho, Catonis
Origines, and the like, which had not been heard of in many ages; and wrote
Comments upon them, himself being both Text and Comment, that the World might
have the less occasion to suspect his fraud: and passed so current for a long
time, that even to this day (though followed and discryed by diverse learned men
of all nations and professions:) many can scarce persuade themselves, that so
many fine Titles and shows, should be but a piece of juggling. Now what
shameful errors and mistakes in point of History both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, they that have trusted unto him have been led into by this jugglor,
any man may imagine, and many have written of it.

Now the ordinary and surest way generally to find out a counterfeit Author in
this kind, is by his style, and by an accurate examination of those particular
fashions, and customs that he does either obiter, (which can hardly be
avoided in any book of what subject soever it be:) or purposely speak of, how
well they fit and suit to the time and place that is pretended. Take away these
two (...), of words and customs, and it will be a hard task for any man to
discover and evict the supposititiousnes of any writing. Hence it is, that in
the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, by Gods great providence all
things (for the most part:) be so punctually set down with all kind of
circumstances at large; which though illiterate men perchance pass over by
reason of their ignorance, yet men of learning, to whom the state of the World
from the beginning with the several periods, alterations, and revolutions of
it (as far as it can be known by ancient books and Records:) is not
unknown, receive marveilous satisfaction from them, both for the better
confirmation of their faith, and the greater contentment of their minds. For
this cause men of judgment, that would gladly make use of their own eyes to
see the way that leads unto truth, and not altogether to depend from the
ability both and fidelity of others, have taken so much pains about words;
as also to be well verst in the rites and customs of all ages and places.
Neither can it be denied by men of understanding, but that this way of study
has been, next under God, the chiefest means of this blessed (...), or new
birth of learning, which begun not much above a hundred years ago. And I must
confess, I have wondered with my self sometimes, that this kind of learning
being come to that height or perfection as it is in our days, no man has yet
labored for the ease of others, to reduce it to some certain Method and rules
of art, as it were; as by setting down the proper words and rites of every age
and place, whereby they are discernable from another; by the help whereof, even
men of ordinary learning might give a good guess at the age of every Author
that they have occasion to use, nor be altogether so liable to the impostures
or falsaries, as they are. Which certainly is feasible enough, if not to
perfection, yet to a good degree of public utilitie. But on the other side,
when I call to mind, that Impostors would be the first that would make use of
this art, to make their forgeries the more passable (as certainly they would:)
then I think it very happy, that it is not, neither of it self more easy to
attain unto, nor made more common by the labor of others, then it is.

What I have said of the knowledge of old customs and the use thereof, in
matter of books, is as true in matter of old writings and evidences of what
kind soever. True it is, that nothing should be more sacred and inviolable
amongst men, then public instruments, and evidences, whose only end and use,
is, to be witnesses unto the truth, and to protect it from her many enemies, as
malice, favor, partiality, and the like. Yet how rightly Seneca said, Nihil
esse tam sacrum quod sacrilegum non inveniat, may appear even in this
particular. For it is well known, that even of old, many evidences have been
forged to abuse the World withal: and that sometimes, not by one or two
secretly combining, but even by many unanimously conspiring together, against
the Truth. For example, I find that about some four hundred years ago,
Gregory the ninth being then Pope of Rome, and Saint Edmond, Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Monks of Canterbury were convicted to have counterfeited, or
adulterated a certain Charter of Thomas of Becket, by which they claimed
certain privileges. For which abominable fact and other enormities, that
worthy pious Prelate intended great and severe punishments upon the whole
Convent. But they having made Otho the Popes Legate and Edmunds great enemy,
their friend, prevailed with the Pope, that the cause might be referred to the
said Otho: And in conclusion, but three of the whole Convent were found guilty
by Otho. And upon this favorable information, and friendly mediation withal
of the Legate, the Pope sent a dispensation unto the Monastery, by which he
did acquit them both from present further troubles, and from future deserved
infamy for such an infamous Act. Even those three that were found guilty, it
was judged they had done it in Spiritu simplicitatis (so runs the
Dispensation:) and for this their simplicity, forsooth, they were, not exiled,
but confined to certain places to do penance. No wonder if others have made
bold in that kind since, if the imputation of simplicity was the worst that
would come of it. Simplicitas digna favore fuit, says one of the old Poets. If
we look back unto better and purer ages, we shall not find I am sure that
Simplicity, was ever objected unto any as a crime; but in Monckes especially,
that once it was thought their chiefest commendation, I find in many Fathers.
But since it is as it is, we may thank God, that evidences and old writings
as well as other things, have had their proper customs in almost all ages; by
the knowledge and consideration whereof the true for the most part, (if the
Impostor has not been very cunning:) may be easily known from the
counterfeit. For not to speak here either of the words themselves or form of
writing, or manner of orthographie, as well considerable in these, as in
books; besides these, there are diverse other things, that are observable.
There have been times, when Seals have been in use, and times when they were
not: when such and such seals, and such and such dates; when such and such
subscriptions, and superscriptions; and sundry such particulars; much differing
one from another all of them, according to their several times and places.
Those therefore take a very good course, who when they have occasion to set out
any ancient Records and evidences, keep to their originals in all points, as
near as may be, to give the better satisfaction unto the learned: which is the
course I see (and am heartily glad to see it:) that Sir Henry Spilman Knight,
that learned and painful Antiquarie, does take in the publication of the
English Synods; which (for the good and honor of our English Church:) he is
now about. For in very truth, a very small alteration, is enough sometimes to
make a true Record suspected. As for example; That those small Arithmeticall
figures (which we had from the Maures or Arabs, as they from the Indians:)
have not been known or in use amongst us Christians scarce yet four hundred
years, has beeene observed by men perfectly well versed in the knowledge,
both of ancient times and writings. They were much to blame therefore, who
setting out some writings of above seven hundred years antiquity, and
professing to follow the Originalls very exactly and punctually in all
circumstances of writing; made no scrupule in lieu of those Roman figures then
in use, to put these small ones so lately received, which certainly they found
not in those Originals.

In the same Manuscript, where the Dispensation that I have spoken of
concerning the falsarie Monks, is registered; I remember to have read a strange
Note, (so it seemed unto me:) concerning ancient Charters and evidences, when
they first began to be in use in this Country: which Note because it is of
great consequence (in case it should prove true:) for the better conviction of
many supposititious Charters, pretended to be of great antiquity, I will here
set it down as it is there to be seen.

Sanctus Ethelbertus Rex Angliae qui suscepit Christianitatem a Beato Augustino
misso a Beato Gregorio Papa Anno Dom. DXCVI. in Ecclesia Christi Cant. dedit
eidem August. and successoribus palacium Regium and sedem perpetuam in Civitate
Doroberniae, quae nunc dicitur Cant. cum Ecclesia veteri quae ab Antiquo
tempore Romanorum ibidem fuerat fabricata, quam ipsemet Augustinus Sancti
Salvatoris nomine dedicavit post consecrationem suam Arelatenis factam, Statuit
and idem Rex authoritate Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, ut in Ecclesia Cantuar.
ordinem Monasticum Monachi in perpetuum observarent, ne primorum videlicet
praedicatio Monachorum, a memoria deleretur, sed semper recens in mentibus
succedentium perseveraret. Dedit etiam idem Rex possessiones amplas praedictis
fratribus infra Civitatem Cant. and extra. and exinde dicta Dorobernensis
Ecclesia, propter primatum, and quia inde primo Christiana Religio emanavit,
and Regnum Anglorum illuminavit, sicut Rex ipse tenuit suas terras and
consuetudines liberas and quietas in suo dominio, ita Archiepiscopus and
Ecclesia praenominata tenuit terras suas and consuetudines suas omnino liberas
and quietas in suo dominio, and inconcusse habuit dicta Ecclesia Cantuar.
omnimodas libertates and consuetudines suas in possessione pacifica sine
interruptione cujusquam ex consuetudine and antiquo more sine cartis vel
monumentis Regiis usque ad tempora Whytredi Regis (who dyed the 23. of April,
in the year of our Lord, 725. having reigned 34. years, and six months,
according to Beda's calculation:) cujus munumenti tenor talis est.

This I commit to the further consideration of the learned antiquaries of this
land, not willing in a matter of such moment, to interpose my judgment either
way; and certain besides, that much may be said, both for it and against it.
Only that the matter (to them especially that know nothing but what is now
done:) may not appear altogether incredible, I shall put the reader in mind of
a passage of Ingulphus, who speaking of the times of William the Conqueror has
this observation. Conferebantur etiam primo multa praedia nudo verbo absque
scripto, vel charta, tantum cum Domini gladio, vel galea, vel cornu, vel
cratera. and plurima tenementa cum calcari, cum strigili, cum arcu; and
nonnulla cum sagitta. Sed haec initio Regni sui: posterioribus annis immutatus
est iste modus.

So much of the good that comes unto the World, from this variety of fashions
and customs; the wretched effects, in themselves, and the means withal, (in
this age especially:) of man's vanity and misery. We have touched upon it,
rather then treated of it. For indeed to speak of it fully, it would require a
large Treatise by it self. But whatsoever the use of this kind of knowledge
be, I think there is not (I speak it for the further encouragement of them
that will take pains in this kind:) any kind of knowledge that can afford more
content and pleasure to an ingenuous mind. For since that the several ages of
the World differ little one from another, but by those outward marks and
recognisances of different rites and customs: He that knows certainly (as
it may be known by a practiced Scholar in this kind of learning:) what has
been the particular estate, if not of all (since there are not books extant
of all:) yet of most ages of the World, wherein they differed one from another,
and wherein they agreed; what peculiar, and what common to every one; he does
as it were enjoy the memory, of so many years, and so many ages past, even as
if he himself had lived all those years, and outlasted all those ages. Hence
it is, that Antiquaries are so taken with the sight of old things; not as
doting (as I take it:) upon the bare either form or matter (though both
oftentimes be very notable in old things:) but because those visible
superviving evidences of antiquity represent unto their minds former times,
with as strong an impression, as if they were actually present, and in sight as
it were: even as old men look gladly upon those things, that they were wont to
see, or have been otherwise used unto in their younger years, as enjoying
those years again in some sort, in those visible and palpable remembrances.
As for those men that have not this knowledge, though they be told that such
things be ancient, yet for want of that knowledge and judgment, which might
satisfy them, that they are so in very deed; and because happily, they know
little or nothing of former ages, the present representation whereof,
occasioned by those ancient evidences might affect their minds; it is no wonder
if the sight of such things, be unto them as either pleasing colors to the
blind, or sweet Music to the deaf.

And now having done with the good Uses of this Variety through Gods great
mercy; we are to consider the bad use of it, (which I fear is more general:)
through corrupt man his wickedness partly, and partly his ignorance. That in
things of themselves indifferent, as in matter of eating and drinking; of
clothing, of civil complements, and the like, there should be Variety of
fashions and customs in the World, according to differences of either places
or times; can be neither occasion of wonder, nor offense unto any, that is not
a great stranger unto the World; or rather indeed, unto reason and common sense
it self. But in matters of right and wrong; of that which is just, or unjust,
lawful, and unlawful; that there should be so much difference among nations
(all consisting of men reasonable by nature:) not them only that are of
different Religions, but even them that profess but one Truth; yea, in the
same nation, at several times; is that which gives occasion both of wonder and
of offense unto many; of error and wickedness unto more; and has wrought so
far upon some, as to make them peremptorily to affirm, that there is not any
real difference in nature between right and wrong, but only in the opinions
of men, grounded chiefly upon custom. Cum bonum and malum natura judicetur,
and ea sint principia naturae; certe honesta quoque and turpia simili ratione
dijudicanda, and ad naturam referenda sunt. Sed perturbat nos opinionum
varietas, hominumque dissensio; and quia non idem contingit in sensibus, hos
natura certos putamus: illa quae alii sic, aliis secus, nec isdem semper uno
modo videntur, ficta esse dicimus. So learned and judicious Tullie of the
vulgar opinions and judgments of his days: and had he lived in ours, it is
very probable he would have said as much of ours. Instances to this purpose
taken from ancient times concerning the variety of men's judgments in point of
right and wrong, we have many in ancient Authors who either of purpose upon
this very occasion; or upon some other occasion, and to another end, have
treated of the different Laws, and customs of several nations. See Plato in
his Politico, or Minoe. Bardesanes, in Eusebius. de Praepar. Evangel. lib. vi.10.
Sextus Empiricus, Pyrr. hypot. Nicolaus de Mor. gentium, in Stobaeus; not to
mention any more. Certainly should we take all nations of the World (such as
have been accounted moralized and civilized nations, I mean; the wild and
barbarous being laid aside:) into consideration, we may generally conclude,
that there is scarce any virtue so much in request in one place, but will be
found to be a vice in another; scarce any vice so much abhorred at one time in
one place, but at another time has been thought in the same place if not a
virtue, yet no unlawful thing. Those Authors that I have but now mentioned,
shall be my warrant for what I have said, if any will not take it upon my
credit. But in point of right and wrong, we need not to go so far, to fetch
our instances; nearer times and places unto our selves, and such as we in many
respects are better acquainted with, will afford us sufficient instances. The
Civil Law of the Romans, if any Law, might be thought to be grounded upon
reason, both in regard of the Authors of it, men of great worth and fame for
their learning; and of the credit that it has found with most nations in
Europe, even to this day. That law thought it good reason to give absolute
power unto fathers upon their children, power even of life and death, as long
as they lived, except by volutary emancipation, or otherwise they had made them
free. Children that dispose of themselves in marriage without the consent of
their parents, are not by that law, lawfully married, and are liable to great
punishments. Neither of these is now any where thought either Law or reason;
though Bodinus I know, in his Politics is very eager for the one; and
Espenseus a learned Sorbonist, has written a learned discourse concerning the
latter, whereby he does endeavor to prove, that it is not only against
Laws, but even contra aequitatem naturalem, that liberi invitis parentibus,
should contrahere matrimonia, sub quorum authoritate, says he, and in quorum
potestate, Natura, Scriptura, Deus, and homines, liberos esse voluerunt. cap.
8. Which I take the rather notice of, because he lays the blame of all this,
that it is not so every where as he would have it, upon vim consuetudinis
expressly, the power and tyranny of custom: which he treates of in the
thirteenth chapter. And to the same power of custom it seems it must be
imputed, that some Nations by their laws and customs, have been so
favorable to stealers of young heirs, to dispose of them in marriage at their
own will, against the will of the parents or guardians (of which kind of men
you may read at large, Decr. par. ii. Causa. 36.) contrary to the practice of
other nations, and to the dictates of reason, and a man would think, of common
sense it self.

By the Roman Laws (at lest in Trajans time:) the Father, if a son dyed
without Issue, and intestate (but however, he was to have legitimam
portionem:) was to inherit, he alone; sine diminutione, ne socium haberet
haereditatis, qui non haberet luctus, says Pliny in his Panegyric; which was
thought a good reason. For although according to the course of nature, and
votum parentum, it be more proper to children to inherit of their Fathers,
then otherwise, yet turbato ordine mortalitatis, as the Civilians speak, when
nature her self does alter her course, and takes the child away before the
Father, Cur posteris amplior honor quam majoribus haberetur? curve retro quoque
non recurreret aequitas eadem? says Pliny; who therefore does highly extol
Trajan for a Constitution of his to that purpose. And Aristotle upon the same
grounds of Nature, goes yet further, (...). That it is not lawful (in point of
right and reason grounded upon nature:) for any son upon any terms, to
disinherit (abdicare, is more; but includes, disinheriting:) his Father, though
a Father have power to disinherit his son, Arist. Eth. Nicom. lib. viii. cap:
ult. Yet in some Countries, though the Son die never so wealthy, and the
Father survive never so poor and decaid, the Uncle shall inherit before the
Father, by reason of a certain Maxim in Law, that Haereditas descendit, non
ascendit, inheritance does descend and not ascend, not in the right line that
is; but in the collateral it may; else the Uncle also were excluded. Yet is
the Father granted to be nearer of blood: but nevertheles eo nomine because he
is Father, he is conceived incapable. On the other side, that inheritance which
they call jure representationis, whereby the Issue of the Eldest son, does
inherit before the next in blood, to wit the younger son, is Legal by the
Civil Law, and approoved by the practice of most Countries. Yet till within
these few years, it was otherwise in France generally for many ages together,
amongst all sorts of persons, both great and small.

But instances in this kind of the difference of Judgments and opinions in
point of right and wrong, are so many and so obvious to any man that shall but
confer together the Laws of several Countries now in force in the
principal places of Europe, that one or two are as good as a hundred, and a
hundred, if need were, as easy to be found as one or two. And though some
Countries are more constant in their Laws and customs, then some other are;
yet I know none that has been so constant, where diverse things may not be
observed, once forbidden and punishable, some; now, legal and lawful: others,
now prohibited, which in former times were lawful: in a word, no Nation or
Country (neither Medes, nor Persians excepted:) where cancelling, reversing,
and repealing of Laws, and enacting of others much different, if not contrary,
in their place and stead, has not been usual. I speak not this of such
alterations only, as have necessarily proceeded from alterations of times and
circumstances: of which Durantus in his Speculo Iuris, well and pertinently,
Nam secundum varietatem temporum jura variantur humana, Et nihil pene in
semetipso manet, sed currit Natura, multas evolvens mutationes, quas neque
praevidere facile est, neque praedicere. Therefore, dicunt quidam (says the
addition there:) quod scientia juris Canonici vel Civilis non est proprie
scientia, etc. Such alterations, I know, may happen many, much different one
from another, though grounded all upon the same reason. But I speak it of such
especially, as proceed from variety of opinions and judgments, in matter of
right and wrong.

Now the power of custom in all these changes, alterations, differences
according to variety both of times and places, is twofold.

First in that most of these differences and alterations have their beginning
from custom, which by continuance does not only get the strength of Law, and
goes for Law in all places; but also commonly begets Laws, properly so called.
For that is the original of most Laws in most places. And it was both a witty
and a true speech of him that first (as I find in Suidas and others:) defined
custom to be nothing else, but (...), an unwritten Law; as on the other side
Law to be (...), a written custom: showing thereby the difference between
Law, properly so called; and custom; very well; though it will not hold in
all. And those Laws that are thus grounded upon custom, are thought by many
as the most acceptable, so the most natural and obligatorie Laws that are: as
being not the invention of any one single man, but of long Time and experience.
Dio Chrysostomus is very rethoricall upon this subject, and more rethoricall
then sound sometimes; as when he says, (...), that it is more proper for men
that are free, to be governed by custom; as for men that serve, by Laws:
whereas indeed true liberty does consist in this, to be subject unto reason,
whether commanded unto us by Laws, or recommended by custom. But certainly it
is no new thing for any Kingdom to be governed by custom: and of the two it
may generally be said, that customs were, before written Laws, if not in all,
yet in most Kingdoms. Which I observe the rather, because some learned men I
see, are of opinion that jus consuetudinarium, and consuetudo in point of Law,
are phrases of latter ages only; and particularly in England, not known or
used till after the conquest of the Normans. But certainly jus
consuetudinarium, whether we look upon the word or thing, is of greater
antiquity then so. In all Greek Authors, as many as I remember, that write of
Laws, (...), Laws and customs go still together. In the Civil Law you
shall read, not only de longa consuetudine, as part of the Law in general;
but also de consuetudinibus municipiorum, of particular customs of places, to
be kept and observed as Law. But when the word consuetudo came first, either
more particularly to be taken pro servitio feudali (which the Civilians call
servitutes praediorum:) for a certain right that a Lord may challenge, and a
Tenant is bound unto by custom; Or yet more generally, for any Ius or due of
what kind soever, that a man has right unto by custom, I am not able to say
certainly. For though this use of the word became most frequent and ordinary
since the times of William the Conqueror, yet I find in some ancienter Charters
Iura and consuetudines in this very sense: as in a Charter of Knutt, de Portu
Sandwici, in these words, Nullusque omnino habet aliquam consuetudinem in dicto
portu, etc. And among the Laws of King Edmund, confirmed by William the
Conqueror, the title of one is, De Baronibus, qui suas habent curias and
consuetudines. But whether the title be as ancient, as the Law it self, may
perchance be doubted. I am the more inclinable to conceive the Latin
consuetudo in this sense, to be of longer standing then so, (then the times of
the Conqueror, I mean or there abouts:) because I am sure the Greek (...),
is; as may appear by the Greek Laws and Constitutions: as for example, where
(...), the customs are taken and used for certain fees (called also (...),
and (...):) due and payable at the Consecration, or, Inthronization of every
Bishop, Archbishop, etc. So Constitut. Novell. Justin. Coll. ix. tit. vi. Nov.
123. c. 3. (...), etc. These fees (or customs) only we allow as lawful to
be paid by every Bishop, etc. and so often in that one Chapter. And since we
are treating of custom, and have said somewhat of the Latin word consuetudo, I
think it will not be amiss to examine the original of our adopted English
custom. The Latin consto has two significations; to coast, and to continue.
From consto, to coast, n being changed into u, is the french couster of the
same signification; from consto, to continue, it may be that the french
coustume might be derived; coustume, being in very truth nothing else but a
continued, or constant use and fashion, whatever be the particular object of
it. But I think it more probable, that it came from couster, to coast; and
that coustume at first was properly taken for vectigal, tribute, toll, or
impost money. Now because matters of this nature, as tributes and imposts, are
matters which concern all men generally to take notice of, and such as go by
custom too, ( In omnibus vectigalibus fere consuetudo spectari solet, idque
principalibus constitutionibus cavetur. D. 39. tit. 4. l. 4. f. 2.) for the
most part; it can be no wonder if custom from that more proper signification,
came afterward to signify consuetudo or coustume as we now used it in common
speech. So the word (...) in Hebrew, which signifies a measure, commonly; and
sometimes tribute; is by the Rabbis at this day (as it was by the ancient
Hebrews, for ought we know, though we have no examples of it in the
Scriptures;) commonly used for mores, or consuetudo. And that of this Hebrew
middah, not only the Latin modius, for a certain measure, but also modus used
for fashion, or custom, in general is derived, is out of all question. And
therefore Aristotle, where he treates de jure naturali and positivo, (Ethic. l.
v. c. 7.) that right, or Law, which he calls, (...), that is, that has no
ground in nature, but wholly depends of men's customs and ordinances, according
to the variety both of times and places; he very appositly compares (...), to
measures; (...) (says he:) (...), etc. And since Grammarians cannot agree
about the derivation of the word mos, some deriving it from meo, some from
modus, some from (...), and some from the Hebrew (...), I know no reason why I
may not more probably maintain that mos (the rather, because it is a
monasyllable:) is the pure Hebrew (...) mas, which signifies tribute. But to
return to our English word again; this is observable of it, that when it is
taken for impost or toll, it is expressed in Latin not by consuetudo, but
custuma properly: as for example, Registri, p. 259. in a Brief concerning
foreign Merchants: where nevertheles I must acknowledge, that I do not
understand the difference between Telonium, which the marginall note says
they are free from; and custuma which the Brief itself charges upon them. For
otherwise I should have thought that telonium and custuma had been all one;
but telonium the more common: And this the rather, because I find in the Laws
of Scotland (where the word custuma is more frequent:) telonium and custumam,
for the same thing. And thus much concerning the words both English and Latin;
though much; yet not too much, I hope, in a Discourse concerning Custom.

Secondly, whatever be the beginning or occasion of these several changes,
alterations and differences, whether custom or any thing else; yet herein
appears the power of custom, to be no less strange and marveilous, in that
in process of time it makes all these differences and alterations, though
never so contary, to appear in the eyes of men, not only justifiable, but
even best, so that all men of all Countries do generally like their own Laws
and customs, when once they have been used unto them, best of any other* and
are ready, if need be, with great confidence and eagerness, to maintain them
to be so against any gaine-sayers. (...) (says Agathias the Historian to this
purpose:) (...). This is apparently common to all the nations of the earth,
that what law or custom soever they have been long used unto, they prefer
before any other, and deem them very excellent. Which made Herodotus, that
ancient Historian, to blame Cambyses King of Persia, very much, not as uncivil
only, but even as a mad man, in that he so freely and tartly derided the
customs and fashions, whether Civil or sacred of other Countries, which were
dear unto them, and in their judgment very plausible. And why any man or
nation should arrogate so much unto themselves, as to condemn and deride so
freely and peremptorily whatsoever was contrary to their own customs, eo
nomine, because contrary to their own, though practiced and approoved by other
men and Nations, by nature equally reasonable; Herodotus, it seems, saw no
reason. Now that men generally think best of their own fashions and customs,
be they never so contrary, Herodotus does show, by relating a trial that
Darius made of it, to satisfy himself, which was this: The Indians, those
that were properly called Calatians, had a custom to eat their Parents and
friends after their deaths; whereas the Graecians did use to burn them: both
these being equally contrary to the Persians; who of the two probably, would
soonest have been persuaded to eat their dead, then to burn them, which
could not be without profaning that which they accounted most holy, to wit,
fire. Darius therefore, first sends for some Graecians, and asked them by
themselves what they would take (and he was well able to give it, though they
had asked many thousands,) to eat their Parents when they should be dead. They
answered, they would not do it for the wealth of the World. Then he sent for
those Indians, and proposed unto them likewise upon what term they would be
content to burn theirs. The very mooving whereof offended them so much, and
seemed so prodigious, that in stead of an answer, they humbly besought, he
would forbear such horrible speeches unto them: and so were dismissed. So
true is that of Pindarus (adds Herodotus:) that (...), that is, custom, is an
Universal Monarch, or King of all.

This of Herodotus, puts me in mind of a strange custom once practiced, and
in great request among the great ones of Europe; which was this: If a Prince
dyed out of his Country, they would chop his body in several pieces, and
boil them in a kettle or some such vessel till all the flesh came from the
bones; and so send his bare bones to be buried in his own Country.
Bonifacius the eight, speaking of it, calls it, detestandae feritatis abusum,
morem horribilem, Deo abominabilem, hominibus abhorrendum, immanem, impium,
crudelem, etc. and if it were so indeed, a man might wonder how Princes and
Great men of that age came to be so far in love with it, as to take order
before hand (as we read of diverse; and particularly of one of our Edwards, King
of England, in Froissard:) in their life time, that they might be so used
after their death: but that the same Bonifacius tells us plainly, that it was,
vitio consuetudinis, that they were bewitched to that mind and opinion of
theirs. And not to go from this very subject of the dead, who would not
wonder, that Ancient Heathens, having forborne (and detested, I may say of many
of them:) the ripping of humane dead bodies as inhumane, cruel, and barbarous;
(which is the reason that neither Hippocrates, Aristotle, nor Gallen, though
great, yea incomparable naturalists otherwise, never saw, as many learned men
are of opinion, any dead bodies dissected:) that now in our days the same
thing amongst us Christians is ordinarily practiced, and is neither matter of
wonder nor of scandal unto any; though sometimes it be done in a most
unbeseeming manner, and all manner of persons admitted unto it, without respect
at all of that Divine fabric, which Saint Chrysostom, as I remember, says in
one place is much reverenced by the Angels of heaven themselves, in honor to
Christ's body, and his blessed Incarnation.

The power of custom then by these and the like instances, as in things
natural, so in Civil also, being granted to be very great; the next thing
that we are to consider, is, Whether we shall grant it such power, as that it
can make, if not all things, yet any thing at any time, which is right in
reason or by nature, to become wrong, actually in point of practice; and on the
other side, that which reason and nature of themselves are against, to become
if not laudible, yet allowable, and justifiable sometimes: that is in effect,
whether right and wrong are by nature truly, and so absolutely immutable and
invariable; or otherwise. To this we answer;

First, That as there is nothing truly natural, that is not in some sort
rational (if not as capable of reason, yet as the effect of reason, in summo
gradu; that is, God; and so rational*) So there is nothing truly rational,
that is not as truly natural, both in regard of God, the eternal and
infinite cause of all things; and in regard of men, whom God by nature has
made rational. Whatsoever therefore is grounded upon reason, is truly and
absolutely natural. And so is the moral Law, which treates of humane virtues,
and vices: and therefore altogether and indubitably natural.

These words nature and natural, are most shamefully mistaken and confounded
by some Christians that have treated of this subject, to wit, concerning
virtues and vices natural; which have made them to fall into detestable
opinions, even such as Civil Heathens themselves would have abhorred in other
heathens. To instance in one; Pontus Hunterus of Delfe in Flanders, in his de
libera hominis nativitate, seu liberis natalibus, cap. 2.3.4. has these words;
Illud vero liberum populis omnibus (exceptis Christianis:) leges cum Natura
reliquere, uxores e sanguine junctis acciperent. Nam haec quoque res, Legis
est, non naturae: ac qui haec septa transiliunt, non in naturam, sed contra
leges peccant. Nullum enim naturae a rerum Creatore datum est, ad animalium
generationem impedimentum, modo diversi inter se sexus, sanis corporibus
conveniant. Non illa Matrem (horresco referens:) nec Sororem; sed pudor,
verecundia, ac honestas, legibus ornatae, rejiciunt: sanguinem non horret, etc.
This man, as appears by what follows, takes nature here, and so in all this
his Discourse, for Natura vegetativa, and natura sensitiva only; as though
there were no such thing in rerum natura as natura rationalis. His rule
therefore how we may know things that are contra naturam, is by the present
manifest inconvenience, that ensues to our natural healths or lives, by those
things. So that by him if a man cut his fathers throat, or rip his own mother,
as Nero did, and sleep not a whit the worse, nor have the worse stomach to
his meat for it, he does not crimen contra naturam committere. And this is
that Natura, which in another place he calls them prudentes that obey,
notwithstanding any laws to the contrary. I must confess he is not the first
that has taken nature in this sense. For by those words Lex naturae, some
understand in a strict sense, that law properly which is common unto rational
and irrational creatures; that is, unto men and beasts. In this sense they
say, that Proprium bonum appetere; Vim vi repellere, and the like, is de lege
naturae. But it is one thing to speak of the law of nature, as it is common
(though in this sense the word Law, is not so proper neither:) to all natural
creatures; and another thing to dispute of that Law, which is natural unto man
properly, who by nature is rational. Just so some Heathen Nations of old, as
Herodotus relates, thought they might lie together in their temples, because
they saw that birds, and other dumb creatures, that were kept in them for
sacrifices, did it freely; whence they inferred that it was not unnatural, and
therefore not displeasing to their Gods; and the reason of this their
inference, Herodotus gives, (...) (says he:) (...), because they presumed that
men and brute beasts, are all of one and the same nature* which he for his part
thought very absurd. And certainly what Saint Jude speaks of some, we may
conclude of all men generally, that (...), If men though rational by nature,
will confine themselves to that natural knowledge, which is common to
unreasonable creatures as well as to reasonable, they must needs lead a
brutish life. I hope I may say without offense, that the ancient Stoics were
far better Christians then so, who maintaining that man's happiness did
consist, in a life according to Nature, have written so many accurat tracts and
discourses, to prove that all virtues (and among them pudor, verecundia,
honestas; which this Hunterus does most falsely oppose unto Nature:) are
natural unto man. They that desire further satisfaction in this point, let
them read Saint Chrysostom, who in diverse places of his works, but especially
in his Homilies ad pop. Antioch. handles it at large, prooving by many reasons,
arguments and pregnant instances, that the knowledge of the Moral Law, or,
(...), is by nature.

Secondly, Whatsover comes within the compass of reason, properly; belonging
as properly to the law of nature; it must needs follow, that the law of nature
extends of it self very far; though men through the natural, or rather (to
speak more properly and phylosophically:) unnatural corruption of their
understanding, apprehend it not in its full extent. Now whatsoever falls within
the compass either of reason, or of the law of nature, is of itself immutable.

Naturalia jura -- semper firma, and immutabilia permanent; So says the
Civil Romans Law; and so all writers generally; Aristotle only excepted, who in
a place seems to say the contrary; to wit, that Some natural laws are
mutable. His words are, Some because they see (...), laws and judgments
concerning that which is just and right, so different and so variable; are of
opinion that nothing is right or just in nature, but by opinion only. But this
is not generally true, says he; but in part it is. For however among the Gods
it may very well be, that that which is naturally just and right, is altogether
invariable: yet among us men, (...), Some part of that law which is by nature,
is naturally mutable: and some part of it, is not. Where first it is to be
observed, that Aristotle does distinguish between Iura naturalia, as not being
all (in regard of men:) of one nature. And so far we follow Aristotle. For it
is well observed by Thomas Aquinas, that there are some Iura naturalia, which
may be called fundamentalia, or principalia; because evident of themselves unto
humane reason. Others as it were secundaria, because not so apparent unto man,
but elicible, or demonstrable from those fundamentals by humane ratiocination.
The former I suppose are they that Aristotle would have immutable, but the
latter not so. Some interpret Aristotle, as though he had meant no more then
this, that de facto some Iura naturalia are changed or violated among men;
though de jure, or natura sua, immutable; because of those words of his, though
happily in regard of the Gods themselves immutable. But that this could not be
his meaning, may appear, first, because he says, some only are mutable, not
all. Whereas there be no jura fundamentalia, but de facto are violated, not
only by particular men, but also by whole nations, as may easily appear to
them, that shall peruse the Authors whom we have before mentioned. Secondly,
by that instance that he brings of things natural, wherein Nature itself,
seems to be unconstant unto her self. The right hand, says he, is by nature
the strongest, and so it is in most men; yet in some it is not so. But more of
his meaning, by and by.

Thirdly, Natural reason being granted, by the fall of man, much impaired and
vitiated, it is no wonder if all men reasonable by nature, do not now agree
upon the Iura naturalia; and it ought to be sufficient unto any reasonable
man, to satisfy him, that those jura that are so called, are truly naturalia,
that most men and nations (though not all:) that are civilized both by their
practice, and their opinions, determine them to be so.

As for example, Some nations (civilized in other things it cannot be denied:)
allowed of theft, some of adultery, or fornication; some made no scrupule of
incest; what then? Most other nations have condemned them for it; and abstained
from these themselves, as being against Nature. That is enough to show that
they were things against nature indeed; and enough to make any man inexcusable
in the eyes of God, that makes any question of it. The extravagancie of some
men, upon this subject, makes me the more earnest herein. For whereas in
reason, what is allowed by the most, should be adscribed unto nature; and that
which by some is practiced to the contrary, to the corruption of nature partly;
(which Musonius the Stoic, in Stobaeus calls, (...):) and partly to the power
of long custom (tanta est corruptela malae consuetudinis ut ab ea tanquam
igniculi extinguantur a natura dati, exorianturque and confirmentur contraria
vitia, as Tullie very well in a place:) Some go a quite contrary course. What
they find practiced by some, they take to be natural; and the contrary,
though there be a major part for it, they adscribe unto the power of custom.
Incest is a thing that true nature does abhor as much as any thing; and as
many good reasons, I dare undertake, may be given to prove the unnaturalness
of it, as for any thing that is generally acknowledged most unnatural. And if
we may believe some ancient Heathens, men of no small authority in the world,
as Aristotle and others, even among the brutes, some of the more generous
abhor it naturally. Yet an outlandish writer of Essays in his long discourse
of custom would persuade us that all difference and scrupulusnes in this kind
proceeds rather from custom, then nature; bringing this among many other
particulars, as an argument of the power of custom among men. Many ancient
Heathen Philosophers, I must needs say, showed themselves far wiser men, who
though they had no certain knowledge (as they could not without revelation:)
of the fall of man; yet from this very thing, because they saw many men every
where, yea some whole nations, make no conscience at all of some things which
they saw by the eye of reason were certainly against nature, concluded that of
certainty, the natural reason and understanding of man, had had a fall; though
how or when, they could not tell. Many pregnant passages out of Plato,
Plutarch, Hierocles, Plotinus, Proclus, and others might be produced here to
that purpose, if need were, and had not already upon other occasions been
observed and treated of, (all, or most of them:) by others: And all of them
agree in this, that in man himself is the cause of this his fall, or
blindness of his understanding, not in him that made him. Even he that erreth
(in matter of life and practice:) against his will, is impious, in that he
disagreeth from the nature of the Universe, (...). For Nature had furnished him
at first with certain instincts, prenotions and opportunities, by the help
whereof he might have attained to the knowledge of truth: which having
neglected, hence it is that he is now not able to discern that which is false
from that which is true: says another, (a Heathen too:) not inferior to any
of those, whom I have named.

Fourthly, As in things natural, some things to serve the nature of the
universe, forget and forgo sometimes their own particular nature; and are
never more natural in a general sense, then when they are so unnatural unto
themselves, particularly; (so the water to prevent a vacuum, which nature
abhors, ascends; and the like*) So must we conceive in things Civil, a
subordination Iurium naturalium; and of reason unto reason.

It is not against reason then, that some things which considered in themselves
are against reason, should in a higher and more general consideration, prove
warrantable by reason. Even by our laws, some things, (say our Lawyers:) may
be done warrantably for a public good, though contrary to the Laws
otherwise. Legally therefore in regard of the Laws, and their general end,
though illegally, because against the express tenor of some particular law. So
the Civil Law too, tells us of a certain Ius singular, quod contra tenoris
rationem introductum est; and allows of it. It were neither; neither Ius, nor
allowable by law, if it were against all reason; though it be granted against
some. I am persuaded, this is it, and nothing else, that made Aristotle say,
(as we have noted before:) that quaedam jura naturalia, were mutabilia: but
his terms are dangerous, and therefore to be avoided. It is one of the
fundamental principles of all Commonwealths, Salus populi; suprema lex esto.
How far a man may go pro salute populi, contra tenorem rationis, is disputed
at large, by them that have written de Iuribus Dominationis, whether
Monarchicae, Aristocraticae, or Democraticae. Some are too nice; and some go
too far; but there is no question, but somewhat there is, that may be done
in this kind; both by the Laws of God and of men, allowable; and warrantable
by sound reason. Now custom being a thing of great force in a body politic,
as well as in a body natural, and of much importance every way, either to the
peace or disturbance of any Commonwealth; if any thing may be done at any time
rationally, contra tenorem rationis; it is in point of custom especially.
Therefore Thomas Aquinas, where he undertakes to prove (which he does very
learnedly and solidly,) that lex and ratio are all one; yet when he comes to
the point of custom, he is put to a forte, not knowing well how to determine
it; Si autem adhuc maneat ratio, eadem, says he, propter quam prima lex
inutilis erat, non consuetudo legem, sed lex consuetudinem vincit. Nisi forte
propter hoc solum inutilis lex videatur, quoniam non est possibilis secundum
consuetudinem patriae, quae erat una de conditionibus legis. Difficile est enim
consuetudinem multitudinis removere. Of many customs therefore we may boldly
say, that the unseasonable altering of them is against reason; though
considered in themselves they be granted to be not reasonable. And herein is
most true, and applyable that Greek sentence, or rather Oracle, (...); not
easily to attempt the stirring of those things, which cannot be stirred
without much stirring; and as much hazard, as stirring. The reason is given by
Augustus in Dio, (...). Those things says he, that long continue in one and
the same state, are to be preferred before those that are ever upon changing,
though it be for the best in all likelihood. We see that most things enjoy
their happiness in their rest; but above all things, it must needs be more
proper unto estates (so called from their stabilitie:) to be happy in their
settled consistence and permanencie; as being liker unto stages and pageants,
then states truly, when always mooving and changing. And besides, not only
the happy being of an estate, but the very being of it does depend of its
stabilitie, in this kind. For rebus novis studere, has always been both the
mark and the refuge of ill affected malcontents, who have no other hopes to
raise their ruined fortunes, but by the ruins of the present estate that they
live in. Alcybiades therefore in Thucydides vi. said well, (...); That their
government is safest, to the Commonwealth, that apply themselves as much as
they can to the present Laws and customs, though they be not altogether so
good of themselves. In this sense must Saint Gregory the Pope his words be
understood, where he seems to adscribe unto custom a power to make things
that are bad in themselves to become just and legal. His words are; Si pravae
rei aditus antequam diu patescat, non clauditur, usu fit latior; and erit
consuetudine licitum, quod ratione constat esse prohibitum. Greg. Reg. Epist.
l. vii. Ind. ii. ep. 120.

Another consideration that should make me the more averse from altering old
customs is, because the reason of some, though grounded at first upon some
weighty consideration, cannot equally appear at all times, those
inconveniences happily, which in former ages gave occasion to such and such
customs being now remooved, and perchance forgotten. Therefore says the
Civil Law, Non omnium quae a majoribus constituta sunt, ratio reddi potest; Et
ideo rations eorum, etc. I remember what answer some Turks made, as it is
reported by Busbequius in his Epistles, being asked the reason of a certain
custom of theirs, which seemed very sensles; to wit, That their forefathers
had done it of old; and as they believed, not without reason; though now not
known unto them as they ingenuously confessed. I will not commend this for a
good answer to all things; God forbid: In some things I think it may hold very
well. If a Turk (to instance in some particular:) should ask a Christian, why
when any does snize in our presences (as it is practiced in most places of
Europe:) we pray to God to bless them, or to that purpose; well might he
answer, that our Christian forefathers have done it of old, and that long
before them their Gentill forefathers had used it; but the reason, how, and why
it first began, neither Christians nor Gentiles can certainly tell us, though
diverse both Gentiles of old, (as Aristotle etc.) and Christians since have
written of it, and have done their utmost to find it out. And now that it has
been so long practiced in the World, I should, I must confess, be one of
them that should make conscience to take it away, though I must acknowledge
with the rest, that the reason, or beginning, is unknown unto me. If
therefore the reason of many Laws and customs though very good and
warrantable, and perchance necessary, be such nevertheles that cannot be
found out but by time and experience; It cannot be safe to resolve upon the
alteration of any long continued Law or custom, though we can give no reason
for it, but after long and mature deliberation.

For these several respects, it cannot be thought amiss or unreasonable, that
all Laws and customs should by them, that are subject unto them, generally be
maintained (in a civil respect, at least:) to be just and reasonable. And
truly, whatever may be alleged against them considered in themselves, yet in
this respect they may be just and reasonable, if they be not partial, but
extend indifferently unto all, that is, just in the execution, or application;
though not in their nature. But besides, if it be not fit to say unto a King,
(be he never so bad a King:) thou art wicked; and to Princes, ye are ungodly,
Job 34.18. Why should not so much respect be due to any Law or custom from
them, (as I said before:) that are subject unto them, who owe their peace and
safety (next unto God and the King:) to their protection, as that it should
not be lawful for them to vilify them, and openly to declaime against them?
Cicero says well, Vt ex medicina nihil oportet putare proficisci, nisi quod ad
corporis utilitatem spectat; sic a Legibus nihil convenit arbitrari, nisi quod
Reipubl. conducat (and that is as much as if he had said, nisi quod justum est,
and there is the same reason for both:) proficisci. However it may not be
doubted by any man that is wise, that there be many Laws and customs in all
countries, which though they be well tolerated and continued for the peace and
safety of the public, yet cannot be practiced by particular men, (as far
forth as they may avoid it:) with a good conscience, and without great peril
to their souls; as being of themselves most unreasonable. And therefore the
same Tullie, who before did teach us, how we may judge and speak of Laws
civilly; elsewhere instructing how to judge, according to truth, says very
solidly, Stultissimum est, existimare omnia justa esse, quae sita sunt in
populorum institutis aut legibus: to believe that every Law or custom, that is
in force and rigidly stood upon in every country, is therefore just and good,
is absolutely to believe with the Epicureans and the like, (whom we have before
spoken of:) that reason, and Justice, is not a matter of truth and realitie,
but of mere opinion and conceit. And it must needs follow, quod si populorum
jussis, si principum decretis, si sententiis judicum jura constituerentur, jus
esset latrocinari, jus adulterare, jus testamenta falsa supponere, etc. as the
same Author very well in another place of the same book. These commendations
therefore, that ordinary Lawyers of every country give usually to their own
proper laws and customs, must cautelously be understood; or else they are
very dangerous. Though some of them speak plainly enough sometime; as that
incomparable Lawyer and Philologist Cujacius, of the customs of France, though
refined and reformed again and again; diverse whereof he does acknowledge to
be grounded upon the errors of former Lawyers, though pretended to be right
and just of themselves. To which purpose also I understand (with submission to
himself, and his interpretation:) the Cujacius of this Island, in his Notes
upon Fortescu, that the diverse opinions of Interpreters proceeding from the
weakness of man's reason and the several conveniences of diverse States, have
made those limitations which the Law of nature has suffered, very different.
And hence it is, etc. Sure I am, that long before either of them, Tertullian
taught us, that the ground of many customs, is either ignorance or
simplicity. His words are; consuetudo initium ab aliqua ignorantia vel
simplicitate sortita, in usum per successionem corroboratur, de virgin. vel. c.
i. He might have added (which is added by others:) another ground of many
Laws and customs, which is, wilful injustice, and want of a good conscience,
the rarest thing of the world, though nothing be more commonly pretended. It
does therefore much concern every particular man, (them especially that take
upon them to be men of judgment and understanding:) as not to control the
received Laws and customs of their countries, the alteration whereof
belongs not unto them: So to understand as near as they may, what Laws and
customs are absolutely good and warrantable in themselves; and which are
tolerated and maintained only for the peace and concord of the Commonwealth.
Here therefore is a maine difference to be made, between those things that the
Law does command, and does oblige us unto; and those things, which if we do,
the Law does allow, but not command: between those things that we do as good
subjects unto the King and his Laws; and those that we do of our own
inclination, taking the advantage of the Law. What Christ once said unto his
Disciples, If your righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, (the strictest men for their old laws and customs that ever
were:) you shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; is in this sense
applyable unto all men; Such a Legal life, will never bring them unto Heaven.
Therefore the Canonists teach us that consuetudo may liberare a paenis
civilibus indeed; but cannot, a paenis gehennae; if in itself it be
unconscionable and unreasonable. And they are not the Canonists only, that
teach us this doctrine, but even our own Lawyers, that have taken the greatest
pains to uphold the credit, and maintain the Justice of our Laws. Many
unlearned persons (says one of them:) believe that it is lawful for them to
do with good conscience all things, which if they do them, they shall not be
punished therefore by the Law, though the Law does not warrant them, etc. and
so goes on, setting down for example some particular cases, of those things
which a conscionable Christian is bound unto, to save his soul though he
cannot be compelled unto it by the Law, Dr. and Stud. lib. 1. c. 19. And in
such cases (says the same Author in another place:) he is in conscience as
well bound if he will save his soul; as he were, if he were compelled
thereto by the Law, etc. If there be not then besides the Law of the Land, a
law of reason and conscience to regulat our actions by, we are certainly but
in bad case, in point of eternal salvation.

HAving treated hitherto (in this second part:) of the Variety, first; then of
the power and validity of custom in things civil; it will not be improper
that I add somewhat of words also, and of the power that custom has in
matter of words and speeches. For though many men for want of knowledge and
experience, think that words are but wind, and therefore account no subject
that is about words, to be very material, or worthy the study of a serious
man; yet wiser men know full well that in very truth, there is nothing that
sets men on work so much, or causes so much stir in the World, as words,
mere words do, and have always done; that words have been the occasion of
many wars, by which many great Cities and Countries have been overthrown;
that words have caused bloody strifes and persecutions even in the Church; not
words only as they were intended, and should have been understood, but even
mistaken through ignorance. It was once said of some ancient Philosophers,
Sentit idem Aristo, quod Xenocrates, quod Aristoteles; loquitur alio modo, ex
hac autem non rerum, sed verborum discordia, controversia nata est, etc. A
happy thing it were for the World, that words were well understood every where;
and all (...), all strifes and contentions about words quite taken away. But
that will not be as long as the World indures; it is in vain to wish it;
though not to wish it, be the part of either an ignorant, or uncharitable man.
But I have nothing to do with words here, but as custom, my present subject,
has to do with them: to wit, to show the power of custom upon words, and
some remarkable effects of this power.

A. Gellius says well in a place, consuetudo omnium rerum domina, sed maxim
verborum; and Quintillian yet more fully, that consuetudo est certissima
loquendi magistra, utendumque plane sermon, ut numo cui publica forma est: and
again, Ridiculum malle sermonem quo locuti sunt homines, quam quo loquuntur,
and sane quid est aliud vetus sermo, quam vetus loquendi consuetudo? So Horace,
and diverse others, who all agree in this, that words and all right speaking
goes by custom* and whereas in other things custom (as has been showed:) is
an usurper upon right, here her soveraigntie is acknowledged to be natural;
right and custom in matter of words and language, being in the judgment, of
wisest men, but one thing for the most part. Now therefore to speak of it
somewhat more distinctly.

First, custom makes words, that were but sounds before, to be words, that
is, to signify somewhat. As for example it makes the sound, that those three
letters, G. o. and d. being put together, do make, to signify unto us of this
nation, the Lord and maker of all things. For of itself why these three
letters should represent such a thing, there is no ground in nature; but
custom. It is true, the Stoics of old were of another opinion, and it became
a great controversy among Philosophers, whether words were (...), by
nature: or (...), by imposition at pleasure. Origin, in few words, states the
question thus; Aristoteles sentit positu nomina, Stoici putant Natura esse
indita, imitantibus primis editis vocibus res ipsas ad quas and nomina imposita
sint: qua ratione and Etymologias inducunt. And A. Gellius to the same purpose,
Nomina verbaque non posita fortuito, sed quadam vi and ratione naturae facta
esse. P. Nigidius in Grammaticis Commentariis docet, rem sane in Philosophiae
dissertationibus celebrem. Queri enim solitum apud philosophos (...) sint,
(...), etc. Saint Augustine handles it at large in his de Dialectica, to whom
and to Gellius I refer them that would know more of it. Hereupon the Stoics
did earnestly bestirre themselves to find out and penetrat into the Etymology
of every word, and to show the reason of it in nature; but to speak truth,
their labor tended rather to make sport unto the idle, then to give
satisfaction unto the soberly curious. Yet the Stoics were tolerable in
comparison of some both of old and of late too, who have proceeded further,
laying this for their foundation, that words and syllables are of great power
and efficacy, and have (some say:) I know not what affinity and hidden
correspondence with stars and planets. Hereupon some by a certain art which
they call (...) and (...), undertake in the name of every man, to read his
fortune, and to foretell great matters. I could not but mention such, coming
so in my way; but I will no more then mention them, their opinions being so
apparently absurd. But why then does Aristotle, who determines it so
peremptorily, that (...), that no words are by nature, in many places stand
upon words so much himself, and examine their Etymologies so carefully? To
this I say, that though generally words go by custom, yet sometimes they may
be said to be from nature, or natural in some sense, that is, set of purpose
to set out unto us the nature of such and such a thing. There be many words of
that nature, it cannot be denied; in some languages more then others; but in
all, some; and in this case, to understand the right Etymology of a word,
conduces much to the understanding of the thing itself. Of the nature of it I
mean; but not to foretell, or foresee by it any thing future; not more then
can be known by the natural knowledge of the thing itself. Some words
again may be called natural, because they do when they are uttered and
pronounced imitate the nature of the thing itself, which they signify. So for
example when we say in Latin, aeris tinnitum, equorum hinnitum, ovium balatum,
tubarum clangorem, stridorem catenarum, Perspicis, says Saint Augustine, haec
verba ita sonare, ut res quae his verbis significantur. So most of them that
they call voces animalium propriae; for the most part, both in Greek and Latin
are natural. Again, custom does make some words natural, in that it gives
unto them the power and efficacy of things that are natural, to produce some
natural effects. Such are those words and sounds, whereby dumme creatures are
governed; which though of themselves they be but invalid words and sounds, yet
(...) (...) (as Plutarch of them in a place:) through custom and skillful
education, become so powerful, that what can be done upon dum creatures with
blows, or whips, or any other kind of violence, may be done with them; and
sometimes more. So a man may use himself to tremble, or weep, or laugh, and
the like, at certain words and sounds, which in time shall have that power
over his body, that it shall not be in the power of his will to forbear. Even
as the sight of whips and scourges (as we read in ancient stories:) has been
more powerful upon slaves in wars, then the sight of more dreadful and
mortal weapons, because the smart of those which they often felt, as slaves,
made them in time to abhor naturally and irresistibly the very sight of them;
so words also; Long use and custom may turn them into charms, to make them
operative upon nature, though of themselves they have no natural power at all.
All these things granted (whereof to discourse at large, is not my present
purpose:) it holds still nevertheless, as we affirmed at first, that generally
and for the most part, words are words, that is, are significant by custom.

Secondly, all difference of words and phrases in point of elegancie, or
barbarism, is altogether from custom. Hence it is, that those expressions
which in some language are most proper and elegant, in another are most
ridiculous and barbarous, neither is there any reason at all for the most in
nature, either for the one, or for the other, but that use and custom has so
determined it, whose will and pleasure stands for reason in these cases. It is
true, that Grammarians have taken great pains to reduce ordinary words and
speeches to some certainty of analogy, without which Grammar is no Art, and
somewhat it is that they have done in this kind for the easier teaching and
learning of languages. Yet does custom herein maintain the power of her
soveraigntie upon words and speeches, in that when she pleases, she breaks
the rules, and strictest bonds of best approoved Analogy, and suffers no rule
of Grammar to pass without an exception. All matter of elegancie then or
babarisme being but a matter of custom, as it is no wonder to see silly people
for want of knowledge, either to vvonder, or to scoff at the expressions of
other languages, when they hear strangers speak the words of the Country
perchance, but use their own phrases and expressions; So I cannot but wonder
that in all ages men that have been most ambitious to be thought learned, have
stood so much upon elegancie, as I find they have done. The ancient Heathens,
Philosophers, and others, did object, many things, I know, against the Gospel
of Christ; but I do not find that any thing generally did in very truth make
them so averse from it, as the language; most of the New Testament being
written in Greek words indeed, some few excepted; but for the most part, in
phrases and expressions that are merely Hebrew; and the Latin Translation
being a mixture of both, both of Hebrew and Greek phrases, rather then Latin,
that was Latin truly, according to the custom of those times. So hard a thing
it was for them, that had been used to Plato and Aristotle, and the like, to
relish such a style; much less to reverence it. A style nevertheles, which
they would have thought elegant enough, had they been used to it; as on the
other side, that of Plato or Aristotle but course and barbarous, had not the
power of custom interposed, and disposed their ears and palates to it. A late
writer of Essays treating of the power of custom; after many strange
instances, brings this, as I remember, among others, as one of the strangest;
That some certain people of the World, should be governed by Laws that are
written in a strange unknown tongue. Certainly if the use of a strange tongue
in one Country in point of Law (which would not be much better understood,
though it were in the vulgar tongue:) be a thing so much to be admired; I
think he might have found somewhat that is done in a strange tongue in many
Countries against all grounds of sense or reason, much more to be wondered at.
But whereas some others, to increase the wonder, deride and defame the said
tongue as barbarous, they rather make themselves an instance of the power of
custom, that makes them think so strange, and speak so scornefully of a
tongue once thought very sweet and elegant, by them that were used unto it;
then persuade us to wonder at others, that make no wonder of it.

Thirdly, custom advances or abaseth words at pleasure, making them that once
were vile to become honorable; and those that were honorable to become vile;
yea words of title, to become words of reproach; and words of reproach to
become words of title. What once knave, and ballad were in old English, when
David was termed the knave of the Lord; and the song of songs, called the
ballad of ballads; is yet too fresh, to be forgotten. Notarius was once a Title
for a Secretary of State, when Secretaries of State, were at the highest; and
then Cancellarius was an obscure name, and of little respect. Now it is quite
contrary, and he would be thought (and reason he should, since custom has
otherwise commanded it:) to commit a monstrous soloecisme that should now use
those Latin words, as they were used when Latin was in use. I do not know any
thing to the contrary, but that men were as scrupulous to tell a lie in former
ages as they are now; nay for some reasons I should think more. As first,
because the art of equivocation was not then known, much less the praises of
it; and again, because as Tullie has taught me, the ancient Romans were so
cautelous in their solemn attestations, as that, were they never so certain
of a thing, yet they avoided as much as they could, religionis and pudoris
causa, words of peremptory and confident asseveration; rather using (which
he calls verbum consideratissimum:) the word, arbitror. Yet a man might have
told another mentiris, that he did lie, (of the Latin word I find it observed
by others; and of the Hebrew, we have examples of it in Scripture, as ii. Reg.
iv.16.) without any great either offense, or breach of civilitie; which now to
give, though but to another be he never so vile, in the presence of a man of
fashion, is greatest incivilitie. But of all things in this kind, I most
vvonder at that some tell us of the word Bastard, which they say was once
rather a Title of Honor, among great ones; then a note of infamy. So Pontus
Honterus: Postremo, says he, quam longe^ abfuerit nostrorum nasutulorum
opinio, ab ejus temporis nobilium sententia, vel ex eo apparet, quod nothi
Burgundi e Philippo Bono nati, omissis Ducum, Comitum, Marchionum, Baronumque
titulis, aliis omnibus praetulerint BASTARDI nomen, scribentes in armoru^
Gentilitiis scutis public ac privatim hoc tantum modo, Corn. Ant. Phil. Bald.
David, etc. Burgundiae BASTARDVS. Ex (...) to supreme powers, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. Caeremoniae Deorum, sanctitas Regum, says Julius Caesar in
Suetonius; that as religious worship is proper unto the Gods, so unto Kings to
be styled and accounted sacred. But numen and altaria, and the like, I wonder
how Christian ears could away with; yet allowed (time was:) even to Christian
Emperors, and used by them speaking of themselves; (as for example in the Code,
nostris altaribus suggestio offertur, and, de nostris altaribus petunt, etc.)
which is not likely their Christian ears would have borne, had not the power
of custom hardened them unto it. He is not a civil man now of late years
among us, that thinks much to subscribe himself servant, though it be unto
his equal, or inferior. Yet Sulpitius Severus was once soundly chid by
Paulinus the Bishop of Nola, for subscribing (or rather proscribing, as the
custom was then:) himself his servant, in a letter of his. But you shall
hear himself speak, if you please, and what he thought of it: In Epistolae
titulo, imitari praestantem in omnibus mihi fraternitatem tuam timui; quia
tutius credidi vere scribere. Cave ergo posthac Servus Christi in libertatem
vocatus, hominis, and fratris, and conservi inferioris servum te subscribere:
quia peccatum adulationis est magis, quam humilitatis justificatio, honorem uni
Domino, uni magistro super terram, uni Deo debitum, homini cuilibet, ne dicam
miserimo peccatori, defer. His words are somewhat ambiguous, whether he
means uni Domino, uni Magistro, and uni Deo, all of one; or rather (as I
rather believe:) partitively, allowing us the use of this word, to those that
are truly our Lords and masters upon earth. But whatever his meaning was, it
is certain that the word is extremely abused now adays; and most abused by
them that know least, and care as little to learn what belongs unto true
humility, and wherein it does consist. Now in this and the like cases, it were
happy if in all places (if all places afford such:) some of the wiser and
graver sort of men, would agree by their joint constancy and gravity to resist
both in matter of fashions that belong unto clothes, and in those that belong
unto words, the vanity, fickleness, foolishness of ordinary worldly men,
who have nothing to busy their idle brains with, but to invent and follow
new fashions. Then were it an easy thing for any sober man to maintain and
embrace consensum prudentum (as wise men prescribe in other things) the consent
of some (though fewer in number:) that are wise; then vulgarem consuetudinem,
the custom of the common people (ordinary wordlings I mean:) which commonly
likes that best, which is worst. And certainly they should be much to blame
in my judgment that would not do it. But when a custom in this kind (though
vain, yet not absolutely impious:) is become so general that a man cannot
avoid it, except he will be singular; a man I think may safely enough (in
these things which of their nature are indifferent:) condescend unto it to
avoid singularity; which always relishes of some want of charity, and is
oftentimes the effects of a worse disease, pride and self-conceit. And so much
be spoken concerning words.

AS God both in regard of his will, and in regard of his Nature, is absolutely
immutable, in a transcendent kind of immutabilitie, beyond all comparison; nay
beyond all imagination of man; which Saint James to express in some sort,
after he had said that there is no variableness with God; not content with
that, adds elegantly, (...), or shadow of turning:) So it stands with reason,
that both the worship of God, and the opinions of men touching God, should be
as invariable; at lest more invariable, then any other thing, the object
whereof is worldly and mutable. Custom a man would think of all things in the
world should have less to do with things of this nature. But it is quite
otherwise. For in very truth of all things in the World, there is nothing
generally that goes by custom so much as religion does, both in point of
practice, and in point of opinions. So that there is nothing so horrible of
itself, or so ridiculous in the judgment of reason and common sense in point
of opinions, which long custom (if men be not very wary of it, and with best
care and diligence use those means to prevent it, that sound reason and true
philosophy do prescribe:) will not make most plausible and acceptable: (...),
custom having once got the strength of long continuance, insinuates errors and
impostures (be they never so gross:) into the minds of most men under the
shape and representation of genuine truth: So Justin Martyr; who fetches hence
especially the origin of Idolatry. And Origin adds that of all Customs,
none stick so fast in the mind when once settled there, none so hard to be
wiped and washed off, as those which he elegantly calls (...), that is, the
customs of opinion and doctrine, be they right or wrong. To this we may add
the observation of Nicetas the Greek Historian, from domesticke experience,
who having particularly instanced, in the ancient Christian inhabitants of the
Pousgusian poole, then half Turkish in their rites and customs, concludes
upon it generally, that (...), Long custom has more power then either nature
or religion. Hence it is perchance that the Hebrew (...) properly, which often
signifies custom, is also taken sometimes for religion or doctrine.

Now the reason why custom can do more in point of religion, then it can in
other things, is first, because the object of religion, is of all others the
furthest off both from the senses, and from the reach of humane reason; which
makes men the more apt, in things so abstruse and so far exceeding the strength
of humane ratiocination, to content themselves with what they have received
from their forefathers, presuming that they had it by some revelation, or other
from above. This made Aristotle, who did not love to speak of things, but upon
demonstrable grounds of reason and nature, not to meddle much in all his
writings, with things divine; concerning either God or religion; as he
himself gives the reason of it, in his de part* animalium, (...). professing
there that he preferred the knowledge of things divine, far beyond any other
knowledge; but could say but little of it nevertheles for want of certain
grounds. Plato, he was altogether for Divinity, it is true; the immortality
of the soul, and the rewards of a godly life in the world to come, and the
like, being his chiefest subject in almost all his Treatises: for which, as he
was much admired by the ancient Fathers of the Church, so in all ages he has
been known by the Title of Divine Plato. Yet Plato himself does ingenuously
acknowledge the imperfection of his knowledge in this kind as both deficient
and uncertain. Witness this divine passage of his, (...), etc. In another
place he says plainly, that without (...), some divine revelation from
above, (...), to know the certainty of these things in this world, is either
absolutely impossible, or extremely difficult. If therefore Plato himself,
coeteris philosophis gentium long lateque praelatus, says Saint Augustine;
(...), that admirable Philosopher (says Eusebius:) who of all Heathen
Philosophers and writers, was the only, that reached unto the very porch of
Truths Sacrarie: if he nevertheles, was so much to seek himself, and so
unsatisfyed; no wonder if ordinary men, unto whon the day star of heavenly
truth was not, or is not yet arisen, have thought it their safest course in all
ages, in point of religion especially, (...), (as Athenagoras the Christian
Philosopher speaks and shows in the beginning of his Apology;) to keep them
closely to the rites and customs of their forefathers, be they never so
ridiculous and absurd.

Another reason why custom is so powerful in matters of Religion, is because
men for the most part, every where are for the things of this present World, as
profit, or pleasure, or the like; as for those things that belong unto their
souls, they think of them as matters of another world indeed; that is, as
matters that do not much concern them, and for which they see no reason why
they should overmuch trouble their thoughts. It is true, that faction and
violent opposition are taken for zeal in most places; and those men thought
vulgarly very religious, that hate them most fiercely, that are not of their
opinions; of which kind of men there is store enough in all places, and of all
professions. But religion, or faith well grounded (and if it be not well
grounded, how we can be ready to give an account of it unto others, as Saint
Peter would have us, I know not:) is quite another thing. We speak not here
of illiterate men or women, whose capacity (for no man is accountable for more
then he has received, so he make good use of it to his utmost:) does not
reach to such either preparation or examination, as both the Scriptures and
right reason do require, to proceed rationally and with judgment in such a
business. It is to be feared that of them that want not judgment and
capacity in other things of the world which they take more to heart, there are
but few to be found in no place, that make that use of either (all prejudice
and partiality being laid aside:) that were fitting in matter of religion. And
so it comes to pass that every where and generally, though few believe it, or
suspect it, yet in very truth, the belief of most men if it be well looked
into, is rather custom, then any thing else.

But to the end that the power of custom in matter of Religion, may the better
appear unto them that are none of the most quicksighted of themselves, nor
disposed to take any great pains by the help of long tedious philosophical
speculations to penetrate into the truth of things, we will here take into our
consideration some one of the many religions that have been in great use and
request among men in former days: and of all the rest, we will make choice of
that purposely, which in the judgment of all men that were not bred and
obliged unto it, has ever been accounted the most ridiculous, unnatural and
prodigious. I will not therefore here speak of them that have worshipped the
Sun and the Moon, and the stars, etc. the most glorious objects that
sensual worshippers could pitch upon; and which some ancients grounding upon a
wrong interpretation of the words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.19. seem to be of opinion
that it was in some manner permitted to the Nations of the world to do, till
the coming of Christ. Nor yet of them, that have worshipped stocks and stones,
the work of their own hands, whose plausible pretense for their gross
idolatry has been in all ages, that they worshipped not the figures
themselves in sight, but the invisible Deities represented unto them by those
figures. Those that I will instance in shall be they, whose religion was to
worship those things, which reason and nature in the judgment of all other
nations has made unto man either contemptible or abominable; the ancient
Egyptians I mean, whose greatest Deities by them adored with all possible
reverence, were dogs, and cats; toades and crocodiles, and the like. Of whom
among others the Latin Satyrist vvorthily, Quis nescit Volusi Bithinica qualia
demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? crocodilon adorat
Pars haec: illa pavet staturam serpentibus ibim
Effigies sacri nitet aurea cercopitheci, etc.
How they came first to resolve upon such horrible worship, they that have most
curiously searched into it, as Diod. Siculus, and others, could never, though
they purposely conferred with the most learned Egyptians of those days, find
out certainly. It is most likely, that they were at first compelled unto it by
their princes and governors for some politic ends and considerations. But in
after ages, when this worship, how strange and uncouth soever at first, was
once become customarie and hereditary unto them, with what approbation of
judgment and affection of heart (to the ready forsaking of their goods, lives,
and liberties for it:) they then did embrace and practice it, ancient
histories, such as cannot by any sober man be questioned, bear record unto
this day. I will not bring here what we read in some of them, because it may be
questioned with more color, of great advantages in wars wittingly and
willingly forgone by the Egyptians by reason of their superstition; yea how
they have chosen rather to yield themselves unto their enemies, when they might
have had the best of it, then to violate though but the bare signs and
pictures of those beasts which were sacred unto them. But the testimony of
Diod. Siculus, (whose words among others, are (...), etc. This superstition of
theirs cleaves so fast unto their souls (or, is so penetratively infused into
their very souls:) and so immoovably bent and affected are they every one of
them to the worship of these creatures, etc.) and those instances that he
brings, whereof he was an eye witness, of their zeal to their religion, no
man can question with any color of reason. And Tullie speaks of it, as of a
thing known to all the World, and whereof examples were obvious in his days;
Aegyptiorum morem (says he, and mark by the way, that he calls it morem; by
which word he closely adscribes it unto custom:) quis ignorant? quorum imbutae
mentes pravitatis erroribus, quamvis carnificinam prius subierint, quam ibim
aut aspidem, aut felem, aut canem, aut crocodilum violent; quorum etiam si
imprudentes quippiam fecerint, paenam nullam recusent. Such was their zeal to
their religion, against nature, reason, and common sense, grounded upon custom
only: whereby it may appear, that bare zeal, without due observation of
other circumstances, is but a weak and uncertain trial of the Truth.

Now to instance (as I have formerly:) in some things of our days likewise,
and in our own practice; it will be hard for me to find an instance that will
be generally thought so pertinent, because though the matter be of itself
never so strange, yet custom having made it familiar, it will not seem
strange unto ordinary men, whose understanding, though they know it not, is
blinded by it; the more dangerously blinded, the less they suspect it to be
so. But to them that are yet free, or at least will hereafter use the means to
vindicat themselves into the liberty of a sound judgment according to truth
and reason: to them I dare boldly say, that it is not more strange (not more
strange; I say no more:) either that some people of the World should worship no
God at all; or that some should with those ancient Egyptians, whom we have
spoken of, worship dogs and cats for their Gods; then that Christians,
contrary, not only to reason and even common sense it self, but also to the
direct example of Christ, the founder of their religion, should behave
themselves so profanely in their Churches erected to the honor of their God;
and make so little reckoning of them, as they do in many places of Europe; and
not only do it, but in some places (which is strangest of all:) think
themselves the purer and sounder Christians, that they do so. Were it but for
the sake of Jews and Gentiles, who cannot but abhor that Religion, that
allows of such profanesse in and about places dedicated to the worship of God;
were there no more in it then so; Yet it is apparently against the laws of
true Christianity (which of all others, are most severe against all wilful
scandals:) that such irreverence should be allowed. I am the bolder to say,
that it is against true Christianity, because I know it was not so, when true
Christianity did most flourish. And truly, he that should have seen in the
times of the primitive Church devout Christians not daring so much as to touch
a Bible without first washing of their hands in token of reverence; and in
their Churches in great humility stooping sometimes to the very ground,
(whence as I take it, are those (...), salutations, or kissings of the holy
pavements, mentioned in the Ius Orientale:) yea directly, terramfronte
concutientes, as Saint Augustine speaks in a place; or as Saint Chrysostom,
(...), prostrating themselves quite down, and beating the ground with their
foreheads, (which though it were not absolutely required of any, but such as
were either to be baptized, or did solemn penance; whence (...) for
prostratio, as Billius has long ago taught us: yet was voluntarily performed
by them of the devouter sort, as appears by Saint Chrysostom, tom. vi. (...).
who calls them there (...), that did it, in opposition to cold careless
worshippers:) and the like: And should now see holy Bibles profanely tossed up
and down as they are; ordinary men entering into Churches, with such gesture
and countenance, rather as if they entered with authority to dispossess God,
then to humble themselves before him; and in time of divine service carrying
themselves in them accordingly; moreover, diverse making no conscience to do
that about and against consecrated walls of Churches, which common civilitie
does prompt us to forbear about private houses, those of our betters at lest;
certainly he would hardly be brought to believe that things so contrary could
proceed from men of the same Religion; or rather indeed, to believe; that men
that had any sense of any religion at all, be it what it will, could be so
securely and senselesly profane. However, though it be not unlikely in this
atheistical age, that many do it because they have said in their hearts that
there is no God; and in this sacrilegious age of purpose, because it concerns
their profit and ungodly designs, that consecrated places be made common, and
profaned; Yet God forbid we should judge so uncharitably of all that offend in
this kind; but rather judge and believe, that it is nothing else but the power
of custom, and the want of due consideration, that leads them into it, and
makes them insensible of their impiety. One thing I am sure of, what ever we
think of the business, that Turks and Pagans (what advantages soever we have
over them in other respects:) may sooner hope to bring us in time to their
religion, by their outward apparent reverence and devotion in duties of
religion; then we hope ever by all our knowledge to do good upon them, as long
as we continue so profane. I press it the more, that the power of custom,
which makes us so unsensibly (though otherwise, I make no question, many of us
affectionately desiring the conversion of Jews and Gentiles:) to pass over
all these considerations, and to do still what we have done, be it right or
wrong, may the better appear.

So much being spoken hitherto of the power of custom in matters of religion,
and having sufficiently (as I conceive) showed it here also to be great; we
are now (according to the method that we have followed in the two former
parts:) to proceed to the consideration of the validity of it, according to
right and reason; and that both in point of doctrine, and in point of practice;
that is, in the agendis and the credendis (for there is no Religion but has
these two parts:) of Religion. And herein as of my self I am very willing to
be but short; so when I consider the things themselves, I do not see that I
shall need to be very long. For Religion, though it go beyond Nature and
policy very far, yet it is grounded in part upon the same foundations, as
both Nature and policy are. As for example; particulars in things natural,
must yield and conform to the general if need be, though it be against their
own particular nature. So water to prevent a vacuum; and the like. A maine
ground of policy, Salus populi suprema lex esto. So in matter of Christianity
too: as it is, fully both and very elegantly, expressed by Saint Chrysostom in
these words, (...). This is the rule of perfect Christianity, this the utmost
bounds, (or, exact definition:) this the highest top of it, to seek those
things that are profitable to the public. Many things therefore formerly
delivered, are here applyable. But yet to express my self somewhat more
particularly herein also, we thus briefly;

First, In those things that are of the very substance of religion, and trench
upon the principal end of it, whether in matter of practice or doctrine,
custom is not considerable.

The end, as all men know that are wise, is the principal thing in all things.
And to this purpose is Aristotle's doctrine in the first of his Ethics of
difference of ends, some principal and absolute (which in his phrase we may
call (...):) some secondarie and subordinat, of very good use and moment. In
the holy Scriptures, though a man meet with many changes, varieties, and
alterations, according to variety of times and places; yet he that shall read
and observe them with due care and diligence, may observe the great things of
the Law, as one of the Prophets calls them; or as it is in the New Testament,
(...), the weightier matters of the Law, to be still the same. These to
understand truly, and carefully to practice, is true Religion both and
happiness.

Secondly, In things external conducing more or less (so they conduce, though
but in a less degree; and not cross directly:) to the maine end, superiors
may yield, sometimes if they see occasion; and inferiors if wise and rational,
must always submit unto custom; though otherwise of it self, perchance, not
so fit and commendable.

Superiors cannot propose unto themselves a better example to imitate, then God
himself. God did indulge many things unto the Jews, which otherwise he would
not have liked, because they had been long used to the superstitions of the
Egyptians. So say diverse of the Fathers; and rightly, I think: and this in
God, they call properly, his (...), or condescension. Of Christ and his
Apostles something might be said, and has been said by others to this
purpose. But certain it is, that the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church,
men Apostolical, and others (as it is acknowledged by all men that know any
thing of Antiquity:) in instituting rites and ceremonies Ecclesiastical, had
great respect unto those rites and customs, whether sacred or Civil, that the
first Christians had been used unto, before their conversion unto
Christianisme. Now if this course be warrantable; where the change is absolute
from one Religion to another; it must needs be more plausible and expedient in
point of reformation; wherein the more we yield unto custom in things not so
substantial, the more likely we are to speed in the redress of more
material abuses. As for inferiors, to them properly belong the words of Saint
Augustine, In iis rebus de quibus nihil statuit scriptura divina, mos populi
Dei, vel instituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt. In those things that are not
apparently contrary to the word of God, for private men, though otherwise upon
grounds never so plausible to oppose their opinion to either custom or
authority, whereby the peace of the Church may be in danger; though it may
go for zeal in this World, yet certainly in the world to come, and before an
higher Judge, it will be found (and for such punished, I fear) either gross
wilful Ignorance, or extreme arrogancy.

Thirdly, In matters of doctrine and truth, though every truth be precious of
itself, and ever to be preferred before any private ends, yet all truth is not
always seasonable to be divulged, where the error is general, and cannot be
opposed without much scandal.

As there be customs in matter of action, so in matter of opinion too; since
(as has been showed:) opinions go by custom, as much as any thing: Whence
it is that in the Ius Orientale, you shall find (...), or, customs divided
into (...), that is customs in point of doctrine, and (...), customs in point
of discipline, or practice; that is, rites and ceremonies. In matter of opinion
then the power of custom is in some degree considerable, as well as in other
things. Civilians tell us, that Error aliquando jus facit; and our common
Lawyers also; that a Common error by their Law, for public quiets sake goes
for a Law. Finch of Law, p. 40. I will not stand to examine upon what ground
they speak it; because I do not mean to ground upon them; though I could not
but take notice of their words by the way. Nolite sanctum canibus; and, keep
thy faith to thy self, (not generally to be understood, we do not mean, but
in some cases only:) and some other such passages, are more to our purpose by
far, then any thing that the Law either common or Civil can tell us. But the
argument is ticklish. I leave the rest to the Angelical Doctor in his 22ae. q.
43. a. 7. Vtrum bona spiritualia sint propter scandalum dimittenda. So far at
least, I could wish al men would take it to heart, as not easily for their own
only private ends and purposes (as many are ready to do:) to vent abroad
either old things justly and legally antiquated; or new things of their own
devising (the unhappy fruits of extravagant brains:) that may any wise tend to
innovation, and to the prejudice of public tranquillity.

My conclusion is this, That it is the part of a wise rational man, as to
consider diligently how far forth custom both in matter of Religion and in
other things is considerable, lest he trouble himself and others without
cause: So to consider as diligently wherein it is altogether against reason,
lest conforming to the vulgar in those things, he himself become one of them;
that is, a man that is led by custom and not by reason; which is as much (if
we may speak freely:) as if we said, a thing that has the shape of a man, but
may more truly and properly be called abrute. And because this cannot be done
without much labor and search, I must exhort all men that think truth and
reason so much worth, to spare no pains, no study, if they mean to speed. It
is true, we live in an age, when Idleness is so much in fashion among all
sorts of men, that it is a hard thing for any man of what profession soever, to
be industrious more then ordinary, and not to suffer, even in his reputation,
for it. Which cannot but be a great discouragement unto many, who otherwise as
rational men, have a good mind to improove themselves in their better part.
But let them propose unto themselves the examples of men famous in former ages
for their indefatigablenes in this kind; and let them consider withal, that
the reward is great. Though they adspire not to be famous in the World, nor
ever live to benefit others by their pains (which nevertheles all good men
must propose unto themselves, if it may be:) yet they shall not loose the fruit
of their labors. If others do not, yet themselves (which is the maine:) shall
reap them. (...), for it is the privilege (as is observed by some of the
ancient worthies:) of a soul that is reasonable, (a rational man, he means;)
(...) ((...):) (...): that whereas plants, trees, and other creatures, that are
not reasonable, bear unto others, and not for themselves, she reapes her own
fruits; and whenever, or wheresoever her life does end, be it sooner, or
later, she may have her own end nevertheless. With which words, we shall
here end.

FINIS.
An addition to page 85. by reason of a new book, entitled Ethruscarum
Antiquitatum Fragmenta, Which came since to the Authors hands.
SPeaking there of notable Impostors, that have done their best to cheat the
World by supposititious writings, by what chance, of all the rest, (there being
but too much choice of instances in this kind:) I chanced to instance in Annius
Viterbiensis, I know not. But since it was my chance so to do, I think my
self bound in many respects to take notice here of a certain book,
inscribed, Ethruscarum Antiquitatum Fragmenta, which since this Treatise was
written and licensed, came first to my hands, and, for ought I know, into the
Realm. It is a book in folio, (as we use to speak:) somewhat larger, then
it is either thick or long; consisting of 284. pages, besides an ample Index,
and a long Preface; printed upon fair thick paper, and in as fair, or fairer
a letter. Besides some mappes, it has many cuts and prints, diverse whereof are
in brass. Were but the tenth part of those things that are there exhibited,
true and ancient indeed, as they are pretended, the book might very well be
worth 30. or 40. shillings to be bought; neither is there, I think, any true
Philologist, or lover of learning in general, that would grudge to purchase it
at that rate. But in a word, as the Graecians were wont to speak, (...), the
Title indeed, and the specious dress, and furniture of the Book, promise
great Treasures; but those Treasures, well looked into, prove but mere trash,
and childrens bables: if I may so call such impudent, shameless, unconscionable
trumperies and forgeries, such as might have better proceeded from professed
Heathens (though I do not think there have ever been many heathens in the
world so absolutely godless and void of conscience, but would have been
ashamed to have been the authors of them:) then men that profess themselves
to be Christians. Me thinks if these impudent jugglors, did so far presume
upon the ignorance and simplicity of us Transalpins, (as once they were wont
to speak in scorn of all that were not Italians;) as to believe that we
would swallow all down readily without any suspicion at all; yet they should
have considered, that Italy affords many learned men, (the present Pope
himself, a man of excellent humane learning: who as they cannot but presently
find, so certainly will heartily detest such abominable practices. But since
the attempt was so great and dangerous, (no less then the confounding of
almost all Histories and Historians of the world; and in a manner of all
truth:) it is Gods great mercy, that the undertakers were such, as had more
will then skill to cheat, and so might easily be discovered. For of all those
284. pages, I dare say there is not any one page (scarce any one line of any
page:) but upon due examination, will afford, not to a professed Antiquarie
only, but even to an ordinary Scholar, sufficient arguments and evidences,
whereby to evince the spuriousnes and falsenesse of the Title. If any man would
be so idle as to gather together all that can, out of the book it self, be
said against it, he might easily make a book in folio ten times as big as
it. For my part, all that I have to say here upon it, is but to let you know,
(which perchance every body will not presently take notice of:) that Annius
Viterbiensis, that infamous Impostor that we have spoken of, though dead
himself long ago, is the very first original ground and fountain of all
this Imposture. Read him, (if you can have so much patience:) his Catonis
Origines and his Comments upon them, and it will clearly appear unto you, to
be as I say. So apt are pleasing fables, to propagate; and so hard (be the
Truth never so clear and apparent:) to be rooted out of the mind and souls
of vulgar men; especially when their vanity and foolish ambition, either for
themselves or for their Country, has some interest in the credibilitie of
those fables. Grounding upon the same Annius Viterbiensis, did one Bernardinus
Baldus Vrbinas long ago (for I find, it has been printed though I never saw
it yet my self, but as I have it, that is, Manuscript:) adventure to set out
an Interpretation (with Notes upon it:) of that Aenea Tabula Eugubina, or
ancient Inscription, found in Eugubium in Italy, and conceived by some to be
written in the Ethruscan tongue and character: though Gruterus in his Thesaurus
seem to be of another opinion. It was a bold attempt, that too; yet more bold
then dangerous, or of any great consequence; and the Author himself, (to do
him no wrong:) was so modest yet, as to call it all, but his Divinatio. But
these late Ethruscan Impostors, have gone beyond all that ever were heard of in
the World, in boldness, and licentiousness of counterfeiting; even beyond
Annius Viterbiensis himself, I would say; but that in very Truth, as I have
already said, they are but his offspring, and the unhappily continued fruits of
his first Chimaericall conceptions. Well, if these men (worse then any (...),
and publici odii victimae:) do not deserve with all possible rigor and
severitie to be proceeded against, tanquam generis humani hosts, as sworn
and professed enemies to that which is the chiefest good, and happiness of
rational men upon earth, that is, Truth. I know not who ever did. And so I
leave them to the judgment of others, in whose power it is to deal with them
according to their desert.

Imprimatur:

Iunii 10. 1638.

Sa: Baker.


