A merry new catch of all Trades.
To the tune of The clean Contrary way.


ALL Trades are not alike in show,
All Arts do not agree:
All Occupations gains are small.
As here they all shall see,
As here they all shall see.
The Courtier woes, his servant does,
Far more then he can answer,
The Baker weighes with false essays,
The Cuckold's turned a Monster. The Cuck. etc.
The Tailor sowes, the Smith he blows,
The Tinker beats his pan:
The Pewterer rank, cries tinke a tanke tanke,
The Apothecary ranta tan tan. The Apoth: etc.
The Bricklayer high does rise to fly,
The Plummer often does melt,
The Carpenter does love his rule,
And the Hatmakar loves his felt. And the, etc.
The Weauer thumps, his old wife mumps,
The Barber goes snip snap,
The Butcher pricks, the Tapster nickes,
The Farmer stops a^ap. The Farmer, etc.
The Curryer toils, and deals in oils,
The Cobbler lives by his piece:
The Chamberlain cheates with musty meats,
And does the Country fleece. And does, etc.
The Carter whips, the Beggar ships,
The Beadle lives by blows,
Yet whores will be whores at honest men's doors
Disphight a'th Beadles nose. Dispight a'th, etc.
The Broome-man cries, maid servants buys,
And swaps with him for wares,
The Country ass does to the Cosse,
Sell Orchards full of Pears. Sell, etc.
Some Schoolmasters teach beyond their reach,
The Mason dealts with his square,
The Fletcher does nock, and works by the clock,
The Beareward lives by his Bear. The, etc.
The Grosers pates 'bout things of weight,
Is often troubled sore,
The Tailors yard is seldom marde,
Tho it measure many a score.
Tho it measure many a score.
The second part.
To the same Tune.
STEPHEN^ BROOMEMAN:^
BVY^BROOME^BVY^


THe Iron-monger hardly deals,
All Fruterers loose by the rot:
The Hagler buys and lives by lies,
The Drunkard plyes the pot.
The Drunkard plyes the pot.
The Collier swears heel loose his ears,
But he will falsely deal:
And such are glad as mand the Pad,
For trifles for to steal. For trifles, etc.
The Budget-maker oftentimes,
Do deal in brazen nails:
And Tradesmen store, turn Porters poor,
When other trading fails. When other, etc.
The Water-man will carry Nan,
For twopence cross the River:
Yet this heel say, if she cannot pay,
Her passage free heel give her* Her passage, etc.
The Glouer pokes, the Gallant smoakes,
Yet lives in Tradesmen debts,
The Drawer thriues by honest wives,
The Cheater lives by bets. The Cheater, etc.
The Cook does broyle, the Fencer foil,
The footman be does sweat:
And Apple-Iohn does usher Nan,
And she gives him a heat. And she, etc.
The Ostler rubs, the Cutler scrubs,
The Semsters deal in Ruffes:
The smoakie man with his small cole pan,
Maintained is by puffes. Maintained is, etc.
The Chandelors deeds great penance needs.
And Faggots they die bear:
The Uintner draws, yet makes no frayes,
The Beggar is void of care. The Beggar, and
The Morris dance does bravely prance,
And about the Country goes:
And May poles hie shall mount to th'skie,
Despite of the Hobby horse nose. Despite, etc
Dissentions seed, the Parators need,
And Scoulds him money give:
And if there were no swaggering Whore,
The Pander could not live. The Pander, etc.
Thus all arise by contraries,
Heaven send them crosses ten:
Unless they all both great and small,
Do live and dye honest men.
Do live and dye honest men.
FINIS.
Printed at London for I. Trundle.


