A SERMON OF THE NATVRE AND END OF Repentance: Shadowed in the Ministry of
John the Baptist.

Preached the Sunday before Lent. 1613.

JOHN 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except that a man be borne of water
and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Edmund Weauer, and are to sold at the great
South-dore of Paul's. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God THOMAS Lord Bishop Elect of CHESTER, my
very good LORD.
My Reverend Lord:
BEing heretofore moved for some considerations to publish this Sermon: I
remained somewhat doubtful in the Dedication thereof, until the news of your
Lordships advancement quickly settled my resolution. For where better could I
have implored Patronage, then where both eminent authority of Place, as also
your Lordships particular favor toward me, seemed no less enforcedly to
inuit by love, then compel by duty? For which respect I have now presumed
upon your Lordships acceptance, trusting the rather to obtain pardon for this
my bold intrusion, and also indulgent censure of these my unworthy labors,
presented to your learned view as chalenging the goodness of your Lordships
disposition, and freely offered courtesy, guilty of this my attempt, and a
chief cause hereof.

The Lord God guide and assist your Lordship with the blessed directions of his
most holy spirit, in the discharge of your high calling in this life, and in
the life to come give you the reward of immortality and everlasting glory.

Your Lordships in all duty to be commanded WILLIAM CASE.

OF THE NATVRE AND END OF REpentance: shadowed in the Ministry of JOHN the
BAPTIST.
JOHN 1. Ver. 31. Therefore am I come, Baptizing with Water.


THe life of a Christian in this world is a medlie, consisting of much
variety, a continual intercourse of changeable succession. Eccles. 3.2. etc.
For there is a time to be borne (says Solomon) and a time to die; a time to
plant, and a time to pluck up; a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to
break down, and a time to build up. A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a
time to dance, and a time to mourn. Sic tristia secundis secunda tristibus
vicissitudo acerba sortis temperat. So wise is the ever admirable Creator in
all his works (says one) as to temper the actions of the life of man with
such proportion and counterpoyse, that no prosperity shall be without his
succeeding inconvenience, no adversity without his comfort; to chase out of
man's mind security and despair, the only enemies of all wise and virtuous
courses. That time (beloved) is but a small whiles past, when there was nothing
heard in your gates but the voice of joy and gladness, of mirth and solace;
and that, upon so good a cause, as a better the world was never made partaker
of, the memory of the blessed Incarnation of the worlds Redeemer. But now
least the proud heart of man should be exalted above measure, and puffed up
through abundance of consolations: Behold, there is a contrary occasion, of a
contrary affection, the sin of man to counteruaile the grace of God; that as
before we have had cause of rejoicing and feasting; so now the time approaches
and is at hand, wherein we have inuitation to lamenting and fasting. So that
having already celebrated with mirth and great joy the memory of Christ's
coming into the world; it remains in the next place that now by sorrow and
repentance we prepare for his coming unto us. For it is the same path which
our Evangelist has trodden out unto us in this Chapter. Wherein after he had
in the beginning thereof Divinely proposed the coming of that light into the
world, which the world being shut up in blindness was not able to comprehend:
in the next place, immediately he proceeds unto the Ministry of John
Baptist, the Ministry of humiliation and repentance, the better to prepare
the souls of men to entertain that heavenly guest, for which in that estate
they naturally were in, they were most unfit. For indeed it was the mere
scope of John's Ministry to prepare those by repentance, which by the
ministry of Christ were afterward to be sanctified by faith and other graces
of the spirit: Which thing as the Baptist upon occasion diverse times in sundry
passages of this Chapter specifieth and witnesses of himself; so specially in
this place, upon the sight of Jesus coming toward him, as you may see in the
coherence: he infers this same testimony of his own Ministry, in the
words which I have now read unto you, [Therefore am I come, Baptizing with
water,] intimating unto his Disciples two things, which are now also of us to
be considered. His Office; and the end of his office: His Office and Ministry
in these words, [I am come, Baptizing with water,] and the end of his Office
implied and included in the illatiue particle [therefore,] that is to say [that
Christ might be made manifest unto Israel, therefore am I come, Baptizing with
water.] So that in these words now read unto you, I have occasion given to
speak of the Office of John Baptist in a twofold respect. First, of the
positive and absolute nature of it, what it is, and the parts thereof: And
secondly, of the relative nature of it, how of it self it is but a rudiment,
and a preparatiue to a further degree of perfection; and yet notwithstanding so
necessary, that the other without it is likewise imperfect, The absolute
nature of his office and ministry, is here noted out unto us to be the
[Baptisme of water;] which as it is many times taken figuratively in the
Scriptures in diverse significations, so especially in this place by a
synechadoche. it is taken for the whole course of John's calling and Ministry.
Whereof thereare two parts: The substance of it, which was the doctrine of
repentance for the remission of sins: And secondly, the ceremony of it, or
the seal of that doctrine, the outward administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism.

To speak therefore properly of the substance of John's Baptism, is to speak
of Repentance, which he Preached only in the whole course of his Ministry.
Now what repentance is, where should we better learn then of him, who was the
Preacher of Repentance? of the Baptist himself, the precursor of the worlds
Savior, who teaches it first by Precept; secondly, by the parts of it; and
thirdly by Pattern in his own example. By Precept showing that it must be: by
parts of it, showing what it must be, and by pattern showing how it must be
practiced of all that hope to reap benefit by the incarnation of Christ Jesus.

And first he taught it by precept in the third of Matthew, ver. 3. When he
says, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Which sentence seems not
so much a precept imposing by commandment a duty necessarily to be performed,
as a counsel, because a reason is annexed: for then he might have said,
Repent, and no more: Neither does it only seem to be a counsel, but rather a
loving persuasion, because the reason is so amiable and lovely, for it might
have been otherwise proposed as it was in another place by our Savior, Repent
least ye perish: But here it is, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand:
as if he should have said, The time was when as the hardness of men's hearts
had locked up and fast barred the doors of grace, so that then there was
neither hope of expecting, nor means of obtaining mercy or favor at the
hands of God. But behold! now (such is the goodness of God) the time
approaches and is nigh at hand, when as the gates of the kingdom of heaven
shall be set wide open; and therefore now; if ever, is the acceptable time; now
is the day of Salvation: to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts, and. A most forceable persuasion and sweet allurement, agreeable to
the glad tidings of the Gospel: yea, even to the beginning of the Gospel (as
Saint Mark calls it) the Doctrine of Repentance: which albeit for the most part
it be a doctrine of sharp rebukes and severe discipline, yet is it mixed with
such gracious motives, and incitations of encouragement to the undertaking of
it, as drives away all thoughts and doubts of danger or despair, howsoever it
be branded by profane Libertines with an imputation of cruelty, working
desperate horror and distraction in the soul and consciences of man. For
although the duty of repentance imposed, be very troublesome and harsh unto
flesh and blood, yet is the end of our repentance so full of comfortable
success as does alleuiate all forrowes and make the yoke easy and the burden
light. And therefore if Christ do call us, though it be with Peter to walk
upon the Sea, yet let us go unto him; and though mighty winds, whether
outward crosses of the world, or inward terrors of conscience, through our
infirmity and infidelity may afright and wel-nigh ouerwhelme us; yet if, when
we begin to sink, we can but say with Peter, Master save us, Math. 14.29.
our Lord Jesus will stretch forth his hand and catch us, But if neither
commandments can force us, nor reasons persuade us, nor loving allurements draw
us to the undertaking of this happy (though heavy) course of Repentance: it
shall not be our pleading that Abraham is our Father, that shall help us;
Math. 3.9.10.
for God is able even of these stonges to raise up children unto Abraham. Now
also is the axe laid unto the root of the tree, and therefore every tree that
bringoth not forth good fruit, shall be hewne down and cast into the fire.
Implying this much, that they who will not kiss the Son, as friendly
subiecta, and be ruled by his Scepter now in his kingdom; shall hereafter be
subdued by the Son, as his enemies, and bruised in pieces with his iron rod
in the day of his wrathful indignation.

Now because the reward is so great, which is proposed to repentance, even the
kingdom of heaven; and on the other side the punishment so great if we do not
repent as thereby to incur the danger of everlasting fire: it will happily so
fall out, that as Herod heard John gladly until he was rebuked for his
incestuous marriage; so many it may be will willingly entertain with reverence
the doctrine of John, until their dearest sins be reproved; and then, rather
then they will be deuorced from that adulterous brood, which with so great
liking and delight they nourish, as chaste spouses, in their bosoms; rather (I
say) then they will suffer rebuke for them, or be drawn to forsake them, they
will not only seek to contemn the calling and disgrace the persons, but even
if they could also take the heads of those Ministers that shall so boldly
censure and show themselves unto themselves. And therefore we cannot well tell
what we shall be, until we know what repentance is in the parts of it.

And that the Baptist teaches in the third of Lukes Gospel, and the fifth
verse, distinguishing the same into four several special parts; comprising
therein all particular branches that respectively may be referred thereunto.
When he says, Every valley shall be filled and every mountain and hill shall
be brought low, Luke 3.5.
and the crooked things shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be
made smooth, and so all flesh shall see the salvation of God: Wherein he does
not only intimate and infer the end and fruit of Repentance in general,
that it is a property thereof to pull those scales of ignorance and
sensuality from off the eyes of our understanding, without which we could not
otherwise apprehend and see the salvation by Christ offered unto us: but also
by an allegory does manifestly declare wherein true repentance does consist,
and does likewise particular the parts thereof. For whereas the nature of
repentance is nothing else but a mortification of all sin, and a general
amendment of life: there is no irregularitie whatsoever whereby the soul of
man is diuerted from the righteous rule of Gods law, but the reformation
thereof may be reduced unto one of these four heads: either in filling the
valleys, or in leuelling the mountains; in making straight the crooked, or the
rough in being made smooth: for the valleys are filled, when as our affections
are raised from the things on the earth, and are set on those things that are
above. Col. 3.2. The mountains are brought low, when the proud thoughts of man
are captiuated to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10.5. The crooked things are
made straight when the unrighteousness of our actions are brought within such
compass as that we do not otherwise unto others then we would have others to
do unto us, Mat. 7.12. And lastly, the rough things become smooth when as we
willingly take the yoke of Christ upon us. and learn of him to be lowly and
meek. Math. 11.29. For by Valleys, Mountains and crooked ways and rough,
(as far as I can conceive there of) can be understood nothing better then the
base earthlinesse of our affections, the swelling pride of our hearts, the
unjust iniquity of our actions, and the perverse frowardness of our wills.
These four containing within them the whole disorder of the frame of man's
nature. For inasmuch as the directing spirit of grace has forsaken us, because
first we had forsaken him: there is now no better desires in the heart of man;
but first an eager pursuit and delight which he has only in the things of
this world. Secondly, a vainglorious pride and boasting which he takes in
them hen he has them. Thirdly, the means whereby he does attain unto them
are indirect and injurious: And lastly, if he fade or be crossed in the
prosecution of them, his passions are troublesome and boisterous. Under which
sour vices, all other are comprehended; as all graces are under these four,
that are directly opposite unto them, for indeed they are ex diametro,
directly opposed unto those four general divine graces, from whence all other
do spring. Faith, Obedience, Love and Patience. Our earthly and base
affections being so fastened unto the pleasures and delights of this world,
that our faith cannot be steadfast concerning the pleasures of a better world;
and so we sin against our Lord and Savior. Secondly, our pride and high
conceit of our selves is repugnant unto that obedience which we owe unto Gods
Law, and so we offend our Lord and Creator. Thirdly, by the unrighteousness
of our actions we are defective in our Charity, and thereby we offer wrong
unto our Brethren. And last of all, the perverseness and frowardness of our
wills does trouble our hope and patience, and so we disquiet our selves and the
peace of our own consciences. Briefly, we are hence to learn, Math. 3.3.
that the Preaching of John (who came to prepare the ways of the Lord, and to
make his paths straight) does in that place intimate thus much unto us, that
all these foureirregularities, are to be rectified if we hope to have the
spirit of Christ to inhabit and possess us. And therefore these our
affections must be wained from the things of this world, for we cannot serve
two Masters (says our blessed Savior;) Luke 16.13.
We cannot serve God and Mammon. Secondly, Iam. 4.6.
the pride of our hearts is to be abased; for God resists the proud, and
gives grace unto the humble. Thirdly, the vnrlghteousnesse of our actions is
to be rectified; Mark. 4.24.
for With what measure we meite unto others, the same will God meite unto us.
And lastly, the perverseness of our wills is to be moderated; James 1.20.
for the wrath of man cannot accomplish the will of God, but a meek and a
quiet spirit is a thing before God much set by. 1. Pet. 3.4.
In fine, this is the sum of all, that in as much as whiles we are in the
flesh; that is, before we are renewed by Repentance, the motions of sin, which
are by the Law, do prevail in our members to bring forth fruit unto death: so
now when as grace does appear, and that the kingdom of God is at hand; all
impediments are to be removed, which might hinder the work of the spirit of
grace within us: so that we may he every way fitted; that we may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; that we may be filled withal fullness of God, as the Apostle speaks
Ephesians. 3, 18.

And the Baptist, does not only teach wherein Repentance does consist, and
what it must be; but he also confirms his Doctrine by his own example,
showing how it must be practiced of all true penitentiaries; and that
especially in their particulars. The place where he lived and Preached, and
that was in the wilderness. The meat whichhe ate, and that was locusts and
wild honey. And lastly, the garments which he wore, and that was a rough
raiment of Camels hair, girt about his loins with a leatherne girdle. In all
which he signified unto all men what he was, and what all true Repentants
should be; even every way mortified unto this world; for All that is in this
world (says Saint John) is the lust of the flesh, the just of the eyes, or the
pride of life. 1 Ioh. 2.16.
The lust of the flesh he subdued, for he pampered not his body with variety
of delicacies, neither troubled he his thoughts with providing the dainties of
these times, but contented himself with such mean refreshment as would only
but sustain nature, such as that wild desert would afford, nothing but
locusts and wild honey. The lust of the eyes he prevented, for he dclighted
not in the garish shows and vain spectacles of this world, neither desired he
the society of good-companions and merry consorts, but sequestered himself
into the wild wilderness, a desert place, from all occasions of sin,
avoiding all allurements that might withdraw him, and all oppositions that
might provoke him to froget the duty of his vocation. And lastly, the pride
of this life he mortified; for those soft and costly raiments whereby the pride
of man's heart is advanced and openly manifested unto the world, did he
contemn, and apparelled himself in such a garment as befitted one whose
profession did acknowledge himself unworthy of any, and therefore contented
himself in humility with the meanest, even a rough coat of camels hair girt
about his loins with a leatherne belt.

His practice is an example unto us; and that so plain, that there are few (I
am persuaded) but do understand it, and can easily make application thereof
unto themselves: and therefore (the time calling me on) I will not further
exemplify things so manifest and ordinary, as the necessity and duties of
Repentance, which though practiced sincerely of few, yet the doctrine thereof
is a highway so much beaten and so plain, that a further guide were
needelesse. Only before I proceed; of the ceremonial part of John's Doctrine,
Hook Eccl. pol. lib. 5.
the outward administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, thus much: That the
administration of the outward signs is occasioned by the weakness of our
faith and understanding, which as they do much depend upon sense, so must they
have some kind of sensible object to convey unto the understanding what is to
be believed. And therefore since God in himself is invisible, and cannot by us
be discerned working, therefore (I say) when it seems good in the eyes of his
heavenly wisdom that men for some special intents and purposes should take
notice of his glorious presence: he gives unto us some plain and sensible
tokens, whereby to know what we cannot see. So communicating by sensible
means, those blessings, that are incomprehensible; assuring us thereby in this
particular, that as water does wash away the filth of the flesh; so does the
blood of Christ cleanse our souls from all pollution of sin, by repentance
and faith in his name.

Now these things being considered, what should I hence infer, but even take
up the complaint of the Prophet Esaias in the first verse of his 53. Esaias 53.1.
Chapter. Who will believe our report? when as there are so many professors
and so few practisers of true and unfeigned Repentance: Every man almost (as
Herod) harboring in his breast some minion sin or other, from whence he will
not be divorced; when as the vallyes of some are not raised, but that their
affections do yet lie groueling upon the earth, raking and rooting in the mire
of this world, and latogether neglecting the golden treasures of heaven: The
swesling pride of others being such, that they can think worthily of none but
themselves: The iniquity of others likewise, banishing all truth and honesty
from their dealings: and lastly, the boisterous and outrageous passions of some
giving assured testimony, that as yet their roughness has not been made
smooth by the power of Repentance. Neither does the outward face of men's
carriage and deportment give other witness, but that many think the example of
St John does nothing coeern them. For though there ought (I confess) to be an
orderly distinction of degrees by outward habits and other the needful
concernements of this life: Yet in these times it seems men's minds are
incapable of moderation, when as in every succession every one for the most
part desires to exceed him that went before him, both in diet, apparel, and
other complements of Nature; As if there were no profit unto a man (as the wise
man speaks) but that he eat, and drink, Eccles. 2.24.
and delight his soul in the variety of this worlds vanity. And that which
is worst of all, the vnteachablenesse of many, gives strong suspicion that
their estate is wel-nigh desperate, when as by the differeces wherewith the
Church our Mother now trauaileth, (which should humble us) do they take
advantage to harden their hearts the more For the one side (say they) are too
licentious, the other too curious, and in the mean time they will bereformed
by neither: much like those wicked Pharisees of whom our Savior speaks in the
eleventh of Matthew; Math. 11.18.19
for John came neither eating nor drinking, and yet they said he had a Devil.
The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they said behold a glutton, a
drinker of wine, and a friend unto Publicans and sinners. So that the truth is,
that when men's minds are so settled upon the things of this world, that neither
the threatenings of the law, nor the promises of the Gospel, neither the
restraints of the one, nor the liberties of the other, can prevail to make men
forsake their sins, there is great presumption that their God is their
belly, when as their unbridled appetite is their sole religion. The
exclamations, the inuectiues, the exhortations of the messengers of God, from
and against these courses, are every where so frequent, that its hopeless, and
therefore needelesse for me to multiply the same Only thus much to conclude
this point. Let us all remember (beloved) what great account we have to pass
at that last Audite, when our chief favorites, the fancie-feeding and
flattering pleasures of this world shall all shrink from us, and nothing but
our own deeds and deserts shall accompany us before the judgment seat of
God.

And so I pass briefly from the positive Doctrine of John, the nature of
Repentance; to the other part thereof, its relative nature, the end of it, why
it was, that is to say, That Christ might be made manifest unto Israel.

And surely it was the chiefest intendment of the Baptist in this place, not to
show what, but wherefore his Ministry served. For indeed of it self it was
almost as nothing; it was but a bare beginning of that which was to be made
perfect by another Ministry. For although at that time Christ was come into
the world, John 1.10.^1
yet the world knew him not; yet though he came unto his own, yet his own
received him not: because the light shined in fuch darkness as was not able to
comprehend it So that of necessity it was requisite that there should proceeds
another Ministry whereby to clecre that glolmie darkness that ouer-shadowed
men's minds from apprehending the light.

Our inserence therefore from this place shall be that Christ could not be
manifested unto Isracl, neither is it possible that we should ever come to the
true knowledge of Christ without the Ministry of John Baptist, the preaching
and practice of (at least one degree of) Repentance going before, For the same
reason which was affirmatiuly given of the abrogation of the old Sacrament
which did prefigure this, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall prosit you
nothing, Gal. 5.2.
does on the negative follow the institution of this; namely, that if we be not
baptized, assuredly Christ shall prosit us nothing. And in saying so, I say no
more then our blesled Savior himself said unto that great Doctor of Israel
in the third of S. John's Gospel; Verily, verily, John 3.3.
I say unto thee, except that a man be brone of water and of the Spirit, be
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. For, there is a twofold Baptism: the
one, by the Ancients called Baptismus flaminis, the Baptism of water: the
other, Baptismus flaminis, the Baptism of the Spirit and fire. The first is a
preparation to the second. And therefore says the Baptist; I indeed baptize
you with water to repentance, Mat. 3.10.
but he that comes after me, is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not
worthy to bear: he will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire.

And that we may further prove it necessary to the manifestation of Christ,
the very Inscription of John's ministry makes it evident, Mat. 3.3.
The voice of a Crier in the Wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight. That as we know it is an usual thing for Princes and great
men, before they come to any place, to have their Harbingers to go before them,
to make even their way, and to prepare a fit place to entertain them against
they come: So the Lord having ordained the sold of man to be his Temple, will
first have it swept and cleansed by somewhat of repentance, from the filth and
pollution of sin, before he will make it his dwelling place. And it is very
consonant unto reason: time of the giving of the Law, and ye shall see how the
people were to be prepared before they were to come before the Lord to make a
Covenant with him at the mountain of Sinai, Exodus 20.10.11
how they were to be sanctified and washed two days, and the third day to come
before him. Now that was the Covenant of works, and it was given by the
mediation of a servant, Moses: but this is the Covenant of Grace, a better
Covenant, and given by the mediation of him that is son and heir of all; and
therefore if preparation were needful in the former, much more in this. Mat.
11.9.
nor a Prophet of the old; Fuit tamen plusquam Propheta, be was more then a
Prophet, and yet not so much as a Minister of the Gospel: the least in the
Kingdom of heaven (says our blessed Savior) is greater then be, as
concerning the subject of his Ministry: Furit autem terminus Legis, and
initium Euangelij, He was the ending of the Law, Mark 1.1.
and beginning of the Gospel: and therefore Repentance (the chief substance
of his Ministry) was to be preached between the Law and the Gospel,
forasmuch as it was impossible unto the Law, Romans 8.3.
being of no strength because of the flesh, James 4.5.
the spirit also that dwells in us lusting after envy (as S. James speaks)
God sending his own Son to redeem us that were under the Law, Gal. 4.4.5.
can it stand with the Justice of God, so to dishonor his Law, as to receive
us to mercy whiles we still be contemners of it? No assuredly. But such only
does the Lord accept in Christ, as feeling themselves unable to fulfill the
Law, do for that cause submit and prostrate themselves at the feet of Gods
Justice, with acknowledgement of their desert, and with penitent and sorrowful
hearts ask pardon for their sins. Not that the Lord requires or accepts
repentance as meritorious, or in that kind any way necessary, for his mercy
is only sufficient, but that a rebel cannot be received without submission.
For the subject of the Gospel of Christ is a promulgation or a proclamation of
pardon unto all such as indeed are rebels against God, but yet not if they
continue so; but only unto such rebels as come in and submit themselves. It is
clear therefore and evident that the paths of Repentance lead and conduct us
unto the Kingdom of Grace. Mat. 11.28.
For Come unto me (says our Lord Jesus) all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you. Now, can the Lord ease us of sin, when we are
already at so much ease that we feel not our sins; they trouble us not? No,
for the scope (I say) of Christian do ctrine is the comfort of them whose
hearts are ouer-charged with the burden of sin.

Furthermore, if this will not suffice, let us take recourse unto the
Ceremonial Law, which was but a shadow: for shadows sometimes may be better
discerned then the substance it self, if the sight be weak. As (for example)
we better discern the form of the Sun by its shadow in the water, then in
looking upon its own body, because our sight is weak. Numb. 21.
So look upon the brazen Serpent, a figure and shadow of Christ, which had
power given it to heal those that felt themselves bitten by the fiery
Serpents, if they looked up unto the same: noting thereby thus much, that when
the terrors of Gods judgments for our sins are so heavy upon our souls,
that they press us unto the very death; if then by a lively faith we can but
look up unto Christ, we shall be healed, our sins shall be remitted: yet
with this Prouiso, this is always to be presupposed, that we can never look
up to be healed, unless first we feel our selves wounded. And if we want
instances, take the Parable of the Servant that fell down at his Masters feet,
Mat. 18.26.
desiring patience and forbearance: and the Parable also of the Prodigal
Son, Luke 15.20.
who having dissolutely wasted all his portion, returned home in great sorrow
and anguish of heart; and so thereby obtained grace and favor again. I will
not stand any longer in amplifying and enlarging the proof hereof, it being a
thing that the tenor of Scripture does always import, and the practice of the
Saints does every where confirm, that Christ cannot be truly manifested unto
us, that is, his merits and mercy can never either be effectual unto us, or
rightly apprehended by us, unless we be baptized with John's Baptism; and
washed with the water of Repentance.

This therefore being so, if we do but reflect our thoughts from what we
should be, unto what we are, and every one examine his own heart, what his
estate is, and how many are there, that either will be assured, or shall
greatly doubt that they have as yet no claim, no interest nor benefit at all
by the merits of Christ's death, because they feel no alteration in themselves
from what they have been at the first, they have never submitted themselves to
the ministry of John Baptist; they have never truly and thoroughly repented
them of their sins; and therefore as yet Christ is not made manifest unto
them, howsoever they have deluded themselves.

But yet here is not all: Reu. 2.24.
for there are profunda Satanae, whereof S. John speaks in the second of the
Revelation, that same deepenesse of Satan which every man cannot discover in
himself. For it were well, if being in a damnable estate, men might feel and
know they were what they are; for then there might be better hope of amendment,
and possibility of reconciliation with God. But it is not so: for there are
delusions, mysteries, mists of iniquity, whereby a man shall be so deceived
(if he look not very carefully and warily unto himself) in judging of his
spiritual estate: that many men questionless, and that to with a good opinion
of themselves slip suddenly away, and descend unto the deep at unawares. It is
not then from our purpose somewhat to unmask the vizard of hypocrisy, and to
discover the subtle illusions of Satan; that seeing the deceit and danger,
we may the better avoid the same.

The first illusion therefore whereby Hypocrites are deceived, is too much
relying and trusting in the outward forms of Gods service. For it is true,
that they acknowledge the doctrine and Baptism of John to be necessary. Yet
what then? have they not sufficiently submitted themselves unto it, when they
have been baptized? what need they then (think they) to make any further
seruple of being in the favor of God? Is not the sacrament of Baptism that
same Lauacrum Regenerationis, 1 Tit. 3.5.
that bath of Regeneration (as the Apostle calls it) whereby they are made
members of the Church of God, sealed for the Children of God; and so assared of
the remission of their sins?

To which I answer, that it is a remarkable sign and token of a man whose
heart is not sincere, to glory and please himself in the outward performance
of religsous Ceremonies, neglecting in the mean time the true subslance of
Grace, and the fear of God. An example whereof we have in the jews, who
chiefly insulted in the Customs and Rites of the Law, crying, Ier. 7.4.5.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, when as the Lord witnesses,
that he had nothing to do with their new Moons, and their Sacrifices, their
hearts being so obdurate, and their lives so profane as they were: for that
that he especial required of them, was to amend their ways and their works.
So it is in like manner in this particular of Baptism, wherein we are never
to think it sefe to presume of Gods grace by bare coniecturall hopes, in
eleuating the outward means of life, the means failing that should come
between. For though the Sacraments and their manner of administration be Gods
own ordinances, yet notwithstanding do they include a subordination of
means, without which we cannot actually be brought to enjoy what God does
secretly intend. So that to build only upon notionall conceits, and outward
formalities of Gods service, as though they were of themselves either
acceptable to God, or any whit behoouefull to our good, unless we keep our
selves in the ways wherein he has appointed us to walk, is but a
selfe-deceiuing vanity. And therefore the outward form and administration of
this Sacrament of Baptism is ineffectuall and unavailable without repentance
true and serious. For the bare form of Baptism in it self is but a mere
Ceremony, and though after a sort necessary, yet not absolutely necessary to
man's salvation, although the graces represented by it be indispensable. For we
may be saved without Baptismall water, but not without Baptismall Grace:
neither does every one receive the grace of God, that receives the Sacrament of
his grace. For howsoever God use the Sacrament as an instrument to give and
assure us of these graces, so that none do ordinarily partake of the grace of
remission of sins, without the Sacrament of Baptism duly administered: yet
is not remission of sins so tied unto it, that whosoever has the one, is
necessarily made partaker of the other, but that thousands receive the outward
sign, which never shall taste of the favor of God.

Furthermore, that we may better conceive the error of these men, and may
more perfectly apprehend the truth of this point, we are to know that there is
a visible Church, that is, a community of men separated from others, and
sanctified through the profession of that truth which God has taught the world
by his Son. And there is an invisible Church, that body mystical whereof
Christ is only the head, that building indiscernable by mortal eyes, wherein
CHRIST is the chiese Cornerstone. In the visible Church there are outward
means, in the invisible Church there are inward graces required as means to
assure us of the favor of God.

Now though he can never be a member of the invisible Church, which is not
first a member of the visible, yet every one that is a member of the visible,
is not a member of the invisible; for, Romans 9.6.
all are not Israel that are of Israel. That which makes us members of the
visible Church are the outward visible means of grace, and our submission
thereunto, the preaching of the Word, the receiving of the Sacraments, and the
like. That which makes us members of the invisible Church are the inward graces
of the Spirit, Repentance, Faith. Hope and Love. Professing the truth in the
one. in the other obeying the truth is of necessity required. Now according
unto these, our judgment of our selves and others ought to be after a
different manner: of others, Charity must direct us: of our selves, Faith must
assure us. If we see others submit themselves to the outward ordinary means
of life, the rule of Charity that hops all things, is that we hope well of
all men; and therefore that those that we see are outwardly baptized, we judge
as inwardly regenerated, because our judgment of others can extend no further
then the outward appearance: But if we have no other assurance of our own
safety but by outward means, our hopes are but uncertain. For, that which
we hope of others, we must feel in our selves; we must feel that inward
grace within us, which makes the outward means effectual unto us: and
therefore if we feel not Repentance in our selves, our Baptism is
ineffectuall and unavailable.

Again in the second place, although men of dissolute and scandalous carriage,
may by enidence of reason be brought to confess, that their outward Bpatisme
is unavailable without inward and true Repentance: yet does the Devil,
through their own corruption, so far prevail with them, as to persuade
them, and make them think that they repent, when as indeed they do nothing
less. For whereas Repentance does especially consist in a dying to sin: Romans
6.2.
how shall they that are dead to sin (says the Apostle) yet live therein? If
therefore we say that (by dying to sin) we have fellowship with Christ, 1
Ioh. 1.6.
and yet walk in darkness, we lie and do not truly, says Saint John: And
yet for all this, such is the mystery of imquitie that by the subtlety of
Satan and the falsenesse of men's own hearts, they still think they do
repent, when indeed they repent not. For there may be some general
dispositions unto Repentance even in Hypocrites; as a willing submission unto
the outward means of life, a desire of Salvation, a kind of hate, of grief,
and sorrow for some sins, some kind of obedience also unto many of Gods
commandments, which may give them some cause to think that the spirit of God
works in them the grace of repentance; when as in truth it is nothing so,
because there is euersome great defect therein which makes it imporfect, and so
unacceptable, either it is not sincere, or not entire, or built upon some
indirect and oblique respect or other. As first for example in the Pharisees
that came to John's Baptism, there was questionless some doubt made them in
some sort think well of themselves, but yet it was not sincere, Math. 3.7.
as it appears by John's reproof. So also it is said of Horod, that he heard
John gladly, which quieted his couscience in some degree, vet it was but for a
time; it continued not. Again, in Balaaem, there was both a fear of evil.
and a desire of good, he was very loath, unwilling and fearful to curse the
children of Israel, and he also desired from his heart he might die as the
righteous: but yet these affections in him were not true, they proceeded from a
servile, base, dejected mind, only formidene poenae, for fear of the danger
he should incur if he did otherwise. So likewise in Saul there was some
kind of obedience to Gods commandments; yet was not his obedience entire; for
being commanded to destroy all and spare nothing of Amelecke, which for the
most part he did; yet he reserved Agag and some few of the best things,
pretending to offer them in sacrifice unto the Lord at his return, contrary to
his commission: so that though a wicked impenitent man may obey God in much, ye
there is always something he loves better then Gods Commandment, and that
also must be cloaked over with religions pretense. And lastly, Ananias and
Saphira, upon whose affections the doctrine of Repentance took such impression
that it made them sell their possessions and all they had, and lay down the
price at the Apostles feet, only they kept back some small part thereof to
help them if occasion should serve, which one would have thought would not
have been censured with such a heavy judgment as it was: for its ever the
property of an Hypocrite to guie some, but not all, when as God requires all,
or none at all. Now such is the course of many in these times, when as happily
the Preaching of the word of God has so stung them, that they must needs
submit and yield: they have forsaken much of their former vanities and finfull
practices; yet their dearest beloved, their darling Sin they reserve, that
must needs be dispensed withal: either covetousness, or pride, revenge, or
some such other, and that to masked over with some plausible pretense or other,
as frugalitie, hansomenesse, justice, and the like; so wily are men in this
age to beguile themselves.

But then it may be demanded that if these motions toward Repentance (though
but in part) be of God, then are they good: if they be not of God, from whence
do they proceed? For answer whereunto we must consider, that there are three
principal active faculties in the soul of man, the understanding, the will,
and the conscience; the understanding to direct, the will to obey; and the
conscience a faithful and indifferent arbitratour between God and man,
conerning both. Now the understanding being enlightened, partly by the grounds
of nature, partly by the word of God, of duties to be done, of evils to be
avoided; if the will do obey, the conscience does continually cheer and
comfort us in what estate or misery soever we are: But if the will be perverse
and will not submit and obey; then is the conscience as a continual torment
ever accusing and condemning us of high treason against God, and therefore when
as our will is not nor cannot be brought unto a true reformation, we are of
necessity forced to counterfeit and delude the conscience with some kind of
degrees of devotion and outward services, even to still those cries which if
they were not stayed, were little better then a very entrance into hell. So
that for the most part those same usual and common sighs and fained groans
which many men would feign make themselves believe are signs and tokens of
Repentance, are but the vpbraidings and exprobrations of conscience which do
then accuse them, and those same flashes of light and hope which from the same
they conceive unto themselves of the love and favor of God, 1 King. 22.
are but the suggestions of that false spirit which was in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets, that by their lying and false encouragement they may be hardened in
their sins, that so their fall might be the greater.

A third deceit whereby men flatter themselves, thing else absolutely and
necessarily required of them; and that because by it alone they are joined to
Christ, nothing can disioyne them; and therefore that the strict exaction of so
severe a course of repentance is needelesse. Wherein they discover their vain
ignorance that though they think they see, yet are they still groaping in the
dark, and are going they know not well which way. For without Repentance their
faith is false and vain. For we must know that there are three several acts
or degrees required to the perfection of faith, according to which it is
distinguished to be threefold: either fides apprehensionis, or fides
approbationis, or fides applicationis, the one being the act of the
understanding, the other of the will, and the last of the conscience. The first
apprehends the promises of God as true, the second approues them as good, and
the third applies them unto our selves in particular, assuring us they do
belong unto us. All these several duties and degrees are required unto the
complete essence of faith. And as the last cannot be where the two former
first are notso the two first without it are fruitless and imperfect. Now the
two first degrees of faith, namely, to apprehend the promises of God to be
true, and approve them as good, may be in a man without repentance: But neither
of these are that true saving evangelical faith, which can assure us that the
benefits of Christ's merits do belong unto us in particular. These are only
general motives unto all kind of good actions; these are that general
belief which is required by the Law of nature of every man, as well heathen as
Christian, for the preservation of a good conscience in all actions whatsoever,
as well legal as evangelical. To illustrate this by an example. Suppose this
to be the proposition. He that confesses his sins, and forsakes them,
shall find mercy. Pro. 28.13. Where the promise of mercy is made unto
repentant sinners: Now the first act of faith in reference thereunto, is by the
understanding to apprehend it as true; James 2.20.
but this faith is not perfect nor saving, for the devils have it; the devils
believe and tremble (says Saint James.) The second degree of faith is by the
will to approve and like it as good; and yet is this neither that true saving
faith, for it was in Balaam, Herod, Agrippa, and it is in every carnal
professor, none excepted. Romans 10.15.
Neither of these therefore, nor both of these are of any force or validity to
confirm the promise of mercy unto our ownesoules in particular; which is the
chiefest property of faith. And yet those are all that faith which is in any
Christian man before repentance, and the chief motive by which the spirit of
God does stir up the heart of man unto repentance. Now after repentance, at
least the beginning thereof, follows the third act of faith by the conscience,
that applies the promise unto our selves, and so our faith is made perfect, as
Saint lame; speaks. He that repents of his sins, (says the holy Ghost)
shall sinde mercy, that's the Thesis: Now after repentance the conscience makes
the assumption, but I have repented of my sins; and then the conclusion
directly follows, that therefore the promise of mercy belongs unto me. This
then is that true, lively, and saving faith that assures us of the grace of
God; this is that faith whereby the spirit bears witness with our spirits
that we are the adoped sons of God. Yet would I not be thought to infer
hereby that there are in a Christian three kinds, but only three degrees of
faith. For although that both the apprehending, and approving faith, as they
are in devils and wicked men are things different from a true saving faith: yet
in a regenerate man they are not distinct faiths, they do not differrespecie,
they are not of different kines; but only in reference unto a true and perfect
faith are as disposuiones in ordine ad habitum, as dispositions toward a
habit; or as media tendentiaad finem, as means tending unto the end of their
perfection. Differing from the saving faith no otherwise then the power of
vegetation and sense, being distinct essences in other creatures, do from the
reasonable soul, unto which they only are as subordinate faculties in man.
There grows many difficulties, and much confusion in the understanding of the
sacred mysteries of our salvation, for want both of observation of the order of
the working of grace within us, and also of distinct explication what kind or
degree of grace the several merits of Christ do procure us. To conclude this
point therefore, as the children of nature walk in darkness and confusion:
so the children of grace should walk in light and distinction; and not only
talk wildely and confusedly of their faith in Christ, of their hope, and other
their great virtues, but also be able to discern of the manner and order of
the working of Gods spirit within them, and distinguish of the several
changings of their affections, and not that only, but also feel the power
thereof in their own souls; and then shall they know whether they can
certainly believe that their sins are forgiven before they be repented of.

Fourthly (for the hypocritical heart of man has many windings) it may be
conceited (as it is by some) that they have already repented, that time is
already past. For there are some Anabaptisticall and fanaticke spirits, that
have limited a certain time for sorrow and repentance, that imagine and
affirm that men are to continue and lie under the terrors of conscience even
until they be ready to undertake some desperate attempt, and then affter they
have once escaped that danger, they think they are safe; they are so thoroughly
seasoned that ever after they remain secure, all their dross is purged out;
going on continually afterward in a course of observing and censuring other
men's imperfections, and in the mean time neglect themselves altogether.
Whereas certain it is that so long as we live in this world, we shall show our
selves, every one of us to be but men full of frailty and instabilitie, and
therefore that our repentance is daily to be renewed. For as the natural life
of man does consist upon that which is called by the Physicians humor
radicalis, and calor naturalis, natural heat and radical moisture (for
indeed all life is sustained by motion, and motion is between contrarieties:)
so in our spiritual life, there must of necessity be two contrary qualities,
repentance continually to put off our own unrighteousness, and faith to put on
Christ's righteousness, the one to work upon the other, so to preserve life by
mofect of good within us, must repentance and faith be increased, which must be
unto the end of our lives, for death only is the end and complement of our
repentance and mortification; even as our resurrection shall be the end and
complement of our faith and vivification.

Now the last shift (worth the speaking of) which men frame unto themselves,
the time should come when men would not suffer wholesome doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3.
but having ears itching shall get themselves teachers after their own lusts.
But to return and satisfy this great doubt. What needs any man to fear
despair? 2 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of God remains sure (says the Apostle) and has this seal,
The Lord knows who are his: Luke 21.18.
and there shall not one hair of their heads perish. How then? shall the
ordinance of God disanull and overthrow the purpose of God? Indeed if any man
should go about to deceive and ouercharge simple souls by a denial or
extenuation of Gods mercy. insinuating that it were either hopeless or a
hazard to trust unto the same: it were dangerous and like enough to swallow
them up with distraction or despair; but so long as Repentance is but taught
truly for the remission of sins, and that remission of sins is not
obtained without it: Let Paul plant, and Apollos water, let every man do his
duty and perform his charge, and refer the event and success to him that
is able to dispose of all things to his own glory, Fphes. 1.11.
and works all things after the counsel of his own will: And then let what
will fall out, it is our part to give praise unto God thereby; knowing this, 2
Cor. 2.15.16.
that the Gospel as it is ordained the savor of life unto life unto such as
shall be saved, even so by Gods own purpose is it the savor of death unto
death unto those that shall be damned.

And therefore this scruple is but a crack that does more fear then hurt,
discovering both folly in the heads and profaneness in the hearts of those that
object the same. For it is certain, that when men's affections are so strongly
set upon vanity, that by no means they will be drawn from the same: they
invent and imagine continually how to oppose, and disable the force of that
which they think does any way check or restrain their unbridled lusts: and
so especially aim to disprove and gainsay the necessity of repentance and
mortification, by such frivolous and ridiculous arguments as these: and yet as
they think wisely to. For of this sort some there are that are in their own
conceits, of so refined and sublimated temper, that they think they are too
wise, and account it as a disparagement for their high spirits, to submit
themselves to the foolishness of God (for, the preaching of the Cross of
Christ is to them that perish foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18.
says the Apostle) and therefore do they always (as much as in them lies)
discountenance and disharten any that are of stricter and more conscionable
carriage then themselves. Others of them there are also so far from embracing
repentance, that they oppose by all means against it, and like iearing Ismaels
set themselves to scorn and diride the same; so that whosoever undertakes
that holy course, exposes himself to all the censure and obloquie that such
wicked and profane hearts can invent. Yea, to so strange a height of Atheism
are men grown in these times, that ordinarily they deem and term others
curious and precise, not because they are busy Polypragmons, having an Oar in
every man's Boat, and judging of every man's conscience; neither for their
affected singularity and nice curiosity; nor for that bold and blind zeal
of Vzza, in meddling with that which belongs only unto the Priests office; nor
yet for their rebellious contempt of the Church-gouernment and Governors; all
which might give just occasion to suspect hypocrisy in any one: but only for
this cause, because they were not either so monstrous blasphemers, or so great
carousers, at leastwise so careless and dissolute livers as themselves. But
leaving such monsters of Nature to the mercy of him who is only able to
transform and amend them, let it never be heard amongst us (beloved) that any
truly virtuous and Christianly disposed mind should ever so much as once open
his mouth to gainsay that which Christ has spoken, Luke 13.3.5.
that if we repent not, we shall all surely perish. The least sin, either in
thought, word or deed, is death without repentance. Let not therefore the
falsenesse of our own hearts delude us, nor the fear of despair discourage
us, nor the imputation of mopish Melancholy, which the world casts upon
Repentance, withhold us from undertaking the same: for it is the Harbinger of
the King of Heaven: it is the beginning of the Gospel of Christ: it is an
entrance into those heavenly and spiritual joys, wherewith the Saints upon
the earth are endued, being such as the world can neither give unto us, nor
take away from us. For there is never any heart more filled with the joys of
the Spirit, then that heart that has taken the greatest sorrow for his sins.
Neither is the portion of Grace given unto any by a greater measure then unto
him in whom there is the greatest measure of repentance.

And though the natural man (that perceiues not the things of God) thinks it
a Paradoxe that a Christian should rejoice in mourning: yet the Holy Ghost has
recorded it by S. Peter, as a consolation for the Saints of God unto the end of
the world, 1 Pet. 1.6.8.
that though for a season they be in heaviness (if need require) through
manifold tentations, yet do these believe and rejoice with joys vnfpeakable
and glorious. 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves therefore (says S. Peter) under the mighty hand of God,
that he may exalt you in due time. James 4.9.10.
Sorrow ye and weep (says S. James) let your laughter be turned into
mourning; and your joy into heaviness. Cast down your selves before the Lord,
and he will lift you up. Else will he (says Job,) Job 40.5.
who sits in the heavens decked with majesty and excellency, and arrayed
with beauty and glory, cast abroad the indignation of his wrath, and behold
every one that is proud, and abase him, and look on every one that is
arrogant, and bring him low. And for conclusion of all, let every man living,
yea, even the greatest despiser, remember, that it is an everlasting truth
registered in the sacred Book of God, Whereof, Luke 16.17.
the heavens and earth shall pass before one jot or tittle shall fall away,
That, Amos 6.1.
woe is unto them that are at ease in Sion: and, Luke 6.25.
woe unto them that now laugh, for they shall weep: And on the contrary, They
that sow in tears shall reap in joy: Psalm. 116.5. Mat. 5.4.
and blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Now the Lord
for his infinite mercy sake, so prevail in us and overrule us by the power of
his holy Spirit, that in the due and serious consideration of our own misery
by sin, we may so partake with him in his sorrows and sufferings in this
life, that we may hereafter be made partakers with him of those unspeakable
and everlasting joys in the life to come, which he reserueth in the Kingdom
of heaven, for all those only, that long and wait for his apearing. Which the
Lord grant unto us for Chirst his sake: unto whom with the Father, and his most
blessed Spirit, be all glory and majesty, all praise and thanksgiving, both
now and for ever.

FJNJS.

