A SERMON OF THE NATVRE AND NECESSITY of Godly Fear.

Preached in the Cathedral Church of CHESTER, in September, 1614.

DEVT. 5.29. Oh that there were such a heart in my people, that they would
fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with
them and their children for ever.

PROVE. 14.27. The Fear of the Lord is a wellspring of life to avoid the
snares of death.

PROVE. 14.16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Edmund Weauer, and are to sold at the great
South-dore of Paul's. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir RANDALL CREW Knight, one of his Majesty's
Serieants at the LAW.
Right worshipful:
I Do unfeignedly profess my self for ever bound unto you, for your
undeserved goodness toward me, and your forward and willing inclination to
entertain me into your favor. Which, as it does require and challenge from
me all respectfull acknowledgement: so am I willing to take any occasion to
witness the same, and for that cause am bold to present this small discourse
unto your Patronage, as a pledge of my unfeigned thankfulness: humbly desiring
you to yield unto it your favorable acceptance, until such time as
hereafter, I shall by some better means give more pregnant testimony of my
thankful mind and dutiful devotion. In the mean time I shall endeavor
myself to deserve your good favors, and will not cease to pray that the
Almighty God may multiply upon you and yours all the blessings and honors of
this life, and after this life crown you with immortal glory in CHRIST JESUS.

Your Worships humbly devoted in the Lord Jesus WILLIAM CASE.

OF THE NATVRE AND NECESSITY of Godly Fear.
Psalm. 4 ver. 4. Stand in awe, and sin not.


THERE is in the Church of God, and ever shall be unto the end of the world,
people of a twofold condition; both prefigured in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, by many typical premonstrations, as of Sarah and Hagar, of Isaac
and Ishmael, of Jacob and Esau, of the Israelites and the Egyptians, and the
like; and also illustrated in the new, by many parabolicall resemblances, by
Wheat and Tares, Sheep and Goats, by Wise and Foolish Virgins, and diverse
such other; signifying thereby the continual opposition between the mystical
members of Christ, and the powers of the kingdom of Satan; between the Godly
and the Wicked, the Elect and the Reprobate. Whereof the blessed and kingly
Prophet David a glorious type of Christ, having many times plentiful
experience, but more particularly at that instant, when he composed this
Scripture of the manifold vexations and grieuances of Saul and his adherents:
He writ this Psalm, consisting partly of devout petitions unto God; partly of
sharp reprehensions unto his enemies; partly of godly exhortation to
repentance: and lastly, of divine resolution with himself, Praying unto God in
the first verse, exprobrating his enemies in the second and third, admonishing
them in the fourth and fifth, and in the three last verses, resolving with
himself, that the light of Gods countenance should minister unto him more
cause of gladness and rejoicing, then all the vain and uncertain delights of
natures blessings, wherein worldly minded men do chiefly repose themselves can
possibly afford unto them; and that in full assured confidence thereof only,
he would rest himself satisfied and secure.

In imitation whereof, though we have begun this morning Sacrifice with
Prayer, yet being conscious every one of our own guiltiness for sin, we
cannot as the Prophet does here in the person of Christ, by way of reproach,
show any contempt each of other, and therefore itremaines that we proceed in
the third place, Heb. 3.13.
to exhort one another while it is called to day (as the Apostle speaks:) and
that so much the rather, because the day draws near; that as literally in
this place the wicked enemies of David, under the conduct of Saul, did grieve
and persecute him, as typically the accursed Jews, under the protection of
Pontius Pilate did pursue unto death, and crucify the Savior of the world: so
spiritually, we having truly and really, by the abundance of our sins,
under the power and subjection of Satan, betrayed and dishonored our Lord and
Redeemer, may above all things be careful that hereafter we stand in awe and
sin not.

In which words I do briefly observe these two specialties. First, the
prevention of sin. Secondly, the prohibition of sin. The prouention of
sin in this word [ stand in awe;] The prohibition of sin in this [ sin
not.]

For the first, the word (as Interpreters do translate it) does originally
signify a simple commotion or perturbation of the mind of man in general,
without any limitation at all. Now as the mind of man is moved by diverse and
sundry passions; so Translators do diversely restrain it. Some to anger, as
the vulgar has it Irascimini, be angry; supposing that S. Paul in the fourth
to the Ephesians, and the 26. verse, has reference unto this Scripture, where
he says, be angry, but sin not. Others limit it to an intention of fear,
and so render it contremiseite, tremble; understanding thereby that sudden and
distracted trembling and amazement, which is the beginning of repentance; such
a one as surprised S. Paul in the way unto Damascus, Acts 9.6.
when the light rom Heaven had cast him down, and he heard the voice, it is
said, that he trembling and greatly astonished said, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? And lastly, others, but especially our learned Church do translate
it, [ Stand in awe.] Signifying thereby, not only that sudden horror which
surprizeth all the powers of the soul, when great and unexpected evils do
presently assault it; but likewise a continual motion of fear in the sold,
whereby it does always stand in awe by the expectancy and danger of evils to
come. So including not only tremorem, but timorem; not only a sudden passion
of astonishment, but also a cautelous and deliberate passion of doubtfulnesse
and fear. According as the Apostle admonishes. He that thinks he stands,
let him take heed, Romans 11.20.
and be not high minded, but fear. Intimating that the only way to be secure
from the danger of punishment for sin, is to fear to commit sin. As if the
Prophet should say in more words. O ye Sons of men, ye mighty and great men
of this world, how long will ye hold on by your contempt and scorn to impute
that as a reproach and shame unto me, which is my greatest glory; pleasing and
deceiving yourselues in the lying and deluding vanities of this world? For be
ye sure that although the Lord do yet suffer you for a time, thus
contemptuously to reproach the footesteps of his anointed; yet at length will
he return and vindicate him that is godly, from the despite of his enemies,
and set him apart for himself; the Lordwill hear when I call upon him. And
therefore it is now high time that ye bethink your selves, that your hearts be
shaken and settled in a fearful and awful respect of that almighty God, which
surely will be avenged on all his enemies, unless the current and stream of
your crying sins be restrained by a godly fear. Which is the truest exposition
of this Text, and most agreeable to the sense of this Scripture. Fear
therefore is the duty here simply propoforce. First positiuely, as it is a
Divine iniunction to stand in awe and fear of God at all times; and then
relatiuely, as it is the special and only means for the avoiding and
restrayning of sin. In the first I will consider; first, what Fear is in it
self, then how God only is to be feared, and none other besides him.

Now Fear in it self is a passion of the sensible appetite, shunning and
avoiding irresistible evils, future and to come: For the better understanding
whereof, we are to consider, that as there are in man two principal fountains
of direction; namely, Reason and Sense; so are there likepetite. For we must
have special care in searching out the knowledge of these things, that we make
a difference between the Will properly and strictly taken, and that inferior
natural desire which is called the Appetite; the one in diverse respects being
more excellent then the other: the one is as the Mistress, the other as the
Servant. For the appetite is the wills solicitor, and the will is the appefor
all actions which proceed from the disposition of the will, are in the power
thereof either to be performed or stayed: whereas the appetite cannot choose,
but rise at the sight of such things as it ias affected withal; neither is it
in our power whether we be stirred with afections or no. Finally, the will is
a free desire or bending of our souls unto the having or doing of that good,
which only reason and understanding prescribes: the appetite an earnest and
necessary inclination and desire, unto that good only which sense proposes.
The one is called appetitus rationalis, the reasonable appetite; the other
appetitus sensitivus, the sensible appetite. For the object of the will is that
good which reason does lead us to seek, and the object of the appetite is
whatsoever sensible good may be wished for. Now as our appetite does
immediately and positiuely respect and seek after good; so does it necessarily
by consequent avoid that which is evil; so that as positiuely good, so
negatiuely evil, is the object thereof. And according unto the diverse
circumstances of its object of good and evil, so is the appetite varied into
diverse forms and fashions, which are called the affections or passions of the
mind. For as in the general it is inclined unto good, it is called Love, and
as it resists evil, it is called Hatred; as it earnestly pursues that which
is good, it is called Zeal, and as it vehemently opposes that which is evil,
it is called Anger; as it is affected with the good which is present, it is
styled by the name of Joy: and as it has reference unto the present evil, it
is named Sorrow; if it respect future good, Hope; and if future evil, Fear.
Fear then is a passion or affection of the sensible appetite, shunning and
avoiding evils, future and to come.

So that seeing what Fear is in it self, in considering in the next place,
that this fear is only to be referred unto God; I will reduce my discourse
into these two heads: first, that he is to be feared: and secondly, that he
only is to be feared, and no other besides him.

For the first. It may be a question, in as much as the object of fear is
evil, (for we fear not any thing properly, but as evil,) how can God be
said to be feared who is only good; yea the sovereign good of all? To which I
answer, that Fear has a double respect. First, of the evil it flies from,
and secondly of the good from whence the evil comes. If it be referred unto
the evil, it fears it per se, for it self; if unto the good, it fears it,
but by accident, not for it self, but propter aliud, for that evil it brings
with it. So that although the object of fear properly be evil; yet by
accident and as it were indirectly we may be said to fear that which is good
also. And that in two respects. First, lest the good which we love, may by
some evil be lost and taken from us. And secondly, because the good we fear,
may have in it some power and strength to inflict evil upon us. Which two
respects (the Philosophers say) are the only original causes of fear, Amor
and Defectus, Love and Weakness; Love unto that good which we fear to loose;
and inability to resist that evil, which would take that good from us. For why
do we fear death, but because we love life? and why do we fear a good
Magistrate, but because he has that power to inflict punishment upon us which
we are not able to resist? If we did not love that which is good, we should not
fear to lose it. And if we had power to withstand that which is evil, we
should not fear it at all. For the biting of a dog is evil, but the Lion
fears it not, because he is able to resist it. What was the reason that Saul
feared, and David had courage to encounter Goliath? but because the one both saw
his forces unequal, and also being destitute of Faith, did despair of the
Lords assistance; whereas the other being assured by Faith that the Lord would
be his helper, feared not. So that love unto good, and inability to resist
evil being the only causes of fear; in both of these respects there is none
whom we ought to fear so much as God the Lord. For who better to be beloved,
in his presence being the fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures
for evermore? Or who is able to oppose his almighty power; and therefore in
that respect who is more to be feared also? In confidence whereof the Prophet
resolves, Psalm. 23.4.
that though he were in the valley of the shadow of death, yet would he fear
none ill, because the Lord was with him. According unto which two, Divines have
distinguished fear to be twofold; either seruilis, or filialis, a servile or
a filial fear. The servile fear does fear God because he is just and
powerful, the filial fear because he is good and merciful: the servile
fear does bridle sin, the filial fear does provoke unto righteousness; the
one does restrain the lust of the flesh, the other does set forward the
motions of the Spirit. Whiles we have but the first, we are but as servants,
but when we have the second, we are accounted as Sons; by the one we are
afraid to suffer, by the other we are afraid to offend; the object of the one
is malum poenae the evil of punishment; the object of the other is malum
culpae, the evil of sin; the servile fear proceeds from that which the
Apostle calls, spiritum Seruitutis, the spirit of Bondage; Romans 8.15.
and the filial fear from that which he calls spiritum Adoptionis, the
spirit of Adoption: For we have not (says he) received the spirit of Bondage
to fear again, but we have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry
Abba Father: Both of them the good work of Gods most holy spirit; the filial
fear he works only in his elect children, the servile fear both in the
elect and the reprobate; though not unto the same end. But in the reprobate as
a pledge and beginning of future and greater punishments; and in his elect, as
it is an entrance into grace, whereby the servant of God is admonished to
forbear sin, for inasmuch as a Christian man is an Hypostasis, consisting of
two natures, which the Scripture notes out by the Flesh and the Spirit, the Old
man and the New, and such like, therefore are both of these fears required, the
one to restrain the power of sin, the other to set forwards the powers of
righteousness. Yet not both in the same degree of respect. For although in a
Christian the servile fear cannot be wanting; because that as in a bad way we
have as much (if not more) need of a bridle then a spur: so we, as it were
riding on through the rough and thorny paths of sin, have in that respect
more need of that fear to hold us back: yet for all that it is not to be
paralelld with the filial fear, nor to be accounted a true and essential
part of Gods worship and honor, but only as a remouer of his dishonor and a
preparatiue unto the filial fear. In which respect, one of the Fathers
compares servile fear to a Needle, and filial fear to a Thread, so that as
the needle does enter into the cloth not to stay there, but to draw in the
thread after it; so is the servile fear required in every Christian, not as a
thing acceptable in the sight of God, but only as a preparatiue unto that
filial fear, wherein his true service does especially consist.

From the consideration of which things, we may gather this observation, and
carefully lay it up in our memories, as a lesson necessary to be learned of all
men; That so long as we fear the judgments of God, we may deem our selves
the servants of God: but we are never the sons of God until we fear him
for his goodness. The servant fears his Master; but why? because that if he
do not well he will punish him; but the son fears his Father, because he
loves him, and therefore is fearful to displease him; having more regard unto
his Fathers grief, then his own punishment; respecting more the loss of his
Fathers love, then the incurring, Gal. 4.30.
and the enduring of his own pain. Now the servant abides not in the house
for ever, (says the Scripture) but they which have received the adoption of
sons shall only inherit. Why? because he fears not God for God, but only
for himself, which properly is not true fear, because the object of it is not
truly evil. For malum poenae, the evil of punishment, which servile fear
only respects, is not simply evil; not evil, suo genere, (as the Schools
speak) nor sua natura in it own nature, (for it is a work of the pure and
exact Justice of God,) but only malum secundum not, evil in respect of us:
Whereas on the other side, the childe-like fear is the only true fear,
because only its object is truly evil. For malum culpae, the evil of sin,
which it chiefly respects is sua natura, in it own nature evil; although our
corrupted nature account it as bonum secundum nos, secming good unto us, and
therefore does our inclination so much desire to commit it. And howsoever the
fear of sons may be said also to respect malum poenae, the evil of
punishment, yet is it not that punishment which the other looks at; for
servile fear looks only at that which is called poenae sensus, that
punishment which it sensibly shall feel; but the filial fear at that which
is called poena damni, the punishment of loss, fearing more to lose the love
and favor of God, and the promised joys of Heaven: then to be justly punished
by God, and to endure all the torments of Hell. Let us therefore consider, that
so long as we do fear God only for his judgments, we are but servile, the
seed of the bondwoman; but until we fear him for his goodness, we are not
the sons of the freewoman, not the true adopted sons of God: By the one we
are still under the Law; but by the other, we are under Grace: The one is
wrought in us by the threatenings of the Law, the other by the sweet promises of
the Gospel. In sum: The true child of God is more afraid to deserve
punishment, then to suffer punishment.

Now for the second, that God only is to be feared, it may be also doubted
that in as much as the Lord has commanded us in his word to fear our Parents,
Leuit. 19.3. Romans 13.4.7. Ephesians. 6.5.
to fear the Magistrates, the Governors which he has set over us: How is he
said only to be feared, and what proportion is there between that fear which
we owe unto God, and that which we are to give unto men: what difference is
there between the one and the other? To which I answer, that God only, and no
other besides him, is to be feared in these two respects and limitations;
Simpliciter, and per se simply and by himself. For first, God alone, and
neither Angel, Devil, nor any other creature besides, is to befeared,
simpliciter, simply, because he only has a simple and an absolute power over
us. For, howsoever the creature may have power to do that evil which we may
fear: yet is not its power absolute, nor over all and every part of us, but
limited unto our bodies and goods only. Whereas Gods power is unlimited and
absolute, both over soul and body, goods and all, and is able to destroy all.
In which respect our blessed Savior admonishes his Disciples, not to fear
them which kill the body, Math. 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell. And the reason why we are to fear the
Magistrate, the Apostle gives in the 13. of his Epistle to the Romans, because
he hears not the Sword for naught. Romans 13.4.
But the power of the sword is limited, either to our goods, or bodies, or
lives, and cannot extend unto the soul and conscience: and therefore is he
not to be feared absolutely as God is, because he has not that absolute power
that God has.

Secondly, God only is to be feared per se, for his own sake, for himself,
without any reference at all to any other creature. For although both Angels,
Men and Devils have power in some things to hurt us; yet have they it not
originally from themselves, nor according to their own wills, but only from
God, and according to his will: Neither have they it always, nor in what
measure it pleases themselves, but both how much and how long it pleases God:
And for that cause our Savior answered Pilate, boasting that he had power
either to loose him, John 10.11.
or put him to death: Thou could have no power at all over me (says he)
unless it were given thee from above. Yea, the Devil himself whom the
Scripture styles by the name of the Prince of this world, had no power to touch
so much as any the least thing that was Jobs, further then the Lord permitted
and gave leave. Although therefore we are by the precept of Almighty God to
fear our Parents and Governors, yet are we not to fear them for themselves,
but as they have power and commission from God, Romans 13.1.
for there is no power (says the Apostle) but of God. God therefore having all
power both in himself, and of himself, and universal and absolute over all,
and at all times; is only simply and by himself to be feared, and all other
but under him, or from him, and as far as he permits and commands.

So that as by strong evidence of reason, we see that it cannot be denied by
any man, but that he is to refer and yield all fear only, and especially
unto God. So also does the consent of Scripture sound altogether that way,
exacting it as one of the chiefest duties, that a christian is to perform:
namely, at all times to stand in awe and continual fear of the Majesty of
Almighty GOD. Oh that there were such a heart in my people (says the Lord,)
that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might
be well with them and their children for ever. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Deutro. 10.20. And in the 12.
verse. And now O Israel! what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, etc. I have given you a Land for which you
did not labor, and Cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them, of the
Vineyards and Orchards which ye planted not do you eat; now therefore fear
the Lord, Iosu. 24.14. And I say unto you my friends (says our blessed Savior
in the 12. of S. Lukes Gospel) be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do: But I will forewarne you whom you
shall fear: Fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into
hell: yea, I say unto you fear him. Fear God and honor the King, (says S.
Peter.) And Fear God, and give glory unto him, says the Angel that had the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto all the earth, Apoc. 14.7.

And the Scriptures does not only abound in precepts to this effect: but also
is plentiful in examples hereof. As Abraham, Genesis 22.12. Lay not thy hand
(says the Lord unto him) upon the child, nor do him any hurt, for now I know
that thou fear me, because that for my sake thou would not have spared
thine only Son. Joseph also witnesses the same of himself: For I fear
God, (says he) Genesis 42.17. The Egyptian Mid-wiues likewise are memorable for
their fear of God in the first of Exodus, and therefore did they dare to
break that barbarous and bloody commandment of King Pharaoh, whereby they were
appointed to kill all the male children of the Hebrews. Obadiah. the Ruler of
King Ahabs household, in the 1. of the Kings 18.3. is said to have feared God
greatly, and therefore did he hide a hundred of the Lords Prophets from the
cruelties of Iezabel. Job also approved by the mouth of God himself for his
fear. Job. 1.8. The Prophet David in the fifth Psalm, In thy Fear, O Lord,
will I ever worship toward thy holy Temple. And in the New Testament, Zachary
and Elizabeth, Simeon, Cornelius, Ananias, and many others are recorded to
their perpetual praise, for their fear of God. Yea, the whole Scripture does
run throughout, that Gods people have ever been a fearful people; that
Gods generation is a trembling generation. And no marvel. Because they cannot
serve their God, unless they do fear him; fear being the only and chief
part of his worship. For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
(says the Prophet in the III. Psalm.) All religion begins in fear. And its
the end of all things says Solomon in the last chapter of Eccles. The end of
all things (says he) is to fear God and keep his commandments. Yea, its
both the beginning and ending, and the continuance of a Christian life; for
work out your salvation in fear and trembling, (says the Apostle in the
second to the Philippians.) And blessed is the man that fears always, Prou.
28.1. I will teach you (says Samuel in the twelfth chapter of his first book,
and the 21. verse,) the good and right way. Only fear the Lord and serve him
in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things he has done for
you. There is no action therefore, that proceeds from a Christian through the
whole course of his life, but should receive such a tincture from Religion and
the fear of God, as should make it remarkable for a godly deed; that if we
speak it should be in fear; if we work it should be in fear; whether we
wake or sleep or whatsoever else we do, all should be done in fear; Nay, the
true child of God takes not so much time as to eat his meat without fear.
For indeed when as the Lord has once truly and thoroughly shaken the heart
and conscience of a man, with the terrors of death and hell for sin; and
has also seasoned his heart with a sweet apprehension and feeling of the
comforts of his holy spirit; when he has once as it were given him a touch of
the sorrows of hell, and taste of the joys of heaven: he is ever after
fearful least he again either incur the danger of the one, or loose the
happiness of the other; As the skin of that place that is once burned will
ever after be more tender then the rest. The life of a Christian therefore, is
not a life of security, a life of dissoluteness and sensuality: but a life of
terror, a life of fear, a life of continual and awful respect of the
presence and majesty of almighty God. Not according to the fashion of these
times, wherein men account it a small thing to cozen and deceive, to extort and
opporesse, to lie and slander, to quarrel and contend, to carouse and revel,
as if there were no God in heaven that does behold them: The only cause hereof
can surely be no other then that of the Prophet, in the 36 Psame. Non est timor
Deiante oculos eorum: they have not the fear of God before their eyes. Primus
in orb Deos fecit timor (says the heathen Poet,) The first thing that ever
made men to think there was a God was Fear. Teaching us that no sooner nor
longer do we believe there is a God then we have fear. A fearelesse man
therefore is a graceless man; the want of fear being an assured and undoubted
testimony, that there is no goodness in him, in as much as it is the first
grace that is wrought in the heart of a man; and so certain a ground of
goodness, that it was generally taken amongst the Jews for the whole worship
of God, and that there can be no part of Gods true worship where fear is not.
As therefore the wants of fear may be fear unto us, if there be any kind of
inclination unto goodness in us, unless we be altogether hardened; so also if
we desire to be happy, the many promises in the Scriptures of diverse and all
kind of blessings thereunto, may encourage and move us to strive and endeavor
our selves to stand in awe and fear of our gracious God.

As first, Acceptance in his sight, for in every nation (says Saint Peter) he
that fears God and works righteousness is accepted of him. Act. 10.35.
Secondly Mercy, for his mercy is on them that fear him throughout all
generations. Luke 1.50. Thirdly Compassion, for as a Father has compassion on
his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him. Psalm. 103.13.
Fourthly the continuance of posterity, for blessed is the man that fears the
Lord, for he shall see his childrens children, and grace upon Israel. Psalm.
128.1.6. Fifthly long life, for the fear of the Lord increases the days, and
he that is filled therewith shall continue and not be visited with evil. Pro.
19.23. Sixthly, Riches, Glory and Life, for the reward of humility and the
fear of God, is riches, glory and life. Prou. 22.4. Seventhly, knowledge and
illumination in the mysteries of our salvation: for the Lord reueales his
secrets unto such as fear him; and what man is he that fears the Lord? him
will he teach in the way that he shall choose. Psa. 25 12.14. Eighthly,
protection and preservation. Behold (says the Prophet) the eye of the Lord is
upon such as fear him, to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve
them in time of famine. Psalm. 33.18. And lastly, audience unto our prayers, for
to him will I look (says the Lord) that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
and that trembles at my words. Esaias 66.2. And in sum, all those things that
can make us blessed shall we be sure of, if we live in this fear: for no good
thing does he withhold from them that fear him. As therefore we do desire
to be accepted of him; as we look for mercy and compassion from him; as we
would expect the blessings of God upon our posterities; as we hope for
protection and preservation from his almighty power; and finally, as we would
be made partakers of all those blessings that may make us happy, either in this
life or the life to come: so are we to endeavor our selves at all times to
banish from our thoughts all security, and always preserve in our hearts a
reverent and awful fear of the dreadful majesty of God; as being assured
that the devil will be the accuser, the Angels the beholders, and the just God
the auenger of all those careless and fearelesse actions, that at any time
shall proceed from us, through the whole course of our lives.

Now for the Relative part of this fear, that it is a bar and restraint unto
sin, though reason and experience might sufficiently inform us herein, yet
for our better satisfaction and encouragement, the Scriptures are express in
many places to this effect. Pro. 14.17.
The fear of the Lord (says Solomon) is a wellspring of life, to avoid the
snares of death; the snares of death are the baits of sin: the only
preservative against their enticements is the fear of the Lord, says Solomon.
The only means which the Lord in the time of the Law prescribed unto his own
people, to prevent and avoid sin: As for example, against Oppression, You
shall not oppress one another, but thou shall fear thy God, Leuit. 25.17. And
against Extortion, take no usury of thy poor brother, nor increase, but fear
thy God ver. 36. Against Cruelty and Tyranny also, thou shall not rule over
him with rigor, but shall fear thy God. ver. 43. Again, thou shall not curse
the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall fear thy
God. Leuit. 19.14. And in the 32. verse against irreuerence toward superiors,
thou shall rise up before the hoarie head, and honor the face of the old man,
and fear thy God. Against presumptuous disobedience to the Priestand Judges,
And all the people shall hear and fear and do no more presumptuously. Deuteronomy.
17.13. Against dissimulation, in singleness of heart fearing God. Col. 3.22.
What should I stand to instance in any more particulars in a matter so
consonant and agreeable to common sense, that only the fear of God does
depart from iniquity. A point of instruction only serving for a rule to try
whether there be any fear of God in us or no. For if at any time the devil,
taking advantage by our own corruption, shall suggest either revenge for
injuries, or deceit to get profit; to use false weights or measures to enrich
ourselves, or indirect means to attain our purposes; or what wickedness so
ever shall be behoosefull unto us: if we fear, we shall forbear. A wise man
fears (says Solomon) and departs from evil. Pro. 14.16. And therefore
beloved, to draw an end of this point, in as much as both reason does teach us,
and the Scriptures enjoin us to stand in awe and fear of God; and that
thereby we shall attain unto blessings, and escape and prevent both siune and
punishment for sin: Let us then haeue grace whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and fear, Heb. 12.28.29.
for even our God is a consuming fire.

And so I pass from the first part of my Text, the preuension of sin: unto
the second, the prohibuion of sin, in these words [ Sin not.] Wherein I
will consider two things; the duty enjoined, [ Sinno not;] and the manner of
proposing it, which is [ indefinitely.]

For the first, the intent and meaning of the Prophet in these words [ sin
not] may be both justly doubted of and questioned. For in as much as considering
the frailetie and corruption of our nature: there is a continual necessity of
sin in man the Apostle witnessing the same of himself, being regenerate in
the seventh to the Romans, that he was carnal and sold vndersinne; Romans 7.14.
and that of the Prophet, Psa. 19.12.1 Ioh. 1.8.
who knows how often he offends? and that of Saint John, If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our Ielues, and the truth is not in us. How then is it here
said, finne not; swear whereunto, we are to consider that sin in a Christian
man is after a two fold manner; either as a Tyrant; or as a Rebel, As a tyrant
before regeneration, when we live as captives and servants under sin, obeying
it in the lusts thereof, and yeelindg our members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto it, without any check or opposition at all. As a Rebel,
when as a Christian after regeneration, seeles the law of his members rebelling
against the law of his mind, and bringing him again as an unwilling captive,
unto the law of sin. Now after this manner, namely, as sin is a rebel,
there is no man living, but sin shall still continue and remain with him so
long as he shall live in the flesh: which the Lord does purposely suffer in his
own elect servants for diverse ends and purposes; both to abate the insulting
pride of man's heart, to make them weary of this world, but especially to make
good, and show forth his great power in their weakness. But after the first
manner; that is, as a Tyrant, sin is in no man, that is actually the child
of God, in which respect only, the Prophet in this place does forbid sin,
namely, according to the Apostles exhortation: not, that sin be not in you;
but that it reign not in you, that you should willingly obey it in the lusts
thereof.

Which kinds of sinning Saint John differenceth herein, comprehending the one
under name of sinning simply, and the other of committing sin, by peccare and
peccatum facere: In the first respect (says he) he that says he has not
sin is a liar and the truth is not in him: Concerning the other, he says, he
that is borne of God sins not: 1 Ioh. 3.9.
These commit not sin, namely, as a servant of sin: Yea he adds, that he
cannot sin, to wit, with a full swing and consent of his will, as those that
be the serswing and consent of his will, as those that be the servants of
sin, because the seed of God remains in him, whereby he is partly spirit,
and not only flesh: so that as he cannot perfectly will that which is good,
because of the rebellion of the flesh; so can he not will, with full consent,
that which is evil because of the reluctation of the spirit. For howsoever
peccare and peccatum facere, to sin and to commit sin, are not so generally
differenced, but that in many places of the Scriptures, the one is put for the
other; yet is there necessity of distinction between them. For he is said
properly peccatum facere, to commit sin, qui studio peccanditenetur, which is
settled in a delightful desire thereof, which bends all the forces of his
mind, and the whole sway of his desires thereunto. Being a property peculiar
unto the reprobate and vnregen erate, who (as the Prophet says of them) invent
mischief upon their beds, Psalm. 36.4.
they cannot sleep unless they have done evil. And as the meditation and
delight of a true Christian should be in the law of his God, and in
contemplation thereof: so is their whole delight and meditation in the law of
sin, how they may fulfill the lusts thereof: that is, they sin ex animo,
without any reluctation at all; it comes willingly and pleasingly from them:
Their very thoughts and intentions are more damnable, then the sinful actions
of the godly; why? because they proceed from the heart, their will concurs
therewith; and therefore our blessed Savior says unto Judas, Quod fasis fac
cito, Ioh. 13.27.
that thou do do speedily. He had then done nothing, yet says our Savior
Zuod facis, What thou do, because his mind was at that time intent and set
upon it. Whereas on the other side we read of diverse in the Scriptures, who
although they did not exactly fulfill the law and commandments of God in act;
yet their thoughts, their affections and their wills, being with and upon them,
they are said to have kept them. So we read of the Prophet, Ps. 119.121.168.
Feci iudicium and institiam, I have done righteously and justly: and I have
kept thy testimonies: and I have not erred from thy precepts. Now how could be
say thus of himself, when as it is well known he had many times sinned
grievously? Why surely, most justly, if we consider his heart and affections,
though not if we consider those sinful actions which by infirmity he fell
into: For his mind and his will was always to have obeyed God, and he
continually applied himself that way; the law of God was his meditation day
and night. In this respect therefore the Prophet does admonish us that we sin
not, that is, that we commit not sin, that our delights be not set thereon,
that our desires and our wills concur not therewith.

Or else thus may be the Prophets meaning in these words, sin not: That
original concupiscence, that habitual custom of sin which is within our
natures, is a corrupt tree continually supullulating and sprouting out; a
filthy fountain, over flowing at all times all the faculties of our souls.
Now, Stand in awe and sin not, says the Prophet, that is, let the fear of
God pluck up those poysonfull Sprigs, and stop the passage of those unwholesome
streams, that the one do not grow, nor the other do not flow beyond the
bounds and limits of Gods Law.

S. James does excellently set forth the gradation of sin, of its beginning,
proceeding and perfecting, in his first Chapter, the 14. and 15. verses. Every
man is tempted (says he) when he is drawn away of his own lust, and is
entised: Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sinnewhen
it is finished brings forth Death. The original, and whole progression of
sin unto the end thereof is in these words expressed. For Concupiscence
begets it, the will conceaues it, the act brings it forth, and death finisheth
it. Though concupiscence therefore would always beget it in thee, yet sin
not, says the Prophet; that is, yield not unto its entisements, and let the
fear of God hold thee back from prostituting thy holy will unto the unchaste
allurements thereof. Stand in awe and sin not.

Lastly to conclude, if for your better understanding hereof I may illustrate
it by an Allegorical resemblance, you may imagine the soul of man at the
first to have bin as the Garden of Eden, the Garden of God; wherein the Lord
had ingrasted every thing that was delightful in his sight, and pleasing unto
his taste: But when as man had so defiled this heavenly Paradise with the
filthiness and stench of sin, the Lord left this goodly habitation; and
since its grown a Wilderness, a poole of Snakes, a Cage of unclean birds,
there nothing but thorns and Brambles, Weeds and Thilstles grows in the
same. So that now before regeneration the soul is as the ruins of an old
Garden ouer-growne with weedie and poysonable herbs. But when it shall please
God to return unto his Garden, to dress it, to dig and furrow up those
thorny knots by repentance, and plant it again by faith, and cause it to bring
forth fruits of Love: then will he again make it his habitation. yet cannot
such a cursed ground as is the soul of man be so dressed, but there will still
be lest a disposition to bring forth weeds, if it be not looked unto, it will
still here and there sprout out; and if we be altogether careless, it will
soon be ouergrown again, and quite extinguish the grace of God. Now what is
the issue hereof? Why thus, that if the Lord having now rid this Garden from
the weeds of ignorance and sin, and planted it again with the graces of his
holy spirit, do commit it unto our care and charge to dresseit and keep it
so, and yet we again do give ear to the subtle baits and enchantments of
Satan, and defile it any more with sin: the second error shall be worse then
the first. Weed it therefore, and keep it clean; and if thou do discover at
any time any unruly passion of impatience in thy self, or any inordinate
desire of pride, to immitate the fantastic and fanaticke fashions of these
wanton times, or whatsoever irregular affection shall spring out from that
filthy unwholesome fountain within, pluck it up. Let the fear of God check
and withold it: Standin awe and sin not.

So that having (I think) sufficiently explaned the Prophets meaning; in the
simple prohibition of sin, I will proceed unto the manner of proposing it,
which is indesinitely; and that in two respects, both in respect of the
persons, and also in respect of the time.

In respect of the persons, it includes all without exception, comprehending in
it, both singula generum, and genera singulorum. For although it were primarily
directed to the enemies of David in the person of Christ: yet now the partition
wall being taken away, and being all one spiritually, it is to be referred unto
all men, none excepted, as being naturally the children of wrath, and enemies
to Christ. As it contains in it singula generum, there is no man living in his
particular, that can be exempted by any privilege from this inhibition of not
sinning; but every Christian man is bound to look to his own person that he
sin not, neither against God nor man. As it contains genera singulorum, it
likewise binds every man in his special place and condition to be careful he
sin not: for as every man is to be careful in his own particular to observe
the general rules of Christianity, that therein he transgress not: so are
all men to look principally unto such duties as concern their special
calling, as they are such and such Christians, either Ministers, Magistrates,
Tradesmen, Artificers, or whatsoever, that therein especially they sin not.
And the higher the place is, the more care and fear should accompany him that
is in it: especially the Minister and the Magistrate; because their negligence
and unfaithfulness are not sins that go alone, but draw a thousand after
them, and therefore are they incident to as much more punishment. For next unto
the wickedness of the Devil, is the unfaithfulness of the Minister and the
Magistrate.

Secondly, in respect of the sin, it likewise excludes none; but we are
inhibited all manner of sin. Now for the kinds of sin, it is by diverse men
reduced into diverse heads. As there are sins against the first Table,
concerning the service of God. And there are sins against the second Table,
transgressing our duties toward men. Again, there are sins of Omission, and
sins of Commission. Which division the Apostle makes in the seventh to the
Romans: whereby he says, the good that I would, I do not, Romans 7.15.
meaning thereby sins of Omission: but the evil that I would not do, that
do I: intimating thereby sins of Commission. Again, sin is described by
others to be either mental, or verbal, or actual. So St. Augustine defines
it. Peccatum est dictum, vel factum, vel cogitatum contra legem Dei. In fine,
how many heads of sin soever there may be (I cannot now stand to enumerate)
they are all here forbidden. So that all manner of persons, of all manner of
conditions, whether male or female, rich or poor, bond or free, noble or
ignoble, of public or private employment, whether in Church or Commonwealth;
are to avoid all kinds of sin, whether of ignorance or of conscience, of
neglect or contempt, of omission or commission, of weakness or wilfulness,
of action or affection, by word or by work; there is no person exempted, nor
no sin excepted, but by express iniunction from the Lord of all, all manner
of persons are to forbear all manner of sins.

But now (beloved) if we apply this unto our selves, we shall find no small
difference between that which the Lord requires of us, and that we return
unto him; between our duties what we should do, and our practices what we
do; between forbearing all sin, and forbearing no sin. For let any man
begin at one end of this city, and go to the other, and but take special
notice and diligent survey of the carriages of men, and its a hundred to one,
if he discover not almost all kind of sin. As happily in the suburbs he
shall see some lurking Adulterer come creeping out of one of the brothels of
hell, who through the false unfaithfulness of those that should inform and
will not, or the merciless lenity of them that should reform and do not,
continues in his filthiness, and is hardened in his sinful and wicked
practices. Next of all without perhaps he shall see many of the swinish sons
of Bacchus come reeling out of the schools of drunkenness, breathing and
belching out nothing but the froth of Ale; devilish and fearful blasphemies,
to the everlasting shame and reproach of man, to the scandal of the holy
profession of Christianity, to the certain corrupting and evil example of
others, and to the great dishonor of almighty God. Go forward and you may see
swarms of lazy and idle Drones, the very shame of this Land, whose profession
amongst our reformed Laity is not farrevnlike the mortified Mendicants in the
Romish Clergy, even wilful poverty, desiring rather to beg or stease; yea
starve, then work and live by the comfortable fruits of honest labor,

Here also are not wanting those desperate Ruffines with whom there is no more
then a word and a blow, making no more reckoning of a man's life, then if it
were to kill a dog: Cursed be their wrath for it is fierce, Genesis 49.7.
and their rage, for it is cruel. Again, you may hear meet those fatted
Epicures, whose eyes stand out for fatness, that eat and drink to sleep,
and rise up to play, only for fashion they sometimes take the Church in their
way: such there have been, are, and will be unto the end of the world, and yet
do they take it as a wrong, if they be accounted any whit less religious then
others. In every corner likewise a company of damnable Atheists, upon every
trisling occasion darting out hellish oaths, which makes our land to mourn;
wounds the ears of the very havens themselves, and cries loud unto the high
throane of justice for speedy vengeance. Hither likewise does oftentimes
resort, those cruel oppressors; that make themselves gorgeous by the ruins of
their poor Tenants: Clothing themselves with the flesh of their poor
brethren, how sure are they to find the reward of Dives, that so little regard
the wants of poor Lazarus? And lastly, (for I cannot stay to repeat all
particulars) whereas the outward deportment of a Christian should be nothing
more then a lovely representation of grace and modesty: why now, both men and
women are generally for the most part so far transported beyond themselves by
pride, that they turn Apes and antickes, dancing through the streets, as if
they knew not whose feet they stand on: so ridiculously, vain, and so
strangely witless and fantastical are men in these times, as that (which
almost I am ashamed to speak) they are grown proud of their very iangling of
the strappes of their boots. Good God! what man's wit is able to sink the
depth of those ridiculous follies wherein to vain man would plunge himself;
if either the shame of men did not withhold him, or the severity of strict
laws restrain him, at leastwise if the awefull respect and fear of Gods
almighty power and presence did not in some meansure bridle and pull back the
headstrong and violent current of his irregular desires? And in fine, you may
here see the seven deadly sins withal their attendants, driven all along
before the Diuelto their everlasting confusion: So that Satan marches with his
hellish troops through the Church of God without control; and the enemy
flourishes his colors amidst our forces, and yet there is none that rises
up against him. Surely the Prophet in this place does enjoin all men of all
conditions, in what they are able, to endeavor to stop and stay the passages
of sin. The private therefore should endeavor by such means as are in their
power, by holy prayers and brotherly admonitions, the Minister by discovering
unto men their sins and reproving their transgressions. Indeed, this, none
of us can say, but for the most part its faithfully discharged: but Reason
(says one) is a good Orator when it has force to back it, and therefore in
the third place without the diligence and faithfulness of the Magistrate all
that we can say will little avail. Now the office of every civil Magnistrate
even such as know not God, is to look to the markets and to hear and redress
the complaints of all disturbances of the civil peace: but of a Christian
Magistrate, to see that God be not blasphemed and dishonored, that Religion be
not dishartned nor disgraced, but that with all his might he do oppose and
discountenance, even all suspicions of profaneness and dishonor unto God;
and as far as his authority will extend, severely to punish all offenders in
that kind, that as he bears not the sword for naught, so being the Minister
of God, he may be a revenger, to execute wrath upon all that do evil.
Romans 13.4. But now its grown to such a pass, that if a man have risen to
any place of respect in this City, he grows after a manner incontrouleable;
he may swear and blaspheme, he may slander or oppress the poor by
forestalling the Markets, he may oppose the Priestly office of Christ in the
power of the keys, he may revel, be drunk, or commit any disorder when he
will, and his Worship shall secure him from incurring any danger of punishment.
But alas (beloved) shall the poor honors of a City privilege any man to
dishonor his GOD, and can we think that the angry eyes of GOD looks not
upon such courses as these? Surely there will not always be a time of mercy,
but at length the Lord will burst out into vengeance; for though the Lord
suffer long and much, yet we read not that he suffers always, but at length
(as the Prophet speaks) in the day of his fierce anger will he visit us with
the rods of his wrath, and will pour out his fury like fire.

And howsoever some men do think this City to be greatly reformed from what
it has been; yet if they look upon it with a less indulgent eye, they shall
see but little reformation therein; only the same or worse sins, masked over
with more plausible and colorable pretenses, that its Gods wonderful
goodness, we are not as Sodom and Gomorrah. When as the beastly bezeling
sin of drunkenness is become the only sinews of good-fellowshippe; the
filthy pollution of the Temples of the holy Ghost, at the mention whereof the
heart of every true Christian should even nauseate and rise with indignation,
is generally for the most part accounted but as a youthful recreation, and
laughed at. When fearful oaths are become mere phrases of gallantrie, and
the unbrotherly contentions of carnal minded men are conceited to be Religion
and Pictie. When as oppression is accounted forecast, and frugalitie, and Pride
esteemed as comeliness, Lying held as policy, Idleness pretended poverty,
and the voluptuous and immoderate wallowing in natures superfluities defended
by a pretense of Christian liberty; and all these the most hateful and
abominable in the eyes of Almighty God of all others, to pass and escape
unregarded and unpunished: Surely, O Lord, we have just cause to admire thy
long sufferance above all thy mercies. The Lord for his infinite mercies sake,
by that almighty power by which he is able to subdue all things to his own
will, break these stony hearts of ours, that we may always stand in awe and
fear of that dreadful Majesty, that so forsaking the crooked ways of sin
and iniquity, we may hold on our course in such paths as are agreeable to
his holy will, until such time as it shall please him to transplant us from
this vale of misery, and make us glorious inhabitants of those sacred
palaces, where nothing but light and blessed immortality, no shadow of
matter for tears, discontentments, fears, or any uncomfortable passions to
work upon; but all joy, tranquillity and peace even for ever and ever do
dwell. Unto which place the Lord in his due time bring us all, for Christ Jesus
sake; to whom with the Father and his most blessed and holy Spirit, be Glory
and Majesty, and Dominion, and Power, both now and for ever. Amen.

FJNJS.
Errata.
PAge 17 line 28. for, These commit, read That is, commits. p. 20. l. 36 for
timer. sin, p. 21. l. vls. for whereby, r. where.


