The very truth of the conference betwixt the Queen mother, and the Prince
of Conde.

Iulye. 1562.

THE VERY TRVETH OF conference betwixt the Queen the mother, and the Prince of
Conde. Iulij 1562.
THey of the house of Guise with their adherentes seeing that the Prince came
forth of Orleans to withstand them, and to give them batta^le contrary to the
hope and expectacyon wherein they had put ye Queen and the Parisians (which was
that they should no sooner show themselves before Orleans but the said Prince
with his partakers would straight way yield them selves) seeing them selves
deceived and considering the danger wherein they were to be overthrown, sent
and offered such conditions of peace to the Prince, as might have been asked at
their hands, requirynge therwithall truce for six days, to the end they might
cause the Queen to come thither to conclude the said peace. betwixt them. The
which. vi. days with three moreover the said Prince for the quietness of the
commen wealth granted: and being comme to communication with the Queen to
the end she might understand that he was moved only by zeal of religion to
do as he did: he said that in his own particular respect he whollye
submytted him self unto her will, yea to be banished for ever out of the Realm
of France, upon condition that the true and faithful ceruauntes of Christ
might safely live in their houses, with quietness of their conscience, in
hearing the sincere word of god, and in the exercise of commen prayers, and
co^municatinge of the Sacraments according to the prescript of the Gospel.
The Queen taking hold of the first point of this his promise and offer, wrote
unto the King and the Court of Parliament, and many other places besides,
that she had made peace, And when the term of the truce was expired, and
that they should come to the conclusion thereof, she declared to the said
Prince that he must be co^tente that there should be no more preaching in
France, and that the ministers a preachers should avoid the realm and al
such others as followed their doctrine, and that they should all have
safeconduct given them to depart: whereunto the said priynce aunsweted, that
christian charity the which by the aucthorritie and commandment of the
said Queen, had put the sword in his hand for the defense of Innocents.
As Well of the Kings majesty and herres, as for the poor faythefull of the
whole Realm of France against the Tiranni of the house of Guise, robbers of
the kings and Queens liberty, and manifest enemies to the word of God,
would not suffer him to admytte and obey any such direction, the which he
knew well did never proceed of her will ne of the Kings, whereas they had
tofore conse^ted to ye contrary by a solempte Edict unto their whole estates.
For mauntenau^ce whereof he had put him self in Armure against the said Guyse,
who by their private authority with violence had broken the same, as the
great number of murders and manslaughters by them committed did testifye. And
whereas they covered the^ selves with thaucthoritie of the King Queen and
Court of Parliamente, it was apparent enough to all the world, that they ruled
the same by force even as they lusted. The said Prince in time and place
convenient will plainly prove that he put him self in arms by the express
commandment of the Queen, for the defense of the King, her self, and the
Realm, from the oppression of the foresaid Tyrannes: Wherefore he cannot
disarme without breaking of the duty of his allegiance, before he se the King
and the Queen's matestye in full liberty, and that the Gospel may have course
according as their maiestes have godly decreed by the universal consent
lawfully assembled out of all the Countries of this Realm of France.

All these things above written at true, whereof it follows that the said
Prince with his adherentes are falsely esteemed and called rebels and
seditious persons, and that the name of rebellion, sedition and disobedience
apperteyneth truly and properly to his adversaries.

As touching their discourse concerning this matter sent by the said Lady
unto the Court of Parliament: It is most certain that Monseur de Guise caused
her to put her hand thereunto. And whereas since it was imprinted by Uascosan,
the sale thereof was prohibited, lest the lies wherewith it swarmeth should be
discovered and known. For of truth it shall never appeeate and be proved that
any other conditions have been offered unto the poor faithful Christians, but
exile and banishment forever out of their houses and countries, or else to abide
with retoutnynge unto their papisticall ceremonies. (*)


