THE VINDICATION OR DEFENSE OF ISAAC CASAVBON, AGAINST Those Impostors that
lately published an impious and unlearned Pamphlet, Entitled The Original of
Idolatries, etc. under his Name, By MERIC CASAVBON his Son.

Published by his Majesty's Command.



Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1624.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND POTENT MONARCH, JAMES
By the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc.
Most gracious Sovereign,

THat which I have here in a few days written for the Defense of my Father, I
acknowledge to ^aue proceeded from your Majesty, as the first Author of it; who
being so highly offended at the injury which Casaubon's name received, that by
your Royal authority the deceitful plotters of it were duly punished, I
thought it would be some reproach to me, if a Son should confer nothing to
the pious vindicating of his Father. And yet it is not so much the defense of
him, that I have here undertaken, as the vindicating of the Truth it self,
which your Maies^y has so much disdained, though in a good cause, to have
been so ill handled by a furious and inconsiderate writer. Our Adversaries
shall be more indifferent to you ^ereafter, if your Royal Majesty be offended
with the forgeries which they bring to maintain a bad cause, when You are so
much offended with the falsehoods that are brought against them by others, that
would otherwise seem to have undertaken the defense of a good cause. And
though such may please themselves with their own fancies, whom any thing will
please that makes for the upholding of such a Religion as they profess; yet
it was most proper for your Sacred Majesty (whose Learning and Love of purer
Relig^on are of equal eminency) both to detect, and to show your Royal
indignation against these Impostors, that were cloaked over with so fair an
appearance. Surely happy is our Cause, that has ^uch a Defender! For who can
now doubt of the Truth of that doctrine, which must have nothing to defend it,
but the Arms of Truth it self? Where^ore I present unto your Majesty, with
all humility, that which I have here written for the Truth, not only because
You were so graciously pleased to accept it before it came to public view, but
chiefly that I might oppose the Authority both of Your Sacred Power and
exquisite judgment against those Impostors, that durst presume to offer a
falseintituled Pamphlet to the patronage of our most Noble and Gracious Prince.
God long preserve your Majesty, the greatest of Kings, to flourish with all
kind of happiness, for these your Kingdoms, and his Churches benefit.

Your Majesty's most humble Servant and Subject, MERIC CASAVBON.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MIGHTY PRINCE^ CHARLES, PRINCE OF WALES, etc.
May it please your Highness,

I Have ende^uo^red, a^ my d^ety was, to free my Father from that ^^spicio^ of
impi^ti^ and ignor^^ce, which the late Book, falsely attributed vnt^ him, had
well-neere brought him into. And I doubt not, but by this means I have
obtained so much of all men, as hereafter not to doubt, but that Casaubon has
been much abused, to have such a preposterous birth fathered upon him. Yet to
little purpose were all that I could say or do, if in the mean time this
m^sked Pamphlet should pass through all men's hands under your Highness
Authority; such being the impudence of this Impostor, that he durst venture
to inscribe it to your Highness Patronage, the better to deceive the world.
But since without all question your Highness is so far from patronizing such
kind of men, that You detest as well their fraudulent dealings, as the
impiety of the Book it self; I presumed of Your Gracious acceptance, if I
should present unto You this Defense of my Father against them; that such
Impostors may know, how vainly they have sought for patronage of their
forgeries from Your Highness Authority, which they shall perceive You have
bestowed upon the Defense of the Truth. God grant unto Your Highness, as to
the most glorious of all Princes, a life of many and many years, with his
perpetual and favorable assistance of You in all things.

Your Highness most humbly devoted, MERIC CASAVBON.

THE DEFENSE AND VINDICATING of IS. CASAVBON;
Against those Impostors, that lately published an impious and unlearned Book,
entitled, The Original of Idolatries, etc. under his name.
Unto how great and various injuries the names of well-deseruing men are
subject after their death, I would it had been my hap to have learned any other
where, then to have had such near experience of it at home. I was in good hope
my care had been at an end, in answering their sundry calumnies, that being of
a contrary part, set upon my Fathers name like open enemies; yet these,
inasmuch as they professed themselves his adversaries, and were clean opposite
against him in the case it self, seemed to be the less dangerous, and not so
much to be feared. But now I must have to do with other manner of men, that
pretending nothing less then any malice or hatred against him, have under
fair shows of good will, most grossly abused his estimation and credit. But
the lessesuspicion there is of an injury, the greater is the injury done to a
man, and the more hainously to be accounted of.

Not many weeks since there was a Book published under the name of Isaac
Casaubon: Which for the Argument was not altogether unlike those works of his,
that he had partly published already, and partly undertaken to write, as I
shall show hereafter. And for the place; who would imagine that any thing
should come forth in Print at London to Casaubon's disgrace; where, as long as
he lived, he was so much esteemed of by his Majesty, and the chiefest of the
land; and now he is dead, I hope I may say his memory is precious to all
honest men? And besides, for him that procured the book to be set forth, he
is so profuse in his praise, that a man would think he meant him no small
addition of glory by his large commendations. But if you once read the book
it self, you shall soon see it is such kind of stuff, as cannot be
imagined to have been my Fathers, without his great shame and infamy, being a
Pamphlet full of such gross ignorance, malignity, and most insolent desire of
nouitie in Religion. Surely the Author of it deserves the name of a
Schismatike, (that I may say no worse) and whosoever he was, is worthy to be
punished for such a one, as being no lesser enemy to the Church of England,
then he is injurious to my Fathers good name.

But that the Reader may wonder the less at it, it is no new thing for books
of novel and unsound doctrine to be fathered upon such men that be free from
error, and sound in their opinions. Every one of the worst and vilest Heretics
were wont to use this craft long ago, to mask under other men's names of
esteem and authority, that so they might the better insinuate their pernicious
doctrines into them that little understood what they were, and seduce the
simpler sort of people from the right way. And thereupon it came, that so many
books fraught with pestilent doctrine were a^tributed of old, to the holy and
orthodox Fathers, and at this day go a great number of them under their names;
many whereof at the first perhaps might be their own, but afterward came to
be so corrupted and adulterated by other men's impurities, that like bastards
their own reputed parents would not acknowledge them. Of which thing even
Origin alone may be a sufficient example; who was long since numbered among the
Arch-heretikes themselves, and yet both by ancient and modern writers is most
strongly defended to have been an Orthodoxe Father, many things being falsely
imputed unto him by Heretics, and his Books otherwise pure and sound, by them
corrupted and plaistered over with their own dawbings; as S. Jerome and
Vincentius Lirinenfis with others have written of his old Apologists. But, to
be short, whether we exemplify this kind of imposture by old or new times, I
dare say, that there was never any bastard-booke fathered upon a man with more
notable impudence and fraud, then this was upon Casaubon.

What purpose they had that were the contriuers of such cousenage, and what
should chiefly move them to do ^o unworthy an act, many probable conjectures
may be made. It is not unlikely that some sculking crafty Puritan came stealing
out with it, to try if he could do the Church of England a mischief.
Peradventure one that bare some private grudge against my Father, thought this
way to wound his reputation. Or rather it is most likely that some vnletter'd
fellow, some sharking companion, lighting upon an old motheaten Pamphlet, which
he thought to be some great treasure, and hard to be come by; and agreeing
with a Sordid Bookeseller to get it reprinted; thought it best to put some man's
name of note before it, that so their gains, which they gaped for, might come
in the faster by the sale. And this last (howsoever the other two conjectures
go, for there may be more in it then this alone) they that have had to do,
and enquire into the matter, have found to be most certain and true.

In the mean, who would not lament to see what a miserable case we are now
adays brought unto, when such base fellows as these, that never had any thing
to do with learning, nor honesty neither, shall take upon them to judge what
Books may benefit the people, and deserve to be published? Unhappy
Theology! which must be made a refuge for Runagates; and, whether she will or
no, be forced to patronize the base service of such dishonest Mountebankes,
that do so shamefully prostitute her to their gain and filthy lucre. The
fault whereof, it is a grief to see, how in a manner it comes from the very
people themselves, who having once got it by the end, that there is no small
religion in making long discourses, and in ostentation of much reading, gape
after such novel Pamphlets as fast as ever the Athenians did after news. And
so no maru^ile if we have every day such dry kickses and abortiue broods sent
us into the world, when there are so many to buy them vp^ as children do
babies and toys. But to make it no wonder, that these Impostors were in such
hope to cosen and deceive the unskillful multitude at ease; is it not beyond
all the degrees of impudence, that they should go about to make Them Patrons
and witnesses of their fraud, whom they should much rather have feared to be
the Reuengers and inst Punishers of it? Lord! what a licentious age do we
live in! that such a lurking obscure fellow (for he is famous and known for
nothing but villainy) should dare to inscribe his Book, which he knew to be
but forged and counterfeit, to our most Noble and Pious Prince, besides many
other great Lords, and all in hope of reward and gain! But to let pass this
iuggling knave, that sets us forth his wares and toys with such a vaunting
kind of language, and to come unto the Book it self.

Certainly I suppose there is no learned man, specially to whom Casaubon or his
Writings were not altogether unknown, that can be so senseless or gross,
but upon the first reading of this Book, he will presently both perceive and
detest the fraud of these cheating companions. And therefore had the Book come
into their hands only that were able to judge of such matters, and to discern
truth from falsehood, I might have saved all this labor. But inasmuch as the
Book came forth in English, and was snatched up so fast by the unlearned
multitude, and is now by their rash judgment so much commended and approved;
I have here briefly undertaken the examination thereof, both to rectify the
ignorant, and to vindicate my Father from suspicion of impiety; that so at
last the vizard being pulled off the Pamphlet, it may appear to all, as it is,
in its own natural likeness.

And first I must seriously confess, that for the original Author of the
Book, I neither know him, nor ever heard the least rumor of him, what he
was, ^t^r an albus, French or English, or whether he be yet above ground or no;
lest happily some might suspect, that I vented any private malice of mine own,
while in defending of my Father, I seem to write something sharply against
one whom I know not.

For his Religion, I think it will satisfy a great many, and be enough for
his commendation too, to say, he was no Papist, but rather a fierce enemy to
them all. Indeed this may be enough for them, that think a man presently right
and orthodoxe enough, if he does but once profess himself an Adversary to
Popery; it being their custom to measure the integrity and soundness of a
man's Religion by his hatred against Papists only. And it is to be feared,
lest that the Book, being written against the Sacrifice of the Mass, as the
Title of it pretends, because I neither approve the Book, nor acknowledoe it
to be my Fathers, both Father and Son, as men taken napping, be by some
Pu^itans reputed for errant Papists. But howsoever it were a fault, to give any
occasion of scandal unto the weakest members in the Church, yet the love of
truth must more prevail with me to undertake her defense, then the prauitie
of other men's judgments to deter me from it. In my opinion he defined virtue
well, that said it was the mean between two extreme vices, which is not only
true in Moral and Practical, but in some Intellectual virtues also; of which
kind the right apprehension of Truth is. And therefore it is no marvel, if
they, which take that way in matters of Religion, do oppose themselves against
two extremes, and have two extremes opposed against them. Yet he that keeps
this middle course, howsoever he may perhaps differ in opinion from either
side, yet in charity he may be united unto both. And for no other cause is he
more maligned by the hot-spurres on either part, then for seeking to procure
peace and concord betwixt them, and for doing his best endeavor to make up the
great schism and rent of the Church, that again we might come to be all one
body. Which misery an old Father was wont long ago to lament in these words,
that may be very well applied to our times. (...) (says Nazianz. Orat. 3.
Nazianzen after he had done speaking of men's maintaining their sides and
factions) (...) That is, Whosoever keep a middle ^ourse, and follow after
peace, are ill used on both sides, being either contemned, or fiercely opposed;
of which number we being, etc.

For the Papists, I have nothing to say to them now. But I have here to do
with such kind of men, who striving to run as far from Papists as they can,
have also unadvisedly run withal beyond the bounds of Truth. These are the
Men, that with incredible pride and arrogance despise all Antiquity; that most
superciliously contemn the ancient and holy Fathers, that study all they can
how to abrogate and abandon all the ancient Constitutions of the Church; and in
the mean while, that arrogate to themselves a power of making what Laws they
list, of appointing Ceremonies at their pleasure, and of bringing in such a
discipline, which the Christians of old never heard of, as if they had be^ne
created the only perpetual Dictators and Governors of the Church of Christ.
And though they have no regard at all of any public tranquillity, refusing
to give way but to the least thing that may make for the peace and unity of
Christians, yet nevertheless they would feign bear up their credit, and for a
color of their bad intents, make us believe they are wondrous zealous men. Of
which sort of men that he was one, whosoever was the Author of this Book,
which these Impostors have published under Is. Casa^bons name, and that he was
no mean one neither, but a chief champion among them, I think no body will
make question, that will but run over the book, and of those infinite places
which prove the same most plainly, will but a little more narrowly mark a
few. There being I suppose scarce any writing extant in this kind, which does
more clearly and evidently argue, what an insolent, perverse, and rash Author
it had. A man would verily think that he was one, who^ had proclaimed open
war and defiance to all Antiquity, or one that being starke-staring mad with
novelty and fury, would abandon all the ancient Customs and Constitutions of
our Forefathers.

The Book indeed by the Title is pretended to be written against Papists, but
in effect it proves as adverse to the Primitive, as to the Popish Church. And
whereas the Church of England, cutting off such corruptions as crept in upon
her in declining ages, has retained many of the Sacred Rites and Ceremonies
which the ancient Church had, yet she is also cunningly stricken at through the
Papists sides, with so much the more danger, by how much the more craft and
close subtlety it is done.

Therefore let this be the first Argument of all the rest, to prove, that
Casaubon neither was, nor could be the Author of this Book. For who was it
that ever reverenced the gray hairs of Antiquity more then he? Who ever,
without iniuring the holy Scriptures, ^steemed more highly of the ancient
Fathers? And for the Church of England, what should I need to speak of i^?
whose Doctrine and Discipline, Rites and Ceremonies he did so much approve
and embrace, that he could never seem to himself to have commended and
magnified it enough. Though there were none of his works and writings left
behind him, out of which it might be gathered and demonstrated what his mind
was herein, yet there be many grave and religious men still living, whom I
could call to witness, how often they have heard him profess and declare at
large, that he was thus affected. But there will be no need of that, seeing
his own Books are every where extant to confirm it. For howsoever he had
never any occasion offered him purposely and ex professo to handle this
Argument, yet seeing all his Works that belong to matters Ecclesiastical and
Divine, have nothing in them, not only contrary, or auerse from the use and
customs of this Church, but what is altogether agreeable to the Canons and
Constitutions of the sam^ and which, as occasion is offered, do ever and anon
defend them; the intelligent Reader will easily perceive, how willingly he
submitted himself unto the Form thereof, and rested wholly content with it.

And for this purpose there are not wanting most certain proofs and
testimonies occurring in many places of his writings, which will be enough to
stop up the mouths of the most impudent gainsayers. As when in his Preface to
his Ecclesiastical Exercitations, written to his Sacred Majesty, he says,
Qui Ecclesiam habeas in tuis Regnis, partim iam olim ita institutam, partim
magnis tuis laboribus ita instauratam, vt ad flore^tis quondam Ecclesiae formam
nulla hodie propius accedat, quam tua, inter uel excessu, vel defectu peccantes
mediam uiam secuta. Qua moderatione ^oc primum assecuta est Ecclesi^ Anglicana,
ut illi ipsi qui suam ei foelicitatem inuident, saepe tamen ex aliarum
comparatione illam cogantur laudare: deinde etc. that is, Who have in your
Dominions a Church so established by former ages, and so settled by your
Majesty's Royal pains and care, as no Church this day under heaven comes
nearer to the flourishing estate and face of the Ancient then yours, which has
taken the middle way between them that went astray on both hands by excess
or defect. By which moderation the Church of ENGLAND has got this special
advantage, that even such as envy her happiness, are nevertheless oftentimes
constrained to magnify her in comparison of others. Besides etc. Whereunto
these words agree in his Epistle to Cardinal Perron, written, though in his
Majesty's name, yet according to his own sense and meaning; Certo, clare ac
liquido sibi constare, si notae (...) quaerantur, and uere necessaria ad
salutem spectentur, aut etiam ad decorum Ecclesiae, nullam in orb terrarum
(Deo vni sit laus and gloria) inuentum iri quae propius ad fidem, aut speciem
antiquae Catholicae accedat etc. That it was most plain and manifest unto him,
how for matters essential, and truly necessary to salvation, or belonging also
to the beauty and decency of the Church, there was (God be thanked) none in all
the world to be found, which came nearer to the faith and face of the ancient
Catholic Church, etc.

It will not be amiss here to set down his judgment about some certain Rites
and Ceremonies, which as occasion served, he wrote and inserted into his
Ephemerides, from whence what he thought of all others in that kind, may be
easily coniectured.

October. 31. An. 1610. Diem sacram non male posui Dei beneficio: sum enim
inuitatus body, ut interessem sacris, quae factasunt ad consecrandos Episcopos
duos Scotos, and Archiepiscopum Scotiae. Vidi illos Ritus, and Impositionem
manuum, and Preces in eam rem. O Deus, quanta fuit mea uoluptas! Tu Domine Jesus
serua hanc Ecclesiam, and Catharis, qui ista rident, da bonam mentem. God be
thanked, I have spent this Holy day well. For I was this day invited to be
present at the sacred s^lemnities of the Consecration of the Arch^ishop, and
two other Bishops of Scotland. I saw the Cerem^nies, the Imposition of hands,
and the Prayers made for that purpose. O God, what apleasure it was to me, to
behold it! Preserve thou this Church, O Lord Jesus, and turn the hearts of the
Puritans, that deride such things as these.

Ian. 4. An. 1611. Gratias tibi, Domine, quod hodi^ ad sacram mensam sum
admissus, and Corporis Christi, sanguinis^ factus sum particeps in Ecclesia
Anglicana, cuius Formulam heri diligenter meditatus admodum probaui, and
ordinem agendi mir^ laudaui prae recepta apud alios consuetudine. Thanks be
to thee, O Lord, that I was this day admitted unto thy Holy Table, and made
partaker of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Church of England, the Form of
which Administration, having read it over yesterday, I did highly approve and
commend above that custom which others use.

And not only these things which concern the Church of England, but those
also wherein he had to do with our Adversaries alone do sufficiently argue
for his defense. Even by his whole manner and genius of writing every body may
know that the book is none of his. For who cannot tell, with what great
moderation and mildness Casaubon was ever wont to treat of Controversies in
Religion? insomuch that many preposterous Puritanes, out of their ignorant and
mad zeal, did blame him for it, and from thence took occasion to suspect him
more then they had reason to do. But this was the way that he took; and he
persuaded himself it was the best and safest way that could be taken, both
for the finding out of truth, and the redress of error; to follow that path
which meekness and moderation either led him, or went along with him in,
without all affection or partiality either way; supposing that such as took
any other course, did put pace in a dangerous and slippery path, and put others
further out of their way that were gone astray one from another. Now if a man
should run through the whole rout of Nouellers, and diligently make inquiry
into their writings, I think there could not one be found for fury, and
malice, and b^tternesse against his Adversaries, to be compared with this
Counterfeit-Casaubon; then whom never was any man more childishly and fondly in
love with his own fancy, or more bent to his faction. It is but a small
matter, that he has railed a little more bitterly then became a modest man,
against such things as were worthy of blame; but so infinitely to belly his
Adversaries, and to put such forged crimes and calumnies upon them, was
insufferable, specially in such an undertaker for the Truth of Christ. Such
manner of dealing with Adversaries, though it may be pleasing to some hot
fiery Zelotes, whom learning never taught any modesty, yet wiser men cannot but
condemn it, as being fitter to spoil, then to help or defend a good cause.
For if there be^ strict Laws provided against such colluding pleaders, that
pretending to help a man, do of purpose leave out that which should most make
for his cause, and bring nothing but false allegations for his defense, so to
betray his right to his Aduersaries^ what is to be done with such undertakers
of Controuersi^s in Religion, that either of purpose, or through gross
ignorance let pass those Arguments that be solid, and of greatest moment, and
come in with such idle poor reasons, as every child may answer and blow away?
Ought not the same Law (when the case is the same) to be made against these
men, as betrayers of an honest and good cause? What readier way then theirs can
be imagined wholly to alienate our Adversaries minds from us, that being
overcome with the truth on our parts, began somewhat to incline unto us? Caius
Fabritius is highly commended unto us by the writers of old times, for his
virtue and magnanimity, in scorning to accept of that victory in a doubtful
battle, which was offered him by the perfidie of a treacherous fellow. And is
it not a shame now adays, that Christians contending with Christians about the
Truth of Faith, should use less faith and conscience one toward another,
then the Pagans themselves were wont to do, who regarded nothing but their
own wordly praise and honor?

Can there then be any body so injurious to Casaubon, or so quite bereaved of
his own judgment, as to think these things, that smell only of a furious
Sycophant, and a most impudent Calumniator, could come from him? From him, I
say, Whose mildness and moderation in matters of Religion is so evident in all
his writings, that to take any pains to prove it, were but to waste time, and
to light a candle in the Sun.

And howsoever it befits not the modesty of a son to contend about the
learning of his Father; yet I hope I may have leave, without the breach of good
manners, to say that he was no mere Block, or such a one as had no good
learning at all ^n him; which, let but be once granted me, and I doubt not of
the good success I shall have, in vindicating his name and estimation from
these Hucksters hands, that put this book upon him. A book which is so full
of excessive ignorance and stupiditie, that whereas every thing in it (except a
few scraps taken from others) argue a most unlearned writer; there are many
things besides, which I wonder how they could come from a man that was sound in
his senses: if yet he is to be thought sound in his senses, whom this pestilent
mad puritanisme has once possessed.

But I suppose the Reader expects, that for the better confirmation of what we
say, we should produce some Examples out of the Book it self, concerning
these things, wherewith we have all this while charged the Author of it. It
remains therefore, that we briefly run the Book over, rather pointing at
the places, then undertaking any refutation of them.

IN the first part of his Book he reckons Page 2, 3, etc. 8, 9, 21.
up all such things, which either happened by occasion, or were directly
ordained by God in the old Law, having some mystical or typical
signification in them; as the Trees of Life and Death, of Knowledge of Good and
Evil; the Rainebow; the Feast of unleavened Bread; the cloudie Pillar that
went before the Israelites in the day; the flame of Fire that guided them in
the night; the division of the Red Sea; the heavenly Manna; the water that
gushed out of the Rock; Oblations and Sacrifices of diverse sorts; the Temple
of Jerusalem; the Priests vestments; the water of clensing, etc. And all these
he will have to been no less truly and properly called Sacraments of the old
Testament, then Circumcision and the Passover were; in place whereof were
instituted those two Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptism, and the Supper
of the Lord. I am not ignorant what a large signification the word Sacrament
has; but never (that I could learn) were all these promiscuously accounted,
and reckoned up among the number of Sacraments by the Fathers; and while I
weigh this man's words a little better, I find by most certain confequence,
that his meaning and purpose was, in making all Sacred Signs to be true
Sacraments, withal to make us believe, that the Sacraments of the New
Testament are nothing else but mere naked Signs and Figures. Neither is there
any other meaning to be collected from him in all his passages about the holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist. For howsoever he would sometimes seem to be far
of another mind, when he uses the words, really and truly; yet he applies
them no otherwise to the Sacred Symboles of the Supper, then he does to any
of those Shadows and Figures of the old Law; acknowledging no power in them
of really exhibiting, but of signifying only, as page 36. or really
signifying, at most, as page 81. upon which ground, that is to say, that there
is no more virtue in the Eucharist, then in those Signs, he thinks he has
most learnedly and strongly confuted the new opinion of Transubstantiation, (a
conceit otherwise most absurd and gross,) because forsooth there was no
Transubstantiation in the Page 85, 86.
Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, none in the Manna, or in the Rock that
flowed with water, or in the brazen Serpent, etc. As if it were not easy to
answer our Adversaries truly out of S. Augustines own words. Prima
Sacramenta S. Aug. contra Fa^st^^. l^b. 19^ c. 13.
cum suo aduentu Christus impleuisset, ablata sunt; and alia sunt instituta,
uirtute maiora, utilitate meliora, actu faciliora, numero pauciora. The
Sacraments of the old Law being accomplished by the coming of Christ, are
taken away; and others ordained in their place, which be greater in power and
efficacy, better for our profit, easier for performance, and fewer in number.

But to make an end with him in this point: His only doctrine is, That by
faith we do really participate of the body and blood of Christ, and be made
one with him^ and that the signs and symboles of this our conjunction and
fellowship are in the Eucharist: whereas we do not call them Signs only,
but believe them further to be the very Instruments and Means of our Communion
with Christ; which is the same that the Primitive Church teaches, the doctrine
of the Church of England, and the Belief of Is. Casaubon, as may be seen in
his Exe^c. 16.
Exercitations, and his Number. 47.
Epistle to Card. Perron. For them that have such base and abject thoughts of
this divine Sacrament, it is no marvel if they can find nothing to wonder at
in it, as this Scribler elsewhere does grant, and some do much more impudently
a^^irme; but the godly Fathers, being wont to call it tremend^ Mysterium, a
Mystery full of horror and dread, would not have us once to think upon so great
a matter without a holv and sacred fear.

In his third Chapter, going about to Page 10. 11, etc.
show, how from time to time, the Signs and Sacrifices ofthe old Law were
depraved, and subject to corruption, without any judgment, or discretion at
all, he reckons us up a number of sins and offenses, of a far different
nature; which nevertheless he will needs have properly to belong unto the
Sacraments; as the Loathing of Manna, and the Peoples murmurring that followed;
the sin of Achan; the impiety of the sons of Heli; the rash attempt of
Uzzah, and others the like; among which Iephte's vow, and Gedeon's garment are
numbered for corruptions of Sacraments. And hither he referres that of 2. Kings
17. 17. Page 15.
Where the Israelites made their children to pass through the fire, which this
fellow calls Purgatory Fire, and says, that from it was derived the opinion
of the Alcoranists and Mahumetans at this day for Purgatory: meaning by his
Alcoranists, the Papists of our times. For so he calls them elsewhere, them
and their Ritualls Page 63. 65. 66. 70, etc.
Durand's Alcoran, Titelman's Alcoran, etc.

In his Seventh Chapter, he cites us his Ecclesiastical Commentaries, and
Page 50. he sends us unto them again. It Is very well. Still have we the
advantage, and every where matter enough to detect the fraud of these
Impostors. For whose soever these same Commentaries be, sure I am, they be
none of Casaubon's. He never published, never wrote any Ecclesiastical
Commentaries. But I am afraid lest these Commentaries In his Epistle to the
Reader.
and those of Elasopolitanus, be twins, out of which the Author of this
book himself confesses, he had every thing to make us up this Pamphlet, such
as it is. What these Commentaries of Elasopolitan are, I think no body yet
ever knew, or is like to know, being at least so unknown and unheard of, as
the very name of the man seemed strange and monstrous to all learned men's ears
that I could meet withal.

In the same Chapter, among the superstitious Ceremonies of Baptism heretofore
brought into the Church, he Page 27. 28.
numbreth up Chrisme, Exsufflation, and Exorcismes; which though they were not
undeservedly taken away by the Church of England, when they began to be abused
unto ridiculous superstition; yet inasmuch as they be known to have been of
very great Antiquity, it was not the part of a modest man to rail upon them
for abominable things, specially as they were used in the Primitive Church.
Certainly the old godly Fathers, S. Cyrill, S. Ba^il, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine
and others (a little better Doctors of Religion and Piety, I trow, then our new
vpstart Zelotes) would never have admitted or allowed them, if, as this man
affirms, they had been first invented to adulterate the true use and prime
Institution of Baptism. And for Casaubon it is not likely that he would ever
have given any such censure of these Ceremonies against the manner and custom
of the ancient Fathers, whom how much he reverenced, he has elsewhere made
known in matters of greater moment.

But we must not here let pass this one most notorious example of the
senseless stupidity and malignitie both of this lewd and idle writer.
Wherefore Page 28.
O you Missalians (says the man) have you foisted in oils into the holy
Sacrament of Baptism, imitating herein the here^ie of Marcus and Marcosus, who
commanded that Infants to be baptized should be anointed? In his Margin he
sends us to Epiphanius. (...). There was one Marcus (says Epiphanius) of whom
the Marcosians were so called. Now who would not wonder what a monstrous blind
bayard this fellow is, to make us proper names of denominatiues? as if a man
should say, there were two certain famous Heretics called Arrius and
Arrianus. But what is the madness of the Marcosians to the ancient custom of
the Orthodoxe Fathers? The Marcosian Heretics used not their oil for an
indifferent Ceremony in Baptism, but made the virtue and efficacy of the
Sacrament to depend upon it, insomuch, that some of them never baptized their
young beginners, if they were once anointed after their own fashion with oil.
(...), says Epiphanius there, Some of them think Baptism superfluous.

A little after he does malapertly inueigh Page 29.
against the ancient Bishops, as if they had permitted women to baptize: which
is a mere false tale. Tertul. de vel. virg. Nonpermittitur mulieri in Ecclesia
loqui, sednec docere, nec tingere, etc. It is not permitted to a woman for to
speak in the Church, or to teach, or to Baptize, etc. In a case of extreme
necessity the very same Father says, that Laymen might do it. Whereupon the
Church of England, howsoever it allows not women or Laymen to baptize, yet
the last being once done, when necessity so requires, it does not believe it
to be void, or to have no account mad^ of it^ In the mean while, what a wicked
and ungracious companion is this same Pseudo Casaubon of ours, so impudently to
bespot the integrity of the ancient Church, with the foul imitation of the
Montanists, Marcionists, Cataphrigians, and such other rabble of Heretics, who
permitted their women, and ^he^ their whores too, to do any thing whatsoever?

Page 30.
Then in his Eighth Chapter, as if he had all this while thought himself too
modest, he begins with open face, as they say, and a tongue past all shame to
fly upon the venerable face of Antiquity. And first of all, see how bravely he
gives the onset. Wherefore when errors came in and prevailed even in the
Apostles times, Let no man hereafter think it strange, that the Apostles
Successors from time to time adulterated the true use, and rites of the holy
Sacraments. As if it were all one, that there were some Heretics in the
Apostles times, and that the Apostles Successors were Heretics themselves. No
body will deny but that there have been Heresies from the beginning of the
Church, or at least have sprung up not long after: But if the heads of the
Church, immediately succeeding the Apostles were tainted, what hope is there,
that the rest of the body, specially in after ages may be sound? Wherefore
that which he repeates by Page 32.
and by again, w^ will not care to grant him, that there were from the
beginning of the Church many and infinite corruptions crept in^ but, by his
leave, none of them were received by the Church, or approved by the godly
Bishops, and sound members of the same. It is the open profession of the Church
of England, that she does wholly assent, and firmly adhere to the doctrine of
the first four hundred years, and more. That which the holy Fathers of those
times delivered, and taught with common consent, she willingly imbracet^ That
which they did not teach, she forbids to be now taught unto the people, as
necessary for them to believe; which is apparent by that golden Canon ofhers
(as Casaubon was wont to call it) made in a Synod Anno 1571. and set forth
together with the Articles of Religion, and confirmed by subscription of all:
whereby all Preachers and Pastors In the Chapter of Preachers.
are bound, That they should never teach any thing, as matter of Faith
religiously to be observed, but that which is agreeable to the doctrine of the
Old and New Testament, and is collected out of the same doctrine by the
Ancient Fathers, and Catholic Bishops of the Church.

But a Gods name, what are these so great corruptions of the Primitive Church,
which this same swinger of Antiquity has made such a stir withal? Page 31.
Next and immediately (so he says) after the Apostles times there was a
contention about a certain Compromission of days, when this holy Sacrament
was to be celebrated, and then they began to make Holy Days, and appoint days
of fasting, etc. That there were any days appointed for the celebration of the
Eucharist in the Primitive Church, or that there arose any contention among the
Bishops about it, I think is this idle man's fancy only, and that no
sufficient testimony can be brought to prove it. For the innocence and
purity of these first ages was such, that as the ancient Fathers and other
writers do witness, not only any day, but every day was appropriated to this
Sacred Celebration; the Christians then for the most part never missing a day,
but they did communicate. A long while after, when devotion began to wax cold,
there grew a necessity of making Laws, to meet with the peoples contempt of
so great a blessing. Then were times appointed, chiefly to tie those that were
so negligent and auerse of themselves. But this dull Ass, living perhaps among
such as thought it religion enough to communicate once a year, whatsoever he
had read about the Feast of Easter, which was a long time variously observed,
he applied most fondly unto the time of receiving the Lords Supper, as if that
had been the only appointed day for the celebration of that Sacrament. But
(so he goes on) the Apostles left us nothing in writing about Fasting, and
Feast days. But so would Casaubon never have written in a matter not merely
belonging to Faith, who has often admired and approved of that Rule which S.
Augustine gives us. S. Aug. de bapt. contra Donat. l. 4. cap. 24.
Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi Apostolica authoritate traditum rectissime creditur. That which
the uniuersall Church holds, which is not defined by Councels, but has been
always retained and used, we do rightly believe to be a Tradition of
Apostolical authority. And for the observation of the Hebdomadasancta, that
Great and Holy week before Easter, he freely professes his mind in his
Exercitations. Exerc. page ^71.
Ego sanctissimam illam consuetudinem iam inde ab Apostolorum temporibus initia
habuisse, aut non multo post facile crediderim. I do easily believe, that
either in the Apostles times, or not long after, this most holy Custom had its
beginning.

In the same Chapter, he tells us that Pope Alexander the first of that name,
who was the fifth from S. Peter, (as Eusebius writes in his Ecclesiastical
History, lib. 4. c. 1.) and one that was crowned with Martyrdom, as other
Authors testify, that this Alexander going about Page 33.
to reform the Gospel of Christ, was the first that invented the mingling of
water and wine in the Eucharist. Concerning which custom, what the practice of
the ancient Church was, and what S. Cyprian, and S. Augustine say of it, they
that know any Antiquity cannot be ignorant.

Again he tells us that from this Custom their Abuse sprung up, who steeped
Page 35.
the bread of the holy Supper in the blood of young infants, and so celebrated
the Sacrament. What a most detestable wickedness of a man is this, to join the
monstrous impiety of lewd miscreants, (that went for Christians indeed among
the unskillful multitude, but were nothing less) and the universal practice
of Christ's Church together! and to ascribe the wickedness of heretics, to
innocent and harmless men! So the Pagans of old, what villainy soever any
base fellow, that was but thought to be a Christian, had done, they were wont
to lay it upon the true Christians themselves, as the Writers of those elder
ages have so often complained. But so true is it, that this wicked bloodshed of
infants sprang from the Custom of the Churches mingling water with wine,
whereof he makes Alexander to have been the first Inuenter, as that many of
better authority then he, fetch the beginning of it from Simon Magus, who was
a whole hundred years elder then Alexander. And it was this Alexander also,
whom he makes to be the Reuiuer of Jewish Ceremonies in the Church, and the
first Inuenter of unleauened bread to be used in the Eucharist. A wonder the
man should be no more afraid of the Allobrogicall Consistory, the Tribunal
seat at Geneua, where the same bread, according as the old custom was, is
used at this day.

In his ninth Chapter, to mak^ (...) way for that which was to follow, like a
wise fore-caster, he begins to treat of the Religion and Rites of the ancient
Roman people: which Argument he handles just like himself, having no more
knowledge in Antiquity, then what he could get from B^ond^^ and Alexander, and
such other late Writers, whom he cites every where for antiquity, as witnesses
beyond all excep^^on: yet for this he is to be commended, though for nothing
else, that he does so ingenuously acknowledge his good Benefactors. But how
well this kind of writing agrees with Casaubon, to depend wholly upon new
Writers, and neglect the old, let them say, that are fit judges in these
matters.

But it made altogether for his purpose, to explicate the Paynim Rites and
Ceremonies of the Romans, from whence he undertakes to deduce the whole
Mass, and to convince it of Paganism. For his undertaking, let honest and
moderate men judge how laudable it is. I know he is not the first, or at least
the only man that has attempted it; there have been those that would needs
fetch the whole Religion of the Papists, both in Faith and Ceremonies, from
Turks and Pagans. But sure I am, that any such thought was very odious to
Casaubon, who was neither so inept to believe any such thing himself, nor so
malignant to persuade other men to it. Which I speak not, as if I meant to
excuse the many and detestable superstitions of Popery: no such matter. But it
is one thing, faithfully to reduce errors and corruptions unto their prime
beginnings, which many excellent men have with great felicity undertaken; and
another, shamefully to detort, and bitterly to exaggerate all things, for the
bringing of them into hatred; which the Author of this Book has most
impudently done, above all others that ever belabored themselves in this kind.
And seeing the Church of England has retained many things in her public
Liturgy, that were before in the Roman Missall, the one cannot altogether be
accused of Paganism, without the opprobrious injury of the other.

But we said even now, and it is too manifest, that this Pamphlet is in most
things repugnant to the Church of England. We will briefly point at some of
them.

In the eighth Chapter, The keeping of Lent is reckoned up among those
ordinances that be contrary to Christ's precept. Page 41.
Temples that bear the names of Saints, are scorned, and taunted at, as if
they were built to the honor of men, and not to the worship of God. Page 61.
Praying toward the East, and the situation of Churches that way, are
condemned for inventions of superstitious heretics. Page ^1.
The Titles of Father, and Reverend Father, which we use to give unto
Ecclesiastical persons, are traduced, as being derived from the custom of the
Gentiles. Page 41.
Confirmation of children is ho^ted at, as the fond device of idle men that had
nothing el^e to do. Page 46.
Through the Popes sides all distinction of Order in the Church is pulled
apieces; and a paritie of E^a^gelicall Ministers set up, and maintained as Ius
Diuinum. Page 59.
The use of a Surplice in performance of Divine Service, he deriueth from the
idolatrous Egyptians: and Page 73.
again, those that brought it first into the Church, he says plainly were
men inspired with the spirit of Numa Pompilius, whom he is eue^ and anon
calling the Magician^ Page 40.
All the Furniture and Ornaments of the Church, as vessels of silver, Hangings
and Tapisteries are condemned and scorned. Page 64.
The use of Music, as well uocall, as isntrumental in the time of Divine
Seruice^ he does most reprochfully rail at; and affirms, that Numa the
Magician, and not the Bishops of Rome, was the first bringer of it into
Churches. Page 68.
Dispensations for pl^ralities of Benefices are but an old renewed custom of
the Roman Idolaters with him, and no Constitution of Christians.

And these, with such other like monstrous absurdities, he is not only so
impudent to affirm, but he will needs betray and show such great ignorance
al^o to confirm them with reasons; that a man cannot tell, at what he should
wonder most, his ignorance, or his impudence. As for example, first Page 67.
bringing that which we alleged last of all concerning Dispensations, and
auouching them to have come from the Romans, he says, Over these Benefices the
high Pontife had usurped a power to give dispensation to whom he would, for the
holding of two together, as in I itus Liuius it is related of Fabius Maximus,
who by a dispensation held two Benefices, when he was created Pontife, more
then 200. before the Incarnation of jesus Christ. These things to be spoken by
a Pagan after the manner of our own times, who would not marvel at? But in
Liuie there is no such matter. He speaks not one word of a Dispensation. That
Fab. Maximus of whom Liuie here writes, was never any Pontife neither, but died
when he was young. Indeed his Father, Q. Fab. the elder was said to have had
two Priesthoods, as they called them, of two kinds nothing like one another^
but not two places, or two preferments in the same kind of Priesthood.
Forsooth, the same man was Augur and Pontife too. And not to tell you what
Plutarch says, that the name Augur was no title of Magistracy or dignity, but
of Art and knowledge only, Liui's words are; Eodem anno Quin. Fabius moritur,
etc. Augur in eius locum inauguratus est Quin. Fabius Max filius; in eiusdem
locum P^ntifex^ (nam duo Sacerdotia habuit,) Ser. Sulpitius Galba: that is,
Quin. Fab. died the same year, etc. Into his room of Augurship, was Q. Fab.
Max. his son consecrated, and Ser. Sulp. Galba (for he had two diverse
Priesthoods) into his place of Pontife.

But this is nothing to the rest of his absurdities: whereof that we may give
some taste, let us see a little how he deriueth the Mass from Numa Pompilius.

Page 48. 49.
For the name of the Mass, he likes not of them, that derive it from Daniel's
(...) Maozim, and thinks it may be much better deduced from the Hebrew Messa,
which word, he says, we have in 4. King. cap. 11. signifying Conculcation.
Indeed in the 11. Chap. uer. 6. we have (...) Massah, which the Septuagint
took for a proper name, and interpreted (...), which the French Translation
also following, has retained the word Mese in the Text; and yet noted the
diverse interpretation of Irruption and uastation in the Margin: from whence
this Ass took his Conculcation. But if the word be taken in that sense of
Irruption or Conculcation, as he speaks, the Root will not be (...) Masah,
but (...) Nasah: neither will the word Massah signify irruption, but, from
irruption, the praeposition being joined with the Noune, as the manner of the
Hebrews is.

With the like frenzy does he derive us Missel from Misseol (...), which does
not signify Hell, but, out of Hell.

Yet these E^ymologies of the Mass, otherwise good enough, he thinks not
therefore fit to be admitted, because the Author of the Mass, Numa Pompilius,
understood no Hebrew at all: and thereupon he concludes, that it is a Latin
word made by Numa himself, who first of all, forsooth, appointed, those words,
Page 49. and 72.
Ite Missa est, to be proclaimed unto the people, when their Sacrifices were
at an end. Reader, can thou imagine, that this fellow had either any shame or
conscience in him to write such things as these? He should have produced one
of the Ancient Heathen Authors, at least, that had ever used the word Missa for
a Substantive, a name usual in their Sacrifices.

And with as little shame is that written of him, when to prove that the
Turks do so much esteem of the Mass, he deduceth the Arabicke words of
Mecca, which is a Towns name, and Mesulmanos, which is, Peacemakers, or
faithful and Orthodoxe, and Mesgid, which is as much to say as the place of
adoration, that is, a Temple, being all corruptly called Messa, Meselman, and
Messites, all these from the word Mass.

Such kind of stuff it is that he says, the old Christians borrowed their
Title of Pop^ from the Heathen Idolaters, who were wont to call Jupiter their
Pope Jupiter. A marvel S. Cyprian and S. Augustine were not Idols with him
too, whom by S. Jerome that so styled the latter, and by the Clergy of Rom^
that so called the first, we find entitled, most holy Fathers and Popes.

In his next page he learnes us from whence the name of Curat^ and Curio came,
forsooth, (...) from cutting the hair, which we ever thought yet had come
from Curiae, (certain distributions of the people, answerable to our Wards)
which had every one their several Curiones or Curates, to perform their
religious paynim solemnities. In the same place he dreams how the Priests
were called (...)^ from the round shauing or crowning of their heads, whom
Dionysius Halicar. interprets to be the Flamines, and says they were so called
from the fashion of their Bonnets, or the Crowns themselves that they used to
wear.

ibid.
With the like liberty of lying he affirms, that the Romans were wont to call
that white garment, which they used in their Pagan solemnities an Albe; and
this most absurd and shameful fancy of his own he ascribes to that learned
Author Alexander ab Alexandro, in whose work there is no such matter to be
found. And among other Rituall Page 52.
writers, he brings us in Philo the Jew to speak of this Albe of the Papists.
For after he has done with the mystical interpretations, that Titleman, and
Gabr. Biel give of it, he adds, That Philo in his book of Dreams, subtly
deuiseth, how the Albe signifies the most resplendent light of the Deity, which
he calls Ens. Philo allegorizing, as his use is, upon those words of Genesis,
Chap. 31. uer. 12. (...). Lift up thine eyes, and behold the he Goats, and
the Rams leaping upon the shee-goats, and the Ewes, white, and
parti-colored, and spread here and there with ash-colored spots, (as the
Septuagint translated it;) after he had already treated of the two kinds,
parti-colored, and ash-colored, he adds, (...)^ that is, as the interpreter
renders it, We will now explain the third and most perfect color that is
called Alba, or white; which he does allegorically expound of the Linen
Garment, that was made of the purest fine thread, and used to be put upon the
High Priest. Now because all this seemed to agree somewhat with the Papists
Albe, the man, being not well in his wits, took those words of the
Interpreter, Quae Alba nominatur; which is called the white color, as if Philo
had spoken it of the Priests garment. But that you might not marvel how Philo
should come to talk of a Popish vestment, you shall presently hear, how he
was acquainted with the Missalia^s themselves. For having reckoned us up most
of the vestments which the Papists use in their solemn performance of divine
Rites, Page 54.
To these (says he) Philo the Jew adds a Mitre to declare the Missalians
Royal Diadem. In the place which is cited, Philo treats of the High Priests
Mytre among the Jews: so that with this fellow the Priests of the Jews and
the Missalists are all one: and then, inasmuch as he does el^ where ever
confound the Missalians and the Pagan Priests together, and brings them both
from the same origin, it must necessarily follow according to him, that there
is no difference between the Priests of Pagans, and the Priests of the Jews
whom God himself ordained.

Page 59.
Labarum, the name of a Banner, made famous by Constantine, but before Christ's
time (as far as we can find by the books of ancient Authors yet extant)
never heard of, he tells us, was known by that name to the old Romans, yea,
and as it were older then Rome it self, he fetches it from Antenor of Troy.

I am ashamed of these follies, whereof the Author himself is not ashamed: who
though he were some unlearned Sot, which is as clear as the light at noone
day, yet he could never have grown to that height of insolent madness, but
that he came so minded to write, as if he intended not to seek out the
Truth, but to oppress his Adversaries with criminatio^s, true or false, no
matter what. For who was ever so mad to say, that Numa Pompilius celebrated
Mass 700. years before Christ was borne? and yet this Scribler affirms it
almost in every page. And therefore when he speaks of the Priests which Numa
constituted, he calls them Mass Priests; Page 55.
and in his 13. Chap. alleging the place of Blondus, concerning the manner of
the Pagan Rites in their Sacrifices, that which Blondus speaks of the
Gentiles, Dijs superis sacra facturi, about to sacrifice unto the Gods, this
man turns, who were about to say Mass.

In his 15. Chapter he says, that Priests Page 62.
learnd to say their Con^iteor before Mass^ of Numa the Magician; for that it
was the custom of the heathen Idolaters also, to look heavily, and confess
themselves before their offering of Sacrifice. In the custom of Confessing,
which otherwise no body, that is in his right mind, can find fault withal, if
the Papists have admitted any thing worthy of blame, I am not he that will
excuse it. But if that be their fault only, that the Heathens used some such
matter, what shall be free from reprehension, even in the most pure and
vncorrupt Religion? For it is well known also, that the Priests under the old
Law did first offer Sacrifice for their own sins; which I think no body
will say the Israelites took from the heathen Idolaters. And let but a man now
deny this fellow, that whatsoever matters in Religion are common to us with
the Gentiles, be in all haste to be cast away, the whole frame of his book
will presently fall asunder: for this is the only foundation whereon so many
unsavory disputes, so many foolish, unjust, and false accusations do rest.
What the mind of the Fathers in this behalf was, may be shown by many of
their own testimonies. Quoniam idol^ colebamus, nun^ Deum colere non debemus,
ne ^imili eum uideamur cum Idolis honor^ uenerari? Because we once worshipped
Idols, shall we not now worship God, lest we should seem to give him the
same honor that Idols bad? says S. Jerome, crying out against Vigilantius. And
S. Augustine against Faustus the Maniche; Sicut, non ideo contemnenda uel
detestanda uirginitas Sanctimonialium, quia and uestales uirgines fuerunt, etc.
As we are not (says he) to despise or detest the virginity of holy Nuns
because there have been uestall uirgins also, etc. To that purpose Tertullian
de praescr. aduers. haeret. does abundantly demonstrate, that the Gentiles had
some things of near affinity with the Ceremonies that we use in the chief
mysteries of our Religion. And so far were the old Christians from refusing
all the Rites and customs of the heathen, that as far as piety would suffer
them, they did prudently condescend and apply themselves thereunto, the more
easily to win them in matters of greater moment; as by learned men it has
been observed, and may be by many examples made good. But this man's own words
are sufficient to confound him, and to convince him also of manifest impiety.

For he that elsewhere so bit^^rly condemns whatsoever seems among the
Papists to have any agreement with the customs of the heathen, and for no
other reason, but because they be answerable one to the other; yet he tells us
^g. 25, 25.
more then once, that Christ himself did choose these Symbols to institute the
Sacraments of the new Testament withal, which as well the Jews as the
Gentiles were accustomed to use in their Sacrifices and Ceremonious worship,
that so all nations might the more facily admit of these Rites, which were
already familiar unto them. As for the Gentiles, whether Christ had any
reference to their Ceremonies, or no, I will not rashly say: but that he did
so accommodate himself to the Jews, as to institute nothing in Rites and
Ceremonies, which was not common and usual with them before, many learned men
have made it good by most certain Testimonies of the Talmud, and other
writings of the Jews. They therefore that without breach of piety have
followed Christ's example in things indifferent, are they to be esteemed as
impious and profane? or are not they much rather to be so accounted, who the
more freely to deride their Adversaries, spare not Gods own sacred word, nor
abstain from horrible blasphemies? wherein how notorious this Hell-bound has
been, it will be enough to declare by this one example.

Psalm. 43. v. 4. David breaks forth with joy into these words (...) which the
Septuagint render after this manner, (...) and the vulgar Latin following
them, has translated, Introibo ad altar Dei, ad Deum qui laetificat
iuuentutem meam. I will go unto the Altar of God, even unto the God that is
the joy of my youth. Upon which speech of the Prophet, thus does this Page 63.
wicked Idiot make his descant. Numa the Magician held opinion, that there was
great sanctity in these wheelings, wreathings and turnings about of the
Sacrificer; which, as may be coniectured, was an occasion of adding this
pleasant Song to the Missall Introduction, I will go up (says he) to the
Altar of God, which rejoices my youth. Has he not just cause to reioyc^,
when h^^ sees the cloth laid, the table set, the banquet prepared, the music
of Organs and other Instruments to sound, odours and Incenses, the Chalice full
of wine, the Collation prepared, and chinke offertories ready to fill his
purse? Are not all these means to exhilerate the Sacrificers youth, when he
goes up to the Altar to say Mass, to dance and turn about, in form to him
prescribed by the Magician Numa Pompilius? A godly Father long since
complaining of a certain City, said, (...). Which Greg. Naz. orat. 3. de pace.
sets her self to jest and play with things Divine, as well as with any other
common matter; and rather will she laugh at such things as be good and honest,
then pass over without laughter such things as be ridiculous. This is the
fault of many now adays, that make themselves sport with jesting upon sacred
Actions, and affect the name of Witty men in things that are so serious.

I should here have made an end, but that I cannot with a good conscience
silently pass over that most heinous injury which is done here to the holy
Emperors, and ancient Bishops of Rome. For thus this furious man writes. The
Page 40. 41.
Bishops of Rome, who termed themselves Christians, for three or four hundred
years after the Incarnation of Christ, did nothing else, but labor to corrupt
the use of the holy Sacraments, to restore the Jewish Ceremonies, and the
Idolatries of the ancient heathen Romans. And of S. Gregory he Page 73. 74.
says expressly, that, being instructed in Pythagoricall Magic, and having
studied the Laws of King Tull. Hostilius, successor to Numa, he enriched the
Mass with new Magical additions. With what countenance, may it be thought,
with what eyes will those blessed souls (if there be any sense in them) look
down from heaven upon this base mushrum, that calls their faith in question,
which many of them, as glori^us martyrs, have sealed with their blood, and
accuses them of the same impiety, which their most cruel persecutors
professed?

But for Casaubon, how much he is abused, to have such abominable
dottrellismes of a frantic fellow put upon him, though I hope there be few
but conceive it, yet it will not be amiss for their behoof that know it not,
to let it be seen in his own words. Thus therefore he writes in his
Exercitations: Page 434.
Nemo peritus rerum Ecclesiae ignorant opera Romanorum Ponti^icum per multa
saecul^ Deum esse usum in conseruanda sarta tecta rectae fidei doctrina, etc.
No man that is seen in Church story can be ignorant, how that many ages
together God used the help of the Rom^ne Bishops in preserving whole and sound
the doctrine of true Religion, etc. In the same place. Uentum est ad Leonem
Magnum, de quo Pontifice quam honori^ice sentiamus, ipsi iam ostendimus: Non
enim ignoramus, quantus hic fuerit syncerae fidei defensor, ^ pro recta fide
quantos labores sustinuerit, quam ^cclesiae Dei utiles, etc. We are come to
Leo the Great; of which Pope how honorably we co^ceiu^, we showed even now;
for I am not ignorant, how great a defender he was of the right faith, and how
many labors he underwent for the true Religion, how profitable to the Church
of God, etc. And in another place of S. Gregory. Fuit Gregorius, non solum
cognomine, sed rebus ipsis Magnus and Sanctus, ac uere sui saeculi prope iam
ferrei, Phoenix. Nos quidem ita censemus, and cur ita censeamus, causas parati
sumus reddere, etc. Gregory was not only Great in name, but a Saint, and Great
indeed, the true Phoenix of his almost yron-growen age. Truly so we think,
and why we think so, we are ready to give account, etc. Without doubt many
more passages might be brought to the same purpose, if any man will take the
pains to turn his books. But I hope, these which did now accurre, will be
enough to satisfy the Reader.

Now for the Emperors of Rom^, we are to say a little of them; because this
Author do^th so confidently auerre them to have ever been all most deadly
enemies unto Christian Religion, and most stiff persisters in the
superstitions of their Ancestors. For so in his tenth Chapter he does
expressly, and in so many words affirm, that for the space of Page 43.
400. years, the Roman Church of Emperors and Senators, were always
Opposites and Enemies unto the Law of Jesus Christ. But in the next page, that,
for the space of 700. years, or thereabouts, after the Incarnation of Christ,
there was no Emperor, King nor Prince at Rome, that would embrac^ the Law of
Jesus Christ. Perhaps (says he) there may be some that will ob^ect against us
one Philip, which some vaunt was converted to holy Baptism, whose depraved
manners gave occasion to the most ancient Historiographers to esteem^ him
unworthy of the name of a Christian. Whereunto they add Constantine the Great,
that assembled the Council of Nice, but his Residence was in Gre^ce, called
the Empire of the East, and yet he would never embrace the Character of
Baptism, to be regenerated by the blood of Christ, till he was threescore and
five years old, when he was baptized by an Arrian Bishop of Nicomedia, named
Eusebius, when the same Constantine was at the point of death. Wherefore
Syluester Bishop of Rome need not vaunt of converting the Emperor to the Faith.

Good God! what a prodigious liberty of lying is here? What fountains of
waters, what seas shall be able to wash away the black poison of this most
impure Calumniator? What, was not Constantine therefore, nor Iouinian, nor
Valentinian, Gratian, not he, whom so many actions, so many glorious praises
of the Christians made famous, Theodosius the Great, was not He a Christian?
But whereas he denies Constantine to have been a Christian, because he
deferred his baptism, it is well known that the most godly Emperor did that
after the manner of his time then in use. For we find that many in those ages,
who had sincerely taken upon them the name of Christ, deferred and put off
their baptism a long while; who believing all their former sins to be washed
away in this sacred Lauer, did suppose that time to be the fittest for it, (as
Eusebius writes in the life of Constantine lib. 4. c. 61.) when their life drew
nearest to an end; that by this means they might go out of the world with a
clean and pure conscience: against which custom notwithstanding, as being too
full of danger and hazard, the F^thers both Greek and Latin that then
flourished, did mainely oppose themselves. But there was a peculiar reason for
Constantine besides; because (as he professes himself in Eusebius.) if God had
given him a longer life, his desire and purpose was to have been baptized in
Jordan, which Christ himself had sanctified with his own baptism.

And if he must therefore be thought to be auerse from Christianity, because
he was baptized so late, what shall we say of Valentinian, who having deferd
his baptism far longer, was overtaken by sudden death? whom nevertheless
S. Ambrose undoubtedly believed to have been received into heaven when he was
dead, much less made any question of his living or dying a Christian. Let us
hear S. Ambrose himself, S. Ambros. de obitu Valent.
how he comforts the Sisters of this deceased Emperor. Sed audio vos dolere,
quod non acceperit Sacramentum Baptismatis. Dicite mihi, quid aliud in nobis
est, nisi uoluntas? nisi petitio? Atqui etiam dudum hoc uotum habuit, ut cum in
Italiam uenisset, initiaretur, and proxime baptizari se a me velle
significauit; and ideo prae caeteris causis me accersendu^ pu^auit. Non habet
ergo gratiam, quam desiderauit? non habet, quam poposcit? Certe quia poposcit,
accepit. But I hear how it grieueth you, that ^e received not the Sacrament of
Baptism. Tell me, what have we in us else, but our will? what, but our
desire? But this desire he had even a long while since; that after his coming
into Italy he might be initiated; and he signified his mind, that he would
presently upon it be baptized by me; For which cause more then any other, he
thought good to have me sent for. Has he not therefore that grace which he
desired? not that which he ^o earnestly prayed for? Certainly because he did
desire it, he did receive it. And a little after: Qui habuit spiritum tuum,
quomodo non accepit gratiam tuam? Aut ^i quia solenniter non su^t celebrata
mysteria, hoc mouet; ergo neque Martyrs, si Catechumeni fuerint, coronentur.
Non enim coronatur, si non initiatur. Quod si suo abluuntu^ sanguine, and hunc
sua pietas abluit and uoluntas. He that had thy Spirit, how had he not thy
grace also? Or if that be a hinderance, because the Sacrament was not solemnly
celebrated, why, then the Martyrs themselves if they were still in the number
of the ^at^ humeni, (Christians instructed, but n^^ yet baptized) shall receive
no crown of their Martyrdome^ for he that is not initiated, is not r^^^iu^d
neither. But if their own blood did baptize them, then did his piety and
desire also baptize him.

Now that Constantine was baptized by an Arrian Bishop, howsoever this opinion
be favored by S. Jerome, yet the contrary is maintained by others. The
Emperors that succeeded next after Theodosius the Great, whether they were
Roman, or Barbarous, though they were many of them infected with the Arrian
heresy, yet Christians they were all, and, which is most to the purpose, they
were every one far from any suspicion of Paganism.

For Symmachus his Relation (which this frantike Zelote falsely calle^h his
Answer, because he would not be brought to confess, that even the chiefest
men in authority and office were feign to beg for their Religion) the matter
must be a little more fully thought on, inasmuch as he makes it against
strengthening of his cause, to prove that the Senate and Senators of Rome (for
so he writes) could not any of them be ever brought to embrace the faith of
Christ. The case was this. Symmachus was sent Ambassador by the Heathens to
Ualentinian, to get them their Altar of Uictory restored, etc. but could not
obtain it. Therefore the Emperor was a Christian at least. But who were they
that desired this? Absit (says Idem lib. 1. cont. Relation^m Symmachi.
S. Ambrose, in his first book against the Relation of Symmachus) ut hoc
Senatus petijsse dicatur; pauci Gentiles communi utuntur nomine. Nam and ante
biennium ferme, c^m hoc petere tentarent, misit ad me S. Damasus Romanae
Ecclesiae Sacerdos, iudicio Dei electus, Libellum, quem Christiani Senatores
dederunt, and quidem innumeri, expostulantes nihil se tale mandasse, non
congruere Gentilium huiusmodi petitionibus vos praebere consensum. Questi etiam
public, priuatim^ se non conuentur^s ad Curiam, si tale aliquid d^^^rn^r^tur.
Dignum est temporibu^ vestris, hoc est, Christianis temporibus, ut dignitas
Christianis Senatoribus abrogetur, quo Gentilibus Senatoribus prophanae
deferatur voluntatis effectus? Hunc libellum ego fratri Clementiae vestrae
direxi. Vnde c^nstitit non Senatum aliquid de superstitionis impensis mandasse
Legatis, etc. God defend that the Senate should be said to have desir^d it; a
few heathen men usurp^ the name of all the rest. For well nigh two years
since, when they attempted it, S. Damasus, the Bishop of Rome, elect of God,
sent me a book, that the Christian Senators, a very great number of them, had
given vp^ expostulating the matter, how that they had given no such thing in
charge, and that it was not meet You should give way to any such p^tition of
the Heathen. And further they complained both in public and private, that they
would not come at the Senate-hous^, if any such thing were granted, or decreed.
Is it fit for Your times, that is, for Christian times, to have the Christian
Senators put by their honor, that the profane Heathen Senators may have their
will? This Book I directed to Your Brother, by which it appears that the
Senate gave no order to those Ambassadors for the upholding of Superstitious
Paganism^. Let the Reader now judge, whom we should believe of the two, this
most holy Prelate, that was an eyewitness of those things in his own time; or
this impudent knave, that has no knowledge at all in Ecclesiastical
Antiquity.

It remains now last of all, that as we promised at first, we should say a
little of that book, which my Father undertook in the like Argument with
this. We will dispatch it in his own words. Casa^bon to the Reader, in his
Exercit. v^on Baronius.
Quaedam breuiter attigi, quaedam paulo uberius tractaui; vt doctrinam de sacro
sancta Eucharistia, de qua dum uestigi^ Baronij premo, Tres scripsi
Disputationes; unam de uarijs huius Sacramenti apud ueteres Appellationibus;
alteram de Transubstantia^ione; tertiam de gener^ Sacrificij Christianorum;
conatus primorum saeculorum doctrinam, non minus candide and (...), quam
accurate exponere. That is, I have touched some things briefly, and other
things I have handled more at large, as the doctrine of the Holy Eucharist;
whereof, treading in Baronius his own steps, I have wrote Three Treatises;
One, of the various appellations of this Sacrament, among the Ancient. Another
of Transubstantiation. A third, concerning the nature and kind of the
Christians Sacrifice. And I have done my endeavor in them to set forth the
doctrine of th primitive times, no less accurately then candid^ly, and without
guile or fraud. The first of these you have in his Exercitations already
published. Of the rest thus he writes himself. Atque Exercit. Page 587.
haec de Appellationibus huius diuini Sacramenti impraesentiarum satis.
Restabat vt ad secundam partem Baronianae digressionis de Eucharistia, quae est
de Transubstantiatione, accederemus; and quae fuit ueteris Ecclesiae ^ides
super eo articulo accurate expenderemus. Sed cum nostra ad eam partem
responsio, itemque ad tertiam de sacrificio Christianae Ecclesiae in molem
multo maiorem quam initio putaremus excreuerit: satius fore uisum est, ut illae
disputationes separatim ederentur, neque huius operis editionem morarentur. And
this shall su^^ice for the present concerning the Appellations of this Holy
Sacrament. It remained, that we should come to the second part of Baronius his
digression about the Eucharist, which is of Transubstantiation; and that we
should diligently examine what the faith of the Ancient Church was concerning
that Article. But forasmuch as our answer both to that, and to the Third part
about the Sacrifice of the Church, grows to a far greater bigness, then we
thought it would have done at first^ I thought good to let those Tractats
rather be published by themselves, then that they should let, or stay the
Edition of this work. But what he here promises being prevented by an
untimely death, he never published. And whether he began them only, or brought
them to any perfection, and left them ready for the Press, I cannot tell,
having never had any thing of them come into my hands; but sure I am, that in
this Pamplet besides the very name of Casaubon, there is nothing of them at
all. None of that candor which he used, none of that simplicity, none of that
accurate diligence is here to be seen; nor any sign of that Method which he
had proposed. Besides that which my Father promised, he had gathered it all out
of the Fathers, and other old Writers; here is no mention of Fathers, no
testimonies produced from them, except three or four at the most, which are
brought in by the By at the latterend of the book. That which we cited even
now from his exercitations, he wrote in the year of our Lord 1614. The French
Edition of this Book, out of which this English Copy was translated an^
reprinted, is pretended to have been ^et forth (as I remember, for I could
get the sight of it but once) in the year 1607, at what time Casaubon lived in
Paris, being sent for thither by the most Christian King Henry IIII. of
France, to be Professor of Humani^ie. Who then desiring leave of his Majesty,
modestly to re^u^e Baronius his Annals, was denied it. And at that time, that
is to say, in the year 1607. was his Book De Ecclesiastica Liberate upon
publishing; howsoever his name was suppressed; and yet that would do no good,
for when there was but a very little part of it printed, the Book was called
in by the Kings authority, and so Casaubon forced to break off that which he
had undertaken to write. Was it likely therefore that he durst venture to set
forth such a virulent Book as this, and one that was so unjustly written
against the Papists? Or if he had ventured it, could he have escaped
unpunished? Where were his Adversaries at that time, who, after his coming
into England, and his first beginning to write about matters of Religion,
opposed themselves against him, in such number, and such bitterness as they
did? I have a Catalogue by me of all the Books which my Father ever published,
written with his own hand, which elsewhere I have set forth to the world. How
came it to pass, that he should leave out this? But what need we any more,
seeing the Imposture of these deceitful men is already detected? who had
cunningly printed, and prefixed the name of Isaac Casaubon before a French
Book, which was put forth without any name at all, (as in France many are,
specially if they be Divinity Books;) and so by an artificial immutation of
the Arithmeticall figures for the year, put a new face upon an old moth-eaten
Pamphlet; supposing themselves to be safe enough, if they could but any way
transfer their imposture upon others. It concerned after ages, that at no
time there should be want of such, as might both deprehend, and revenge the
fraudulent dealings of these wretchlesse and wicked men.

FINIS.
AN ADMONITION TO ABRAHAM d' ACIER, the Geneuian, falsely surnaming himself
DARCY.
SIr Undertaker for a false work, it were not amiss, (if you be capable of
good advise) that you gave some satisfaction to the world your self for this
foul injury, which you have so rashly done, not only to Mr. Casaubon, but to
the whole Church of England, in republishing a Book under his name, that was
fitter for a Turk then a Christian to write; and hereafter that you would take
notice of your own insufficiency, to spend your Censure upon such matters, as
you understand not. What had you to do to tell the world, what a Rare and
Admirable piece of Divinity you had found out, a Book of such abstruse
Learning in it, so Orthodox all, so (...) a work? Is it for ^ man that never
had his sight, to judge of colors? or for you to tell us, what is Orthodoxall,
or what not? Go, I Will give you better counsel, home again, and meddle with
your Fiddle-strings. Take not upon you beyond your reach. It is not for such as
you are, to tell us wh^t Book^s are beneficial for this Church and Monarchy.
And when you look upon your Book again, let it be through this, that you may
perceive and acknowledge your self to have been a more rash and ignorant, and
M. Casaubon a more Religious and Learned man, then you thought on. But above
all things, (because you are not capable of many) the next time you read over
your Title with his Nam^ on it at the beginning, and your Aliterate verses upon
his Name at the end of your pretended precious work, Read on here withal,
and read with shame enough, That this your admired Pamphlet, this your
Allobrogicall Dormouse indeed, came stealing out in a corner by owle-light, (no
good sign of a Sincere Book) and was Printed in French Three years before M.
Isaac Casaubon was borne. I say no more then what I have seen, and can make
good. But it is no marvel you counterfeit other men's names, seeing you have
already falsified your own. So wishing you to be wiser, and more honest
hereafter, lest a worse thing happen then you have endured hitherto, I leave
you.

C.

Faults to be amended in the Print.
Page 6. lin. 17. for, In^the (...) Read, In the ^ean^ (...)

Page 33. lin. 21. for, the last: Read, That.

Ibid. lin. 23. for, (...) to h^^e, etc. Read, as a (...) of (...) (...) at
all.

Page 34. lin. 7. for, They: Read, Them.

Page 46. lin. 14. after the word P^n^ifex: blot out the Colon:

Page 48. lin. 16. for, a name: Read. And a name.

Page 52. lin. 24. for, as it: Read, as if it.

Page 67. lin. 5. for, received: Read, crowned.

Page 68. lin. 2. for, against: Read, a great.

Page 73. lin. 19. add in the Margin, See the admonition to Dar^y.


