THE ORIGINAL OF IDOLATRIES: OR, THE BIRTH OF HERESIES: A true, Sincere, and
exact description of all such SACRED SIGNS, SACRIFICES, and SACRAMENTS as have
been instituted and ordained of GOD since ADAM; With the true source and lively
Anatomy of the Sacrifice of the Mass.

First faithfully gathered out of sundry Greek and Latin Authors, as also out
of diverse learned Fathers; By that famous and learned ISAAC CASAVBON, and by
him Published in French, for the good of Gods Church: And now translated into
English for the benefit of this Monarchy; By ABRAHAM DARCIE.

LONDON Printed by Authority, for NATHANIEL BVTTER. Anno Dom. MDCXXIV.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY CHARLES PRINCE OF WALES, etc.
Heir Apparent to the incomparable Monarchies of GREAT BRITAIN, etc.
Most mighty PRINCE,
HEAVEN turning all the Eminent DANGERS and PERILS, of your HIGHNESS famous
TRAVEL to a strengthening and Confirmation of your HEROICAL and Magnanimous
SPIRIT, happily returned your HIGHNESS to your own proper Soil with all true
Hearts, joyful CRIES, and inexpressible ACCLAMATIONS of your loyal Subjects,
who (with the rest of GODS people) are ever bound to yield Thanks unto the
LORD; in solemnizing that blessed SUNDAY whereon your HIGHNESS landed:

I am bold at this your joyful Return, to present to your PRINCELY view, This
Excellent, sincere, and most learned work, which may serve for a true and
bright MIRROR, wherein clearly to discern the lively Portraiture of the true
CHVRCH, by the foul and odious deformities of her OPPOSITE. A Treatise so
faithful and rare, that it will absolutely resolve many doubts which
undoubtedly have been discussed in your HIGHNESS hearing; and point out, as it
were, with a divine finger, the unclean Puddle and Sink, from which all
modern Impurities in GODS SERVICE took apparent Original. It was first
Published in French, and now by my willing indeauors expressed in English, out of
a poor Strangers zeal, and desire herein to make known to your HIGHNESS the
inward loyal affection of my heart, wholly douoted to the humble observance of
your High, and most deserving Titles, and Illustrious dignities: Resolving ever
both in life and death, constantly to persevere

Your HIGHNESS most Humble and devoted prostitute, AB. DARCIE.

A TRES-PVISSANT PRINCE CHARLES PRINCE DE GALLS DVC DE CORNVALL, YORK, ET
ALBANI, MARQVIS D'ORMONT, CONTE DE CHESTER, etc. FILZ VNIQVE DV ROY.

CHARLES STVART

ANAGRAM.

CHASTE STAR RVLE long,
on your Illustr'ous Name,
HEAVEN pleasing PRINCE,
Accept this ANAGRAME.
AT HOME, in FOREIGN PARTS,
at SEA, on LAND
SAFE you have STOOD; So may
you ever stand,
TO fright pale DANGER, check
SINS Surging SEAS,
SIN that does hourly seek
the SOVLES diseas;
THe various Changes of your
FAMES bright STORY;
ANGELS protect for that
IMMORTAL GLORY:
RIch glittering STARLIGHT,
(Sempiternall Sense
Ravished at sight) of GODS
Omnipotence:
Under whose SACRED Sempitern
Defense,
LOng live CHASTE STAR, on
Earth, to RVLE and shine
ETernally in HEAVEN,
a Star DIVINE.
IN PERPETVALL HONOR AND IMMORTAL FAME OF THE RIGHT Honorable, most pious,
Religious, and truly Noble, the LORDS of the Magnificent Court of the most
Gracious and Noble PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Sir THOMAS HOWARD Viscount ANDIVER Master of the Horse to our Gracious PRINCE.

ROBERT Lord CARRY Baron of LEPINTON, Chamberlain to the PRINCE'S Highness.

SPENCER Lord COMPTON Master of the Robes to his Highness.

JOHN Lord VAGHAN, Controler of his Highness, Illustrious and Honorable
Household.

And to the right generous, and most virtuous Sir ROBERT CARR Master of his
Highness Privy Purse, One of the Gentlemen of the PRINCE his Bedchamber. Sir
FRANCIS COTTINGTON, his Highness Secretary, Sir EDMOND VARNEY. Sir WILLIAM
HOWARD. Sir RICHARD WINN. Sir WILLIAM CROFTS. Sir JOHN NORTH. Mr. JOHN
SANDELANS. Mr. FRANCIS CARRY.

Gentlemen of his Highness Privy Chamber.

Mr. THOMAS CARRY. Mr. GEORGE KIRK. Mr. ARCHIBALD PITCARNE. Mr. ENDIMION
PORTER. Mr. WILLIAM MVRRAY. Mr. JAMES LEVISTON Grooms of his Highness
Bedchamber.

Mr. ROBERT TERVVIT, And Mr. JAMES BVY. Quary to the PRINCE.

Mr. PETER YOUNG. Mr. PETER NEVVTON. Gentlemen Vshers daily Wayter.

Mr. HVMPHREY DETICKE, Gentleman Usher Quarter Wayter.

Mr. JAMES ELIOT, Mr. PHILIP PROGER, Mr. JOHN PORTVIS, Grooms of the Privy
Chamber.

Mr. THOMAS GERMAN, Page to his Highness.

And to the most learned and pious, Mr. Doctor MAVVE, And Mr. Doctor WREN,
Chaplains to the Highness of Prince CHARLES.

Most worthy Patrons of HONOR, patterns of VERTVE, and Noble Lovers of
LEARNING and good endeavors.

ABRAHAM DARCIE presents to their judicious viewes, this Excellent Work by him
Translated for their Honorable use. Wishing to their Religious selves, with the
rest of the Nobles and worthy Servants of his Highness that were in SPAIN
with our PRINCE, all external, internal, and eternal happiness in the holy
Trinity.

TO THE HONOR AND USE OF THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, GEORGE, Duke of Buckingham, his
Grace:
And to the Right Honorable
The Earl of Arran, Son to the Marquis Hamilton. WILLIAM Earl of Denbigh,
etc. HENRY Viscount Rochford, etc. Sir HENRY RICH, Baron of Kenzington. Sir
DVDLY NORTH. Sir GEORGE GORING. JAMES Earl of Carlisle Viscount Doncoster etc.
THOMAS Viscount Andeuer, etc. SPENCER Lord Compton. ROBERT Lord Digbigh. Sir
ROBERT CARR. Sir JOHN NORTH. Sir WILLIAM CROFT. Sir FRANCIS COTTINGTON. Sir
EDWARD VARNEY.
With the rest of the Noble Peers and worthy Gentlemen of GREAT BRITAIN, that
were in SPAIN, to Attend on the Most Mighty and Gracious Prince CHARLES, our
incomparable Prince.

ABRAHAM DARCIE humbly presents the Translation of this excellent and rare
Work to their Honorable censure; wishing to their Noble, Religious and
Virtuous Persons all increase of true HONOR in this WORLD, and in HEAVEN
infinity of those incomprehensible FELICITIES, and eternal joys allotted to
Christ's Elect.

MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORTHY,
NO HONORS can be comparable to those, which GOD most graciously returns upon
them, who constantly in this WORLD, advance the true HONOR of his NAME, and
confidently maintain, against all oppositions, his sacred Verity and Truth.
This famous MONARCHY has always, as upon so many firm and Noble Pillars,
committed the earthly foundation of GODS Church and flock, to the Religious
care and Honorable supportations of her Noble Peers, out of which number, you
are such Patrons, as have ever manifested a rare and confident protection of
GODS unspotted Religion and Worship: but in your late HONORABLE employments in
foreign parts, under our Illustrious PRINCE, they have received a more
apparent testimony of your true HEARTS RELIGION and ZEAL, when soiourning for
a time, (as one may say) in the very Tents of KEDAR, and beholding with your
bodily eyes, many superstitious Idolatries, you yet retained firm and
unshaken, the treasure of a sincere faith, and inviolable conscience, having
conveniently -- L'OEVIL AV GVET, the eye at his sight-hole, (as our French
Proverb terms it) the better to discern of all objects, and with the surer
aim, to level all your Honorable Actions, and worthy designs.

There is no doubt but your Noble selves met with many Oppositions and
Encounters, by way of discussion and Argument: But the Scripture being a Test
and quadrant, by which they are not willing to try, or square their
proceedings, Learned CASAVBON has made a diligent search and Inquisition of
their own Registers, and Records, and chiefly out of the Volumes of the
Commentaries of ELASOPOLITAN, whereas by the direction of a Divine hand, may
be found out the Birth and Original of all adulterous and strange Adoration,
from the first ADAM, to these our later times, but especially the Sacrifice of
the ROMAN MASS, is here most learnedly delineated to true life, from the
cradle and infancy thereof, till now that it has made so great and perilous
a progression.

The AVTHORS are nominated the several parcels set down, as they were in
several AGES annexed, the perspicuous difference betwixt it, and the
infallible form of the Apostolical, and Primitive CHRISTIAN worship is
explained, with whatsoever else that mere HVMANE TRADITION and INVENTION has
unjustly usurped, over Orthodoxall, and vnspoated true service in the CHVRCH OF
GOD. So as clearly discerning the Scandals, the Scandalizers likewise are as
plainly revealed, and this Christian Domus deuisa in se: Out of my humble and
dutiful affection, I could not but commend this excellent Treatise, to your
Honorable viewes, and learned censure, the which I have studiously expressed
in the English Tongue, principally to manifest unto all your Lorships, my
serviceable and grateful heart, both to every one of your Honors in
particular, as also to this happy Kingdom in general, to whose bounties and
protection I stand deeply obliged; and as he, whose thoughts have no higher
scopes nor aim, then justly to be reputed.

YOUR GRACE, YOUR HONORS, and YOUR WORTHINESS, Most faithful, and humbly
devoted, ABRAHAM DARCIE.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Most courteous Reader,
COnsidering the Controversies and bloody hatred grown betwixt those (who
profess themselves Christians) about Religion, for they aspiring to retain
these vain superstitions proceeding from their predecessors: and many also not
contented, do invent new Sects, Schisms and Heresies: Others (least in number)
divinely inspired, and of God elocted, desire to extirpate the Darkness of
Ignorance, thereby to cause resplendently to shine, the Light, and claritie of
Truth: But it seems, that the most dangerous Poison that Satan uses to
entoxicate men with the Venym of sedition, and cruel contention and hatred,
deriues chiefly from the Mass, desguised with some good meaning, masked and
covered (peradventure) with a good intention. And although that many heretofore
have by sundry faithful descriptions endeueured to discover to the world the
deceitfulnes, error, and blindness thereof, yet could they not preuailc, nor
give light to their duskish and heavy sight.

Therefore now, without any passion, I have faithfully extracted, and lively
drawn out, from the Volumes of ELASOPOLITAN'S COMMENT ARIES: (It is a large
and faithful description; whereof the second Volume treates of the
Constitutions of great Pontiss, Sovereign Priests, and Sacrificers, as have
been ordained since the beginning of the World, and their true Number Power,
Riches and Authority; (all for thy only benefit) this sincere Summary of the
Sacrifice, called The Mass.

In this Treatise (though little in appearance) are designed and set down all
such Sacred Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments ordained of GOD from time to
time: As also the Corruptions that have grown successively in the Church of
GOD: whereby I do evidently show the birth of all Heresies and Idolatries, and
especially the true Original of the Mass; for the which the world is in great
strifes, bloody Contentions, cruel Divisions, Hatred, and lamentable Civil
Wars: for some do Inuectiuate and Inueigh against it, alleging that it is
newly devised and inueuted; others defend it by prescription, and long
possession; and thus by such like altercations the Christian Church is sore
afflicted with the yoke and Terror of Sedition. But if thou art a Christian
(beloved Reader) of what Sect soever, Papist, or Evangelical; I pray thee
heartily, for thy own good, to have patience to read this Work; for by it
thou may evidently know, and plainly discover the very truth of what
soever thou stand in doubt of, what Sacrifices, Sacraments, and Sacred
Signs have been instituted of GOD since Adam; what is the Mass and Original
thereof; who were her Founders, Augmenters, and Inuenters; and to the end thou
may firmly believe with assurance, all the Contents herein mentioned, have
recourse to those Authors out of whose Books and Works I have drawn and
derived it: their Names and Books are quoted in the Margent. So aiming at GODS
glory and thy own Benefit, I rest with my prayers to GOD. to inspire thee with
his Holy Spirit, by the intercession of our only Savior, Redeemer, and
Mediator JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

THE TRANSLATOR TO the Courteous Reader, wishes all Saving health in JESUS
CHRIST.
WIse Politicians (favorable Reader) in their Institutions, and Gouernnement
of Commonwealths, do hold for an infallible maxim, that to reform
Corruptions and abuses in States, better course cannot be taken, then often to
reduce things to their primitive Original; Because Laws at first enacted with
good and profitable intention, in the Revolution of few years, by men's
instability and inconstancy of mind, or the peculiar interest of Avarice by
Injustice, are abrogated and neglected. The Venetians being a people at this
day celebrous, and famous for their Government, have a supreme Magistracy,
which they call A Syndicate, that once in a few years, survey all the Offices
and Dignities in their Commonwealth, the Duke himself not there excepted, to
look into abuses, and prevent their deep roo^e and plantation; that so all
things may continue and stand entire, according to the rules and precepts of
their first Constitutions and ordinances.

Also a Garden-plot, though never so curiously drawn or distinguished into
borders, and set with all manner of odoriferous flowers, and wholesome herbs,
yet every shower of rain brings forth new weeds, the which if they be not
carefully, and daily supplanted, will soon ouergrow the good plants, and bring
the same to a wild and savage plot of ground. And though the inevitable
deprauation and corruption of man's nature carry so strong a hand in things
transitory and mutable, yet one would think they should be more stable and
provident in those courses tending to eternal salvation, and souls
reprobation, in observing those Laws and Commandments, uttered by GOD
himself, and recommended to all Posterities for a square Rule, whereby to
measure our faith and actions. Notwithstanding men are more prone to
Declination and Corruption, in that from the very beginning, and first
institution of the Law Mosaicall, till these present times, that for many ages
have received the clear and manifest Truth, and doctrine Evangelical,
Heresies have ever crept in and carried too powerful an hand, as Verity it
self, like gold in the bowels and entrals of the earth, is encombred with a
wonderful deal of oar and dross, which is not like to be separated till the
last fire of trial, which shall prove every man's work, and cast out the
dross to be trampled and trodden under foot; wherefore (Christian Reader) for
the better satisfaction and general good of all Gods Church, I have labored
to translate this curious and admirable Master piece, most worthy and necessary
to be observed and read: for thou may, as in a Miner, clearly see and
discover the Birth and the Original of this soul Monster Heresy, in the
Church, even from the first ages before the written Law, as also during the
force and efficacy of the Mosoicall Sacrifices, and now in these later times
more pertinent under the Law and precepts of Christ's holy Gospel, wherein are
deduced the Authors and Founders of the Roman Mass. And what conformity it
holds with the Ethnicke-Rites and Ceremonies, and how far a digression it
has made from the doctrine, life, and practice Apostolical, and the ages of
the Primitive Church, wherein the Author ever has abandoned all passion and
partiality, and in full proofs, cited none but either approved and authentike
Authors, as the ancient Doctors and writers of the Church, that lived before
the present Inundations of superstitious Traditions.

Bring them to the Text of Gods Word, compare them with the example of the
Prophets and Apostles, observe the Customs of the Primitive Churches and thus,
by reducing them to their beginnings it will be, easy to judge whether they
stand still in that v^ spotted integrit^e, or have not adulterously profaned
the sincere worship of GOD, with many, and mere humane int^emions.

If thou do but vouchsafe the diligent and careful reading hereof, I make
no doubt but it will yield great comfort to thy Conscience, and confirmation to
thy Faith, as that which will clearly delucidate many hidden passages that
have not hitherto been revealed: and if it may take this happy effect, I shall
think my pains sufficiently requited and recompen^ed in all things, aiming at
GODS glory, and not mine own. And thus I rest

Thine affectionate, and humbly devoted, ABR. DARCIE.

A TABLE OF THE Contents of this Book.
CHAP. 1. Of Sacred Signs. Fol. 1. CHAP. 2. Of Sacrifices. 2. CHAP. 3. Of
Corruptions. 10 CHAP. 4. Corruptions punished. 18 CHAP. 5. The Ceremonial Law
accomplished by JESUS CHRIST. 21 CHAP. 6. Of Sacraments ordained by JESUS
CHRIST himself. 23 CHAP. 7. Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of Baptism. 27
CHAP. 8. Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper. 30 CHAP. 9.
The ancient Religion of the Roman Empire. 37 CHAP. 10. How the Bishops of Rome
began their Corruptions. 40 CHAP. 11. The first greatness of Popes, proouing
Antichrists, and bringing in the Sacrifice of the Mass. 44 CHAP. 12. Of the
Mass in particular, with her true Original. 48 CHAP. 13. The Mass divided,
with the true nature of Holy Water. Fol. 54 CHAP. 14. The Procession of the
Mass. 57 CHAP. 15. The third part of the Mass, that is, the Altars and
Candles lighted. 61 CHAP. 16. Of Incense and Offertories, with other parts of
the Mass. 65 CHAP. 17. Of the round Host, with the consecration of the same.
69 CHAP. 18. Of diverse parts and sundry Ceremonies belonging to the Mass. 72
CHAP. 19. Against Idolaters Antiquity, and long possession of the Mass. 76
CHAP. 20. Against the Idolatry of the round Host. 80 CHAP. 21. The invention
of Transubstantiation, with confutation of that labyrinth of Idolatry. 83 CHAP.
22. Comparison between the two holy Sacraments. 99
THE BIRTH OF HERESIES: OR, A true and faithful description of all such SACRED
SIGNS, SACRIFICES, and SACRAMENTS, as have been instituted of God since the
Worlds Creation; Together with the Original and true Anatomy of the Mass: As
also the corruptions and abuses of all those holy things from the beginning.
CHAP. I.
Of Sacred Signs.
IN the time preordained of GOD by his inscrutable and incomprehensible
Wisdom, (when he had created man to his true Image and likeness, the better
to move and incite him to fear and obedience, as also to make him partaker of
his blessings, he gave him some exercise of virtue whereby he might
acknowledge him his Almighty GOD, and omnipotent Creator) were ordained many
Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: First, to our first Father Adam, to whom
with his Successors, corporal men, God allotted corporal signs, to approve
the better of their obedience, to wit, trees planted in the midst of the
Orchard, and earthly Paradise, which although they were not of any other
quality then the other plants: yet notwithstanding being dedicated and
consecrated of God for Sacraments, or Sacred Signs, their quality was then
for to serve as Seals for the Testimony and approbation of his divine will and
pleasure, which was effected by the infinite goodness and bounty of God, to
make appear and known, that the Association, Confederation and alliance
contracted with man his Creature, was ordained from time to time, yea, from the
beginning of all times: Thus, I say, were exterior and Corporal Signs, which
man could see and contemplate with his Corporal Eyes, constituted to serve for
an assurance, pledge, and hostage of the Divine Covenant.

These Trees and substantial Fruits ordained for our first and common Father,
were committed and given unto him to keep, without diminishing, eating, or
wasting of them, upon pain of eternal death. Wherefore we must in faith
believe, that they were not vain Signs and Sacraments, or as a mere and
simple Picture, but whereas life or death depended on them: they comprehended
both the signs and thing signified; wherein consisted the knowledge and
wisdom to fear God, Prou 7. 2, 3.
and obey him. And therefore they were called the Fruits of the knowledge of
good and ill, and the Trees of life; For in the careful keeping of these sacred
fruits, and obeying God, there was promised etetnall life; whereas on the
contrary, by abusing the Sacrraments, and opposing the will of God, there was
intimated to us by exterior signs, that eternal death and damnation was
purchased.

For other exercises required of man toward God, Sacrifices before the written
Law.
concerning the reverence, honor and adoration of him, many and diverse
Sacrifices were celebrated, even before the Law, written by Moses. And though
God Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, needs not any humane works, Psalm.
50
or to be nourished with the blood of beasts, or with terrestrial fruits, yet
he had always a desire to draw man unto him, in an external obedience and
fear, by Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: so as the Sacrifice of Lambs,
offered by Abel, were agreeable and pleasing to God. Noah in like manner, after
the inundation of waters past, in sign of his recognition and obedience
toward God, Genes. 4.
erected an Altar, Hebr. 11.
immolated an offered sacrifices of unspotted sheep and birds, Genes. 6. 7, 5.
whereof he made a real Holocaust acceptable to the Lord. By which examples
we may easily discern, that Sacrifices took not their beginning in Moses
time, but that Innocent and Just Lamb was prefigured in Abels Sacrifice, Apoc.
13.
as a type of Jesus Christ, slain and offered from the beginning of the world.

After the rigor and justice of the deluge was appeased, The Rainbow.
that happened for a punishment of Tyrants offenses on earth, in sign of a
reconciliation, and Covenant renewed, our good God ordained the sign of the
Rainbow, Genes. 9.
for a pledge and assurance of his Divine mercy. This sign and celestial
Bow, though it formerly appeared in thick clouds, being a notice of rain
to ensue, notwithstanding it was not as yet constituted nor appointed to serve
man for a sign or Sacrament, until the time that it was by God ordained for
an assurance of the Covenant contracted with the good Father Noah, and his
successors.

After this, Circumcision in the year of the world 2048.
with the faithful Patriarch Abraham, there was another confederation and
alliance contracted by the wisdom of God, who, for a pledge and assurance to
him and his posterity, constituted the external sign of Circumcision, to
serve him for a Sacrament, and a perpetual notice of Gods holy will and
pleasure: and so he was enjoined to circumcise the male infants within the
eighth day of their nativity, Genes. 17.
upon pain of being rejected from the number of those people whom God had
adopted.

Then followed to his posterity afterward, called The people of Israel, the
sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb, which was ordained by the shedding of blood,
to preserve them from the appointed slaughter in Egypt: Exodus 12.
As also the flesh thereof was appointed to be eaten, and celebrated
festiually every year, on the day called The Pascha, or Easter; for a sign
and commemoration of their Deliverance from Pharaohs servitude: and to the
participation of the flesh of this Paschall Lamb, was annexed the unleavened
bread for seven days, Exodus 12.
on pain of Death.

Other sacred signs were sent by God to his Elect people, to win them
continually to his fear and obedience: The Cloud. The Pillar of fire, Exodus 13.
as the sign of the Cloud, to conduct the people by day; and the flaming and
fiery Pillar, for their guide and direction by night; and all to deliver them
out of the hands of the Tyrant Pharaoh.

Then followed the sign of the division of the Arabicke Red Sea, The division
of the Arabic red sea, in the year of the world, 2403.
over which the elect people of God passed. By all which admirable signs, it
pleased God to prefigure the holy Sacrament of Baptism, instituted afterward
by the elementall sign of water, which is the washing of Regeneration, and the
renouation of the Holy Ghost.

Now during the time that this elect people of God were detained in the Arabian
Deserts, 1. Cor. 10. Titus 3.
and barren Wilderness, they had provision of heavenly bread, wherewith they
were nourished for forty years, which was also holy a Sacrament, instituted
by the power and will of God, Heavenly Manna.
and held in so high an admimiration, that each one amongst the people said,
Man-hu, Exodus 16.
what a wonderful thing is this? They saw celestial Manna exhibited to them
without travel, 1. Cor. 10.
a Figure of the Bread of Life, which came down from Heaven, giving life to
all the faithful.

Another wonderful sign there was ordained by God, John 6.
of the Rock gushing out with clear water in Mount Horeb, to quench the
peoples thirst, who were very dry, and almost stifled with heat.

This was a sign and figure of the true Rock Jesus Christ, out of whom came
blood and water, to quench perpetually the thirst of sinners, and refresh our
souls.

CHAP. II.
Of Sacrifices.
BEsides these signs and Sacraments aboue-mentioned, Diverse sacrifices
ordained by God, in the year of the world 2455. Holocausts.
which were only by God ordained: there was also a Law enacted and published
for sacrificers by Moses, as Signs, Figures, and Shadows of that absolute
Sacrifice, consummated by Jesus Christ; so that Sacrifices were either public,
or private; general, or particular. Some were Holocausts, being Sacrifices
that were wholly consumed with fire: Others consisted of beasts slain and
immolated to eat, Division of sacrifices, extracted out of Exodus, Leuiticus,
and Numbers. Beasts appointed for sacrifice.
there were earthly and ayerie Creatures. Amongst those terrestrial, were the
most obedient and obsequious beasts; as the Ox and the Calfe, the He, and
she Goat: and so likewise amongst Foul, the most mild and gentle; as the
Pidgeon, and Turtle.

Of Sacrifices again, some were public, and others private or particular:
those public were either quotidian or every seventh day, either at New Moons,
or in times of Fasting: but they were chiefly celebrated at three festival
times of the year; which were:

First, Days appointed for sacrifices.
the days of unleavened bread, when the Paschall Lamb was offered, and eaten.

Secondly, the time of Harvest, and first Fruits.

And thirdly, at the Feast of Vines, and Olives, toward the end of the year.
Exodus 23.
They were commanded to immolate every day two Lambs; one in the morning,
another in the evening, after the Altar was first perfumed, with Incense and
Odours.

Some of the Sacrifices also were ordained, See the books of Philo the Jew, and
of Josephus.
for corporal things, which were celebrated with shedding of blood, other
sacrifices were without blood for things incorporate. Sacrifices named
Holocausts concerned only the honor of God, because the whole oblation was
consumed in the fire. Holocaust: Philo the Jew in his Treatise of Beasts,
appointed for sacrifice.
For which Holocausts, the Male, and not the Female was received as an
oblation, that is to say, the Ox, the Lamb, or Goat of a year old.

In the sacrifice for Health, Joseph lib. 3 c. 20. De Antiq. Iudaic. Leu. 9. 2,
3, 4. Sacrifice for health.
it was a matter indifferent, whether the oblation were Male or Female: but of
the victime offered, three parts were reserved for the Priest, which was the
fat, the two Rumnions, and the Kidney, or Fillet of the Kidneys.

There was another difference between the Sacrifice for Health, and that
celebrated for sin: for in the one, they were inioyn'd to eat up all the
oblation in two days; and in the other for sin, the Priest was commanded to
eat it up in one day: and by this means some Sacrifices were termed
Holocausts: some were ordained for health, other some for sins.

Sacrifices for sin were diverse, Sacrifices for sin.
both in respect of the persons, and of the oblations.

For he that offended out of ignorance, Sacrifices for sin out of ignorance.
his expiation was celebrated with a female Sheep or Goat: but the expiation
for voluntary and wilful sin, was with a Male sheep.

The High Priests sin was expiated by the sacrifice of an immolated Calfe:
Sacrifices for the High Priests sin, for the Princes, for the Magistrate, and
for particular men.
that of the Prince with an He Goat, or Bull: that of a Magistrate, with an
He Goat; and the sin of a particular man, with a female oblation.

The Sacrifice for expiation of offenses toward God, Leu. 3. 4, 5 6.
was with a Ram.

The Sacrifice of a man polluted, Sacrifice for a polluted man. Sacrifice for a
delivered woman.
was also with a female Sheep or Goat: and for a woman's expiation after
childbed, was a Lamb of year old, a young Pidgeon, and a Turtle.

For the clensing of the Leprous were appointed two living Fowls, Leuit. 12.
pure and clean, Sacrifice for the Leprous.
Cedar-wood, and Hysop, two whole Lambs, and a female sheep of a year old,
Leuit. 14.
with Meal and Oil.

Another Sacrifice was celebrated, Sacrifice for manstruall polution.
for a man or woman polluted, by shedding his Seed, or her menstruall blood;
with two Turtles, and two young Pigeons.

If the great Oblations failed, they had recourse to Doves, Pigeons, or
Turtles, or for Holocausts: others, maintenance.

In all Sacrifices there was pure Flower, Leaven and Honey forbidden in all
sacrifices.
without Leaven, Salt, Incense, and Oil: and nothing was permitted to be
offered upon the Altar, with Leaven or Honey.

Notwithstanding in the Sacrifice constituted for the Purification of a woman
suspected of Adultery, Sacrifice for a woman suspected of Adultery.
there was neither Incense, nor Oil, as in other Sacrifices; Numb. 5.
but it was offered with water, mingled with the dust, or ashes, gathered up
from the floor of the Temple.

There was also another Sacrifice, Sacrifice of Nazareans.
celebrated for those that had made some great Vow, called Nazareans, Numb. 6.
when the time of their Devotion was expired, wherein they were appointed to
offer three Victimes, Philo the Jew in his Treatise abouenamed.
a Lamb of a year old, a Sheep, and a Ram: the one, that is, the Lamb, to
serve for a Holocaust: the other, of a female Sheep, for Salvation, and the
third oblation for Health. Furthermore, his hairs that made the oblation, were
to be cast into the fire, to be burned together with the Holocaust.

I was willing particularly to discourse of the diversity of sacrifices, that
hereby I might make known the great goodness, and bounty of our God: who in
the Law of sacrifices, published by Moses, meant to curb and reyne in the rude
people of Israel, as it were with a Bridle, who could not forget the Egyptian
Idolatries, wherein they had been nourished and bred, for four hundred and
thirty years, under the tyranny of the Pharaohs. But what rigorous Laws
soever enacted: Exodus 20.
what Ceremonies or Sacrifices soever he did ordain them: this people ever
made a relapse into their Idolatry, abusing the Law of God, and corrupting the
holy Sacraments, and sacrifices, as hereafter shall be expressed. But if any
man desire to know more at large, the multitude and variety of sacrifices: let
him read the books of Philo the Jew ^; and of Josephus in his Antiquities of
the Jews, according as Moses has expressly written in the books of
Leuiticus, and Numbers.

There was another sign and Sacrament instituted of God, Arc of Covenant.
by the Arc of Covenant, described in Exodus, being a sacred sign, and
dedicated to receive celestial divine Oracles, Exodus 25. 26, 27, 28.
to the end to induce the people to a remembrance, fear, and obedience of God
To accompany and honor the Arc of Covenant, many other external signs were
constituted by God, as the ornaments and consecrations of the Priests; Ephod.
especially that ornament called the Ephod: both which and the Sacrifices, the
Israelites abused and profaned with their Idolatries.

Another sacred sign there was, Water of Purification consecrated.
of cleansing water, or Water of expiation, instituted by God, for Moses and
Aaron the High Priest. This cleansing or purifying Water was consecrated, Numb.
15.
with ashes taken up by an unpolluted man, of the oblation offered in the
Holocaust, that is to say, of the whole Red Cow, without spot, not having ever
bin exposed to labor.

The Fire; for the burnt-offering was ordained to be of Cedar-wood, Hysop, and
of Purple-Crymosine. Polluted men were sprinkled over with this Water, Exodus 38.
for an expiation and purgation of their corporal blemishes.

At the entry of the Tabernacle, or Temple, there was a kind of Lauer like a
Font of Brass, forged at first of seeing Glasses, of the Israelitish Women. In
this Lauer or Holy Water Font, was put this Water of Purification, where with
the Priests besprinkled themselves, before they celebrated their sacrifices, to
the end they might be purified, and obtain grace and remission of sins.

After the death of the High Priest Aaron, the Israelitish people, ungrateful
toward God, for the benefit he sent them, murmuring when they were weary of
the heavenly Manna, Brazen Serpent.
which he gave them bountifully for their sustentation, they were punished
with the stingings of venomous Serpents. Numb. 27.
But God being merciful, gave them a sacred sign, to be preserved and
restored to health, that is to say, the sign of the Brazen Serpent erected up
on high, which was a Figure of Jesus Christ crucified. John 3. 7.


This in brief is the greatest part of the Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments,
instituted by God, in the first Church of the Israelites, being figures of the
true and perfect sacrifice, accomplished and immolated by Jesus Christ, the
true Messiah, the Eternal Priest, who sits at the right hand of God his Father.

CHAP. III.
Of Corruptions.
NOW we must succinctly produce how Man by his own fault falling into
oblivion and disobedience against GOD his Creator, Corruption began first in
Adam.
abused herein divine favor and grace, and corrupted the sacred signs,
sacrifices and Sacraments, by him ordained and instituted. For else what
persuaded our first Father and his Wife Eve to hide themselves, when they heard
and were set in the way of God, but that they had abused his sacred signs, and
violated the Law of those Fruits prohibited and forbidden them?

This holy sign which our first Parents so alienated and abused, was the
original of other Vices and corruptions hereafter described, wherein two men
are fallen, Corruption of the sacrifices by Aaron. Exodus 32. Deuteronomy. 9.
having a relish of the corrupt mass in Adam.

Omitting the particular corruptions of signs, sacrifices, and Sacraments,
before the Law written by Moses, we will begin in setting down briefly, the
most notable errors committed by the greatest Sacrificers, Kings and Priests,
with others, that had the government and charge of the people. When Moses
remained in Mount Sinai, to receive the Commandments from God, his brother
Aaron the High Priest caused a golden Calfe to be framed, of the earings
delivered unto him by the people of Israel, he built an Altar, offered
Incense, and celebrated Sacrifice, causing the common people to adore this
Image. Was not this an abusing of the sacrifices ordained by God, and a
corrupting of their true use, procuring the same to be adored, which before was
it self offered, and immolated, according as the custom was?

His sons also, Corruption of sacrifices by Nadab and Abihu. Leuit. 10. Numb.
11.
Nadab, and Abihu, were they not consumed with fire, because they adulterated
the true use of sacrifices, and took unconsecrated wood, by corrupting the
instituted Law?

The people of Israel ungrateful for the benefit received, in being delivered
from Pharaohs captivity; did they not murmr against the holy Sacrament of
celestial Manna, when they contemned and despised this Bread of Life, crying
out for flesh to eat? Achan the son of Charms, did not he violate the Law
of sacred signs, when he committed sacrilege, by detaining the spoils of
Jericho, which were vowed and consecrated for sacrifices to God? Josh. 7.


If any man more curious, desires to see the abuses and corruptions continued
by the same people, let him read the Histories of the Judges of Israel, and he
shall perceive, Iud. 6. 3. 6. 8, 9.
that in all ages men have never been content with the true adoration
instituted by God; but in stead of external signs constituted by God, to
draw the people to his fear, and obedience, they have forged and brought in
their own inventions: and in stead of reuerencing the Altars, and the Arc of
Covenant, Iud. 10.
in the name of the lonely one God, which were external sacred signs, the
Israelites misled by the Idolatries of their neighbors, the Syrians, Judge. 50.
Sidonians, Moabites, Ammonites, and Palestines, erected Altars to strange
gods, to Baal and Astaroth.

Iephta Judge, and Conductor of the Israelites, did not he corrupt the Law of
Sacrifices, when he offered up his own daughter, excusing himself by a Vow he
made, which was not so enjoined him by God?

The sacred sign ordained for the High Priest, Inhumane sacrifice of Iephta.
Judge. 17.
and Sacrificer, in celebrating of Sacrifice, called the Ephod, serving for an
external ornament, was it not abused by Gideon, Captain of Israel, when of
the spoils of the Madianites, and their earerings, he forged an Ephod of
gold; by means whereof, the people fell to great Idolatry?

How long was this external sign of the Ephod abused, Idolatry by the golden
Ephod.
when an Image was thereof erected in Siloe, by the Mother of Michas: so that
Priests were expressly instituted to sacrifice thereunto, and an Altar
edified; and thus was the true use of holy sacrifices corrupted? While the
Temple continued in Siloe, into what depraved and adulterate Rites did the
Priests and Sacrificers fall, who were appointed, and ordained for the
celebration and Ministry of holy sacrifices, and Sacraments, when by long
custom, they usurped this privilege over the people, that when the sacrifice
was solemnized, and the flesh of the oblations was a boiling, their son or
servant having a trident or iron hook in his hand, he had the liberty to rake
out of the pot or Cauldron, whatsoever he could bring up with his hook? 1.
Sam. 2.
Moreover, with more extreme Leuiticall Tyranny, this servant of the Priests
had the privilege, to demand of the Celebrater some flesh to roast for the
Priest, or else he might violently take whatsoever he listed.

Were not these wonderful abuses, and detestable corruptious practiced by the
sacrificers and High Priests, under the pretext and color of sacrifice? What
groffer corruption can be mentioned, then that of the children of Eli the High
Priest, Ophni and Phinees corrupters of sacrifices.
named Ophni, and Phinees; who, under the color of devotion, committed
infamous Whoredoms, with the women that watched near to the holy Oraculous
sign, 1. Sam. 2.
instituted by God. For which sin, they were lamentably slain, and the Arc
of Covenant violently taken away by the Philistims, who erected it in the
Temple of their Idol Dagon. 1. Sam. 4.
But God not permitting this sacred sign to the thus profaned, he caused the
Image of Dagon to fall down, and sent grievous punishments upon the
Philistims, 1. Sam. 5. 6.
so as they were constrained to re-deliuer up again the Arc of Gods Covenant.

This sacred sign was so precious and estimable, Arc of sacred. Covenant.
that being but abused and profaned by the Bethsamites, that were not of the
Order of the Levites, fifty thousand of the common people, and seventy of the
most apparent and remarkable amongst them, were by divine revenge cut off by
sudden death.

This example may make them tremble, that presume to profane the fignes and
Sacraments instituted by God, Against the corruption of sacred signs.
Vzza also, for abusing the same sacred sign, though it were with a good
intention, to ease the Arc of the Covenant, that leaned too much of one side,
was he not punished with death? For other prophanations committed by the
Israelites, 2. Sams 6. Osias.
there are examples of Osias punished with Leprosy; for adulterating the
sacrifices, and assuming the Ministry of incensing, allotted only to the
Priests.

Saul the first elected King of the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 26. Saul.
was put to the Sword, and his Kingdom succeeded to another, as was foretold
him by Samnel, in that he profaned the sacrifices, and permitted his Subjects
to commit the like abuses. 1. Sam. 13. Joseph. lib. ^. cap. 4. de. Antiq. ludae.
His successors to the kingdoms of the jews, and Israelites, did they not
persevere in their abuses and corruptions of the Sacrifices and Sacraments
ordained by God, when they celebrated Sacrifices to the gods, Astaroth the god
of the Sidonians; 1. Kings 11.
Chamos, of the Moabites; and Melcom, or Moloch of the Ammonites: building
Temples and Oratories for them, offering incense, and solemnizing sacrifices to
them?

Jeroboam King of the Israelites, did not only erect a golden Calfe, Jeroboam.
1. Kings. 12.
as the high Priest Aaron formerly did; but he set up two golden Cowes in the
two Temples of Bethel, and of Dan: he instituted strange Priests, corrupted the
Law of God, and caused Sacrifices to be celebrated after the manner and form
of Aarons.

This Idolatry and corruption of Sacrifices was continued by the Israelites
for more then four hundred years, 1. Kings 14.
during the reigns of their Kings, who had taught them to adulterate the true
manner and form of Sacrifices, in particular Chapels and Oratories, edified
on the tops of hills, and consecrated in shadie forests, violating the law of
sacrifices ordained for the holy Temple, in the sacred City of God: For
particualr examples of abuses committed against the true use of sacrifices, we
read an history of Maacha, 1. Kings 16.
the mother of King Asa, who caused an Image to be erected to god Pan: she
consecrated and dedicated unto him a shadie Forest, and celebrated to him
sacrifices.

Achab another King of the Israelites erected an Altar, Achab. 1. Kings 16.
and procured sacrifices to be solemnized to god Mars, otherwise called Baal;
to whom he dedicated and vmbragious Grove, Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 10.
to please herein his wicked wife Iezabel. He also built another Temple and
Altar to the god of the Tyrians, ordained sacrificing Priests, and instituted
about 40. false prophets. His son and successor Ochosias, Ochosias.
instructed by his father in corrupting the true use of the sacrifices, caused
men not only to immolate to Baal, who signified Mars, but perseuering still in
far greater corruptions, 2. Kings 1.
he built another Temple to the god of the Acaronites, Joseph. li. 9. cap. 1.
called by Josephus, Myos; and by the Grecians Priapus, to which god he
offered sacrifice.

And to be short, what more abominable corruption can be imagined, then the
invention of Purgatory fire, Purgatory fire. 2. Kings 16.
which the Israelites abused, causing their children to pass through the
midst of the fire, in Tophet, a valley belonging to the sons of Ennon,
sacrificing to god Moloch?

This corruption of sacrifice, In the book Alcoran.
though it had been practiced since Moses time, notwithstanding the idol of
Moloch, Asoar. 29. lib. 46. and Asoar. 5.
in the valley of Ennon, was not demolished till the reign of good King
Josias, more then nine hundred years after Moses. Ignem gehennae, non nisi
numero dierum praeterminato. Animas sentire docet Alcoranliber, and ad diem
Veritatis omnes accedere operum suorum mercedem accepturos, Asoar. 5.
Nevertheless, this abuse has been continued by the Arabians and Africans,
even to this present day; for the Alcaronists and Mahumetans are of this
belief, that the souls of the dead shall pass through fire, to be purged
and purified of their offenses. By this brief collection we may clearly
discern, how from the beginning of the world man has fallen by his own
defect into this gulf of the error and corruption of Sacred Signs,
Sacrifices, and Sacraments instituted for him, by God. But the most capital
abuses; from whence the original of all Idolatry deriues, have proceeded from
this, in that, carnal and fleshly men have bin always more addicted to
visible signs and external ceremonies, The cause of corruption in Sacraments.
then to things signified and intimated in Sacraments; for in stead of
circumcising their hearts, and casting off the old skin of sin, to be
regenerated, Apo^. 13.
and purified by the blood of the heavenly oblation offered up before all ages,
they have taken and understood the circumcision carnally, for nothing but the
corporal foreskin circumcised. For did they follow the interpretation of God
hereof by Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. 50.
which was to circumcise the prepuce of their hearts? Did the people of Israel
give credit to the good Prophet Ieremias, who admonished them of the spiritual
Circumcision, and to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, Ierem. 4.
in casting off the old skin of their corrupt nature? The like has happened in
sacrifices and sacred signs instituted by God, for signs of that sacrifice
consummated in the sacred person of Jesus Christ: for carnal man had reference
to the corporal blood of the terrestrial beasts, whereas man should have
raised up his spirit to heaven, to have apprehended what was presigured and
signified, by the Immolation and Oblation of beasts. Esaias 7.
And therefore divine Justice is denounced by the Prophets; What need have I,
says the Lord God, of your sacrifices? I am angry with the oblation of your
sheep; I take no more delight in the blood of oxen, nor of lambs, and
sacrificed goats. Why labor you to erect Altars to me? I Will none of your vain
Offerings and Oblations; I abhor your Incenses; I cannot endure your New
Moons, your Sabbaths, your assemblies, nor your feasts: all this is but
vanity. I have conceived an hatred against your Feasts of New Moons, O you
Israelites, and your solemn celebrations. I am weary with having endured so
much: Psalm. 41.
you are ready to address unto me your prayers, but I will no more hear you,
for the abuses you have committed, by your hands full of blood: I will accept
of no Bull hereafter, from the house of Israel, because sacrifices are not
pleasing to me. Esaias 66.
I take as much delight in the sacrifice of an immolated Ox, as in the murder
of a man slain: and in the Oblation of Incense, Ierem. 6.
as in the adoration of an Idol: Wherefore then, says GOD, take you so much
pains to hunt after Incense from Saba, and for odours out of a far Country
to me, to celebrate sacrifices that are not pleasing to me?

Who incited you, O Israelites, to erect Images to the god Moloch, and to the
star of Romphan, during the time you were in the deserts, where I fed you
with my heavenly Manna? Amos 5.
Your Feasts are odious to me, your Holocausts, Oblatio ns, and Sacrifices
for safety I will reject; your Offerings displease me. By what means
therefore must we present our selves before GOD? Must it be by oblations of
Heifers of a year old? Does God take pleasure in the great number of sheep
sacrificed to him, or in the abundance of consecrated oils? Shall I offer unto
him, says the Prophet, the first born, for remission of sins?

Our good God herein clearly expresses what he would have us to follow; Psalm.
^.
which is equity, to love mercy, and to humble themselves before him with a
contrite heart: 2. Sam. 15.
Obedience is better then sacrifice, or the fat of sacrificed sheep. What
moved God to refuse the Sacraments and Sacrifices by himself ordained, but
only the abuses and corruptions the Israelites had committed, understanding
too carnally, the signs and ceremonies therein concurring to draw them only
to true fear and obedince? For, in stead of comprehending what was figured in
the signs and corporal sacrifices, they relied on the flesh of immolated
beasts: whereas they should have circumcized the prepuce of their hearts, they
depended merely in carnal circumcision, and in the mean while strayed from
the true adoration of God, in repairing to the Creatures, as to the Stars,
and the Queen of Heaven, and to other strange gods, offering Incense to them,
building of Temples, instituting of Priests, Chaplains, and Sacrificers,
making Oblations, and celebrating sacrifices to them.

And then further, to heap up all corruptions, they offered sacrifice with the
blood of Innocents, offering, and causing them to pass through the Purgatory
fire, in the valley of Tophet. For the abuses also committed in the holy
Sacrifices, sacred signs, and Oblations constituted for God, it was said to
the people of Israel by the Prophets, that God would have no more of their
Feasts, of their New Moons, nor of their celebrated sacrifices, 4. Esdras 7.
by bloody and idolatrous people.

CHAP. IIII.
Corruptions punished.
AFter that the inscrutable Wisdom of God knew the obstinacy and infidelity
of the Israelitish people, which perseuered still in committing Idolatry, by
corrupting the sacred signs, sacraments, and sacrifices; and in stead of
acknowledging Gods infinite goodness, that had freed them from the tyranny of
Pharaoh, and fed them in the Desert; who had brought them into a promised
fertile Land, and had so many times assisted them in the wars, against their
neighbors, the Canaanites, Moabites, Madianites, Philistines, Ammonites,
Syrians, Sydonians, and other envious people, and enemies: This rude and
ungrateful people continued still in their Idolatry, instructed by their
Priests, sacrificers, Princes, and Kings, without returning to the true
adoration of one only God: For this cause, after great mercies showed, and
long expectation of a Just and rigorous Judge, who by all courses of correction
was desirous to reduce his people by divine particular inflictions; which was,
by excited wars, by captiuities, and seruitudes, by divisions of the Kingdom,
distributed between Roboam and Jeroboam, successors to Solomon, who fell to
extreme Idolatry, by intestine and civil wars, growing between the same
people, divided in themselves, and by other usual scourges, to chastize those
whom God meant to favor, for the reducing of them under his fear and
obedience. At last, this people being too much obdurate, and inueterated in
their Idolatries, were brought into miserable servitude under the Tyranny of
the unbelieving Assyrians, 4. Kings 15. 24.
the Idolatrous Babylonians, and their kingdoms wholly extirpated.

But some pretty while after, when the same people by the special mercy of
God, were delivered out of the hands of these infidel Tyrants, restored to
their liberty, and Country of promise, they again fell to Idolatry more then
before, under the government of their sacrificers and high Priests, which
confounded the Spiritual and Temporal together, so far as to inuest
themselves with the Royal Scepter, and Diadem.

Then came in the Heresies of the Pharisees, Joseph. lib. 13. ca. 16. de Ant.
Iud.
the Sadducees, the Esseans, Galileans, Masbutheans Hermerobaptists, and
Samaritanes, corrupted through the diversity of strange Nations, having
subdued, and inhabited the Country of Samaria next to Judea.

For the Babylonians worshipped Succobenoth for their god. Joseph. lib. de
Antiq. Iud.
The Cutheans of Persia had for their god, Nergal, or Nergel. The Hamathensians
called upon their god Asima. The Ananoys worshipped Nebahaze, and Thartace. The
Sepharuamensians, held for their gods, Adramelech, and Anamelech; to which gods
they sacrificed their children, causing them to pass through the fire.

Wherefore, when all kind of Idolatry was thus spread among the Israelites, when
the sacrifices were absolutely corrupted, the sacrificers became mercenary,
auaricious, tyrants and Idolatrous. The people made tributary to the Tyrants of
Rome; the Country of Judeae reduced to a Province, Joseph. lib. 15. cap. 3.
next to that of Syria, under the subjection and power of the Romans; as also
the Order and Law of electing high Priests adulterated, and their dignity quite
bastardized, Joseph. li. 8. cap. 8.
so as without any respect made of the race Leuiticall; the sacrificers were
constituted by the Consuls, Entros. 1. cap. 12.
and Deputies of Rome at their pleasure, and whereas before they were permanent
during life, they now became Annual.

When the Royal Scepter was alienated from the Progeny of Judea, Genes. 49.
their Kingdom wholly subverted, as before was prophesied: the
incomprehensible power of God was revealed by his Son, begotten before all
ages, who humbled himself to take upon him humane flesh, in the womb of the
Virgin, to redeem his people, and to restore them to grace and favor with God.

CHAP. V.
The Ceremonial Law accomplished by Jesus Christ.
NOw, as in Adam, through his preuarication and sin, Comparison between Adam
and Jesus Christ.
and in abusing the Sacred signs committed to his guard and custody, as the
whole mass of humane flesh was tainted with the leaven of sin; so by the
second Adam Jesus Christ, we were again by grace purged from all our
offenses. To our first and general Father Adam, was given the Sacred sign for
an exercise of obedience, and other sacred signs to his successors,
Sacrifices, and Sacraments instituted by God, the Tree of Life, the Fruits of
the knowledge of Good and Ill; the Rainbowe; Circumcision; the unspotted Lamb;
the unleavened bread; the Cloud; the Pillar of Fire; the Red sea divided;
Heavenly Manna; Water out of the Rock; the Oblations and Holocausts of beasts
for sacrifice; the Arc of Covenant; the Brazen Serpent; the Temple edified in
the holy City: All which sacred signs, Sacrifices and Sacraments, were
figures of that which was accomplished in Jesus Christ.

For first he was the true Tree of Life, planted in the midst of the
Paradise of God, Jesus Christ the Tree of Life.
in and by whom, we that were bastard slips, have been engraffed, to obtain
eternal life: Apoc. 2. Romans 12.
He committed to our keeping the Fruits of the Tree of Wisdom, by his holy
Gospel commanding us to preserve it entirely, without adulterating or
corrupting the same, without adding or dimishing therefrom, upon pain of
eternal death.

He was as the Rainbow, extended all over the Air, The Rainbow.
to assure us of the League and Covenant contracted between God and us, that we
should no more be drowned in the deluge of sin: He was circumcised, that the
Law in him might be accomplished, that so the prepuce of our hearts might be
circumcised, Circumcision. Galat. 4.
and to make us cast off our old corrupted skin in Adam.

He was like the flaming Bush, The flaming Bush.
incarnate in the womb of the Virgin, conceived by the Holy Ghost, without the
seed of Man; the sacred Virgin, like the Bush, remaining notwithstanding
entire, and not consumed.

He was sacrificed, Pascall Lamb.
like the just and Innocent Lamb, and his Blood shed, John 1.
to preserve us from the Tyranny of satan, Heb. 13.
and to open unto us a passage, whereby we may enter into the Land of Promise,
the Heavenly Kingdom.

He is that true unleavened Bread which came down from Heaven, The bread of
Life.
incorrupt and unspotted; of whom we must eat for our spiritual nourishment;
1. Cor. 5.
that we may celebrate the Feast of that miraculous passage from Pharaoh, in
the Land of true Liberty.

He was the Cloud, The Cloud, the Pillar of Fire, The Red Sea.
the fiery Pillar, the divided Red Sea, which conducted and delivered us out of
the hands of our enemies; out of whose opened Side, came Water and Blood for
our Salvation.

He was the heavenly Manna, 1. Cor. 10.
sent from Heaven, Job. 19.
to feed us for ever; Heavenly Manna.
and the true Rock, out of which issued Water, to quench their thirst for
ever, which believe in him. The flowing Rock.


It was He, Living Water.
that only offered up the saving Sacrifice for the expiation of our sins; 1.
Cor. 10.
both Priest and Sacrifice, Sacrifice.
both the Offerer, Heb. 1. 8, 9, 10.
and the Oblation; remaining an Eternal High Priest, at the Right Hand of God,
his Father; being entered into the Holy and Heavenly Sanctuary, Heb. 9.
not built with men's hands, but by the Hand of God.

He was the true Arc of Alliance and Covenant, Arc of Covenant.
by which God revealed and manifested his Oracles; and in him he did reside, to
accomplish his divine and incomprehensible Mysteries.

He was like to the Brazen Serpent, Brazen Serpent.
fastened to the Cross, to give health unto the sick, which return to him,
Ioh. 3.
and contemplate on him by Faith.

He was the true Temple of God, Temple of God.
wherein the Holy Ghost dwells, one God in Trinity; in, and by whom God is only
adored. Ioh. 2.


He was the true and sacred Oblation, of whom the real water purgatory was
made, Holocaust, and water Purgatory.
for the purgation of every blemish. Himself, with his own Ashes, that is,
with his immolated Body, besprinkled and wet with water issuing out of his
Side, Joh. 15.
all People and Nations that believe in him.

CHAP. VI.
Of Sacraments ordained by Jesus Christ himself.
THe Law Ceremonial being by this means accomplished, not in Figures, but
really executed, by the Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
our Savior, our Mediator, our Eternal Priest and Propitiator; the infinite
goodness of God was yet further revealed, by the new Covenant, new Alliance,
and new coming of the Son of God, Incarnate: For, Heb. 9.
by his New Testament, ratified and confirmed in the death of the Testator* He
has constituted us as heirs and coheires to God, in his heavenly Kingdom.

For assurance of this celestial succession, Romans 8.
purchased for us by grace, after the Consummation of the Law Ceremonial, and
the same abolished (as we have formerly declared) through that perfect
Sacrifice of the Priest Eternal; there were left unto us two sacred Signs or
Sacraments, wherein God bestowed greater favor, and more special grace, then
he had done before his Incarnation: St. Augustine lib. 3. de doct. Christ. cap.
9.
For he has freed us from the servile Law of Circumcision, from the
difference of meats, and diverse Sacrifices ordained in the first Church of the
Israelites: And by easing us of this weighty burden, He further conferred
upon us a greater comfort; in constituting, for a memorial and remembrance of
our regeneration and eternal life, two holy Sacraments, under two sacred
signs; which are, the water of Baptism, and the Bread and Wine in the
Communion of his Body.

Now, Sacraments of the New Testament.
that his Grace might be extended to all Nations, God thought good to make
choice of the most familiar and ordinary Signs and Symboles: For Circumcision
was a special mark for Abraham and his Posterity; Distribution of the
Sacraments to all Conuerts. Herod. lib. 2.
to which Circumcision, other Nations were not accustomed; though Herodotus, a
Grecian borne, in an History he wrote of the Egyptian manners, specifies their
manner and custom of being circumcised, but especially the Priests: and we
may easily conjecture, that he had heard of it, at the time when the Jews
dwelt in Egypt for the space of 430 years, and observed Circumcision.

Moreover, Circumcision was appointed only for the Males, and not for Females:
there was a limited time appointed for Circumcision; which was, within eight
days after the Nativity; and the cutting of the foreskin, was with grief and
pain.

But the Grace of God, Genesis 17.
by his Incarnation and plenary Sacrifice, having abolished the rigor of the
Law Ceremonial, as well for difference of meats, as of days; He left unto us
by his New Testament, and new Alliance, the sacred sign of Water, common to
all, both Male and Female, without any distinstion of days; and the Infant, by
the Sacrament of Baptism, feeling no pain, as it did by the Circumcision of
the fore-skinne.

This Sign of Water, intimating unto us the purgation and expiation of our
sins, through the Blood of Jesus Christ, was common, not only among the
Jews, who used ordinarily, Water purgatory, and of expiation; but the
Gentiles also, and all other Nations, Numb. 19.
were accustomed to a Lotion and purgation of cleansing, and purgatory Water,
as we may perceive in reading Ancient Histories. Wherefore, to the end that
Gods Grace in Jesus Christ, might generally be spread oner all the Earth; to
all Nations, Regions, and Provinces; both to the circumcised and uncircumcised;
to the Jews, and to the Gentiles; God made election of the most common sign
of Water, the more freely to expose himself unto Man, and to win him to His
feere and obedience.

By which Sign, he has instituted his holy Sacrament of Baptism, for an
assured note and mark of our regeneration and purification, sacramentally
conferred by the power of the Holy Ghost: In which Sacrament, God does warrant
us his help and assistance, so ingrafted and regenerate in Jesus Christ, to be
made and renewed the members of his members; and to receive us, Tit. 3.
as clothed anew, Gal. 3.
and reincorporated by and through him.

The like reasons may be produced, for the other holy Sacrament instituted by
God in his New Testament, which is that of Bread and Wine: Which Signs
Symboles, and external Elements, all Nations were accustomed to use, in their
Sacrifices, Oblations, and Ceremonies belonging to their Religions; both
Circumcised and uncircumcised, both Jews and Gentiles: As also, the two
specificall Refections for the nourishment and sustentation of men, are
comprehended under these signs of Bread and Wine.

Our good God therefore, for these reasons, desiring to draw all Nations to
himself; to nourish, and minister unto them most necessary provisions, He
instituted the Communion of the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
under the symboles, sacred signs, and Sacraments of Bread and Wine: And look
how we are assured by the outward mark and Character of Water in Baptism, to
be regenerate and incorporated into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
represented in this Sacrament of consecrated Water, by the power of the Holy
Ghost; so are we nourished by the Communion of his Body and Blood really
presented to us, in the consecrated Bread and Wine, for our spiritual food,
living and eternal, by the virtue and power of the Holy Ghost: Wherein God
has showed us this special favor, to discharge us of all bloody Sacrifices,
ordained in the first Church of the Israelites, who were charged with sundry
and diverse Sacrifices, celebrated with the blood of many earthly beasts shed,
according to the diversity of sins and offenses, and of persons that had
offended.

All which Sacrifices were consummated and abolished, by shedding of the blood
of that just and Innocent Lamb, JESUS CHRIST; who, by his perfect Sacrifice,
has absolutely abolished all other Sacrifices, reserving to himself, the
dignity of High and eternal Priest, placed at the right hand of God the Father.

But so much he has favored us, that in stead of abolished sacrifices, he
has instituted two holy Sacraments heretofore mentioned, for an infallible
assurance of our Regeneration, Purgation, Adoption, and of our nourishment and
eternal life bestowed upon us by the Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of Baptism.
AS the Israelites being too gross and carnal, relied too much on external
signs, having corrupted the true use of Sacrifices, and Sacraments appointed
for them by God; so such like abuses, yea, far greater corruptions have
happened in the two holy Sacraments, Corruptions of the holy Sacraments.
left unto us by the New Testament of Jesus Christ. For in the Sacrament of
Baptism, which succeeded in the place of Circumcision, man conceived of a
foul and wicked mass, could not be contented with the holy Institution from
GOD, but quickly depraved and defiled the use of the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, Sacrament of Baptism corrupted.
by Coniurations, Exorcismes, mixtures of Salt and Oil, wax Candles, Extreme
Vnctio^s, Breathings, Babies, or Puppets, with a thousand Cruzadoes in the
forehead, in the eyes, on the back, on the stomach, on the shoulders, and at
the mouth, and all to drive away Devils.

For the Messalian Heretics, Theod. in the book of the fables of Heretics.
Authors of Exorcismes of Cruzadoes, affirmed, that every borne Infant, was
borne with his peculiar Demon, or Devil, which cannot be driven away, but by
Coniurations and Exorcismes.

By this means the holy Sacrament of Baptism came to be corrupted, Ca^sine,
and ca^posiquam de conerat. distinct. 4.
even to the adding and annexing of Syriacke words of Driuell, and
Purgatory-Spittle.

What greater corruption can be imagined, then such abominable inventions;
Epheta. Per. Satyr. 2.
as if the blood of Christ Jesus were not sufficient for our Regeneration and
purgation; and that God of himself were not powerful enough to engraft and
regenerate us, by the sacred sign of Water, representing the Blood of Jesus
Christ, Galat. 3. ^phes. 4. 1. Corinthians. 15.
but that there must be exorcised Spittle, and Driuell, Oil, Salt,
Puppet-Images, Creames, Torches, Waxe-Candles, Milk, or Honey, invented and
devised by other Heretics?

Some also there be more subtle Magicians, Pithagoreans, instructed in the
Messalian Heresy, have added to all this, the pronouncing of the Devils name
twenty times, to exorcise and conjure him, as ^e that associates the male
Infant when he comes to be baptized; and thirty times they utter it, at the
baptizing of a Daughter. Was there ever so detestable a corruption in the
Sacrament of Circumcision?

Wherefore, O you Messalians, have you foysted in Oils, into the holy
Sacrament of Baptism; imitating herein the Heresy of Marcus, and Marcosus,
who commanded that Infants to be baptized, Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 3. haeres. 38.
should be anointed? The sacred sign of Water, instituted by the hand of God,
was it not sufficient to signify the precious blood of Jesus Christ, for our
regeneration and purification, without intruding of Fattes, Oiles, spittle, and
other mixtures invented by the corrupters of Sacraments?

The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, wherewith we are clothed anew by the
sacred Water of Baptism, was it not powerful enough, and efficacious, to
preserve us from all tempests, without borrowing of your Exorcismes and
Unctions?

And yet, for a further corruption and abuse, Women were permitted to baptize,
conformable to the error of the Marcionists, Quintilians, Cataphrigians,
Montanists, Epipha. lib. 1. tom. 3. haeres. 42. and lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 49.
Pepuzians, Priscilians, and Artotirites. Were Women ever admitted by the Law
of God to minister the holy Sacraments, or Sacrifices instituted in the first
Church of the Israelites? or in the New Testament of Jesus Christ?

In the History of Moses it is reported, that his wife Sephora excited with
feminine fury, Exodus 4.
took the stone or knife wherewith she circumcised her son: But it is not
written, that she, or any other like her, were ever permitted to administer
the holy Sacraments.

Out of these corruptions in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, many Heresies were
raised by the Catabaptists, Anabaptists, Antipedobaptists, with other
Heretics, and Schismatikes, who were not satisfied with Gods pure and sincere
Institution, but regarded more exterior signs, then that which in them was
spiritually represented.

Whosoever desires to understand more particularly, the abuses and corruptions,
invented and devised in diverse ages, out of the variable humors of men, let
them read our Ecclesiastical Commentaries. We must now at this present
descend to the corruptions in the other holy Sacrament of the Supper, and
Communion of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
We may evidently discern by this succinct Discourse, how weak and mutable
man is, ever abusing and alienating the graces of God. For as the people of
Israel, from the beginning of the Law and Institution to them recommended,
corrupted the true use of Sacrifices, sacred signs, and Sacraments ordained of
God, so has it fallen out to the Law of God by Jesus Christ, having constituted
a form of communicating his Body ^and Blood, under the symboles and sacred
signs of Bread and Wine: Which holy Sacrament began to be alienated, even in
the very times of the Apostles, by the Corinthians; Sacrament of the Supper
corrupted. 1. Corinthians. 11.
against whom Saint Paul wrote Epistles, to reduce them to the sincere and true
observation of this holy Sacrament.

Wherefore, let no man hereafter think it strange, if the Apostles successors
have from time to time adulterated the true Use and Rite of this holy
Sacrament; and the further off they were in the present age of their living,
from the reign of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, the more easily they fell into
corruptions; yea, such as were most abominable; having converted the sincere
Use of this Sacrament, into a Gulf and Precipice of all Idolatry.

First of all, Hist. Eccle.
what an alteration happened in the Church, next and immediately succeeding the
Apostles, touching a Comprimission of days, when this holy Sacrament was to be
celebrated.

Sabatius the Heretic instituted the celebration of the Passover, Hist.
tripart it. lib. 9. cap. 37. and lib. 11. cap. 5.
with unleavened bread, after the manner of the Jews.

Some of his sect ordained, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
that this holy Sacrament should be solemnized the fourteenth Month, as the
Jews did. Policrates, Bishop of the Ephesians, was said to be of this sect;
Hist. tripart. lib. 9 cap. 39. and 39.
Philip Hiropolitan, Policarpus, Truscas, Melitus, and Narcissus Bishop of
Jerusalem; Victor Bishop of Rome, Eleutherius his predecessor, and Theophilus
Bishop of Palestina were of a contrary opinion. This difference continued for
more then three hundred years after the Apostles time.

Others celebrated the Passover after the Aequinoctiall season, when the sun
entered into the sign of Aries: and others observed the Month Xanthicke,
called by the Romans, April. Some affirmed for example the Quartodocumans,
how they were informed by S. John, to celebrate it in the fourteenth Month.

The Romans vaunted that they were taught by S. Peter and S. Paul, whereof
notwithstanding no manifest proof appeared. The Phrygian Montanists condemn
the Quartodecumans, which observed the fourteenth Month; and that they ought
herein to be governed by the course of the sun, and so to begin it at the
springs Aequinoctiall: And for this reason they celebrated it the eight of the
Ides of April, which was the fourteenth of the said Month, though it fell
upon a Sunday.

And there was not a contention only touching the administration of this holy
Sacrament, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
on the several days assigned for celebrating thereof: but there was likewise
a notable division among the Christians, about the Ceremonies invented, whereby
worthily to receive the same. For some, as in particular, the Romans, observed
the Fast, or Even, three weeks before the day it self of Easter. The
Illyrians, and all Greece, as likewise the Alexandrians, instituted a
Quadragesima, to fast for six weeks. Some others ordained a seven weeks
abstinence, with an Intermission from five to five days.

Then was another Jewish Ceremony restored, Hist. Tripar. Chap 38.
the more to corrupt the holy Sacrament of the Supper, through diffrence and
distinction of meats. For some prohibited during the Feast, the eating either
of Fish, or Flesh: Others forbade the use of Flesh only, permitting men to
eat Fish, or Foul; which they said, according to Moses, did participate of
the substance of the Water. Some in like manner ordained, that men should only
eat bread and Water: Others fasted till noone, without any distinction of
meats. And to resolve briefly: there was in the beginning, an infinite number
of Corruptions and Customs, in the Communion of the holy Sacrament of the
Supper, by means of the Ceremonies renewed, about difference of days and
meats, abrogated by the Grace and Law of Jesus Christ.

But was there any holy Apostle of God, Col. 2. Galat. 4. Heb. 7.
that ever left in writing any Law or Commandment, for distinction of days
and meats, in celebrating the holy Supper of Jesus Christ? Their intention was
not to institute a Religion of Feasts, a distinction of days and meats: Their
Doctrine only aimed to instruct men how to live well; and that one only God
was to be adored and worshipped.

Wherefore, we must necessarily hereupon infer, that the Ceremony and
Festiuity of the Pascha, or Easter, proceeded from a custom; for none of the
Apostles left any thing thereof in writing.

To qualify such Dissentions and Corruptions, Hist. Tripar. lib. 9. cap. 38.
many Councels were assembled; one, at Sangariae in Bithinia; by which, to
avoid all contentions, every man was apermitted to celebrate the Passover,
when he would. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23
Another Council was held in Cesarea, by Theophilus, Bishop of that place, and
by Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem. Another Council there was in Achaia. And
another Council was conuented at Rome, by Victor, Bishop of the same place.

After these petty corruptions, there succeeded greater from time to time,
according to the humors and affections of the Bishops of Rome. In the year of
Christ, 114.
Alexander, 1. of that name, being raised to the superintendencie of the Roman
Church; one of the first successors to the Apostles of Jesus Christ, Tlatina
Sabelli.
and one of the first corruptors also of the holy Sacrament of the Supper;
invented the mingling of water with Wine, before the Communion: wherein, he
went about to reform the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, which instituted the
Communion of his Body and Blood, under the two kinds of Bread and Wine; but
Alexander added thereunto a third kind, which was water.

He also renewed the Jewish ceremony of unleavened bread, wherewith to
celebrate the Passover, as the Jews did; following herein the opinion of the
Ebionites, who taught, that the Ceremonial Law of Moses was necessary for
salvation: as also, Symmachus the Heretic in Palestine, taught the like.

If Jesus Christ was circumcised to fulfill the Law of Moses, Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 27. and lib. 8. cap. 14.
must it therefore be requisite to use Circum^nmcision? As also, if it were His
pleasure, for accomplishing the Law of Ceremonies, to use one days appointed
unleavened Bread, must we needs therefore return to the rigor of this
Ceremony, abrogated by the complete Sacrifice of Jesus Christ? In what place
of Scripture did Alexander learn to mingle water with Wine? and to restrain
Christians to unleavened Bread; as also his other invention, of driving away
Devils with salt water exorcized?

As for the Purgatory Water by him ordained, we will hereafter derive the
original thereof from Numa Pompilius, that great Magician, and Roman
Idolater. Cel. li. 39. cap. 21.
But touching the mixture of water with Wine, he might peradventure be
instructed by the ancient Idolaters; who, in celebrating their sacrifices, were
wont, in a Chalice, to consecrate Water with Bread: especially upon the
Festiuals dedicated to the Sun, which the Persians worshipped, called by
them, Mythros. And in the Feast of the Nephalies, they also used Water for
sacrifice.

With this comparison, Justin. in Apolo. 2.
Iustine Martyr relates the custom observed amongst Idolaters, and by
Christians, in the consecration of Bread, Wine, and Water: by the one, which is
to say by the Idolaters, in the name of their Idols; and by Christians, in the
Name of their True God.

And yet this first corruption in the administration of the holy Sacrament, by
the mixture of water with Wine, perseuered not without contradiction: For the
Greeks were of a contrary opinion; Inno lib. 4. cap. 5. de officio Disial.
and that it was not requisite to brew water with Wine, neither would they
herein follow the Alexandrian corruptions.

Amarcanus was of the same opinion as Alexander; affirming, that the mixture of
water with Wine was necessary. Scotus the subtle Sophister, absolutely denied,
that it was necessary to mingle the water with the Wine: because, says he, it
cannot then be changed, nor transubstantiated into Blood, except the same were
first changed into Wine.

Some others, more ingenious, labored to interpret this Institution of
Alexander, by alleging, that the wine was converted into blood: but as for
the water, it was transubstantiated into the water that came out of Christ's
side.

This first corruption of Alexanders, gave occasion of many other succeeding
abuses: For some other more profound Impostors devised to mingle with the wine,
blood, that was taken from young Infants, August. lib. de Haereti. cap. 26. and
64.
wherewith to besmeare the bread of the holy Supper of Jesus Christ as the
Cataphrigians, who brought in a kind of transubstantiation of wine into blood,
really and corporlly.

Some others added cheese thereunto, Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 5. haeret. 49.
called Artotirites; which is to say, Cheese-bread-mongers. Certain also
abusing this holy Sacrament, in stead of wine, put in water, under pretext of
the greater abstinence. Others had an Institution of steeping bread in the
wine, the which custom the Messalians also retained in their Missall
sacrifices.

For another detestable corruption of this holy Sacrament, some Popes of Rome
forbade their Messalian sacrificers, not to administer to Christian people,
whom they call Laymen, the Body of Jesus Christ in both kinds, but only
under the sacred sign of Bread, and not of Wine; which they reserved for their
Messalian sacrificing Priests.

Is not this corruption directly against the holy Gospel, and Institution of
the Supper of Jesus Christ, ordained and commanded, that all faithful men
should eat his body, and drink of his blood? When he took the Cup, did he
not use these proper words? Drink all of this Wine, in memorial of my Blood
shed? Used he any other words for the eating of his Body in the symbol of
Bread, then he did of his Blond, Matthew. 29. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Corint. 11.
under the sign of Wine? For if we compare the sacred sign, ordained by God
in the Church of the Israelites, being a Figure of the Communion of the body of
Jesus Christ, which was the true Paschal Lamb, whose flesh was ordained to be
eaten without exception of persons, so they were circumcised; was there ever
any difference in the eating of the Paschall Lamb, and the celebration of the
Passover among the Jews; between the Levites being of the race of
sacrificing Priests, and others of the common people?

To bring in another odious corruption, the Messalians instituted in their
Missall-Idolatries, to sacrifice and offer the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
reiterating by this means the Sacrifice fully consummated by Jesus Christ,
which cannot be reiterated, because it was, not according to the form of
Aaron, but of Melchizedec, 1. Cor. 11,
the Eternal Sacrifizer and Priest, without leaving any successor. As also
when the Apostle admonished the Corinthians to celebrate sacredly the Supper of
Jesus Christ, were they commanded to sacrifice? No; but to eat, and
communicate together of the Body, and to drink of the blood of Jesus Christ.

The beginning of the Supper, was not to kill or immolate, or to sacrifice any
beast, or oblation to God; but only to eat and drink at his holy banquet,
prepared for us by Jesus Christ, the Eternal sacrifice, and Sacrificer; who
reserved only for himself this Eternal Priesthood; yet nevertheless, he
left unto us a sacred Institution of a banquet, set before us in the Bread and
Wine, which represent his Body and Blood.

After these aboue-named corruptions, Satan, a diligent Babylonian Architect,
employed all his power and means, to raise an inexpugnable Fort of Idolatry; to
the end that he might wholly demolish and subvert the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, when he undertook to suborne the Mass, in stead of the holy
Sacrament of the Supper, as we will briefly produce, and so clearly, that the
most hard-hearted Pharaohs inueterated in their ancient Idolatries, shall by
the truth of Histories acknowledge their errors, and abominable Heresies.

CHAP. IX.
The ancient Religion of the Roman Empire.
BEfore my deciphering of this labyrinth of Error, The Roman Emperors and
their Priests.
wherein the Messalians did so lose themselves, I think it very requisite
succinctly to lay open the ancient Religion of the Romans, during the reign
of the Occidentall Empire: and of the Emperors usurping both the Temporal
scepter, and the dignity of high Priests, superintendents over the Roman
Church and Religion.

All of them, as well as my self, will confess, that the ancient Roman
Religion was either wholly, or for the greatest part instituted by Numa
Pompilius, the second King of the Romans, about seven hundred years before
the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Then were your high Priests invested, which
afterward were reduced to a certain number, Titiuill. lib. 1. deca. 1.
even to four: then the number was augmented to eight: and afterward by Silla
to fifteen.

In the College of Priests, Fenestell. lib. de Magist. Romans
there was one Pontifex Maximus, who was chosen by the other inferior Priests,
of their Order and dignity; even as the petty Priest purple-Cardinals make
the election of their great Roman Pope, out of their place, order, and
dignity.

This Pompilian Religion was so religiously observed by the Romans from father
to son, as it was never possible to irradicate, or supplant it: but it
continues even to this day, as every one shall manifestly discern by this
succinct Narration.

To confirm this point, no man can be ignorant, if ever he read the Roman
Histories; but that, before the Incarnation of Christ, there was not so much as
one King, Consul, Dictator, or Roman Emperor, instructed in the Law of God,
but all were Idolaters and Infidels, observing the Religion of that Magician,
Numa Pompilius. For since the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, for the space of
three hundred years, or thereabouts, there was not likewise any Emperor, or
Roman Consul, that changed his Religion, to embrace the Law of Jesus Christ:
but, on the contrary, they strayn'd all their might and power, to put in
practice what cruelties soever against the Church of Jesus Christ; Eusebius. in
his books of the Eccl. Hist. Anno Dom. 34. and 68. Anno Dom. 94. 112. and 183.
167. 202. 238. 254. 257. 276. 292.
which may be justified by the Ecclesiastical Histories: wherein are
explained, about eleven several great persequutions, under the Roman
Pontifes; which were, Claudius, Tiber. Nero, Claud. Domitian. Nero, Flau..
Domitian. Traian. Elia. Adrian. Antonine the Philosopher, Septimius Seuerus,
Jul. Maximin. Mar. Quint. Traian. Decius, Licinus, Valerianus, Valerius
Aurelianus, and Dioclesian. All which Emperors governed both the Empire, and
the superintendents over the Roman Religion for three hundred years after the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ; and in their Coins, Sepulchers, Monuments,
Titles, and Letters Patents, they retained the style of great Pontifes, and
high Priests: as is most diligently collected in a book of the Antiquities of
Rome, wherein are specified the Medails, Coins, and Monuments of the ancient
Roman Emperors, Pontifex Maximus.
all which were enstil'd Pontifes, under these Titles: Iul. Caesar. Pont. Max.
In a book entitled, A discourse of the ancient Religion of the Romans, by
William de Choue Bailey of Dolphinois.
Tiber. Nero Pont. Max. Vesp. Caesar Pont. Max. Marc. Aurel. Antonine. Aug.
Ponti. Max. Heliogabalus high Priest: Aug. Adrianus Jmp. Pontif. Max. Tit.
Caes. Pontif. Max. Commod. Jmpe. Pontif. Max. Galerius Maximianus Pontif. Max.
Elauianus Constantinus, Aug. Pontif. Max. Being therefore in this manner
Emperors, and Roman Pontifes, they never would permit any other head above
themselves, in the Church and religion of Rome, which in all ages was an enemy
to Jesus Christ. For when the Apostles preached Christ to be the High and
Sovereign Priest, the Eternal and Great sacrificer, without successor, after
the order of Melchizedec, the Roman Tyrants took occasion, or at least their
Lieutenants, to condemn Jesus Christ, for fear of impayring the authority of
the Caesar's high Roman Pontifes.

With what fury for the space of three hundred years, Catalogue of the
Caesar's, at the end of Nicephorus History.
were they excited against Christians, and the Religion of Jesus Christ, to
maintain their ancient Pompilian Religion? What answer was given to the
Emperor Theodosius, Anno Dom. 410.
by the Senate and Senators of Rome, when they were moved to change their
Religion, and embrace that of Jesus Christ? They showed how they had bin in
possession of their Pompilian Religion for more then a thousand years, and
that the alteration of Religion, was the ruin of Commonwealths. For these
reasons persisting in their old Roman Religion, they forbear to receive the
Law of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. X.
How the Bishops of Rome began their Corruptions.
BY these Histories we may easily resolve, that during four hundred years and
more, In the Canons collected by Clement Bishop of Rome, 21. 22. 62. and 95.
Anno Dom. 93.
the Bishops of Rome, who termed themselves Christians, could never draw the
Senate nor Senators of Rome, to entertain the holy Gospel. As also they could
hardly convert the Roman Idolaters from their old and inueterate Idolatries.
For the Bishops of Rome were too busy in restoring the Jewish and heathen
Ceremonies, about difference of meats, touching ordinances not to fast on
Sundays or Thursdayes; Alexander the first, Bishop of Rome, in the year of
our Lord 110.
to invent Table-^lothes, Vailes, Vessels of gold and silver, on Hangings,
Tapistries, and other ornaments of the Altar, worn out with old age, and to be
burned, and the ashes to be laid up in Fonts. Some also were mightily busied to
renew the Jewish Ceremonies of unleavened bread, having their minds greatly
turmoyled to corrupt the true use of the holy Sacraments instituted by God, by
the mingling of water with winae, nd seasoning water with salt, Sixtus Bishop
of Rome in the year of our Lord 127.
to make it purgatory, and exorciz'd for the repelling of devils. Othersome in
like manner took great pains to ordain Ephods of fine linen, wherein to wrap
the sacred Host: also to constitute Aubes, Syluester Bishop of Rome.
and other vestiments for the Priests in their sacrifices, of white, and no
died colors. Some had their brains troubled to devise Feasts of dedication,
and Consecration with Exorcismes, Higinus Bishop of Rome the year 140.
to drive away devils with salt: and othersome to invent Oils and Unctions,
wherewith to corrupt the holy Sacrament of Baptism.

Then afterward during the time of these tyrant Emperors, Fabian Bishop of
Rome in the year 240.
and great Pontifes, the Bishops of Rome, desiring to perpetuate their names,
they wore out their brains in building of Temples, Pius Bishop of Rome, in the
year, 144.
not to the honor of God, but to the names of men, and women, Saints by them
cannonized, at their own pleasure.

Others were occupied in ordaining and decreeing, Z^pherin: Bishop of Rome, in
the year 200.
that the consecrated Bread or Wine falling to the ground, should be licked up
by the Priests* and the rest remaining to be burnd in the fire: and the ashes
to be reserud in a Reliquarie.

Some look out for Chalices, Calixtus Bishop of Rome, in the year, 280.
that they should be of Glass, and not of Wood.

Others instituted solemn ceremonies for the four several seasons of the
year, to bring Christians by this means under the servitude of destinction of
days.

Others were studiously employed in ordaining the oblation, Eutiches Bishop of
Rome, in the year, 262.
and consecration of Beans: to solemnize Funerals with Purple habites, after
the form of a Vestment called Trabea, Red roabes of Cardinals.
which Idolaters used in their Triumphs celebrated to the honor of their Gods.
The like purple Ornament is in use at this day amongst the Cardinals.

Others were occupied in devising confirmation for little Infants, and to
consecrate the Cream for Bishops only, also to honor extraordinarily the
Bishop of Hostia, by whose hands the Bishop of Rome is to be consecrated, with
a kind of Mantle called Pallium: Siluest: Bishop of Rome, in the year 314.
and to invent a number of other vnecessary Ceremonies, yea such as were
opposite to the Evangelical liberty, ginen unto us by Jesus Christ.

How was it possible therefore, for the first Bishops of Rome to draw the
Princes and Roman Senators, to the Law of the Gospel, for three or four
hundred years after the Incarnation of Christ, when they labored nothing else
but to corrupt the use of the holy Sacraments, to restore the Jewish
ceremonies, and the Idolatries of the ancient Heathen Romans?

They may here object one Philip, which some vaunt, was converted to holy
Baptism, whose depraved ma^ners gave occasion to the most authentic
Historiographers, Cronic. of John Baptista Ignatius.
to esteem him unworthy of the name of a Christian; Whereunto they add
Constantine the Great, that assembled the Counsel of Nice, but his residence
was in Greece, called the Empire of the East, and yet he would never embrace
the Character of Baptism, to be regenerate by the blood of Christ, till he was
threescore and five years old, when he was Baptized by an Arian Bishop of
Nicomedia, Hist^tripartit: lib. 3. cap. 12.
named Eusebius: When the same Constantine was at the point of death. Wherefore
Syluester Bishop of Rome need not vaunt of converting this Emperor to the
Faith. For the same Siluester likewise would not be present in the assembly of
the Counsel held at Nice, in the year of Jesus Christ 327. Howsoever the
matter stands, we must ever have recourse to the truth of Histories, wherein is
recited the answer which the Senate, and Senators of Rome made to the Emperor
Theodofius more then threescore years after the death of the said Constantine
the great: to wit, that they would not receive the Law of Jesus Christ, but
rather observe their ancient Pompilian Law, to avoid the ruin of their
Commonwealth through a change, and alteration of Religion: Wherefore it must
needs be inferred, that the Law of GOD was not received nor approved at Rome,
by the Senate and Senators.

Now we must come to the subsequent times. Paul: Aenul. lib. 1.
After the decease of Theodosius, the Roman Western Empire began so much to
decline, In the year 412.
that in a short space, it was clean extirpated by the Vandales and Alands,
who were the first that sacked Rome, In the year 434.
in part burned it, and carried away the Emperor Theodosius own daughter,
Blon. lib. 2. D^cad, 2.
whom they married to Atolphus King of the Goths. Not long after succeeded the
Hunnes, and then Attila King of the Goths, which usurped Italy. About this
time the Occidentall Roman Empire was stripped of all Germany, Dacia, Sarmatia,
and all other tributarie Provinces even to Dannbius. Spain also, Aquitane,
Gascoyne, Burgundy, and all the Gauls revolted from the Roman Tyranny.

Then came the Astrogothes with their Kings, Procop. lib. 3. Of the wars of the
Vuandales in the year 486.
Valamir, and Theodemir, Theodoric, with other Barbarians and Infidels, as
likewise the Visigothes, all usurpers successively in Italy.

After this reigned Totilas, In the year 550. 554.
who entered, sacked and burnt Rome, and all Sicilia. At last the Lombardes came
to reign, conducted by their King Alb^im, who usurped over all Italy.

These barberous, Paul Acmil. lib. 1. in the year 568.
Idolatrous, and Infidel Nations were as Gods scourges, ordained to punish the
Roman Idolaters committed by them, who had received the knowledge of the holy
Gospel: and yet ran astray from the true adoration and worship of God,
violated and corrupted the holy Sacraments by their humane inventions and
fictions: in like manner to punish the obstinacy, and infidelity of the
Emperors and Senators of Rome, who first by their Officers, and Lieuetenants
Deputies, had caused Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles to be crucified:
daily persecuted the Christians, and ever opposed the Law Evangelical, to
maintain their Pompilian Religion.

We may therefore resolve, and conclude, that for the space of four hundred
years, the Roman Church of Emperors and Senators were always opposites and
enemies to the Law of Jesus Christ.

Afterward when the Western Empire was extinguished for three hundred years
or thereabouts, that Rome, and all Italy was ruled and governed by Kings,
Princes, and Dukes, that were Infidels, and Idolaters, which was by the
Vuandales, by the Goths, by the Hunnes, Ostrogothes, Visigothes, and Lumbards,
for the space of seven hundred years or thereabouts after the Iucarnation of
Jesus Christ there was no Emperors, Kings nor Princes at Rome, that would
embrace the Law of Jesus Christ. The which I desired briefly to produce, to the
end the Reader* might not think it strange, though I here set down how the
sacrifice of the Mass took original, from the ancient Ethnicke Religion,
Instituted by Numa, more then seven hundred years before the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ: and that since also the same sacrifice has been continued by
the Roman Idolaters, hardened and inuerated in their Pompilian Religion, which
they would never abandon nor give over.

CHAP. XI.
The first greatness of Popes; proving Antichrists, and bringing in the
sacrifice of the Mass.
NOw, to the end nothing might be concealed out of the Roman histories, to
obscure the clearenesse and sunshine of truth, during the Tyranny and
usurpation of the above mentioned Nations, there was erected in Italy a petty
Exarcate at Rauenna, which stood for an hundred eighty three years, In the
year, 572.
till it was suppressed by a Pope, Platine Blond: volaterad.
who was invested in the same, and encroacht upon St. Peter's Chair, by a
Donation or Dismission wrought by Pepyn in the year 758. Paul: Aemil: lib. 10.
Blond: lib. 10.
in requital of the Tyranny used by Zacharias, a Greek Roman Pope, who
deprived* the true heirs of the Crown of France, which were Chilperio, or
Childeric, whom he shut up in a Monastery, to confer the Kingdom upon the
said Pepyn, son to Charles Martell the Bastard. Blond. lib. 1. Decad. 2.
This Donation of Pepyns bestowed on the great Roman Pontife, was the first
Original of the exaltation and eminency of the Roman Popes, Paul. Enul. lib.
2.
who to this day remain the Exarcate of Rauenna, since about eight hundred
years, with many Towns along the coast of the Adriatic, assigned over to
them by Pepyn, against the express prohibitions of Constantine, then reigning
Emperor of the East in Greece.

While this petty Exarcate continued at Rauenna a long time before Pepyns
Donation, The first apparent Antichrist.
the Bishop of the place seeing that there were no more Experors at Rome,
tyrannized and governed by barbarous and miscreant Nations, In the year 588.
began to lift up his horns, so as he would be preferred before the Bishop of
Rome, and style himself head of the Church, Sabellic.
both he and his successors Bishops of Rauenna, while the Exarcate lasted.
This was the first petty Antichrist that assumed a Tyranny in the Church,
pursuing the terrestrial Tyranny of his Exarcate.

After him rose another great Antichrist in Constantinople, In the year 600.
named John, Bishop of the place: who perceiving the Occidentall Empire of Rome
clean extinguished, Blond. lib. 1.
and that of Constantinople risen to a great height, Greg. lib. 4. of epist.
cha. 29.
he grew also affected to worldly Tyranny, and conformable thereunto erected
one Spiritual in the Church of Jesus Christ. By a Council held for the
purpose, he denounced himself to be Oecumenicall Bishop, which signifies
general, and head of all the Church. But presently after, the great Roman
Pontifes took so good a course herein, In the year 604.
that by treason the Emperor Mauricius was cruelly slain in Constantinople,
himself, his wife, and family, by that wicked Phocas: who, Platin. Sabellic.
for recompense of this abominable Murder committed, by the notice and
intelligence of their Church of Rome, always contrary to Jesus Christ, caused
Boniface the third of that name, In the year 612.
to be declared head, and General of the Church of God, usurping the Authority
of the great and eternal Sacrificing high Priest, the only Spouse, and head
of his Church Jesus Christ. Who could better resemble Antichrist then he that
assumes a Tyranny in the Church of God, a Poligamie in the Church, the Spouse
of Jesus Christ: Math. 26.
ascribing to himself that power, which Jesus Christ reserved for himself, to
reside perpetually with his Church, by the power and virtue of the holy Ghost,
for the conduct and government of the same.

May not he rightly be termed Antichrist, that labors directly to oppose the
holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, Math. 23. Luc. 11. Marc. 2.
who forbad his Apostles, when he sent them to Preach the Word, that they
should not constitute a Monarchy in the Church, as the Princes, Kings, and
Tyrants of the earth are wont to do? That none of them should presume to be
called head, or greater then the rest; but that they should all be humbled as
brethren: being assured that they had one only Head, and one heavenly Father,
who would dwell and continue with them for ever, to conduct and inspire them in
his holy will?

Is not he truly an Antichrist, that will term himself to be Jesus Christ's
successor to the chief Pontificacie, and to the sovereignty of Priesthood by
him administered, which dignity he reserved only to himself, he remaining
eternal and high Priest for ever: Who left no successor in his dignity, as
Aaron and his successors did, to the dignity of the Jews high Priesthood; but
according to the order of Melchisedeck, King, and high Priest, without any
successor in his dignity.

Wherefore O you Roman Antichrists, why have you assumed the dignity of high
Priests, as Heads and Sovereigns of the Church of God, and usurp the
authority of Jesus Christ, causing your selves to be entitled, most happy, and
most re^erend Fathers, and Popes, having founded a College of petty purple
Pontifes, to elect a great Pontife or high Priest: but to the end to renew the
ancient Ethnic Roman Religion of Numa Pompilius, the first founder and
erecter of your Pontifical dignities.

About the same time that this cruel murderer Phocas set up Antichrist in the
Roman Church, The cause of Mahomets original.
Mahomet rose up in the Church of Arabia, instructed by Sergius a Monk, about
the year 620. For this Apostaticall Heritick perceiving the whole Law of God
to be corrupted by humane traditions, and the holy Gospel contemned: also the
Sects, and diverse heresies, planted as well by the Jewish Pharisees, Esseans,
Saduces, Masbuthians, Galileans, Hemerobaptists, and Samaritanes: as also by
Christians, the Symoniackes, Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, Menandrians, and
Ebionites, the Valentinians, Cerdonians, Marcionists, Montanists,
Cataphrigians, Tatians, Eucratites, Seuerians, Look the Ecclesiastical
History.
Artemonists, Porphirians, Helchefaites, Nouatians, Sabellians, Chiliasts,
Paulianists, Manechees, Antomousiastes, Arrians, Eunomians, Macedonians,
Eunomiotheophroniens, Eunomeoeutichians, Aetians, Donatists, Luciferians,
Patripassians, or Theopachites, Photinians, Heretics in the Church.
Marcellians, Paulosomosetans, Apolinarists, Iouianists, Pelagians, Platirians,
Anthropomorphites, Nestorians, Sabbatians, Acephalians, Acarians, Olympians,
Quaternians, Monothelites, and other Heretics, having corrupted the true use
of the Sacraments ordained of God. And seeing also, that the Sect of the
Messalians, especially prospered in their ceremonies, taken partly out of the
Jewish Law, and partly from the Panyme Idolatries, he invented the high
decrees of the Alcoran, wherein he employed many Chapters and Articles called
Azoares, which are like Canons and Rules of the Mahumetan Religion.

This brief and compendious discourse of the Roman History, I thought
requisite to recite, before I began to discribe the original of the sacrifice
of the Mass,: that thereby I might induce the Reader no understand the truth
of the matter: how the Roman Empire was governed till the declination of the
same, which was about the year of Christ 410. and how the barbarous Idolaters
usurped it since, for the space of 300. years: as also the Antichrists have
been raised, which still enjoy it at this day, and have done for some five
hundred years past.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Mass in particular, with her true Original.
FOr beginning to this our brief Missall Treatise, Original of the Mass:
with exposition of the word.
we must first express this term of Mass, called by the ancient Romans
Missa. Some have preferred this Missall Sacrifice, to take original from the
Hebrews: alleging that place of Daniell, when he speaks of Maozin, Dan. 11.
as if by Maozin they would signify the Mass. But this word in sense, stands
far from the Missa or Mass: and there are some Hebrew words which come far
nearer to it, as Messa; which by enterpretation is Conculcation: 4. Kings 11.
of which word mention is made in the History of the Kings of Israel. There
is also an other Hebrew word very conformable to the vulgar term of Messel,
Messa.
which is Missal, and that is hell, or the grave. But I suppose the great
Roman Pontifes would not derive the original of the Sacrifice of their Mass,
from the Hebrews, because then they must acknowledge the Mass, Messell. Hell.
or their Missell, to be a Conculcation or extortion, and hell, or a grave. And
to speak but truth, the Author of the Roman Religion Numa Pompilius, never
thought of the Hebrews, when he first instituted the Mass: neither can this
word Missa, or Mess, take original from the Greeks. Because there is no
sacrifice of this name or title, though some have brought in a colorable
reason from this Greek word Myzein, which is to say in French; to hide or
keep in secret: as if the Messalian Sacrificers received from the ancient
idolatrous Greeks, to mumble secretly the principal words of their Masses,
that the Auditors might not hear them: but they used to murmur and whisper
betwixt the teeth, the Canons, and some special words, which neither
themselves, nor they that look on understand. Nevertheless, neither the
Hebrew nor Greek words cannot properly be applied to the Missall Sacrifice.
And therefore we must repair to the true etimologie of the word Missa, Mass
drawn from the ancient Latin Romans.
or Mess, drawn from the ancient Latin Romans, who used these words,
Missus, Missa, Missilis, and Missio: even as in French we have Messager,
Message, and Messiues, for letters sent. Wherefore, when the ancient Roman
Idolaters meant to dismiss the Assistants at the Sacrifices celebrated, they
pronounced in the end these words. Amongst the Greeks the Priest having
discharged his function, spoke aloud in this manner.
I. licet Missa est: depart, it is permitted, and so the Assembly was dismissed to
go home. But in time, because this note signified a pleasing release of the
people, to go home to their houses, being a cheerful, and acceptable sound,
it was suppressed, and the Sacrifice honored with this term of Missa. To
confirm this point, two thousand years being now come and gone, these words
are pronounced at this present day. Laiois Aphesis, as if he discharged the
people.
Ite, missa est, which signifies a leave given to the company or assembly, to
depart: so as they themselves, which frequent these Temples, Apule. lib. 11. de
Asm. aur.
so soon as they hear this pleasing note, Ite, missa est, commonly they skip
and leap for joy, being assured that they are then licenced to go to dinner.

The Arabians, and Mahumetists, instructed for a long time by the Monk
Sergius, as formerly we cited, hold this word of Messa in great esteem. By
which word they have nominated three Towns or Cities called Messa, In the
book of the description of Afric, by John Leo Affricanus.
situated upon the Ocean shore, upon the Cape, where Mount Atlas takes his
beginning.

Near to the same Towns, in the Suburbs, there is a Temple much reverenced by
the Turkish Idolaters, because they believe, Messa of the Turks.
that from Messa should come the righteous Pontife, promised and prophefied of
by Mahomet: they also think, that about that quarter or shore of Messa,
Messelmans, in the book of the great Turks Court, by Friar Antonie Geffrie.
Jonas was cast up again, after his being swallowed up by the Whale.
Furthermore, they so highly esteem this name of Messelmans, as we do the name
and title of Christians. Intimating by this word Messelman, as much as saved.

Moreover, the Mahumetists honored their Priests with the name of Mess,
calling them Messen, and their Temples Messites, In the book of the above
said, Messen, Messi.
or Meschites: Wherefore, they that published the Anatomy of the Mass, the
Centons, the Foundation, Augmentation, and embellishing thereof, could not but
write with special reverence, in respect of the ancient Pompilian Religion and
the Alcaron, Institutions of Mahumet.

After we have thus decided the word of Mess, or of in the Roman tongue, to
be derived from the ancient Roman Idolaters, and not from the Hebrews not
the Greeks: we must now descend to the vestments of these Missalian
Sacrificers. Pontife lib. 1. of Commenta.
But by the way, we must not omit the name of Pontife, or Pontifex, taking also
it is original from the Romans, as we declared in our Commentaries. The style
also of Pope proceeding from the ancient Idolaters, who used to ^nstile their
God Jupiter, calling him Pope Jupiter, but especially the Bithinians and
Scithians. Which word Papa, comes from the Greek word Papus: which is to say,
great Father. As also the true title subscribed to any suits presented to the
great Roman Pontife, is: Most blessed Father. The next purple Pontifes are
termed, most reverend Fathers, and petty Bishops, reverend Fathers: all of them
retayning this word Father, or Pope, A Curate. Curio, a Priest, or Curat, who
in his Cure, that is, in his Parish had the care of sacred celebrations.
Great Father, which was wont to be a common name to all Bishops: but
afterward the great Roman Pontifes reserved it only to themselves. Another
title is also retained for the Demie Bishops termed Curates, who are
superintendants in every Parish, borrowing this nomination, from the ancient
Roman Curates: which is to say, a rasing, or shauing, because the ancient
Curions and Sacrificers were cut, and shaven in their heads, after the
Babilonian manner, Tit. Liui. lib. 1. Decad.
or of the Herculean Pontifes, called for this reason Stephanophores, as
wearing a Crown upon their heads. Nevertheless, by the reason that all the
members of the Missall Sacrifice, derive from the Pompilian Religion^, we
should wrong the ancient Roman Idolaters, to take from them the original of
these names Mass, Tit. Lini. Fenest. Pompo. L^tt.
Pontife, and Curate, as may be justified by the Roman Histories.

As for the vestment of Missall Sacrificers, Numa ordained that it should be
white, called by the Latin word Alba, an Aube: Aube. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4.
chap. 17.
which name of Aube continues to this day, for the vestment of him that
sacrifices and celebrates Mass. Moreover, above his Aube, the Priest was
appointed to wear a Tunickle painted, Super tunicam aeneam pectori regumen. 1.
Decad. 1.
and above that the ornament of a Pectorall of copper or brass, afterward
changed into gold or silver, which the Missalists term a Chasuble. They also
used a veil to cover their heads, when they sacrificed called Amictus, first
instituted by Aeneas. Virg. lib. A^neid. 3.


These are the principal vestments, Purpureovel are comas ad opertus maictu,
ca^ite ante aras Phrigius Velamus amict^.
instituted by Numa more then 700. years before the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ. It Is true, that since, there have been many Jewish ornamens added, as
the Stole, Ephod, Zone, or Centure, the Myter or Theare, and some other
decorations, the better to pownce, and set forth the great Babilonish whore.

But the Missalians desirous to alter the original of their Missall vestments,
Titilman. in tractat. de expo. Myster. Missae. et Gab. E^el. in lib. de
exposit. Missae.
pretend that the Aube is a figure of Jesus Christ's conversation in the flesh,
or the purity of his body incarnate in the womb of the virgin. Others
interpret the white color, to signify chastity and continency. Some minding
to mock, and make Plays sophistically of the Passion of Jesus Christ, say,
that by the Aube, the white Robe is represented, which was offered by Herod to
Christ, when he was sent back again, like a fool to Pylat. Philo the Jew, a
more worthy Philosopher, in his Treatise of Dreams, subtly deuiseth, that
the Aube signifies the solidity of the most resplendant light of the Dyetie,
which he calls Ens. The linen also whereof the Aube is made, they express for
the subtilty of the Scriptures. As for the Amict invented by Aeneas, they
adulterate it, for the Veil wherewith Christ was covered, when the Jews
mocking him in Caiphas house, did smite him. Titilman one of the subtilest
Missalians, deuiseth, that in the Amict, Christ's Deuinity, concealed in his
humanity, was intimated. Some likewise confess, that the Amict was subrogated
in stead of the Jewish Ephod, by the Zone, Maniple, and Stole, which are three
Ligaments, they understand the three Cords wherewith Christ was bound* and
drawn before the high Priests: and after that, before the Roman Lieutenants
in Judea. Biel another pregnant Missalian, by the Zone, conceiues the rods
wherewith Christ was scourged: By the Stole, extended in form of a Cross,
there was signified the Gibbet or Cross, which Christ bare upon his shoulders.
The Maniple also which he wears on his left arm, to figure the band of love,
wherewith Christ was bound. Another Mummerie they have for the Zone, wherewith
the Aube is trussed, and this signifies the band of Gods charity. The Stole put
over the Amict, at the Missalians neck* in form of a Cross, deciphers
Christ's obedience, even to the death of the Cross. The Maniple worn on the
left hand, signifies the reward of Christ's eternal felicity. Other
sophistries there are upon the Amict, as that it represents faith: the Stole
humility and obedience: the Maniple, the vigilancie and hearty devotion of the
Missalian Priest. Tittilman has another subtle devise for the Maniple worn on
the Priests left hand; which as he says, does express the battle and power
of Christ, against all visible and invisible dominations, being as a buckler
against all temptations: and the Buttons of the Maniple, portend final
perseverance.

He also further sophisticates, that by the left hand is understood the humane
infirmity of Christ, which being tied with the Maniple, that Christ is tied and
bound by his divinity, like a mad man. Brunus another Missalian Doctor,
fantasticates, that by the Maniple is inferred the Missalian Priests special
care to drive away bad affections: or else that it figures the Cord, wherewith
Christ was bound by the Jews; and that the Stole is a figure of the Lords
yoke, which the Mass Priest must wear garnished with the Arms of Justice on
the right and on the left hand. The other painted Ornament instituted formerly
by the Magitian Numa, they disguise by the name of a Planet, as an errant
Vestment; otherwise called a Cap, or Chasuble, which they say resembles the
Purple Robe presented to Christ, in Pilates Hall, when they mocked and called
him King of the Jews.

There is another sophistry, how this Vestment implies the Nature of Christ,
wherein the Deity was couched. Philo the Jew immitating Plato, interprets this
Vestment so adorned with colors, to be a Figure of the signs, and celestial
Stars. Now the Mass Priest being roabed, with his Aube, Amict, Zone,
Maniple, Stole, and his Chasuble, or Cap of diverse colors; he must stretch out
his arms, to play two parts at an instant, represented by the Chasuble, whose
quarter before, is less then that behind, figuring herein the Primative
Church, from Abel till Christ, and by the after part more ample, and enricht
with the sign of the Cross Christian people are signified. This Chasuble must
be joined to the Amict, which was in the beginning in the head, to represent
the conjunction of Christ with his Church. The Aube also must be correspondent
to the Chasuble: to intimate how Christ applied himself to our infirmities.
Philo: in lib. de profug.
Besides, the above mentioned Vestments, Philo the Jew adds a Myter, to
declare the Messalians royal Diadem, who must have their heads anointed with
Cream, or sacred Oil, to signify the Priests dignity: which Mytrall
Ornament, is only preserved for eminent and higher Priests.

CHAP. XIII.
The Mass divided, with the true nature of holy water.
NOw we must descend to the description of several parts of the Mass, Apul.
lib. 11. de lasno auri.
whose head and original we will particularly set down according to the truth.
First of all in those which are called high Masses, celebrated on Sundays, the
Missalian Priests, retain somewhat of the Pompilian Religion, Proclus in lib.
de sacrafic. and Gag. Procl. Platoni. Catul. Eius aquae aspersione, peccata,
presertim per iuria, mendati aque dilui credebant.
as to exercise a lustrall water, called holy Water, wherewith to besprinckle
the assistants or beholders at the Sacrifice. The coniuration and exorcisme
instituted by Numa, was of Sea or salt water, because (said he) salt did
participate of the fiery Nature, or of Fire, very proper to purify. For this
reason, the Ancient Roman Idolaters, besprinckled this salt exorcised water,
as a Mercuriall expiatorie and Purgatory water for popular offenses, especially
for perjury and lying.

To preserve this consecrated, Blond. lib. de Romans trium. Ovid lib. Fast 3
and exorcizd salt Water, they had two sorts of Holy water Fonts: One was large
not moveable, but placed at the entry of their Temples, where they adored
their Images, Fonts of two sorts.
that so they might sprinckle those which entered into the same Temples. The
other was a portable Font, Dijs supcris sacra facturus, corporis ablutione
purgabatur: cum vero inferis lijamdum erat, sola aspersio sufficiebat.
to conueigh therein Lustrall water into any part of their Temples or houses,
that they might be watered with it, for their expiations, and purifications.
They that were to celebrate Mass, if it were to the inferior gods, it was
enough for the sacrificing Priest to sprinckle himself with that Lustrall
water. But if the Priest celabrated Mass, to the superior gods, Blond. lib.
2. de Romans trium. Ma^r. lib. 3. Satu. chap. 1.
he must bathe his whole body, and wash all his members therewith.

Furthermore, he was prohibited, not to use this Lustrall water for any other
purpose, In Delij Apolinis templo praecipua erat aqua sacrificantium vsui
accommoda, quam ad alios vsus hausisse magni criminis instar erat. Alex. ab
Alex: lib. 4. ca. 17. Platine.
but for expiations, and purgations. Conformable to which Pompilian
constitution; Alexander the first of that name, next successor to the Apostles
of Jesus Christ, and one of the first corrupters of the holy Sacraments
ordained by God, continued this Idolatry, of consecrating and exercising
Lustrall water with salt, to repel devils. Nevertheless, the better to mask
Pompilian Magic, he framed this comparison: so it is, said Alexander, that
the ashes of an inuiolated red Cow for sacrifice, mingled with Fountain water,
purified the people of the Jews, and therefore by a more preualent reason, Si
ciuis vitula aspersus populum Iudaeorum mundabat, multo magis aqua sale
conspersa populum sanctificat, and insidias Diaboli auertit ea, a quam, de
consecrat. distinct. 1.
water exorcizd with salt, must needs purify Christians, and drive away devils.

Was not this a violating, and corrupting of the holy Law of God, to content
and please the Romans, tainted with the ancient religion of Numa Pompilius
the Magician? If Alexander had not yielded to the use of salt, instituted by
the ancient Idolaters for lustrall water, he would rather have followed the
Jewish ceremony, and ordained Ashes to consecrate the water of expiation. For
if he thought to disguise it by the Miracle of Elizeus, The Law of God
corrupted.
that purified the water with salt, Moses also did the like, with the wood
which was brought him, when the people of Israel were distressed for sweet
water to drink. Numb. 19. 4. King. 2.
But in these miracles no mention is made, Exodus 15.
that Elizens or Moses instituted any lustrall water to purify the people of
the Jews. Numb. 19.
And we cannot find, that there was ever any lustrall water amongst the Jewish
ceremonies, but only with Ashes of the victime offered for sacrifice. And
therefore Alexander and his followers must needs acknowledge, that the
invention of salt water exorcizd for the remission of sins, took original
from Numa Pompilius more then 700. years before the Incarnation of Christ.
This lustrall water was so religiously obserud by the Roman idolaters, that
more then 360. years after the Incarnation of Christ, it is related how
Valentinian the Emperor entering into the Temple of the Goddess Fortune,
Hysto. trip. lib. 6. cap. 35.
a Priest who was Guardian of the same Temple, sprinkled some of this holy
Lustrall and salt water upon him, Valentinian the Emperor against holy water
sprinckle.
which he took out of a Font at the going into the Temple: wherewith the
Emperor being angered, struck the Priest with his Asperges in his hand,
alleging how it was rather defiled then purified.

By these true Histories the Missalians may boast, that the first part of their
Missall sacrifice is very ancient indeed; and that their holy water Fonts, and
their lustrall salt waters of expiation, proceed from the ancient doctrine of
Numa Pompilius, but not from the Evangelical doctrine of Jesus Christ, which
they term a new Doctrine, and the New Testament differing from the ancient
Jewish ceremonies, Salt holy water very ancient.
and heathen idolatries. And though I cannot sufficiently wonder, wherefore
Alexander presumed to renew the Pompilian Idolatry, considering he had means
to restore the water ceremonial after the manner of the Jews; and in this
doing, to follow rather the law of God, Against the salt lustrall water of
Alexander Pope of Rome.
then that of Numa Pompilins: for he had easy means to get Ashes wherewith to
compound a lustrall water after the Jewish form: nay, precious and sacred
Ashes: which is to say, Ashes reserud in Reliquaries, coming from vailes,
napkins, and consecrated vessels, which Pope Clement, Ca: Omnes de consecrat:
distinct. 4. and cap. Altaria and cap. Vestimenta: distinct. 2.
Alexanders predecessor, forbid to be applied to any profane use, but when
they were consumed with time to burn them in the fire, and the ashes to be
preserved in the Baptisterie. Yet were these sacred ashes, to incite Alexander
to restore cinderal and lustral water after the manner of the Jews, if he had
not bin so addicted to salt, and found a better relish to maintain the ancient
idolatrous Roman religion. Alexanders successors, might have gotten other
ashes, that is, from the round azimall consecrated Hosts, which the high
Pontife Higinus appointed to be burnt, Cap. Altar^s: de confecra: Distinct. 1.
if falling to the ground, they could not be lickt up by the Mass Priest, and
the ashes of the said Hosts to be laid up in a Reliquarie. He might also have
had other ashes of Ratts or Mice, or other creatures, when they devoured the
said Hosts, ordaind to be burned, In lib. Cantel: Miss:
and reserved in a Reliquary. Wherefore seeing Alexander would not follow the
cerimoniall law of God, to institute a salt holy and ex^rcise water, at least
why did he not emplore the salt with the host of the Mass Priest, which they
say they offer to God as a saving sacrifice? In doing so, he had imitated the
Moysaicall ceremony, Leuit. 2. 5. 6.
wherein they were commanded to offer salt in all sacrifices, and to sprinckle
therewith the sacrifices that were emmolated for safety. But if Alexander and
other his successors had followed the law of God, they could have added nothing
of their own brain, they could have no memorial nor renown of their own
Institution. And therefore in this respect they would in nothing follow the law
of God, but contrariwise, they prohibited the use of salt with their round
consecrated Hosts, The reason why new Idolatries were invented.
to celebrate their missall sacrifices. They also forbid the mingling of ashes
in their lustrall waters, that in all their Institutions, they may not be
thought to have taken any thing from Gods pr^scription, neither from the law of
Moses, as also much less, from the Law Evangelical of Jesus Christ: they
thought to attribute these inventions merely to themselves, though they had
their original from the ancient heathen Roman Idolaters 700. years before
the Incarnation of Christ.

To resolve this first Missall part, it were much more expedient; O you
Missalians, True holy water for Christians.
in stead of your sacrifices and exorcismes of salt water, wherewith you
sprinckle the people, to preach purely, and cincerely the holy Gospel, and to
teach Christian people, that the true purification and washing away of sins,
depends on the blood of Jesus Christ, which is powerful enough to repel
devils, Heb. 9.
to deliver us from hell, to preserve us from eternal death, and to wipe out
in us every spot and blemish of sin: without using exorcismes, or coniurations
with salt, to drive away devils conformable to Pompilian Magic, Epiph. lib.
1. tom. 1. sec. 9. and 17. Cont. haer.
and the herefie of the Samaritans, who thought themselves purified by those,
and washing with the same every day.

CHAP. 14.
The Procession of the Mass.
AFter the Asperges is sung, 2. Part of the Mass, Procession. Platina.
the lustral exercizde water sprinkled upon the Altars, the Images, and all
the assistants at a Mass, then follows* Procession, Tit: Liu: in his Decades.
Supplicationes, quit* nos processiones vocamus, fiebant circa delubra fanaque
and puluinaria, in quibus honos dijs dabatur, praecedentibus pueris ingenuis ac
Sacer dotibus cora^atis, ac laurean^ tenentibus manum, voce ^odulata
ca^entibu^. c^^men, subsequent maximo Pontifice vel curione: dein. de
sequentibus patritijs ac senatoribus cum coniugibus and liberis plaerunque
coronatis.
which is attributed to Agapet the Roman Pope: But this was Instituted above a
thousand years before him; for the ancient Roman Idolaters called it
Supplication. A form Instituted by Numa to go on Procession, either to
appease the wrath of the godds, to obtain peace, or to pray unto God for the
fruits of the earth; the order was in the manner: First before the Procession
walked certain young children, then the sacrificing Priests clad in white
Surplesses, singing Hymns, Paeans, and Canticles to the honor of their gods.
Then marched the high Priest, or Curio: Then marched the Roman Senators, with
their wives and children: and sometimes the common people assisted. There was
commonly carried about in Procession, the Shrine or Reliquarie of god Jupiter,
or of Anubis, by some Priests clad in white Surpleses, with shaven heads, and
thereon wearing crowns. This Crown was of such reverence and esteem, that
the Emperor himself Commodus Antonius high Pontifex, caused his head to be
shaven and cut round, expressly to carry the Cabinet of god Anubis. Before the
Cabinet or Reliquarie, went a Cierger, carrying a light Taper in his hand. When
the Procession went along through the streets, there were seats erected, to
serve for stations or places, where the Priests, which carried the relics were
appointed to rest and take breath. When the Procession was ended, Apul. lib. 17.
de Asi. aur. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. chap. 27.
the Temples were opened, the Altars and Images perfumd with Insence, and the
relics of their gods showed. On those days, when the Procession went abroad,
a Feast was celebrated, the shops were closde up, the Hall of Justice shut in,
and the prisoners vnshackled: In the book of the discourse of the ancient
Romans Religion.
who can better discipher the order of Processions observed even at this day,
by the Missalians Instructed from father to son in the Pompilian religion.
What other Author can be alleged touching the ceremonies performed in
Procession, except Numa Pompilius himself? Lamprid. Apul. lib. 11. de Asm. aur.
If the Missalians sought not out further, for their crowned shaven crowns,
and white Surplesses which the ancient Aegiptian Idolaters were wont to use:
the Priests of the Goddess Isis, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 50. chap. 27. Herodote in
his Histories.
or the Babilonian sacrificers, wearing their heads and beards shaven. As for
the Law of God, the contrary therein was observed, and the sacrificing Priests
were forbidden, to cut their heads or hair round, Ierem. in his Epist. ad
Iudeos in Babylonem abducendos. Neverticem deraditore, noue barbam vollitote.
Leuit. 19.
and to shave their heads. And as for the Law of the Gospel, there is no such
like ceremony commanded by Jesus Christ, nor by his Apostles: they must
therefore needs proceed from the ancient Pompilian Religion: For other things
in the Procession, they have added the carrying of the Cross or Banner: this
Banner was termed by the ancient Roman Idolaters Labarum: which was reputed a
sacred ensign, Nec in gyrum ac rotundum attondebitis comam vestram, nec
radetis barbam.
so much reueerd by the Dictators and Emperors, as also by the soldiers that
went to the wars. Antenor first pictured in that Banner a Sow, by reason of the
name Troia, which in the vulgar Italian tongue signifies a Sow: Ezech: 44.
which ensign Antenor vowed and dedicated in the Temple of Juno, Queen of the
heavens: because the Sow, was the consecrated Victime to the same Goddess. Ex
libris Messaae ad Octauianum Augustum: Apul. lib. 2. de Asin. aur.
The old Romans afterward caused a Mercurius Caduce to be drawn upon the
Banner whereon was painted the picture of two Serpents coupyed together* then
was an Eagle portraced for the Ensign of the Romain Empire: but Constantine
the Great, Emperor in Greece, made to be drawn therein a figure of greek
letters, In the said book of the Religion of the ancient Romans.
a X interlaced with an, and on the two sides a and o in this sign, a o
signifying thereby this word Christos, or Christ. This Banner was spread upon a
pole or staff of wood, made in form of a Cross, the Ba^ner being four
square, in the fashion of an Ensign of crymosine violet silk, edgd about with
fringe of Gold or silver, and precious stones. In imitation of this, the
Missalian Priests have adornd their Pompilian Processions, in which they carry
Banners, as if they meant to go to the wars, or conduct a martial Army: but
in stead of portraying therein the name of Jesus Christ, they paint the effigies
and Images of diverse gods and goddesses, saints, men and women, the Patrons of
each parish. This in sum is the original of the Missall Procession, standing
for the second part of the Mass. Was there ever such palpable Idolatry used by
the Israelites, when they would celebrate the Feast of unleavened bread, to
eat the Paschall Lamb, a Figure of the holy Sacrament of the Supper, which
the Missalians have adulterated by their Missall sacrifices? Did they ever
carry about in Procession the flesh, or the blood of the immaculate Lamb? Did
they ever lay it up in a Reliquarie to be carried in Procession about the
streets? The Serpent of Brass, though they much profaned and abused it, yet
did they at any time carry any part of it in a Reliquarie upon the shoulders of
their Priests, wearing their heads and beards shaven, as the Greek Pontife
Urban ordained, that the round consecrated Host should be carried in
Procession by the Missalians, A^: Christ. ^64
and instituted a solemn Feast every year on holy Thursday, that so he might
convert the use of the holy Sacrament, to a more detestable Idolitrie then all
his Predecessors?

CHAP. XV.
The third part of the Mass, that is, the Altar and Candels lighted.
AFter the sprinkling of holy water, and Procession performed, The third part
of the Mass.
Numa instituted that the Mass priest, to celebrate Sacrifice, being clad with
his Aube, and Chasible, or painted coat, his head crowned, Altar, and Tapers
light.
and beard shaven, that he should approach to the Altar, prepared for
sacrifice, set forth with a Lamp or light Taper, Omil. lib. 4. de Fast.
which ordinarily was of Tede or Pine. For without an Altar and fire, no
Sacrifice could be celebrated. He also ordained that the Mass Priest should
turn himself near to the Altar, Apul. lib. 11. de Asm. aur. Plut. in Numa.
toward the East. Porphirius the heretic did not only continue this Pompilean
Magic, but further he constituted, that the entry into the Temple, and the
Images should be turned toward the East, to the end that those which went into
the Temples, prostituting themselves before the Images, might adore and make
their prayers toward the East: even as the Persians did, who worshipped the
Sun in the East. Are not these Missalian and Pompilian Institutions contrary
to the ancient ceremonial Law of the Jews, wherein they were prohibited to
pray toward the East, that so they might be different from the ancient
Idolaters? And therefore acknowledge, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
O you Missalians, that your erection of Altars toward the East, your Lamps
and light Tapers, the Pictures and Images worshipped in your Sacrifices, to
have had their original from one to another. For those Images and Pictures
wherewith your Altars are enritched and adorned, cannot be derived from the law
of God: which does not only prohibit the permission of any Images in Temples,
Exodus 20.
but the very hewing of them out, Leuit. 26.
and that they should not be renewed. To what can God be resembled? Deuteronomy. 5.
what Image, picture, or pourtrature can be devised to his similitude? Esaias 40.
And yet nevertheless, out of most detestable and abominable heresy,
Abominable Idolatry.
you (O Missalians) draw the Image and form of the Trinity, of one God in 3.
Persons, in your round hostel, which you cause to be adored.

Nevertheless, two Missalian Doctors, Titelman and Biel, express the Altar
otherwise, when the Mass Priest approaches with the golden chalice in his
hand, they all adging, how this does figure Christ, bearing his Cross to
Mount Caluary. And then the Priests kissing of the Altar, to signify the
Nuptials and Nuptiaell sign of Christ, with his Church. The right side of the
Altar to figure the people of the Jews, and the left the Gentiles. For this
reason, Durand: lib. 4. rub. de mutat.
Durand a subtle Missalian, writes, that the Missall Mummery must begin at the
right side of the Altar, and conclude in the same: nevertheless, all the
principal Monkeries are celebrated on the left side of the Altar. As for the
fire and light Taper, they apply them to Christ, as being the fire which
purifies the rust of our sins: Or otherwise, the fire of charity enuironing
all Christian poople: and the light Taper portends the light of faith, and the
joyful coming of Christ's Incarnation. And not these abominable
sophistications, which Numa the Magitian never dreamt upon, when he instituted
the Altar, the fire, and light Taper wherewith to sacrifice.

To continue the order of the Missall Sacrifice, 4. part of the Mass.
when the Mass Priest has made his approach to the Altar, the Taper lighted,
and he adorned with his Aube, and Chasible, turning his face toward the East,
Confiteor. R^m diuinam facturus, ad sua^ leuandam culpam, semi primis reum
dicere debebat, and noxae poenitere ac fateri admissum, Vultumque submittere.
and contemplating the gilded, and beautified Images, he must say his
Confiteor, and confess himself, acknowledging his own proper offenses, and
craving pardon of the Gods and Goddesses, men and women Saints, requesting just
and reasonable things, as Pythagor as said in his golden Charms, and Orpheus
in his Hymns. It seems that Numa the Magitian thought the Mass Priests
conscience cleared by Confession, and without the Confiteor, that the Sacrifice
could not be worthily celebrated: wherefore Damasus and Pontiam Roman
Pontifes, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 37. Bl^nd. lib. 1. de Romans Triumph.
cannot justly take unto themselves the glory, of being the first Institutors
of the Confiteor, for the Mass Priest. For above a thousand years before
their time, it was forged by the ancient Roman Idolaters: being also vpheld to
this present day: for when Priests celebrate their Missall Sacrifice, they
pronounce or murmur a Confiteor in a language not understood by themselves, nor
the standers by, addressing their prayers and supplications to the Gods and
Goddesses, men or women Saints: in stead of reuerencing, honoring, adoring,
and praying to the only true and omnipotent God, Creator of all good things.

Nevertheless Titelmans Alcoran applies the Mass Priests Confiteor to the
confession of Christ for the sins of the people. Chap. 9.


After the Confiteor mutterd; for better observance of the Pompilian Religion
and Ceremonies, Fifth part of the Mass.
the Mass Priest must wheel and rewheele about, turn and return along the
side of the Altar, Turnings and wheelings about.
first lifting up, then abasing his hands, with prayers and meditations toward
the East. For Numa the Magitian held opinion, Hae sunt vertegines in sacris, a
Numae institutae, dextram ad osculam far, et se in orbem circum agere. Blond.
lib. 1. do Romans Triumph. Macro in Saturnali.
that there was great sanctity, in these wheelings, wreathings, and turning
about of the Sacrificer: As may be coniectured, it was an occasion of adding
this pleasant song to the Missall Introduction, when the Priest begins to make
his wheelings and turnings, I will go up says he, to the Altar of God, which
rejoices my youth. Has he not just cause to rejoice, when he sees the cloth
laid, the table set, the banquet prepared, the Music of Organs and other
Instruments to sound, Odours and Incenses, the Chalice full of wine, the
Collation prepared, Introduction to the Mass.
and chink offertories ready to fill his purse? Are not all these means to
exhilerate the Sacrificers youth, when he goes up to the Altar to say Mass, to
dance and turn about, in form to him prescribed by the Magician Numa
Pompilius? And not only the Romans but other Idolaters, also in celebrating
their Sacrifices, were wont to turn and wheel about, lifting up the hand to
their mouth, and then turning the whole body round about, Plin. lib. 28.
which windings and wreathings were reputed sacred.

Titilman in his Alcoran makes mention, that the Mass Priest in making his
vagaries along the Altar, discharges 7. reuerences or salutations to the
assistants in his Sacrifice: that h^ may repel the 7. mortal sins, by the
seuen-fold grace of the holy Ghost. But in performing the 7. reuerences in his
Missall dance, he must turn about to the standers by except before the
Preface, and the kiss Pixe, he being then employed in the fraction of his round
host, to convert it transubstantiate into an accident without substance.

When these wheelings, The sixth part of the Mass. The second of the Organes.
windings, wreathings, and gesticulations, are perfor'md by the Missalian
Priest, Numa co^stituted the sound of Organs, Flutes, and Viols, to sing
Hymns, Peans, and Canticles, to the honor of the Gods, in whose name the
Missall Sacrifices was celebrated. This part of the Mass has bin enritched
with diverse Antems and Songs, by many Roman Pontifes. Some, Antems. Collects.
Gradualls. Tracts. Sequences. Hymnorum plures species ^r a^t, Hyping^s, Dianam,
Apollini, P^an, sit Prosaedia. Dionisio Dithirambus. Ceteri, Iulus, Vencri,
Cr^tyetus, praeter quos fuere, prosaeduri, Hypacthema, et Stasimon. Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Diverse Masses. Dry Masses.
as Flaman, and Diodorus, instituted Antems, Prelesphorus Collects. Leo, or
Gelasius Graduals. Gregory, or Gelasius Tractes. Gottigerus Abbot of Sandal
Sequences: which are sundry Musical Notes, to serve for decoration and
ornament to the sacrifice of the Mass. But if the ancient Commentaries of the
Roman Pontifes, instituted by Numa were revealed, we might find great
variety of Songs, Peans, Hymns, Canticles, and Odes, dedicated and consecrated
to sundry Gods and Goddesses, even as much diversity of Musical songs have bin
annexed, by reason of different Missall sacrifices ordained for diverse Gods and
Goddesses, men and women Saints. For as the old Idolaters celebrated their
Sacrifices to sundry Gods and Goddesses, the Missalians also persevere to
celebrate their Masses to diverse men and women Saints: some in the name of our
Lady, others of St. Sebastian: some of the holy Ghost, and others of Requiem,
putting a distinction even between dry, and common Masses, wherein the sop is
steept in wine: so as an infinite company of Missall Sacrifices have sprowted
out to diverse Saints of both Sexes, wherein are sung sundry Canticles and
Sequences. Were not these horrible and abominable corruptions of the holy
Sacrament of Christ's Supper, to make an Idolatry of it, after the manner of the
ancient Sacrifices instituted by Numa the Magitian? Wherefore Vitellianus the
Pontife cannot glory for having enriched the Sacrifice of the Mass, with the
sound of the Organs. For above 1200. years before his days, this Institution
was published by the Magitian Numa.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Incense and Offertories, with other parts of the Mass.
But to varnish this Babylonian Sacrifice, the Alcoranist Missalians interpret
the variety of their musical Songs by Pythagoricall Philosophy. As for the
Collects, that is to say, pieced or annexed Prayers; they command them to
besung in vneauen numbers: that is, three, five, or seven: three, to intimate
the Trinity; five, to represent the five wounds of Christ; and seven, to
symbolize the seven words of Christ which he uttered upon the Cross; or else
the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost. Furthermore, for the more subtle
Pythagoricall Philosophy, the Mass Priest must not pass the number of seven,
by the ordinance of Pope Innocent the third of that name.

The Sophister Biel in his Alcoran of the interpretation of the Mass, adds,
That the number of the Collects are equal to that of the secrets; which is to
say, to prayers secretly mumbled by the Mass Priest, that they might not be
contemned of the people. After the Collects, the Graduall song more sharp and
grave, is a figure of the confession of Publicans, when they heard the
preaching of Saint John Baptist: notwithstanding, this Graduall note is not
sung in the missall sacrifices from Easter till the Feast of Pentecost, to
decypher the happy estate of the time to come.

Besides the sound of the Organs, Seventh part of the Mass.
and musical songs, the ancient Roman Idolaters were wont to use in their
sacrifices, Perfume of incense.
the perfume of incense which they preserved in a little vessel called Acerra.
In this little Thurall Coffer lay the Odors which the Priest took to incense
the Altars, Blond. lib. I. de Romans Trium.
Images, Host or Victime, especially in Masses celebrared to god Ianus, Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
and to the goddess Vest^, Iliacus temporibus veteres non Thure sed Ced^i, and
(...) i fu^^o, deos adolebant.
who rejoiced in the wine and incense offered to them. For in the Trojans time,
in stead of incense they used Cedar or Pomecytron wood for perfume. Wherefore
it was not Leo the Roman Pontifex that first instituted the use of incense,
Alex ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Platina.
and to smoke inc^nse at the Missall Sacrifice: for more then seven hundred
years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ, the ancient Roman Idolaters
practiced incense in their sacrifices. As also the Romans retained the Latin
word which significes Incense, Thus, from the old Greek word (...), Tit. Liu.
3. Decad. 3.
that is to say, I sacrifice: because the idolaters in all their sacrifices
used incense, as likewise they had a portable Incenser, Tit. Liu. lib. 9.
D^cad. 3.
wherewith to incense: Although some have written, that the ancient Roman
Idolaters celebrated sacrifices to the goddess Ceres, and used the gum of the
Pinetree called Tede, in stead of incense: for which cause Ceres was termed by
the Poets Tedi^era. O^id. l^b. 3. F^st


In Titlemans Alcoran, the incense is interpreted for the prayer of the
Mass Priest, that it may mount up into heaven with the odor of swauity: even
as the fume of incense steames up on high. He sophisticates also with Biel his
companion, auerring that the Incense signified the grace of the holy Spirit.
These subtle Alcoranists allege the passage of Tobia, who drove away the
Devil by the perfume of a burnt Liver. The same Biel makes another
interpretation of the incense, as that it figures the unction of Christ by Mary
Magdalen, because Christ was anointed twice, the incense is also twice offered
in the Missall Sacrifice. For another part of the Missall Sacrifice celebrated
by the ancient idolaters, The eight part of the Mas^e.
the Offerto^y of the first fruits comes in, which were offered to the honor
of the gods, Plin. lib. 11. cap. 3
in whose name the sacrifice was solemnized. This offering belonged to the
Mass Priest, and he might freely carry it home unto his house, for the
nourishment of himself and his family. Notwithstanding there were other
offerings distributed to such as were indigent. Afterward through the
Missalians avarice, this use was converted into an offertory, or offering of
gold or silver to line the purse, which some attribute to Leo the Roman
Pontifex; though this offertory had been practiced more then a thousand years
before his time. And for a justification hereof by the Roman Stories, when
Numa had instituted all the Ministers of his Religion, Blond. lib. 2. de Romans
Trium.
as Pontifes, Augures, Saliens, Fecials, Curioes, and others, he also
constituted means to nourish and maintain them. Sacerdotiorum sieve
beneficiorum duo eraat genera: vnum, quorum colla^io adremp: aut principem, aut
ad pontificum collegiu^ spectabat: alterum, quorum collatio ad aliquam
f^mil^am, eiusque successores pertineb ^t: quae benefi^ia (...) is patronatus
censebantur. Blond. lib 2. de Romans triumph. Disp^ns^tion to hold many benefices.
He caused a fundamental allowance to be raised out of the public reuennues
for the maintenance and entertainment of religious vestals.

After his example, many particular men did the like, so as their benefices
grew rich by these foundations or annuities: and these benefices were of two
kinds; one at the presentation and inauguration of a Prince, of the
Commonwealth, or of the College of Pontifes: the other were at the
presentation of some particulars, patrons of the same benefices by them
founded, and endued with great richesse. Over which ben^fices the high Roman
Pontifes had usurped a power to give dispensation for the holding of two
together, as in Titus Liuius it is related of Fabius Maximius, Tit. Liu. lib.
30.
who by a dispensation held two benefices when he was created Pontifex, more
then two hundred years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. This was
therefore the first reuennne of Missalian sacrificers to have benefices richly
founded. Foundation of Benefices. Offertories.
Their second reuennue or emolument, grew by offertories, offerings or
oblations. The third reuennue confisted of annual means and contributions,
First Fruits and vacancies.
as the first years fruits, which the idolatrous Roman Pontifes were wont to
take, Tertia, Sacer dotiorum opulentia, a solutionibus proueniebat, quas
inferiores, superioribus Pontificibusim pendebant, quale apud nos est, cum
Pontifici Romano fructus primos, antisiites and his minores Sacerdotes ad
obtinenda beneficia pecuniam dissol^unt. Blond. lib 2. de Rom triumph. Viuentes
(...) deos haberent propitios, multa Sacerdotibus largi^bantur faelici^ati
animarum consul turi. Blond lib. 2. de Rom Trium. Cicero in oratione pro demo
sua ad Pontisi (...). Blond. lib. 3. de Romans Trium.
for the vacancy of benefices in their gift, or that they sold and dispensed
with. The fourth reuennue grew from obsequies, anniuersaries, legacies, and
donatiues conferred, to pray to their gods for the souls of the deceased. All
which is verified likewise at this day, by the monuments and sepulchers of the
ancient idolaters. The fifth reuennue came in by amercements, condemnations, and
confiscations, which were adjudged by the Roman Pontifes: As Ciceroes house
and palace when he was banished, were confiscated to the College pontifical:
and specially allotted for sacrifices to be celebrated in the Temple
consecrated to the goddess Liberty. I was desirous by the way, briefly to
recite the reuennues and supportations of the ancient Roman sacrificers, to
the end that men might more and more discern that all abuses and idolatries
succeeding in the Church of Jesus Christ, are not new* but originally derived
or revived from the ancient Roman idolaters, as the foundation of Masses,
Obits, Anniuersaries, Dispensations for holding sundry benefices, pensions,
vacancies, first fruits, offerings, and the Missalian treasure, all
amercements, and confiscations adjudged within the demeans of the Roman
Pontife, with other ordinances revived by new Roman Popes, which have
descended from one to another. To this purpose read in the Roman Stories,
that during the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the second of this name,
there happened a dangerous sedition at Rome, between the Christian and
idolatrous Priests, which strove who should amasse or heap up together most
wealth in the Church by grants, testamentary legacies, oblations and other
inventions: so as the Heathen and Infidel idolaters, who retained yet a Temple
to themselves, called at this day the Church of Saint Peter ad Vincula, fought
with the Christians at Rome, who would have dedicated it to their devotion.

After the Offertory, Chap. 35.
Titlemans Alcoran sets down how the Mass Priest should be silent for a
time, to figure the flight of Christ, or his Disciples fear to confess him
before the Jews. Then this being performed, the Priest sings aloud, per omnia
secula seculorum: because after Christ had hidden himself, he publicly came
forth in Lazarus house: Then he sings Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus; to allude to
the Jews song, when Christ entered into Jerusalem. When this Music ends, the
Priest must murmur in secret, and between his teeth, counterfeiting sorrow,
without any turne-abouts, but then he must express a kind of mute mummery, by
the making of many reiterated croysadoes, as shall hereafter be mentioned.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the round Host, with the Consecration of the same.
NExt to the Offertory, Ninth part of the Mass.
we must come to the ninth part of the Mass, the most rich and most pleasing
for the Missalians. Round host of flower.
This is the Host or victime, which comprehends the end of all this Missall
Sacrifice. In the days of Numa the Magician, Plutarch. in Numa.
the Romans were not yet accustomed to kill, and immolate with the blood of
beasts: but men were appointed to eat and communicate within the Temple,
Pollux. in onom. lib 6 Mysteriis peractis, qui sacris intererant rotundis
panibus quos in honorem Deorum abbibebant stan^es vescebantur, nec nisi
sacrificio persecto vesci licebat Alex. ab Alex l. 4. cap. 17*
after the end of the Missall Sacrifice, small round loaves consecrated to the
honor of the gods, in whose name the sacrifice was celebrated. These little
round hosts of fine meal, were eaten by the Priest, and by the assistants,
standing upright, and not sitting. The flower whereof they were made, was
called Mola, and from thence came this word immolare. There were diverse hosts,
that is to say, little round loaves dedicated to diverse gods, as there were
likewise sundry Missall Sacrifices. With the said round hosts they also offered
wine: the Altars serving for Tables. While the Priests and the assistants in
the sacrifice, eat and communicated together of the said little round loaves
consecrated to the honor of their gods, hymns and thanksgiuings were sung, and
some used the sound of the Organs and Cymbals.

Before the swallowing of this round host, printed with imagery, the Missalian
Doctors ordained the Priest, to utter certain exorcismes, and coniurations,
with many signs of the cross. First, he must make three crosses upon this
round host, to figure the trinall tradition of Christ; that is to say, by the
Father, by himself Christ, and by the holy Ghost, in pronouncing these words;
Haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata. Some other Doctors
Alcoranists and Missalians interpret the third crossing for Judas treason, who
delivered his Master into the hands of the Jews. Besides the above mentioned
three Croisadoes, five other follow: to intimate the five days space from the
day of Palms, to the day of the Passion, or otherwise to represent the five
wounds of Christ; two in the hands, two in the feet, and one in the right side.
Of which five Croysadoes, the three first must be made over the Chalice, and
the round host; to figure the delivery of Christ to the Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, or to signify the price of Christ's sale, that is to say, three
times ten, which import the thirty pence. The two other crossi^gs are made
distinctly; on which is the fourth over the host, and the other over the
Chalice distinctly, to manifest unto us the two persons, of Christ and Judas:
when this is done, the Mass Priest continuing in his fooleries and monckeries,
stretches out his arms, to delineate Christ spread upon the Cross: then, he
lifts the round host printed with imagery on high, that it may be adored:
Afterward, he returns to make three crosses; one over the host, another over
the Chalice, and a third over himself: to play herein the part of three
estates or conditions: of those that are in Heaven, in Purgatory, and in the
earth. Then he thumps upon his breast, to play the penitent thief that was
hanged upon the Cross. This thumping of his stomach must be performed with
the three last fingers of his hand, because the thumb and the next finger are
reserved to consecrate and transubstantiate the round host. Moreover, he must
beat his breast three times, to figure a triple offense, of the heart, of the
mouth, and of real act; exalting his voice, to represent the Thief or the
Centurion which confessed God in the Passion. Six other Croisadoes are
afterward reiterated, three over the cou^red Chalice, to commemorate the three
hours that Christ hung alive upon the Cross; and three other crosses are made
over the open Chalice, and the round host, being once more elevated, to
decypher the three hours, that Christ hung dead upon the Cross. Then does he
add two other crosses, after the Masse-monger has kissed his Chalice, to
describe the mystery of blood and water issuing out of Christ's sides. Besides
all the above mentioned mute mummeries, the Priest must lift the veil over the
Chalice, and release it from the Plataine, to represent the rent veil in the
midst, at Christ's death. This being done, the round host is laid upon the
Chalice, and couched in the corporal, to figure the burial of Christ. When the
Mass priest has plaia the part of the hanged thief, of the traitor Judas, of
Christ, of the Publicanes, he afterward comoediates the Centurion, singing
the Pater Noster. But Durandus Alcoran, by the seven petitions in the Pater
Noster, expresses the seven tears of the Virgin Mary, the seven virtues; or
the seven mortal sins. When this song is ended, the Priest remains silent
for a while, to represent the silence and repose of Christ in the grave.
Another apery or monckery is played by the Mass Priest, with the round host,
which he lays upon the Pix, to decypher the union of his divinity with his
humanity: but when he plays the secret mystery, the host is hidden out of
sight. CHAP. XVIII.
Of diverse parts and sundry Ceremonies belonging to the Mass.
WHen the sacrifice was ended, and the little round hosts eaten, Re diuina and
ceremoniis celebraetis, Sacerdos tunc, I, licet, succlamabat: qua voce illos
qui interfuerant, missos faciebat.
Numa appointed these words to be sung, I, licet, or, Ite, Missa est: which is
to say, go, you are permitted, the assembly is dismissed, to repair home to
their houses. Are not these all the parts of the Missall sacrifice, Alex ab
Alex. lib. genesis dic. 4. cap. 17.
most of which were ordained by Numa the Magician above 700 years before the
incarnation of Jesus Christ: that is, the vestments of the Aube, Mass
instituted by Numa more then 700 years before the incarnation of Christ.
Chasible, Lustrall holy exorcis'd water, with salt, to repel devils: the
Altar, the light Taper, the sweepings and glancings along the Altar, with
prayers and meditations toward the East: Procession, with the Relics and
shrines carried on men's shoulders by the Priests clothed in white surplices; and
crowns upon their heads: the Confiteor addressed to men and women saints; the
sound of the Organs, Canticles, Peans, Hymns, and Odes: the incenser and
incense: the Offetory, the communication of little round loaves consecrated to
the name of their gods; and at last the note, Ite, Missa est? Will you now at
last acknowledge, O Missalians, that you borrowed all these parts and members
in your Masses from the Pompilian religion? Why retain you the name of Mass,
which Jesus Christ called a Supper, Mat. 27.
or the Communion of his body? Why have you made choice of the peculiar
vestments of an Aube, Luke 20.
and painted Chasible, Mark. 14.
from the ancient Roman Idolaters; 1. Cor. 11.
which habits were never appointed you by Jesus Christ? Why have you given more
credit to Pompilians Migicke, for the driving away of Devils with salt,
exorcis'd water, termed holy water, then to the sacred Word and Gospel of
Jesus Christ, Mark. 16.
who enabled you in his name, to repel devils, and not with the Magic of
salt? Who inspired you but the spirit of Numa, to shave your heads round, to
put on white surplices, to carry about shrines in Procession with a banner? When
Jesus Christ celebrated his holy Supper, and instructed his Apostles in the
communion of his body and blood, did he command them to follow the rites of
the ancient Roman Idolaters? to have Altars set forth with Images, to use
windings, and wreathings along the Altar, to be cut round, to have aubes and
chasibles; addressing your Confessions to men and women saints, to sound the
Organs, to perfume the altars and Images with incense, to gape after the
offertory, to bring money to the Coquille for the Priest, to eat little round
hosts consecrated and adorned with imagery, and then after all to sing, Ite,
Missa est.

But you Missalists, I foresee your cautels, wherein (Missalians) you will
readily confess that the main body, and principal parts of the Mass, were
digested and brought in by Numa Pompilius: the further additions
notwithstanding and ornaments were invented by other Roman Pontifes; and
especially by a Monck called Gregory, the first of that name, who attained to
the Papacy: who being instructed in Pythagoricall Magic and Philosophy,
having also studied the laws of King Tullus Hostilius, successor to Numa, to
the end to perpetuate his name by some new addition to the sacrifice of the
Mass, Platina, Volaterra. Kyrie eleyson.
instituted the singing nine times these Greek words Kyrie eleyson.

Gregory held this ninth number in great reverence, Quoties prodigium
nunciabatur, sacrum nouemdiale per nouem dies agebatur.
even as the ancient Roman Idolaters had recourse likewise to the Nouemdiall
Mass, upon any monstrous prodigies or sights. He also ordained, that at the
Missall sacrifice, there should be sung two Hebrew words to accompany the two
Greek words: and on some days these words to be sung, Tit. Liu. lib. 1. decad
1. Alleluia.
Alleluia: being on other days forbidden.

Instead of which Alleluia is sung another song called a tract, with a loud
voice, and a protracted note, in a grave kind of Music, to decypher the
miseries of this age. Now, he that sings the Alleluia must sing with a higher
voice then he that howles the Graduall, as Titlemans Alcoran makes mention. Was
there not M^gicke enough in the Missalians sacrifice without adding these
Greek and Hebrew words? and foisting in Pithagoricall numbers, and the song
Nouemdiall; instituting a distinction of days, where on to sing the Hebrew
words, on other days prohibiting them? and to invent croysadoes and mute
mummeries? Are not these corruptions of the holy Sacrament of the supper
ordained by God? some others augumented this Missal sacrifice, Platina. Sabell.
Gloria Patri, Agnus Dei, Kisse-Pix, instituted.
as Damasus the Roman Pontifice, with a Gloria Patri: Sergius with the Agnus
Dei song thrice: Which Titleman interprets to be a figure of Christ's Ascension.

Innocent with a kissing of the Pix by the Priest.

Which Pix of gold signifies the Divinity of Christ, by the doctrine of the
Alcoran: the Gloria in excelsis by Symmachus, which must be sung with a low and
mild voice, and it represents as Titlemans Alcoran relates, Chap. 15.
the weak and infantine voice of Christ while he was yet in the cradle. O
blasphemous and detestable mummeries of the Son of God! Leo the second
instituted the kissing of the Pix, Chap. 56. and 57.
which Titlemans Alcoran says does signify the union of Christians, and that
the kissing of the Pix was subrogated in stead of the holy Communion observed
in the first and next primative Church to the Apostles. This kisse-Pix is sung
by the Mass Priest in saying; Kisse-Pix.
Pax Domini: and making three crosses upon the Chalice, when the third part of
the Host, is put into the Wine, to intimate the Incarnation of Christ, or to
signify the triple peace, of the time, of the Spirit, and of future eternity.



Furthermore, Canon of the Mass.
there is added the forging of the Missall Canon to Alexander, Gelasius,
Syricius, Leo, and Pelagius. These be pieces patcht together, according to the
humor of the Roman Pontifes, Authors, Restorers, Endowers, and augmenters of
the Missall Sacrifice.

We must not omit the greatest enrichment instituted in this Missall sacrifice,
Platina. Sabell.
which is, to say some passages of the old and new Testament, called Epistles
and Gospels: which the Missalians have cut out, and mixed with Pompilian
Idolatry, and therein profane the Law of God, Epistles and Gospels cut out in
the Mass.
as Sergiu^ the Apostate Mahomets Doctor did, who adorned the Alcoran with many
passages of the holy Bible, and forged a gallomawfry of Fables and Heresies, to
be of equal authority with the sacred Law of God.

The Missalians for the song after the Epistles and Gospels, constituted two
persons, to solemnize their Missall dance, which is to say, the Subdeacon who
marches before, to play the part of the first law of the Jews; and the Deacon
who comes after in greater dignity, to represent the Law Evangelical. Which
Deacon caries a pillow against his stomach, to figure an humbled heart: The
Subdeacon receives no benediction from the Mass Priest, as the Deacon does:
because, say the Missalian Doctors, God sent his Prophets inuisibly: But the
Deacon representing the Evangelical Law receives benediction, as being sent
among wolves, in that Christ sent his Apostles visibly like men. The Deacon is
enjoined to we are a crossed stole hanging down his shoulders cross the reins
of the back, to figure force and continency joined together in the
Mass Priest. The Deacon playing his part, and singing some abstracted passage
of the Gospel, in a language not understood either by himself, or the
assistants, must wheel about toward the North, standing upright: because says
Titleman, the Northern parts are cold and abnoxious: for this reason he must
make a cross, to repel Northern Devils. Are not these more blasphemous
i^glings and incantations, then all the Commentaries of the ancient Idolatrous
Roman Pontifes. CHAP. XIX.
Against the Idolaters Antiquity, and long Possession of the Mass.
IS not this long Possession, to confirm the Mahumetan Alcoran, Against the
long possession and prescription of Idolatries.
which the Turks at this day have enjoyed, for above nine hundred years;
having conquered Countries, Kingdoms, and Empires, prospered in their
enterprises, and always observed that abominable law prescribed in their
Alcoran. Against the Turks.


Was the people of Israel excusable before God, Against the Israelites
sacrificing to Moloch. 2 King. 16. and 23.
when they offered sacrifice of the blood of Innocents in the valley of Tophet
to Moloch, by alleging the long possession thereof and inueterate use, for
above 1200 years before this idolatry was wholly abolished by good King Josias?
Did the Israelites murmr aginst the virtuous King Ezechias when he demolished
the brazen Serpent, Against the idolatry of the brazen Serpent. Number. 27.
which was instituted by Gods express commandment, above 900 years before?
Were the people themselves excused of their idolatry committed in the two
Temples erected in Dan and Bethel, wherein were the images of two young Heifers
of gold, under the pretext and allegation of long possession, for they had
continued this idolatry for the space of three or four hundred years? Against
the Jews infidelity.
The Jews that are at this day vagabonds, shall they be excused before the
Majesty of God, by presenting the long possession of their ceremonial Law,
instituted even by God himself above three thousand years ago? As likewise
your selves, Against the Missalians.
O Missalians, can you allege against God a long possession and prescription
of having celebrated Pompilian Masses for a long time, that you and your
predecessors used it, sold and set to sale your missall sacrifices? Is long
possession a sufficient and well grounded reason, as your predecessors the
Roman Senators alleged to the Emperor Theodosius, that their Pompilian
Religion had been observed for above a thousand years? The inducing of long
possession, and use observed of long time, will not be a sufficient reason to
approve your idolatries. Prescription takes no place against God.
For if God out of his unspeakable mercy and patience, has tolerated the Jews
in their infidelity, the Turks in their Alcoran law, and Christians in their
Missalian idolatries, we must not argue nor dispute of Gods incomprehensible
secrets. But in humility re-enter the way of verity, when he is pleased to
point it out unto us, after long and palpable darkness, whereinto people in
all ages have fallen by straying from Gods true institution and worship, as we
briefly before declared of the Israelites an elect people of God, who though
they had Moses and the Prophets, which admonished them by many miracles and
comminations how they ought to honor God, and observe his law, yet would they
never cease idolatrizing with their own fond and humane inventions.

If therefore during the reigns of Princes, Judges of Israel, when this people
was governed as in an Aristocracy, then yielding to the yoke of Kings, as by a
Monarchy: and at last reduced under the government of Priests, embracing the
spiritual and temporal, the law of God was corrupted, the sacrifices and
sacraments adulterated and violated, and idolatry erected and propagated, for
more then sixteeene hundred years from the written law, published by Moses, till
the Incarnation of Jesus Christ; what may be hoped of the people of Rome,
instructed and nourished in all idolatry, like a withered tree, like a bastard
and heathen people?

Notwithstanding that the Missalian heretics may not vaunt of long possession,
in their missall sacrifices, except it be by the restoration of the nine parts
formerly described, borrowed from Numa Pompilius: the other members of the
Mass, were invented at diverse times by sundry Antichrists, corrupters of the
holy Sacraments ordained by God. And to understand the peculiar times and ages
of these famous Architects; Agapit Roman Pope, reigning in the year of Christ
577, added to the Procession instituted after the prescript form of Numa, the
Confiteor, restored by Damasus, reigning in the year 377: the Kyrie-eleyson
was annexed by Gregory, reigning in the year 593: the Collects and Tracts by
Gelasius, reigning in the year 493: and the Sequences by Gotherus Abbot of
Sandale: the Gloria in excelsis by Symmachus, reigning in the year 508: the
Incense and Offertory, renewed out of the ancient Pompilian doctrine by Leo the
third of that name, in the year 800: the Kisse-pix by Innocent the first of
that name, reigning in the year 408: the Agnus dei instituted by Sergius in
the year 697: Dirges for the dead, were invented by Pelagius in the year 558:
the Canon forged by Gelasius, Syricius, Leo and Pelagius, reigning in the year
800: Transubstantiation was instituted by the Roman Pontifes, about the year
of Christ 1062. And therefore what an impudency is it in the Messalian
Alcoranist Doctors falsely to auerre, that the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ
celebrated the missall sacrifice? considering that this sacrifice was not
restored to its integrity since the days of Numa Pompilius, but above 800
years after Jesus Christ. What approved History makes mention that such an
idolatry was committed by the holy Apostles of God? How can we possibly believe
or imagine it, when this great Babylonish Whore was not restored to her mask
and vizard of sanctity but long time after the Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XX.
Against the Idolatry of the round Host.
But we must return to our Roman History, Continuation of Histories.
that we may more and more discover the true original of the Mass. In
discoursing of the parts and principal members of the missall sacrifice, we
related how the ancient Romans, before they were accustomed to sacrifice with
the blood of beasts, used little round loaves consecrated to the honor of their
gods, which they eat standing within the Temples, at the end of the sacrifice.

These little round Hosts of wheat flower were taken by the Missalian
sacrificers, Abominable Idolatry.
but they have augmented the magic and idolatry of Numa Pompilius, in that
they beautify their little round Hosts with pictures and images printed within
the rotundity of the said Hosts, to make them the more sacred, yea that they
may be adored, out of Honorius invention a Roman Antichrist, reigning in the
year of Christ's incarnation 1226, which Numa the Magician never practiced
before, neither grew to this abominable idolatry: what more detestable heresy
can be laid open, then to paint the Majesty of God in the form of humane
similitude as the Anthropomorphites did? Who taught you, O Missalians, Against
the idolatry of round Hosts.
to corrupt the holy sacrament of the Supper of Jesus Christ, in devising these
little round loaves and Hosts, but the Magician Numa? When Jesus Christ
celebrated the holy Supper with the Apostles, did he appoint them to have
little loaves or round Hosts, to print them with humane characters and
effigies, to conjure and exorcise them with crosses and croysadoes in equal or
unequal numbers, and cause them to be adored? Confess therefore, O
Missalians, that the principal part of your Mass, that is, your little round
hosts, to be original from the ancient Pompilian Religion, more then seven
hundred years before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ; who did not institute for
you these rotundall hosts, or that they should be rather round then square,
tryangle or octangle: so far he was from ordaining the round figure
correspondent to Numaes form, that on the contrary, when he instituted the
Sacrament of the Communion of his body, he used a fraction of bread by morsels,
which he distributed to his Apostles, for a Symbol, sign, and figure,
signifying really and sacramentally his body by the power of the holy Ghost.

And the Missalians have not only made choice of the round form in their
consecrated hosts, printed with Images, to make them be adored after the manner
of the ancient Romans: but moreover they have exceeded all other Idolaters. For
in the days of Numa and his successors, those that were present at the Missall
sacrifice, eat standing together the said little round consecrated hosts, they
using no charity toward them that assist in their Missall sacrifices?

Is this to follow the ordinance of Jesus Christ, who brake the bread and
distributed it to his Apostles? Jesus Christ the eternal Priest, stood he
alone near to an altar, munching a little round Host, printed with Images,
when he celebrated the holy communion of his body. O you Missalians, more
detestable, and less charitable Idolaters, then all the other ancient Romans;
can you so sophisticate and iuggle, as to procure your Missall sacrifice
(wherein the Priest alone deuoures the little round printed Host with Images,
giving no share of it to others) to be taken and received as a communion,
causing them that are present at your Mass by an admirable Magic to believe,
that they have communicated together with the Priest, though they neither eat,
nor receive any portion of the round Host.

And yet further, for a more extreme Idolatry, the Missalian Doctors
Interpreters inform, that the round Host must be divided into three parts, one
for those that are in Paradise, another for those that are in Purgatory, to
obtain remission of their sins, and a third steept in wine, for those that
are living in the world. But Durands Alcoran sets down, that the three broken
portions of the Host, represents the triple form of Christ's body, sleeping in
the grave, lying on the earth, and afterward raised up from the dead.

Biel another subtle Doctor, not to confess the body of Christ to be broken or
bruised in the round host, deuiseth the fraction of the Host to be made of an
accident without substance. Are not these abominable Heresies, to make souls
that are in Paradise, or Purgatory communicate: instituted by Sergius a
Mahumetan Doctor, by the means of a round Host devoured by the Mass Priest?

But peradventure (Missalians) you may object unto me, the use of the Primative
Church observed in the Communion of the holy Supper, where every one of the
assembly in the Temple, took a portion of the broken bread; being also
consecrated to eat, and communicate together: which custom was retained till
this present day, in your Missall sacrifices, celebrated on Sundays, Communion
of holy bread.
which you cause to be distributed of morsels of holy bread to those present
within the Temple. But this ancient commandment, was maintained only in
picture; because the Missalians abusing the holy Sacrament, have reserved the
round little consecrated Host to be eaten by themselves, A notable difference
between round consecrated hosts and holy bread.
distributing no portion of it to the assistants: for whom they leave morsels
of holy bread, which for the most part were four square.

The round Host is azimall, and the holy bread made with leven: the round Host
is without salt, and the holy bread seasoned: the round Host is printed with
Images, and the holy bread is without characters or effigies: the round Host is
adored, and the holy bread received with thanksgiving: the round Host is
devoured by the Priest, and the holy bread distributed to every one of the
Assembly, to communicate and eat thereof: the round Host is in part steeped in
wine, and the holy bread is eaten dry without wine.

To conclude, there is so great a difference between these two several
Communions, as there is between the law of the ancient Idolaters, and the Law
Evangelical: but that they iumpe in one point: which is that both in the one,
and the other, there is a corruption of the holy sacrament of the supper
ordained by God.

CHAP. XXI.
The invention of Transubstantiation, with confutation of that labyrinth of
Idolatry.
WE must now descend to the very bottom of this Idolatrous Labyrinth:
Transubstantiation instituted.
we did recite the history of the people of Israel, who were not content with
the celestial bread, and Manna given unto them by God, while they remained in
the desert, but murmured against God, and Moses his Servant, they demanding to
eat flesh: the people also of pagan and infidel Rome, were not content with
the Pompilian institution in the communion of little round loaves; but that the
Roman Idolatrous Pontifes must needs further ordain the killing and
immolating of beasts, that they might eat, and communicate of the flesh of
victimes in their sacrifices, Blond lib. 1. de Romans triump.
especially the sheep, the Sow, the Goat, and the Ox: which was first
instituted by Euander King of Arcadia. Wherefore, that the Missalians might not
degenerate from the idolatry of their predecessors, they must needs follow this
communion of flesh: and they are not content with their little round azimall
hosts, consecrated, and printed with images; but with time they have invented a
new magic to transubstantiate their little hosts of flower, Hosts made of
flower transubstantiated into flesh, and the wine into blood.
into flesh and bones, the bread being no more bread, but an accident without
substance: and by this means to convert the round host of flower into a carnal
and sanguinolent host.

The wine also offered in their Missall Chalices to be transubstantiated into
blood, the wine being no more wine, but an accident without substance. Was
there ever a more abominable magic, Detestable Heresy.
or a more detestable Heresy then this Missaline transubstantiation? When the
people of Israel murmured against God, because they were weary of eating Manna
and celestial bread, calling for flesh, was the Manna transubstantiated into
flesh, bones, and blood? When the ancient Roman Idolaters, An. Christ. 1062,
in Chronolog. 10. Volateran.
meant to change their round hosts of flower, or meal, and grew to eat flesh
in their sacrifices, did they use this magic of transubstantiation? Wherefore
I freely auerre, that this Missall addition was lately invented by the
Missalians, more then a thousand years after the Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

This Heresy began to spread very much of a Nicholaitan Antichrist climbing up
to the Roman Pontificacie, by the monopoly and suggestions of Hildebrand,
expelling by force the other elected Pope, which was Benedict the second of
that name, Lanfrac: de sac.
in the year of Jesus Christ 1062.

Afterward by a Monopoly held in Saint John Lateran in Rome, it was advanced
during the ecclesiastical tyranny of Innocent the third of that name, about
two hundred years after the Palinodie canonized by Berengarius Deane of S.
Maurice in Angiers. Against which abominable magic and heresy we must briefly
by form of a recapitulation compare the institutions of the Sacraments
ordained by God.

First of all, the fruits of the knowledge of good and ill, Against
Transubstantiation. Tree of life.
forbidden to our first father Adam, as sacred signs and sacraments of fear
and obedience, whereon depended life or death, were they transubstantiated or
converted into knowledge or into death, to leave their nature of being trees or
fruits, reduced to an accident without substance?

The celestial Manna, Celestial Manna.
and the Rock gushing out lively water, Sacraments that had reference to the
holy Sacrament of the supper, The Rock flowing out water.
were they transubstantiated into an accident without substance?

The unspotted Lambs immolated by Abel, Lambs immolated by Abel.
in his acceptable sacrifice to God, were they transubstantiated into any other
nature?

The Fore-skinne circumcised for a note and mark of covenant to the good
Patriarche Abraham and his posterity, Circumcision.
was it converted into an accident without substance?

The blood of the Paschall Lamb, Paschall lamb.
for an assurance of Isreal's salvation, was that converted into any other
substance?

The flesh of the immaculate Lamb, to be eaten on the day of the Passover, a
true figure of the holy Sacrament of the supper, was it transubstantiated into
an accident without substance?

The brazen Serpent, Brazen serpent
which being only beheld, health was granted to the sick, did it not continue
a Serpent of brass? was that transubstantiated, being ordained for a Sacrament
and sacred sign to the people of Israel?

Victimes offered in sacrifice, Victimes sacrificed.
both of beasts of the earth, and azimall loaves, with other sacred signs
ordained by God, for holy signs and sacraments of expiation and salvation for
the people of Israel, were they ever transubstantiated into accidents without
substance?

All sacred signs ordained by God in the Israelitish Church, though they
really and sacramently represented that which was by them figured, and not as a
simple picture without real effect, yet did there never live so detestable an
heretic, which invented or added thereunto this Magic of
transubstantiation. And nevertheless, O Missalians, you must needs confess
that the good and holy Fathers of Israel were adopted, engrafted, and
regenerated by faith in Jesus Christ, begotten before all ages: that they were
nourished, and purchased eternal life by Jesus Christ: that they and we have
but one God, and one only Jesus Christ, one Mediator and Redeeme^: That by
faith, they sacramentally communicated, and participated spiritually of the
blood of Jesus Christ, for their salvation and eternal life: Comparison of the
faith of the ancient fathers of Israel with ours.
That there is no difference touching God, between them who did precede the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, and us that were since his incarnation: but both
they and we are equally the Church of God redeemed by the blood of the just
and unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus. For the rest, they had a faith of the future
promise, and observed the holy Sacraments and sacred Symboles of the Sacrifice
which should be consummated by Jesus Christ: D. Aug. contra Faust. 20. ca. 21.
and cap. 14. l. 19. and contra Petilian. lib. 2. ca. 37, 77.
and we in the new law celebrate the memorial and remembrance of the
sacrifice now finished by Jesus Christ, having a fruition of the promise
accomplished.

If then the Israelites eat the same celestial bread, and drunk the same
saving drink, ^ Cor. 10. August. in Psalm.
which we do by faith in one only Jesus Christ: If they had sacred signs to
represent actually and really the future death of Jesus Christ, even as we
retain sacred signs of his present, or past death: they for the future, and
we for that which is past; why did the Missalians invent this new magic, to
convert an holy Sacrament ordained by God, into a magic of
transubstantiation, and into an accident without substance? I God to approve
his power, Against miracles alleged by the Missalians.
and to manifest the hardness and obstinacy of Pharaoh was pleased to perform
wonderful things by Moses and Aaron, Exodus 7.
by converting a Rod into a Serpent, water of the river into blood, Exodus 8.
and into frogs: the dust of the earth into lice: and then to make the
nauigable sea d^y, Exodus 14.
performing many other miracles: can we by this infer a transubstantiation of
the little round azimall host, printed with images, into an accident without a
substance? In what place of the holy Scriptures, when mention is made of sacred
signs, and Sacraments, or sacrifices ordained by God, is it said that the
sign or sacrament was transubstantiated? But on the contrary, Gods will
accommodating it self to man's infirmity, he ordained from time to time common
signs, for notes and marks of assurance of the thing signified: wherein Gods
power is the more renowned and exalted, in really giving us, what by the sacred
sign is represented by the virtue of faith, and of the holy Ghost, as if the
sign it self had been really transubstantiated by some occular miracle. For
the Sacraments comprehend in them, more spiritual then carnal sense. For this
reason God by his Prophets ever blamed his people of Israel, for understanding
the sacraments too carnally, as succinctly we have before declared.

But tell me O Missalians, when Jesus Christ made it known how himself was
the true bread of life descended from heaven, to confer life eternal; and
how these sacramental words of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, The
interpretation of Jesus Christ touching the eating of his body.
were to be understood, wherewith the Capernaits your Predecessors were
scandalized; did he teach us in this interpretation, that to eat his flesh
should be meant, by a little round transubstantiated host? that the round host
of flower, and the wine, is no more bread or wine, but accidents without
substance? Is this your abominable magic, the doctrine of Jesus Christ.
Nothing less. But Jesus Christ like a true and heavenly Lawgiuer, who can
only sincerely interpret his own law, made answer to the Capernait Doctors,
how they were gross and carnal minded, John 6.
minding only the flesh, as you Missalians do, though the flesh alone profits
nothing: alleging how his sacramental words were spiritual: The flesh says
he, profits nothing: but the spirit quickens. As also, O Missalians, how can
you religiously accord your transubstantiation with the doctrine of Jesus
Christ, which promises and assures eternal life to those, that shall eat
his flesh, and drink his blood, if you conceive these words carnally? For you
cannot be ignorant, but that your own bodies when they have devoured these
round transubstantiated hosts into flesh and bones, drunk and taken down the
transubstantiated wine into blood, notwithstanding live and are mortal through
the necessity of the law. Wherefore eternal life promised by this communion,
cannot be understood by a mortal body, or flesh. And therefore of necessity
you must needs acknowledge, for the most sacred interpretation, that to eat
the body and drink the blood of Jesus Christ, must have reference to a
spiritual and heavenly life: and that the flesh profits nothing, but the
spiritual words; and the communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by
faith and spirit give eternal life. This interpretation is many times recited
by the holy Apost^e St. John, when Jesus Christ himself uses these words, He
that comes to me, shall never hunger; he that believes in me shall never feel
thirst, but have eternal life. Are not these terms intelligible enough, to
express this holy sacrament of the communion of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, without running to your magic of transubstantiation? Comparison of
Baptism with the Sacraments of the Supper.


Another interpretation of the holy Doctor and author of the sacramental law
is described, when Jesus Christ was interrogated by Nicodemus, of the means
how a man might be regenerated, and borne anew. Is it possible says Nicodemus,
John 3.
that a man can return again into his mothers womb? Did Jesus Christ answer
this demand, by affirming that in the holy sacrament of Baptism, the water was
converted into the body, into flesh and blood, and transubstantiated in a
carnal womb, to be there again ingendered and regenerate? Was there not also
as great reason, according to your Magic, to have returned this answer, as
well as in the holy Sacrament of the Supper? for by the one of these two
Sacraments, we are regenerated, and by the other nourisht. Now regeneration is
as admirable to humane wisdom, as nourishment; for conformable to humane and
carnal judgment it may seem impossible, that we can be twice engendered and
begotten. But our good God uses the like interpretation of Regeneration, as of
the communion of his flesh and blood: which is, that these sacramental terms
must be spiritually conceived, and not carnally: for the flesh profits not;
but the spirit quickens. What is of the flesh is carnal, what of the spirit,
spiritual.

The holy Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 11.
relating to the Corinthians what he had received from Gods hand, admonished
them of the coming of Jesus Christ: during the expectation whereof, he
commands them to communicate of the body, and blood of Jesus Christ, by the
fraction of bread, and the cup of benediction called the new Testament, and new
covenant contracted by the blood of Jesus Christ: wherefore seeing we are
assured of the second coming of Jesus Christ, being ascended up into heaven,
and set at the right hand of God his Father: till the day predestinate that he
shall return to judge both the quick and the dead: how will you reconcile
this passage, O Missalians, when by the magic you utter, you make him
descend, and return the body of Jesus Christ in flesh and bone, before the
time preordained for his second coming.

This Magic was by you restored, since the first author of your Missall
Sacrifice Numa Pompilius: who by his magic diuulged, that he made his Nymph
and Goddess Egeria come down from heaven, as also his Jupiter Elicius, by
whose means there were celestial secrets and mysteries revealed unto him. If
by your magic the round consecrated host, was transubstantiated into the true
and real body of Jesus Christ, Numa Pompilius, vt populum Romanorum sacris
obligaret, volebat videri sibi cum dea Aegeria congressus esse nocturnos,
eiusque monituse, quae accepta diis immortalibus sacra forent, insti^uere
Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 3.
the bread being no more bread, but the true body, how came you to be so
presumptuous, to break and tear in pieces the body of Jesus Christ, according
to the invention of Sergius the second of that name your predecessor Roman
Pontife? Are not you far more execrable executioners then your predecessors,
Lieutenants of the Roman Church, which crucified Jesus Christ, and yet they
never tare, nor rent his body in pieces, as he prophesied? And notwithstanding
you are not contented to have broken it into three pieces, but in your Missall
sacrifices you presume to drown and steep one portion in wine, John 19.
transubstantiated into blood, Exodus 12.
to be swallowed, Numb. 9.
and drunk.

To confirm your Magic of transubstantiation: Corruption of the holy
Sacrament.
why took you no order to preserve from corruption your little round printed
Hosts, which you keep and lay up so curiously in reliquaries and boxes, after
they are transubstantiated into flesh and bone, Against transubstantiation.
and into the real body of Jesus Christ? Is it not an abominable heresy to
believe, that the body of Jesus Christ is capable of corruption? Nay, and
oftentimes is eaten, by Worms, Weasels, Rats, and Mice? Can you interpret
this, to be an accident without substance? When your Hosts become many times
stinking and corrupted in your Cybaries? Many times likewise devoured by brute
beasts of the earth, which you cause to be burned, and their ashes laid up in
Reliquaries?

When Victor the third of that name, Herman. Cont.
Pope of Rome, received poison by your transubstantiated Wine into blood:
Blond. Platin.
was this an accident without substance? Or when the Emperor Henry the seventh
of that name, was poisoned, by eating of a little round, consecrated, and
transubstantiated Host, was it without substance, when it procured death? There
was much more appearance for the celestial Manna, given to the people of
Israel, the which though it corrupted, when it was kept; yet that which was
reserved in secret, within the Arc of the Lords Covenant, Nehem. 9.
was preserved without corruption: Psalm. 78. 104.
but yet for all this was it transubstantiated into flesh, Psalm. 16.
and bones, to be called celestial bread* bread descending from Heaven, John
6.
the Bread of Life, or the bread of Angels?

Now it remains for us to contest with the subtle reasons of the Missalians,
who to make a foundation for their Magic, insist carnally upon the word est,
saying, that these words were expressly written: This is my body, this is my
blood, when Jesus Christ instituted the holy Sacrament of his Body and of his
Blood* under the Symboles of bread and wine.

But I desire all those that are zealous of the honor of God, exactly to weigh
the sacred Institution of this Sacrament, by which God meant to symbolize and
signify the communion of his body by the bread, and the drinking of his blood
by the Wine and Cup. All will confess, that the true and principal
nourishment of man's body, is comprehended under the kinds of bread and wine: so
that the term of bread is often taken in the holy Scriptures for the
nourishment and life of Man.

Let us enter into an examination of the passages of the Bible. Genes. 3.
Was not the first Man, created after Gods similitude, for the penalty of his
offense, told, that he should eat his bread with the sweat and labor of his
body? Can any man be so ignorant as not to confess, that this was understood
by the living and life of Man?

When Jacob prayed unto God to give him bread and raiment: Genes. 28.
did he not understand by bread, whatsoever was requisite for his whole
nourishment? When we hear recited, that God rained bread upon the people of
Israel being in the desert, Exodus 16.
and that the Israelites were replenished with this celestial bread: Nehem 9.
This term of bread, Psalm. 78. 6.
was it not conceived by the celestial Manna, sent by God to sustain the
people of Israel?

Is this Manna called the bread of Heaven, Sap. 16.
and the bread of Angels, John 6.
given to the people without labor or travail?

When Mel^hisedech meant to furnish good Father Abraham's Army, Genesis 14.
did he not present him with Bread and Wine?

When Abraham was to gratify and refresh three Angels that appeared unto him:
Gen 18.
Did he not expose unto them bread baked upon the embers? Genesis 21.
Did he not give Agar bread for her nourishment? Genesis 27.
Isaacs Mother to favor her best beloved son, Genesis 43.
gave him bread. Joseph in Egypt offered bread to his brethren for their
nourishment.

When we go about to describe a Famine and scarcity of victual, Genesis 47.
do we not say there wants bread? Numb. 37.
When God promised any mercy or favor to his people that did keep his
commandments; Did he not give them assurance of bread in sufficiency? Tobit.
4.
when he recommends unto us the poor, Psalm. 104.
as his members, commands he us not to give them bread? It is bread therefore,
which nourishes and sustaines the heart and life of man.

When Satan enterprized to tempt Jesus Christ, Mar. 4.
to testify that he was true man: Luke 4.
Did he not make choice of bread, when he incited him to make the stones
bread?

When Jesus Christ celebrated his banquets to give bodily nourishment, Mat. 6.
once to five thousand men, and then again to four thousand persons: Luke 2.
Did he not show his power under the Symbol of bread? When he taught us to
address our prayers to God: Did he not expressly ordain in the Lords Prayer
that we should request of God to give us our daily bread? And bread is not
only mentioned in the holy Scriptures for vulgar and corporal nourishment:
but also in sacrifices celebrated by the Hebrew Priests, and the prescript Law
of Sacred bread ordained by God: Exodus 21.
that was azimall bread without Leaven. Leuit. 24.
Other bread was termed the bread of proposition, which the Priests every
week renewed and eat, Math. 11.
which David used, presented to him by Achimelech the High Priest. 1. King. 27.


Contrariwise the term of bread, is appropriated to the bread of iniquity,
of lies, of sorrow, to polluted bread of Idolaters, to bread of coinquination
offered upon the Altar; Ose 7.
to bread of mourning, and to bread of trembling. The Ephraimites also called
ashy and unturned loaves: that is to say, half hak't, half circumcised, and
Idolaters.

And therefore, O you Missalian Capernaites, you must not be so obdurate, and
inueterate in your carnalities, Deuteronomy. 8.
as not to observe the phrases of the holy Scripture, Mar. 4.
in which bread is oftentimes taken for terrestrial and corporal bread; Luke
4.
as when it was said, that man did not live only by bread, Math. 15.
but also by whatsoever proceeded out of the mouth of God.

Sometimes also bread is taken for the Word of God, and Doctrine. When Jesus
Christ commanded his Apostles to keep themselves from eating leauened bread
with the Pharisees: Math 15.
these terms of bread and leaven, Mar. 7.
are they not expressed by the doctrine of the heretical Pharisees? When the
Cananitish woman demanded grace and mercy for her daughters health, detained in
in a long malady of sickness: did not Jesus Christ answer her, how it was not
lawful to take the Childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs? Was not the bread in
this answer, taken for life and health, and not only for corporal nourishment?

Wherefore if bread be taken for the life of Man, which depends principally of
Bread and of Wine, and that Gods goodness, accommodating it self to our
infirmities, made choice of these two signs and symboles, or notable marks,
to signify his body and his blood; that is to say, the bread, the Wine, these
two provisions being common to all Nations, was this any reason, to build upon
it a carnal transubstantiation, as if God without it were not mighty enough,
really to figure, and represent unto us sacramentally, that life was given us:
yea, life eternal, by the communion of consecrated bread, Math. 26.
and Wine of benediction; these being figures and symboles of his body, Mar. 4.
and of his blood? John 6.


Jesus Christ produced these words, that the Bread is his body, and the Wine is
his blood: he also said, that himself was the Bread of Life, the living bread,
and that he was the living bread come down from Heaven. Furher he says, that
he who eats of that bread, shall live eternally. Does this infer by the
word est, that Jesus Christ is converted and transubstantiated into bread, and
that he is no more Christ, but an accident without substance. O abominable
heresies! have you any more reason, O you Missalians, to interpret these words
carnally, This is my body, to transubstantiate the bread into the body, then
when he testifies, that himself was the bread, to transubstantiate him into
bread, considering that it is written, how the communion of this bread gives
eternal life? Jesus Christ said, Hoc est corpus meum: he also says of
himself, Math. 16.
Hic est panis qui de Coelo descendit: in both these places, John 6.
is not this word est used? And yet must we needs hereupon infer a
transubstantiation, in stead of orthodoxally interpreting the same by a
Metonimy and familiar comparison of bread to Jesus Christ, that we might
apprehend, how eternal life was given us by him, and likewise by him our
spiritual food is ministered, even as by bread, a nourishment corporal?

Howsoever, we must always have recourse to the true expression of Jesus
Christ, the absolute Lawgiver, and Author of this holy Sacrament, who
expounding his own Institution, says in the first place, that he is the
Bread of Life, John 6.
then afterward he says, that this bread is his flesh and his body, which
must be offered for the salvation of the world: he says, his flesh is true
meat, and his blood true drink; he says, that whosoever eats of his flesh,
and drinks of his blood, he will remain in him.

How does he himself expound this Manducation? Jesus Christ by his own words
expresses himself: Whosoever comes to me, John 6.
shall never hunger; and he that beleues in me, shall never thirst. Is not
this a true eating, and a true drinking, never again to be hungry, nor never
to thirst? Must we not in this have faith, which consists in spirit?

To address our selves to Jesus Christ, our celestial bread, our spiritual
drink, wherewith to be satisfied for ever, to quench our thirst of sin
perpetually, must we run to the Magic of transubstantiation, and forge an
accident without substance? Wherefore, O Missalians, do you presume to invent
any other interpretation, then that of Jesus Christ, who witnesses that the
flesh profits nothing; but the Spirit quickens? and that his words are not
carnal, but spiritual, giving spirit and life, by faith and confidence, that
he is the Savior of the world, incarnate, dead, and crucified, to purchase
for us eternal life: and then raised up again, he ascended into heaven, sits
at the right hand of God his Father, John 15.
remaining an eternal Priest, Propitiator, Mediator, and Redeemer.

To return to this term, est, that does so molest the Missalians brains,
that they dream out of it a transubstantiation. If Jesus Christ uttered how he
was the true Vine, John 4.
that God his Father was the keeper, and that we are the branches; Can we
hereupon conclude by this word, est, a Magic of the transubstantiation of God,
into the keeper of a Vine, of Jesus Christ into a Vine, and of our selves into
branches?

If Jesus Christ was said to be the immaculate Lamb that wipes out the sins
of the world; John 10.
can we hereupon induce a transubstantiation? If Jesus Christ said that he was
the door of the sheepe-fold, by whom we must enter to be saved: And that he
is the good Pastor, and we his sheep; must we needs so strain and wrest
these places of the holy Scripture, as to think it necessary, because the word
est is mentioned, to believe a transubstantiation?

When Jesus Christ admonished his Apostles, Math. 5.
saying, that they were the salt of the earth; did he therefore
transubstantiate or convert them into Statues of Pillars of salt, Genes. 19.
as he did Lots Wife? If Jesus Christ said by his Apostles, 1. Cor. 5.
that we are the Temples of God, in which the holy Ghost inhabits; 2. Cor. 6.
must we therefore imagine, that we are transubstantiated into a mass of
stone?

If the holy Apostle writ, 1. Cor. 10.
that Jesus Christ is the Rock, out of whom came living water, to wash and
purge us from our sins: Must we wrest out of this a transmutation, and
transubstantiation of Jesus Christ into a Rock, or a material stone?

If the holy Apostle testifies, 1. Cor. 12.
that we are the body of Christ: may we by this infer, that we are
translated, and now no more men, but transubstantiated into an accident without
substance?

I readily foresee, O you obdurate Missalians, that you will object all these
pre-alleadged places: wherein this word est, is, and make no mention of the
Sacraments, which must the more exactly be observed, in that these be sacred
mysteries ordained of God: which is most true.

And this word est, is not only found in the holy Scriptures formerly cited:
but when we speak of holy Sacraments first instituted by God for his people of
Israel; Genesis 17.
is it written, that Circumcision is Gods alliance and Covenant?

In the other holy Sacrament of the Communion of the Paschall Lamb; Exodus 10.
13.
was it said that the Lamb was the Passover, which is to say the passage? But
shall we induce hereupon a Magic of transubstantiation? Will you not
confess, O Missalian transubstantiators, that in these passages of the holy
Scriptures, speaking of holy Sacraments, that this word est, can not be
otherwise interpreted, then to signify some real performance: Genesis 17.
and that Circumcision was a sign and a mark of the Covenant and alliance
contracted by God with Abraham. Numb. 10.
The Paschall Lamb was also a sacred sign of the passage, Psalm. 68. 94.
for a remembrance of their delivery out of Egypt? Mat. 21.
The Arc of alliance for another Sacrament, John 2.
of which it is written, that it is the truth and power of the Lord: Must we
understand by this, that it was transubstantiated into the real Majesty of
God? We must, we must I say, interpret the holy Scriptures with discretion,
and in humility without sophistication, and without Magic, soundly to
apprehend the conception of words, and not stick so close to the letter, which
kills: but receive the Word of God in lively spirit.

If then the sacred Arc is called the Lord, and nominated God, because in it
he exercised his omnipotent power, and declared his Oracles and mysteries, by
exterior signs, to draw the Israelitish people to be mindful of God, and to
fear and obey him: If Jesus Christ also said that he was bread which came
down from Heaven, the Bread of Life; and that the Wine was his blood: that the
Cup is the New Testament, by the external signs of Bread and Wine, to give us
to understand, that our life and saving nutriment depended only on Jesus
Christ, and that by his death and bloodshed, we have assurance of eternal
life; even as bread and Wine serve for corporal nourishment, and that he meant
and ordained these sacred signs, to be to us for Sacraments, to approve and
confirm our faith: Did he determine we should hereby Capernize, and Nicodemize,
to enquire, or make doubt of Gods power how it is possible to eat the body, or
drink the blood of Jesus Christ: how we can possibly be regenerated and borne
anew? Seeing the promise was made unto us by the Word, wherefore, have you, O
Missalians, conceived a carnal transubstantiation, distrusting in the
incomprehensible power of God? May it not suffice you simply to believe, that
the body and blood of Jesus Christ was really and sacramentally offered, to
communicate thereof for our spiritual nourishment, and to grant us eternal
life, through the Bread and Wine consecrated, with giving of thanks; the bread
being truly his body, and the Wine his Blood, which we must worthily receive
by faith, and purity of conscience, as sacred signs and marks of the divine
Character, without searching too subtly after the means, other then the
plain interpretation of Jesus Christ, that the flesh profits not, but the
Spirit quickens, and that his words are spirit and life? Should we doubt
whether God has power, by the symboles of Bread and Wine consecrated to make
us communicate of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, though the bread remain
bread, and the wine wine? If it were otherwise, this could be no Sacrament, but
rather called a Miracle. As when Jesus Christ converted the Water into Wine,
he then used the miracle of transubstantiation, John 2.
changing the Water into Wine: But he ordained not this for a Sacrament, as he
did the communion of his body and blood by the sacred figures of Bread and Wine.

Was it not also as easy for God to change the Wine into blood, Exodus 4. 7, 8.
or the bread into flesh, as for Moses and Aaron, to change the water of the
River into blood, to confirm the hardness of Pharaohs heart; or when the clouds
were turned into the flesh of Quails, Exodus 16.
that rained upon the people of Israel? Nevertheless, God did not ordain,
that these miracles should serve for ordinary Sacraments: but herein he
applied himself to our infirmity, exhibiting to us sacred, but not
transubstantiated signs, and yet are not vain nor fantastical: but signs
external that we may behold* touch, eat* and taste, remaining still in their
substance: and nevertheless they represent sacramentally what is by them
comprehended, and intimated, wherein consists the approbation of our faith, to
manifest by a sacramental work and ministration, that we are in the number
of the regenerate, and sustained by the holy Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Supper.

CHAP. XXII.
Comparison between the two holy Sacraments.
IF we may presume to make comparison of the two holy Sacraments of Baptism,
Comparison of the two holy Sacraments.
and of the Supper, though there be a difference between it, and
regeneration, which is not reiterated: For it suffices that we be once
regenerate, and begotten anew; but this spiritual nutriment is often renewed,
according to the course of nature, and other differences, very amply described
by the holy Apostles, and Ministers of Gods Word. Notwithstanding the same end,
the same Jesus Christ is represented as well in Baptism, as in the Supper. By
the blood of Jesus Christ we are regenerated, Tit 3.
and by the same blood nourished. Ioh. 3 6.
By the blood of Jesus Christ we are renewed, Romans 11.
set, and engraffed; and by the same blood we are entertained and preserved
from hungring or thirsting for ever. John 6.
By the blood of Jesus Christ, we cast off our old corrupt skin, Gal. 3.
and put on his body, Ephesians. 4.
from which likewise we receive nourishment, and eternal life. By the blood
of Jesus Christ, we have access and entry into the Kingdom of Heaven: And by
the same blood, we have fruition of the same kingdom.

In this sense the holy Apostle testifies, that we were all baptized by the
virtue of the holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.
and we are likewise drunk of the same spiritual drink, 1. Cor. 10.
given unto us by Jesus Christ. Be not these comparisons drawn out of the holy
Scriptures? to witness that Jesus Christ is the only aim and scope, whereto
we must tend both in Baptism and the holy Supper? If therefore that the signs
of sacramental water in Baptism, and of Bread and Wine in the Supper of Jesus
Christ, are sacred Signs, Earnests, Gages, Hostages, Symboles, Seals, and
Sacraments, instituted by God for an assurance, and approbation of our faith:
Wherefore, Against the Missalians.
O Missalians, seeing you have invented a Magic of transubstantiation for the
Sacrament of the Supper: why did you not likewise with the same Magic
sophisticate the Sacrament of Baptism? Why have you not constituted that
sacramental water, after it is by you exorcis'd and coniur'd with salt, to
repel devils, to be transubstantiated into the blood of Jesus Christ; the
water being no more water, but an accident without substance, as you have
forged by the Bread and Wine? What difference do you assign, but Sophistries,
Sophismes, and Missalian subtilties? If you persevere in your heresy, John 3.
4, 7.
by reason of this word est: this word is also used in the water of Baptism,
Tit. 3.
which is termed renouation, and regeneration; Gal. 3.
it is named the holy Spirit, and the Vestment, by, and with which we are
reuested, renewed, and regenerated in the blood of Jesus Christ. Seeing
therefore you acknowledge, O Missalians, that you could never yet meet with a
second Berengarius, to institute another Decree of a Palinody, for the
extending of your Magical transubstantiation, to the sacred water of Baptism,
and by the same means likewise to transubstantiate your lustrall Plegme and
Spittle; your Oil, your Creames, your Salt, and other Drugges, wherewith you
have corrupted the holy Sacrament of Baptism; Against the corrupters of
Baptism.
why are you so inueterate, and obdurate in your Pompilian Religion, as to hale
Jesus Christ from the right hand of his Father, to make him in body and blood
to descend by your muttered Magic, like another Jupiter Elicius, before the
day preordained for his second coming? Luke 1.


I may well propound unto you the similitude of the Sun, Mal. 4.
called by some Apostles the Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, Comparison of
the Sun of Jesus Christ, which Iustine the Martyr uses in his Treatise of the
Exposition of faith, chap. 2.
because light comes from Heaven, by this luminous and glorious sphericall
Planet: and so spiritual light is exhibited to us by Jesus Christ, who out of
the night and darkness of sin has brought us into the brightness, and
clear sunshine of his grace.

You may now therefore understand, carnal and gross Capernaites, A notable
comparison of the Sun, to utterly confute the erroneous doctrine of
Transubstantiation.
this sufficient and evident comparison, to intimate that the infinite power of
God, is much more complete and perfect, then your abominable invention of
Transubstantiation. Will you not acknowledge, except your eyes be blinded, and
obfu^cated with the palpable darkness of obstinacy, that the Sun gives us his
light, his force, his heat and vigor, and yet nevertheless, the body it self
of the planetall Sun remains and continues in his sphericall Orb? Do you
not use to say ordinarily in common language when the window of an house is
open on that part where the Sun shines, that the Sun is come into the
house, although the Sun remains still in the Firmament? Must we therefore
violently hale and pull the body of the Sun, to make it descend, and be
transubstantiated into this earthly substance, before it can afford its heat,
beams, light and nourishment, to Plants, Trees, Herbs, and Beasts of the
earth? Are you so brutish, O Capernaits, as not to recognize that the true
Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, has more power then this Astrall Sun,
being but mortal, and created? If then a mortal creature has this power to
infuse into us the virtue and efficacy of his body, by his beams, light, and
heat, extended really and effectually over the whole earth, the body remaining
still in its heaven: and shall we not believe that God an immortal Creator
has much more power to grant us the true Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ:
to give us the virtue and power of his body and bloodshed for us by the beams,
light, and heat of his holy Spirit, except he be by your Magic plucked from
the right hand of God, and his body drawn out of heaven, to be
transubstantiated upon earth? Why should not Jesus Christ have this power to
afford us his light, and to offer his body and blood to enter into us, if by
faith and a pure conscience we be ready to receive him, by the efficacy of his
holy Spirit, as well and better, then the sphericall Sun can enter into our
houses, with his force and power, and never be drawn out of his heaven, to be
transubstantiated? The Sun is an entire body created, residing in heaven: the
cause of the generation of Plants, Trees, and Herbs, which by his force and
calidity, gives sustentation to whatsoever lives upon the earth, and in one and
the same moment, has power to quicken, heat, and nourish, an infinite number of
Plants, Trees, Herbs, and beasts of the earth; and yet his body is never
separated, divided, drawn out of his sphere, nor transubstantiated. The body
also of Jesus Christ which he assumed up into heaven, set at the right hand of
God: has not that more force, more virtue, more power, to regenerate, nourish
and sustain us; to give us his virtue, light and beams; to inspire, quicken,
illuminate and nourish us, and in a moment to make us all by faith partakers of
his body and blood: to make us members of his members, united in, and by him,
through his true promise, comprehended under the symboles and sacred signs
commended unto us, till the second coming of his humanity be revealed upon
earth? Wherefore then O Missalians, have you devised this Magic of
transubstantiation, to blaspheme against God, to impair his omnipotency, and
disable his virtue more then you do that of the sphericall Sun, but his
creature? Why should you hale the body of Jesus Christ out of heaven, before
the preordained time, to transubstantiate it into your little round azimall
hosts printed with image^y, which you cause to be ador^d, seeing Christ as
God, Jesus Christ as God assists all.
there assists his Church perpetually, and has the power to regenerate, feed,
and sustain us: yea, with an eternal life and nourishment, by his most
assured promise, testified by the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the sacred
Supper.

For other more familiar and domestical comparisons, consider O Missalians,
how earthly and mo^tall Princes are reputed, reverenced and honored by such
sacred signs as they ordain; I will only propound unto you two, which is to
say, wax and metals: of one the Princes seal is composed, with which grants,
pardons, and remissions are sealed, charters, and privileges by the Prince
conferred. He that falsifies this seal is he not punished as in case of high
treason, even as if he had outraged the person of the Prince? Does not this
seal represent his own person, even as if himself were present?
Nevertheless the seal though it be called the seal of the Prince, is not
transubstantiated, but still remains wax: but otherwise having received the
sacred character of the Prince, Familiar comparisons of Princes seals and
coynings, which if they be conterfeited or falsified, the counterfeiters thereof
are executed as offenders to the Princes person.
being then no more called wax, but the Princes seal.

Also the metals of gold or silver coined with the Princes stamp, do serve
for money, although they are no more called gold nor silver; but having once
exchanged their names at the Princes will, they are either crowns, Angels or
Pistols, or else shillings, groats or penies, or other such like names; they
are yet notwithstanding metals of the very substance as they were before,
there is but that difference, that they have the Princes impression upon them
by and in which he is represented really: so that whosoever clips or falsifies
that money, is sorely punished by death as a fellon and a Traitor his Prince,
for it is in a manner as bad, and as if he had offended and conspired against
the Princes own person; by far greater reason the bread and the wine
consecrated and ordained to be Sacraments of the precious body and blood of
Christ Jesus, represents them really, 1. Cor, 11. 13.
and not by picture. Wherefore whosoever receives it unworthily, commits a
heinous crime against the supreme and Divine Majesty of him, to his eternal
damnation; but it is not to conclude a transubstantiation by a most abominable
coniuration or witchcraft.

But if you Massalians or Mass Priests, Nicholaits and transubstantiators, be
not sufficiently satisfied with Jesus Christ and his Apostles interpretations,
as likewise with those similitudes and familiar comparisons, Here is proved by
the Doctors the words of Christ concerning the Sacrament of his body and blood,
to be spiritually taken and not carnally, and so utterly Transubstantiation is
confuted.
to reduce and bring you to the sincere way, and certain form ordained of God
for to celebrate his holy Sacraments, in abolishing your Pompilian and
Missafique Idolatries, eiecting from you your abominable witchcraft of
transubstantiation. At the least will ye not believe at all the interpretations
of the anci^et authors of the Church: hearken but to the sayings of St.
Augustine against Adamantine that notable heretic: Even as the blood, says
he, in many parts and places of the holy Scripture is said to be the water,
the Stone also to be Christ; L. 8. Aug. chapter 12. The authority of ancient
Doctors.
even so the bread is said to be his body: which three places must be
understood and interpreted to be sacred signs and figures, then when this
very author said Christ Jesus uttered these words; St. Augustines
interpretation.
Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, Lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. and in
praefat. Psa. l. 3.
in presenting and breaking bread to his Disciples, he gave them the sign of
his body: for otherwise it should seem to be a thing both inhumane and
unlawful, to devour the precious flesh and blood of Jesus Christ; if there
were not the figure of the bread and wine for to keep in memory his flesh and
blood, the body of Christ having been sacrificed to God his Father for our
life and eternal nourishment. Lib. 10. de Cant. des. cha. 5. ca. sacrificium de
consecr. distinct. 2. Tertullian. lib. 1. and 3. 4.
Again the same author uses this interpretation, The Sacrament visible is the
new Testament, that is to say, the sacred sign of the invisible sacrifice: the
like interpretations are described by Tertullian against that heretic
Marcion, Vt quid paras dentem and ventrem? creed and manducasti, ea. vt quid,
de consecrat. distin. 2. Aug. in lib. de remed. paeniten. and in Joan. tra. 25.
cap. 6.
Christus acceptum panem corpus suum fecit, dicendo, hoc est corpus meum: id
est, figura corporis mei. Wherefore then O Missalians, have you not followed
the authority of these holy Doctors, of the Church which would not blasphem
against God by the magic of transubstantiation, but have freely and virtuously
acknowledged the Sacrament to be a visible sign or sacred figure, signifying
by faith and spirit that which is invisible? S Hiero in epist ad Ephef.
wherefore do you prepare the mouth and the belly for to devour the body and
blood of Christ corporally, really and carnally? Ca. dupliciter ead. distinct.
why offer you not your selves by true and lively faith for to eat worthily
Christ Jesus? S. Gel^se against Eutychius and Nestorieus.
Why have you not understood the manducation of the body of Christ, by the
notable distinction of that learned Doctor S. Jerome, S. Ambr^se in the book
of Sacraments, cap. 1. and 11.
saying, the flesh of Christ Jesus is to be understood carnally, when it is
spoken of the shedding his blood, and crucifying of his body for our salvation;
but spiritually, when it is said that his flesh is the true meat for us to
eat. For another proof, I will allege that learned Prelate Gelase Bishop of
Rome, the which disputing against the Heretics Eutichines and Nestorians,
does affirm the bread and wine consecrated and made Sacraments are
nevertheless in substance bread and wine, but to be signs of the body and
blood of Christ Jesus by the mystery of the Sacrament. And if ye desire larger
testimonies, Saint Ambrosius upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians
has explicated and made manifest, that the eating of the bread and the
drinking of the wine does signify the flesh and the blood of Christ Jesus
offered for us. Origin. in Leu. ho^^. 7.
Origin likewise in his Homilies teaches the Sacraments to be figures, which
we ought to examine really, and not carnally: because says he, that those
words, Hoc est corpus meum, not understood spiritually kills the soul, when he
writes to eat the flesh of Christ. Wherefore S. Chrysostom admonished the
people to honor that holy Sacrament in offering himself his soul to God, for
the which Christ Jesus was crucified; and that by that holy Sacament of bread
and wine, is signified to us the similitude of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ. For resolution, we must follow and be ruled, according to the
instruction and interpretation of our holy Savior Christ Jesus and his
Apostles, S. Chrysostom. hom. 31. chapter 15. com. 1.
to honor and reverence his holy Sacraments instituted of him by exterior
signs, to lift up our hearts and raise our spirits and minds to heaven, Psalm.
12.
for to comprehend that which by those signs is represented to us, and not to
esteem, hold, and account them as vain pictures or apparitions; but endeavor
to receive them worthily by lively faith and virtue of the holy Ghost, to the
end to be fed and nourished with celestial bread, to the salvation of our
souls thereby to attain life eternal.

Let us then be assured in Christ Jesus as members of his body that we may be
reduced and brought all into one unity, 1. Corinthians. 10.
for to communicate and eat the same bread and drink the same wine compounded
of many grains united together, 1. Corinthians. 12.
to the end that we may say with the holy Apostle, All we faithful are the
body of Christ Jesus, saved and redeemed by his holy body crucified, and
precious blood shed for us, and so remaining permanent in faith in Christ
Jesus, in eating his body and drinking his blood, to believe firmly to have
been crucified and risen from the dead, D. August. in Joan. tra^^. 30. ^rt. 1.
and 3.
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God his Father, until
that he returns as he is ascended with his humanity, and nevertheless his
Almighty power and Divinity to be distributed to us and diffused in earth, and
in all places, especially in his holy Sacraments, which he has left us for a
pledge, and exterior approbation of our faith, for memory and recordation of
the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
To my Noble and most learned Author, on his worthy Name.
I N the Circumference of all Natures frame,
S O honored is (learned Casaubon) thy name,
A S so much need my encomiasticke lines,
A S a small Taper when that Phoebus shines
C Leare at noone day:
C An this so litterate Age afford a breast,
A Closet where such profound wit does rest,
S Vch abstruce Learning? these he did combine
A Peerlesse Grecian, and unmatched Divine:
V Nder the wounds of his Polemicke pen
B Led the Idolatrous Whore: Rarest of men,
O Ver all Nations flies thy far-spred Name,
N O angle but resounds thy datelesse fame.
The admirer of his works, ABRAHAM DARCIE.


