Catascopos.

A SVRVEIGH AND CRITIQVE CENSVRE OF THE CHRISTIAN WORLD.

Est cuivis rigidi facilis censura cachinni:
Esto. Ego fungosae plebis ludibria sperno.
LONDON From the Press of WILLIAM STANSBY, and are to be sold by John
Smethwicke. 1615.

Cum sapiant pauci, paucis placuisse laboro,
Hoc tantum cupio, complacuisse bonis.

Catascopos.
Suus cuique genius suum et ingenium.
FAr from the turmoils of this worlds affairs,
Whence still succeeding seas of endless woes,
Like Hydra's heads inflicting new despairs,
Conforund the soul with false deluding shows:
In secret Cel, with sweet content divided,
I sigh to see how mankind is misguided.
Linquo Coax ranis, Ka coruis, vanaque vanis:
Ad Logicam pergo quae mortis non timet ergo.
Hic vacue curis licet hic cantare sub antro,
Et procule speculo fluctus spectare furentes.

Catascopos.
I see great kings that mighty Septers swaie,
And take their vows, the Gospel to protect:
Give damned Atheism privilege and way,
As though the Gospel were of none effect.
Yet is the Gospel under foul disguise,
Proclaimd the cause, whence Christian wars arisd.
Quicquid delirant reges plectuntur Achiui.

Catascopos.
I see how Moses chaste seat is deforn'd,
By brothel incest or adult'rous fry,
That John and Peter's poverty have scorned,
To glut themselves with sensual Sodomie:
O age, wherein the Lamps that light should shiue,
From virtue, truth and true zeal do decline!
Domus mea domus orationis, etc.
Optime hic suo fungitur officio, qui
studet been vivere.

Catascopos.
I see good laws for godly use divised,
The just man's right, and rigor for offenses
By filthy lucre masqued and disguised.
Truth's but a sound to shadow foul pretenses:
For pride, ambition, ire and avarice
Do dull, dim, blanch and blind the wisest eyes.
Pacis lex, legis ligamentum, iusticia est.

Catascopos.
I see how wars, the Canker of Estate,
Hels image and al commonweals downthrow,
Spring from the proud ambitious hearts debate,
Where rancor, spleen, and envy ouerflow:
Not multitudes of men conquest atchieue:
It Is only god that victory does give.
Arma ira, vindictaque Dei.
Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine fratres.
Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri.
Innocuo sitiens sanguine Romamadet.

Catascopos.
I see craft crept into the clowted shoe:
The ploughmans life that happy lifs disgraced,
Of yore content with fruits that did ensue
From feithful feilds, where al their hopes they placed:
Now to the rest I may it well resemble.
Full taught to swear, forswear, lie and dissemble.
Foelix nimium prior aetas,
Contenta fidelibus arvis.

Catascopos.
I see extortion, and that boundless gulf,
Hight usury, which suck up humane blood,
Devouring live flesh, like an hungry woolf,
And until death, do never mite of good:
Where is old love, which charity men cleepe?
And where is conscience? sunck or sound on sleep.
Divitis ad manes nil feret vmbra suos.
Dormierunt somnum suum, and nihil invenerunt,
Viri divitiarum in manibus suis.

Catascopos.
I see in youth no reu'rence to old years,
Temples are made but marts to traffic in,
Regard to virtue but in feiwe appears,
Good works and almsdeeds are accounted sin:
Freindship is fled, and feithfull love exiled,
Satan so much this last age has beguiled.
-- heu dona bonorum
Sunt breuia, aeternum, quae nocuere, dolent.

Catascopos.
I see a sect of Locusts swarm of late,
That pry into each Prince is Cabinet,
And rampe upon the Majesty of state,
Assassinats, though sheep they counterfeit,
Whose project, is the work of holy good,
Whose practice, poison, strife, rebellion, blood.
Quo, quo scelesti ruitis?
Furor ne coecus, an rapit vis acrior?
An culpa?
-- culpa. vndique tuto
Astutae vulpes penetrarunt viscera regni.

Catascopos.
I see another sect their opposite.
That leap beyond the limits of the law,
And personat the curious hipocrite,
Of King and Church without respect or awe:
Instain'd with Phresie, of neiw reformation,
That broach contempt, pride, peril, innovation.
Alter et alterius hostis, vterque nocet.

Catascopos.
I see the true Euangiliques disposed,
And held betwixt the is two extremes, at naught,
The one with foreigne stratagerns disguisd;
The other with domestique rancor fraught:
And both they, from their proper ends, conspire,
To set all states and king domes on a fire.
Pestiferum mira propinant art venenum,
Et miser as blando circundant ore puellas.

Catascopos.
I see the nests, that nourish and maintain
Those harpies, built in place of eminence:
Courts, City, groves hills, valleys and the plain,
Shroud and support their vncurbd insolence:
The Sentinels, that should the feilds defend,
As Scar-crowes, but amaze, but not amend.
Nihil interest, faueas ne sceleri,
an illud facias.

Catascopos.
I see a Chaos of the universe,
Religion, laws, minds, manners, tongues tranform'd,
Whilom the direct current, now reuers,
The Luster of the holy place deformed,
Where sin does sit and swaie the stedles helm:
Whiles Schism and sects poor virtue ouerwhelme.
Tempora temporibus succumbunt prima futuris.

Catascopos.
I see that triple mitred monsters head
Gilt with the gores of sacred majesty,
His Altans Ore with guiltless blood be spread,
But that is not all, O unhard butcheries!
He looked of late, at one blow, to devour
A King, Queen, Prince, and kingdom in an hour.
Stat cruor in templis, multaque rubentia caede
Lubrica saxa madent, nulli sua profuit aetas,
Non genus aut sexus.

Catascopos.
I see, O God! and must I hold my peace?
Are not the lives of Kings and Princes dear?
Will here, think you, their rabious fury cease?
No, no, more plots in practice are, I fear.
Let Jacob know, no true peace to enjoy,
When Egypt still affronts him with annoy.
Incauta semper nimia praesumptio est
and sui negligens.

Catascopos.
I see the Bees, whose feithfull zeal inclined,
Their hiues with wax and honey to replet,
By slothful drons confronted and confined,
That suck the sweet, for which they never swet:
But hog-like francke and feed their glottonie,
Whiles their poor flock vnsed and famisht lie.
Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas.
-- et sic
Infoelix lolium, steriles dominantur auenae.

Catascopos.
I see the cureles Gangren that insect.
And mortifies the bodies soundest part,
Disperse it self with dangerous affects,
Through all the veins, to seize upon the heart:
And yet I see not art nor policy,
Give rupture to that mortal malidie.
Aditum nocendi, persido prestat fides.
Opprime, dum nous sunt, subitimala semina morbi,
Antidotus cinerinam sua sera venit.

Catascopos.
I see examples, that teach to be wise,
Remote, and of too recent memory,
Whose yet hot blood, ascended to the skies,
Call for reueinge, but held as dreams; and why?
For Sirens songs do lul our sense sleep
Our dogs are dead, wolfs ouerrun the sheep.
Fistula dulce canit, voluorom dum decipit auteps,
Cordaque foedifragum mortaliae fascinat aurum.

Catascopos.
I see the two forerunners of the fall
And period of Estats and Monarchies,
Venting their venim blancht with sugared gall,
Two fatal Sisters Pride and Luxuries:
That with their unknown strange effects portend,
Or woe, or wrack or ruin in the end.
Luxus and superbia non aegrotae modo,
Sed periclitantis reipublicae inditia.

Catascopos.
I see all sins have aesta's height over past,
And swel at full with Autums surcharged wonder,
Expecting that both sith and sickle have,
To cut the proud apostum'd bulk in sunder:
That Sodom-like Rhamun sia do cosume,
Boulk, stuble, flraw and chafe with quenchles fume.
Grandia supplicijs grauibus peccata luuntur.

Catascopos.
I see the Eagles in confined eye
To toure about the earth's inheritance,
Scorning all birds that would him timber bye,
To interrupt his self sole governance:
Whose sublimed thoughts which no mean can contain,
Shall know, against God, man's counsels are but vain.
Quicquid in altum fortuna tulit, tuitur a leuat.
Deposuit potentes de sede sua, etc.

Catascopos.
I see the glorious Churches of the East,
Whose splendour long time, till of late had shined,
Now by the common enemy possessed.
Shall homebred discord still our Judgments blin'da
And shall our selfs be stirs-men to our woe?
I say no more, God grant it be not so.
Propter iniquitatem populi transferetur
regnum de gente in gentens.

Catascopos.
I see, and what? O see, but sight no more,
To weep or laugh were passions, bootles, vain.
Compute the scasons that have past before;
From peace to wars, from wars to peace again:
And thou shall say, it is decreed from hie,
Times have their turns, ask not Jehovah why.
Mundus semper sibi similis.
Currunt sic ordi ne f^
Rotat omnia fatum.

Catascopos.
Cogita super nos, O Deus, cogitationes pacis and non afflictionis, and des
finem and patientiam, and inuocabimus te, and viuemus. Amen.

Verbum Domini manet in aternum. -- non me mordax mendax
infamia terret. FINIS.

