The lamentacion of a sinner, made by ye most virtuous Lady, Queen Caterin,
bewayling the ignorance of her blind life: set forth and put in print at the
instaunt desire of the right gracious lady Caterin Duchess of Suffolk, and
the earnest request of the right honorable Lord, William Parre, Marquess of
North Hampton.

Wiliam Cicill having taken much profit by ye reading of this treatise
following, wishes unto every christian by ye reading thereof like profit with
increase from god.
Most gentle and Christian reader, if matiers should be rather confirmed by
their reporters, than the reports, warraunted by the matters, I might justly
bewail our time wherein evil deades be well woorded, and good acts evil
cleped. But since truth is, ye things be not good for their praises, but be
praised for their goodness, I do not move the to like this christian treatise,
because I have mind to praise it, but I exhort the to mind it, and for the
goodness, thou shall allow it, for whose likinge I labor not to obtain, only
moved by my example, their judgment I regard chieflye confirmed by by the
matier. Truly our time is so disposed, to grant good names to evil fruits,
and excellent terms to mean works, that neither can good deeds enjoy their
due names being defrauded by the evil, neither excellent works can possess
their worthy terms being forstalled by the mean. In so much that men seek
rather, how much they can, then how much they ought to say: inclininge
more to their pleasure, the^ to their judgment, and to show them selves
rather elo^uent, then the matier good: so that neither the goodness of the cause
can move them to say more, neither the euilnes less. For if the excellencye
of this christian contemplacion either for ye goodness herin to maruaill,
appering either for the proffyt herupon to the reader ensewinge should be with
due commendacion followed, I of necessity should either travail to find out
new words, the old being anticipated by evil matiers, or wish that the
commen speech of praising were spared until convenient matters were found to
spend it: such is the plentye of praising, and scarcenes of deserving.
Wherefore lackinge the manner in words, and not the matier in dead of high
comme^dacion, I am compelled, to keep in my judgment with silence, trusting
who^ my reaport could not have moved to like this present treatise, the
worthiness of the matier shall compel to give it honor. Any earthely manne
would sone be stirred to see some mystery of magike, or practice of alchumye,
or perchance some enchauntemente of Elements: But thou which art christened,
have here a wonderful mystery of the mercy of god, a heavenly practice of
regeneracion, a spiritual Enchauntement of the grace of god. If Joy and
tryumphes be showed when a kings child is borne to the world, what Joy is
sufficient, when gods child is regenerated from heaven.

The One is flesh which is borne of flesh: The other is spirit, which is
borne of Spirit. The one also shall wither like ye grass of the earth in
short time, the other shall live in heaven beyond al time. If the finding of
one lost sheep, be more joyful, then the having of ninety and nine, what Joy
is it to consider the return of a straye child of almightye god, whose
return teaches the nyentie and nine to come to their fold? Even such cause
of Joy is this, that the Aungells in heaven take comfort herin: be thou
therefore joyful where a noble child is newly borne: show thy self glad
where the lost sheep has wunne the hole flock: be thou not sad, wherein
Aungelles rejoice. Here may thou see one, if the kind may move the a woman,
if degree may provoke the a woman of high estate, by birthe made noble, by
marriage most noble, by wisdom godly, by a mighty king, an excellent Queen, by
a famous Henry, a renoumed Katheryne, a wife to him that was a king to
realms: refusinge the world wherein she was lost, to obtain heaven wherein
she may be saved: abhorringe sin, which made her bound, to receive grace,
whereby she may be fre: dispising flesh the cause of corrupcion, to put on the
spirit, ye cause of sanctificacion: forsaking ignorance wherein she was blind,
to come to knowledge, whereby she may se: removing supersticion, wherewith she
was smothered, to enbrace true Religion, wherewith she may revive. The fruit of
this treatise (good Reader) is thye amendment: this only had, the writer is
satisfied. This good lady thought no shame to detect her sin, to obtain
remission: no vileness, to become nothing, to be a member of hi^, which is al
things is all: no folly to forget the wisdom of the world, to learn the
Simplicity of the gospel: at the last, no displeasauntnes to submyt her self
to the scole of the Cross, the learning of the crucifixe, the book of our
rede^pcio^, ye very obsolute library of gods mercy and wisdom. This way
thought she her honor increased, and her state permanente, to make her
yearthlye honor heavenly, and neglect the transitorye for the everlasting. Of
this I would the warned that ye profit may ensewe. These great mysteries, and
graces be not well perceived, except they be suerly studied, neither be they
perfectly studied, except they be diligently practiced: neither profitablye
practysed, without amendment. Se and learn hereby what she has done, then
may thou practice, and amend that thou can do: so shall thou practice with
ease having a guide, and amend with profit, having a zeal. It is easyer to see
these, then to learn: begin at the easyest to come to the harder: see thou
her confession, that thou may learn her repentance: practyse her
perseueraunce, that thou may have like amendment: displease thy self, in
eschewing vice, that thou may please god in asking grace: let not shame
hinder thy confession, which hindered not the offense: be thou sure if we
knowledge our sins, god is faithful to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteous: obey ye prophets saying: declare thy ways to the lord. Thus
far thou may learn to know thy self: next this be thou as diligent to
releive thye self in gods mercy, as thou have be^ to reuele thy self in
thine own repentance. For god has concluded al things under sin, because
he would have mercy upon al, who has also borne our sins in his body, upon
the tree, yt we should be delivered from sin, and should live unto
rightwisnes, by whose stripe we be healed: here is our anchor, here is our
shepeherd, here we be made hole, here is our life, our redemption, our
salvation, and our bliss: let us therefore now feed by this gracious queen's
example, and be not ashamed to become in confession publicanes, since this
noble lady will be no Pharesie. And to all ladies of estate I wish as ernest
mind to follow our queen in virtue, as in honor: that they might once appear
to prefer god before the world: and be honorable in religion, which now be
honorable in vanyties: so shall they (as in some virtuous ladies of right high
estate it is with great comfort seen) taste of this fredome of remission of
this everlasting bliss, which excedeth all thoughts and understandings, and
is prepared for the holy in spirit, for the which let us with our
intercession in holiness and pureness of life, offer our selfs to the heavenly
father an undefiled host: to whom be eternal praise and glory through all the
earth, without end. Amen.

A lamentacio^ or complaynte of A Sinner.
WHen I considre, By knowelege of sin comes confession.
in the bethinking of mine evil, and wretched former life, mine obstynate,
stony, and intractable heart, to have so much exceded in euilnes, yt it has
not only neglected, yea contemned, and despised gods holy precepts and
commandments: But also enbrased, received, and esteemed vain, folish, and
feyned tryfles: I am, partly by the hate I owe to sin, who has reigned in
me, partly by the love I owe to all Christians, whom I am content to edifye,
even with thexample of mine own shame, forced and constrained with my heart
and words, to confess, and declare to the world, Charity is not abashed.
how ingrate, negligent, unkind, and stubberne, I have been to god my
Creator: and how beneficial, merciful, and gentill, he has been always to
me his creature, being such a miserable, wretched sinner. Truly I have taken
no little small thing upon me, The argument of the book.
first to set forth my whole stubbernes, and contempt in words, the which is
incomprehensible in thought (as it is in the Psalm) who understands his
faults? The authors sins.
Psalm. ii^.
next this to declare the excellent beneficence, The goodness of god.
mercy, and goodness of god which is infinite, unmeasurable: neither can all the
words of Angels, and men, make relacio^ thereof, as apperteyneth to his most
high goodness. Who is he that is not forced to confess the same, if he consider
what he has received of god, and does daily receive? Yea if men would not
acknowledge, and confess the same, Lu. xix.
the stones would cry it out. Truly I am constrained and forced to speak and
write thereof to mine own co^fusio^ and shame: but to the great glory, and
praise of god. God i^ goodne^ maruelouse.
For he as a loving father, of most habundant and high goodness, has heaped
upon me, innumerable benefits: and I contrary, have heaped manifold sins,
Man in euilnes wonderouse.
dispysing that which was good, holy, pleasant, and acceptable in his sight,
and choysing that which was delicious, pleasant, and acceptable, in my sight.
And no marvel it was that I so did, for I would not learn to know ye lord
and his ways. But loved darkness better then light: Ihon. iii.
Yea darkness seemed to me, The judgment of man is corrupt in all thing^^.
light. I enbraced ignorance, as perfect knowledge, and knowelege seamed to me
superfluous and vain: I regarded little gods word, but gave my self to
vanities and shadows of the world. I forsook him, in whom is all truth, and
followed the vain folishe imaginacions of my heart. I would have covered my
sins with the pretense of holiness, I called supersticion, godly meaning, and
true holiness, error, The lord did speak many pleasant and sweet words unto
me, and I would not hear: he called me diversely, but through frowardnes I
would not answer. Mine euilles, and miseries be so many and great, that they
accuse me even to my face. Every man^ syn accuses him self.
Oh how miserably and wretchedly am I confounded? when for the multitude and
greatness of my sins, I am compelled to accuse my self. Was it not a
merueylous unkindness when god did speak to me, and also call me, that I would
not answer him? what man so called, would not heave hard? or what man
hearing, would not have answered? If an earthlye Prince had spoken, either
called him, I suppose there be none but would willingly have done both. Now
therefore what a wretch and Caytife am I? that when the Prince of princes, ye
king of kings, did speak many pleasant, and gentle words unto me, and also
called me so many and sundry times, that they can not be numbered: And yet
notwithstanding these great signs and tokens of love, I would not cum unto
him, but hyd my self out of his sight, seking many crooked and bye ways,
wherein I walked so long, that I had clean lost his sight. And no maruayle
or woundre, for I had a blind guide called Ignorance, A blind guide ^or a
blind way.
who dimmed so mine eyes, that I could never perfectlye get any sight of the
fair, goodly, straight, and right ways of his doctrine: but continually
trauayled vncomfortablie, in the foul, wicked, crooked, and peruerce ways,
Yea, and because they were so much haunted of many, I could not think, The
number of people may not be followed, but the goodness.
but I walked in the perfect and right way: having more regard to the number
of the walkers, then to the order of the walking: believing also most surely
with company to have walked to heaven, whereas I am most sure, they would have
brought me down to hell. I forsook the spiritual honoring of ye true living
god, and worshipped visible idols, A fleshly man r^gardeth not spiritual
things.
and images made of men's hands, believing by them to have gotten heaven, yea
to say ye truth, I made a great ydol of my self: For I loved my self better
then god. And certaynely look how many things are loved or preferred in our
hearts before god, Mark a number of Idols.
so many are taken and esteemed for ydolles, and false gods.

Alas how have I violated this holy, pure, and most high precepte and
commandment of the love of god? The sin against ye. i. commandment.
which precepte byndeth me to love him with my hole heart, Deuteronomy. vi.
mind, force, strength, and understanding. And I, like unto an evil, wicked,
disobedient child, have given my will, power, and senses, to the contrary:
making almost of every earthly and carnal thing, a god. The blood of Christ.
Furthermore the blood of Christ was not reputed by me, sufficient for to
wassh me from the fylth of my sins: The word of god is only y^ doctrine of
salvation.
neither such ways as he has appointed by his word. But I sought for such
rifraf as the bisshoppe of Rome has planted in his tyranny and kingdom, B. of
Rome, is an evil vsurpou^ of Christ's power.
trusting with great confidence by the virtue and holiness of the^, to receive
full remission of my sins. And so I did as much as was in me, to obfuscate
and darken the great benefit of Christ's passion: then the which no thought
ca^ co^ceyue any thing of more value: There can not be dooen so great an injury
and displeasure to almighthy god our father, The father is honored i^ hi^ son.
as to tread under foot Christ, Hebre. x.
his only begotten and wel-beloued Son. All other sins in the world
gathered together in one, be not so heinous, The most horrible si^.
and detestable in the sight of god. And no wonder, for in Christ crucified,
The hono^ of God abou^ded upon ye cross^
god does show him self most noble and gloryouse, even an almighty god, and
most loving father, Hebre. i.
in his only dear and chosen blessed son. And therefore I count my self
one of the most wicked and miserable sinners, because I have been so much
contrary to Christ my savior. Saint Paul desired to know nothing but Christ
crucified, i. Cor. ii.

To know Christ crucif^ed is ye conningest lesson in divinity,


after he had been rapt into the third heaven, where he heard such secrets
as were not convenient and mete to utter to men: but counted all his works,
Philip. iii.
and doings as nothing, to win Christ. And I most presu^ptuously thinking
nothing of Christ crucified, went about to set forth mine own righteousness,
Lit. xviii.
saying with the proud Pharisey. Good lord I thank ye, Man of his own proud
nature is easily made a Pharisey.
I am not like other me^. I am none adulterer, nor fornicatour, and so forth,
with such like words of vaynglory, extollyng my self, and dispising others,
working as an hired servant, for wagies, orels for reward: and not as a loving
child, only for very love, without respect of wagies or reward, as I ought to
have done: Child^e^ l^rne to be thankeful to your father
neither did I consider how beneficial a father I had, who did show me his
charity and mercy, of his own mere grace and goodness, ye when I was most his
ennemie, Romans v.
he sent his only begotten and well-beloved Son into this world of wretchedness
and misery, to suffer most cruel and sharp death for my redemption. But my
heart was so stony and hard, Hard hearts receive no print.
yt this great benefit, was never truly and lively printed in my heart,
although with my words it was often rehearsed: thinking my self to be
sufficiently instructed in ye same, and being in deed, in blind ignorance. And
yet I stood so well in mine own judgment and opinion, yt I thought it vain
to seek ye encreace of my knowledge therein. Paul, calls Christ the wisdom
of god, i. Cor. ii.
and even the same Christ was to me folishnes: my pride and blindness disceyued
me, Two yoke fellows. Bli^dn^s and hardness of heart.
and the hardness of my heart withstode the growing of truth within it. Such
were the fruits of my carnal and humane reasons, to have rotten ignorance in
price, for ripe and seasonable knowledge. Such also is the malice and
wickedness, that possesses the hertes of men: such is the wisdom, and
pleasing of the flesh. I professed Christ in my baptism when I began to
live, Profession i^ baptism.
but I swarued from him after baptism, in continuance of my living, even as
the heithen which never had begun. Christ innocent.

Esa. liii. man sinful.


Christ was innocent and void of all sin, and I wallowed in fylthie sin:
and was free from no sin, Philip. ii Christ obedient.

Man stubburne.

Math. ix. Christ humble

Man proud. John, viii Math. iiii


Christ was obedient unto his father eue^ to the death of the cross, and I
disobedient, and most stubburne even to the confusion of truth.

Christ was meke and humble in heart, and I most proud and vaynegloryous.
Christ despised the world with all the vanities thereof, Christ heavenly.

Man wordly.

John. xiii John. vi. Ma. xviii Ma. viii. ii. Cor viii


and I made it my god because of ye vanities. Christ came to serve his
brethren, and I coueted to rewle over the^. Christ dispysed worldly honor,
and I much delited to attain the same, Christ loved the base and simple
things of the world, and I esteemed the most fair and pleasant things.
Christ loved poverty, and I wealth. Christ was gentle, Christ poor Man rich
Luke xiiii Lu. xxiii.
and merciful to the poor, and I hard hearted and ungentle. Christ prayed for
his enemies, John. viii. Math. ix.
and I hated mine. Christ reioysed in ye conuercion of sinners, and I was not
grieved to see their reuercio^ to sin. By this declaracio^ all creatures may
perceive how far I was from Christ, and without Christ, yea how contrary to
Christ, although I bare ye name of a Christian. Many chr^stians know^ not their
patron

Ignorant wisdom.


In so much yt if any man had said I had been without Christ, I would have
stiffly withstand the same. And yet I neither knew Christ, nor wherefore he
came. As concerning the effect and purpose of his coming, Without the cause,
nothing is rightly k^owen.

Romans ii.


I had a certain vain, blind knowledge, both cold and dead, which may ^e had
with all sin, as it does plainly appear, by this my confession and open
declaracio^. Lame^tacion.
What cause now have I to lament, mourn, sigh and weep for my life, and time
so evil spent? with how much humility and lowlines ought I to cum and knowledge
my sins to god? giving hi^ thanks, yt it has pleased him of his haboundaunt
goodness, to give me time of repentance: for I know my sins in ye
consideracion of the^, to be so greuouse, and in ye number so exceeding, yt I
have deserved very often, eternal damnacio^. And for the deserving of gods
wrath, so manifoldlie due, God shows goodness in differring his wrath.
I must incessantly, give thanks to the mercy of god, beseching also that ye
same delay of punishment, cause not his plage to be the sorer, since mine own
conscience conde^neth my former doings. But his mercy excedeth al iniquity:
Psalm. ciii.
and if I should not thus hope: Alas what should I seek for refuge and comfort?
Psalm. cviii
no mortal man is of power to help me: and for the multitude of my sins, I
dare not lift up mine eyes to heaven where the seat of judgment is, Lu. xviii.
I have so much offended god. Christ draws man from desperacyon
What, shall I fall in desperacion? nay I will call upon Christ the light of the
world, i. Ihon. i.
the fountain of life, the releife of al careful, John. iiii
and the peacemaker between god and man, i. John. ii
and the only health and comfort of al true repentant sinners. John. iii.
He can by his almighty power, Math. xxviii. The power and will of god.
save me, and deliver me out of this miserable state, and has will by his
mercy to save even the whole sin of ye world. John. iii. No savior but one.
Lu. xix.
I have no hope nor confidence in any creature, neither in heaven, nor earth,
but in Christ my whole and only Savior. He came into the world to save
sinners, and to heal them that are sick, Math. ii.
for he says: the whole, have no need of a Physician. Behold lord how I
come to the, a sinner, sick, Man's humility
and grievously wounded: I ask not bread, but the crummes that fall from the
childrens table. Math. xv*
Cast me not out of thy sight, although I have deserved to be cast in to hell
fire.

If I should look upon my sins, and not upon thy mercy, I should despair:
for in my self I find nothing to save me, but a donghill of wyckednes, to
condemn me: if I should hope by mine own strength, and power, to cum out of
this mase of iniquity, and wickedness, wherein I have walked so long, I should
be disceyued: For I am so ignorant blind, weak and feeble, that I cannot bring
my self out of this entangled and weyward mase: A mase o^ sin,
but ye more I seek means and ways to wind my self out, the more I am
wrapped and tangled therein. So yt I perceive my striving therein, to be
hynderance: my travail to be labor spent in going back. It is the hand of ye
lord, Psalm. xviii.
that can and will bring me, out of this endless mase of death: Phil. ii. ii.
Cor. ^ii.
for without I be prevented by the grace of the lord, God begins with man.
I can not ask forgeuenes nor be repentante or sorry for the^. There is no man
can auowe that Christ is the only Savior of the world: Math. xvi.
but by the holy ghost: yea, as Saint Paul says, no man can say the lord
Jesus, i. Cor ^ii. Romans viii.
but by the holy ghost. The spirit helps our infirmities, and makes
continual intercession for us, with such soroful groninges, as can not be
expressed. Therefore I will first require and pray the lord, to give me his
holy spirit, to teach me to auowe that Christ is the savior of the world:
The teching of the holy spirit.
and to utter these words, the lord Jesus: and finally to help mine
infirmities, JESUS.
and to intercede for me. For I am most certain and suer, that no creature
in heaven nor earth, is of power: Acts. iiii.
or can by any mean help me, but god, God is only the helper.
who is omnipotent, almighty, beneficyall, and merciful, well willing, and
loving to all those that call, and put their whole confidence and trust in him.
And therefore I will seek non other means nor advocate, i. John. ii.
but Christ's holy spirit, who is only the Aduocat, Christ is the only mean
between god and man.

Objection.

What makes man bold


and mediator between god and man to help and relyue me. But now what makes
me so bold, and hardy, to presume to cum to the lord with such audacitie and
boldness, Solucion.
being so great a Sinner: truly nothing, but his own word: The promise of
Christ.
for he says. Cum to me al ye that labor, and ar burdened, and I shall
refresshe you. What gentle, Math. xi.
merciful, and comfortable words ar ^hese, to all sinners? were he not a
frantic, mad beastly and folysh man, that would run for aid, helps, or
refuge, to any other creature? What a most gracious, comfortable, and gentle
saying was this, with such pleasant and sweet words, to allure his enemies to
cu^ unto him? Is there any worldly prince or magistrate, that would show
such clemency and mercy, to their disobedient and rebellious subjects,
having offended them? I suppose they would not with such words allure
the^, except it were to call them, whom they can not take, and punish them
being taken. But even as Christ is Prince of Princes, Apoc. xvii.
and lord of lords, so his charity, and mercy excedeth and surmounteth all
others. Christ says, Math vii.
if carnal fathers do give good gifts to their children when they ask them,
The giver.
how much more shall your heavenly father, being in substance al holy, and
most highly good, give good gifts to all them that ask him? The gift.
It is no small nor little gift that I require, The taker.
neither think I my self worthy to receive such a noble gift, being so
ingrate, unkind and wicked a child. The goodness of God boldeneth his Chosen.
But when I behold the benignity, liberality, mercy, and goodness, of the
lord, I I am encoraged, boldened, and stirred to ask such a noble gift. The
lord is so bountefull, Zacha. x.
and lyberall, that he will not have us satisfied, and contented with one gift,
neither to ask simple and small gifts. And therefore he promises, and binds
him self by his word, to give good and beneficial gifts, John. xvi.
to all them that ask him with true faith: Faith is ever ne^^ssary.
without which, nothing can be done acceptable or pleasing to god. Romans ^iii.
For faith is the foundation, and ground of all other gifts, Romans iii.
virtues and graces: and therefore I will say, Lord encreace my faith. For this
is the life everlasting lord, i. John. iiii. ^erne wha^ true faith does i^ man.

Ose. ii. ^phe. ii. Romans v.


that I must believe the to be the true god, and whom thou did send, Jesus
Christ. By this faith I am assured: and by this assurance, I feel the remission
of my sins: Galat. iii.
this is it that makes me bold, this is it that comforts me, this is it that
quenches all despair. I know O my lord, thy eyes look upon my faith: Saint
Paul says, we be justified by the faith in Christ, and not by the deades of
the law. Justification b^ a Christian faith.
For if rightwisenes cum by the law, then Christ died in vain. Roma. iii.
Galat. ii.
S. Paul means not here, a dead humain, historical faith, gotten by humain
industry, but a supernall liuelye faith, which works by charity, as he him
self plainly expresses. Galat. v.
This dignity of faith is no dirogacio^ to good works, Dignity of faith
hurts no w^rkes.
for out of this faith springs all good works. Yet we may not impute to the
worthiness of faith or works, our Iustificacio^ before god: Mark dililigently
with out offense.
but ascribe and give the worthynes of it, wholly to the merits of Christ's
passion, Romans iii.
and refer and attrybute the knowledge and perceyuyng thereof, only to faith:
whose very true only property, is to take, Romans v.
apprehende and hold fast the promyses of gods mercy, the which makes us
rightwise: and to cause me continually to hope for the same mercy, and in love,
to work all manner of ways allowed in the scripture, that I may be thankful
for the same. Thus I feel my self to cu^, as it were in a new garment,
before god, and now by his mercy, to be taken just, and rightwise, which of
late without his mercy, was sinful and wicked: and by faith to obtain his
mercy, the which the unfaithful can not enjoy. John. iii.
And although Saint John extolleth charity in his Epistle, Objection.
saying that god is charity, i. John. ii.
and he that dwells in charity, dwells in god, Truly charity makes men
live like aungelles. Solucion.
And of the most furious unbridled carnal men, makes meke lambs. Yea with how
fervent a spirit, ought I to call, cry, and pray to the lord, to make his
great charity to burn, and flame in my heart, being so stonye, and evil
affected, that it never would conceive, nor regard, the great inestimable
charity, and love of god, in sending his only begotten and dear beloved Son
into this vale of misery, to suffer the most cruel and sharp death of the
cross, for my rede^cion? Yet I never had this unspeakable speakeable and most
high charity, and abundant love of god, printed and fixed in my heart dulye,
till it pleased god of his mere grace, mercy, and pity, to open mine eyes,
making me to see, and behold with the eye of lively faith, Christ crucified to
be mine only savior and redemer. Charity knows not Christ, but by report
of faith.
For then I began (and not before) to perceive and see mine own Ignorance
and blindness: the cause thereof was, that I would not learn to know Christ,
my Savior and redemer. But when god of his mere goodness had thus opened mine
eyes, and made me see and behold Christ, i. Cor. i.
the wisdom of GOD, John. i.
the light of the world, with a supernatural sight of faith. All pleasures,
vanities, honor, riches, wealth, and aids of the world began to wax bitter
unto me: tha^ I knew it was no illusion of the devil, nor false, ne humain
doctrine I had received: when such success came thereof, that I had in
detestacio^ and horror, yt which I erste so much loved and esteemed: being of
god forbidden that we should love the world or the vain pleasures and
shadows in the same. i. John. ii.
Tha^ began I to perceive yt Christ was my only Savior and redemer, and the
same doctrine to be al divine, holy, and heavenly, infused by grace, into the
hearts of ye faithful, which never ca^ be atteyned by humayne doctrine, wit nor
reason, although they should travail and labor for the same, to thend of ye
world. John. xiiii.
Then began I to dwell in god by charity, Charity immediately follows lively
faith.
knowing by the loving charity of god in the remission of my sins, that god
is charity as Saint John says. So that of my faith (whereby I came to know
god, and whereby it pleased god even because I trusted in him, to justify me)
sprang this excellent charity in my heart. I think no less but many will
wonder and marvel at this my saying, Secret obiec^ion.
that I never knew Christ for my Savior and redemer, until this time, for
many have this opinion, saying: who knows not there is a Christ? who being a
Christian, does not confess him his Savior? And thus believing their dead,
humayn, historical faith, and knowledge (which they have learned in their
scholasticall books) to be the true infused faith and knowelege of Christ,
which may be had (as I said before) with all sin. They use to say by their
own, experience of the^ self^s, that their faith does not justify them. And
true it is, except they have this faith the which I have declared here before,
they shall never be justified. And yet it is not false that by faith only I am
sure to be justified: even this is the cause that so many empugn this office
and duty of true faith, because so many lack the true faith. And even as the
faithful are forced to allow true faith, so the unfaithful can in no wise
probably intrete thereof: ye one feling in him self that he says, the other
having not in him for to say. I have certeynly no curious learning to defend
this matter withal, A mylde and true solutio^.
but a simple zele, and earnest love to the truth, inspired of god, who
promises to power his spirit upon all flesh: which I have by the grace of
god (who^ I most humbly honor) felt in my self to be true. Let us therefore
now I pray you, by faith, behold and considre the great charity, and
goodness of god, in sending his Son to suffer death for our redemcion, when we
were his mortal enemies, and after what sort and manner he sent him. First it is
to be considered, How god sent his son.
yea, to be undoubtedly with a perfect faith believed, that god sent him to us
freely, for he did give him, and sold him not. A more noble and rich gift,
John. iii.
he could not have given. He sent not a servant, or a friend, but his only
Son, so deerlye beloved: not in delytes, riches, and honors, but in crosses,
poouerties, and slanders: not as a lord, but as a servant. Yea, Philip. ii.
and in most vile, and paynfull passions, to wassh us, not with water, i. John.
i.
but with his own precious blood: not from myer, but from the puddle and fylthe
of our iniquities. He has given him, not to make us poor, but to enryche us
with his divine virtues, merits, Roma. viii.
and graces, yea and in him, he has given us all good things, and finally him
self: and that with such great charity as can not be expressed. Was it not
a most high, and aboundaunt charity of GOD, to send Christ to shead his
blood, to loose honor, The charity of GOD toward man.
life, and all, for his enemies? Even in the time when we had done him most
injury, Romans v.
he first showed his charity to us, with such flambes of love, that greater
could not be showed. God in Christ has opened unto us (although we be weak,
and blind of our selves) yt we may behold in this miserable state, the great
wisdom, goodness, and truth, with all the other godly perfeccions, A godly
med^^acion.
which be in Christ. Therefore inwardlye to behold Christ crucified upon the
cross, is the best and godliest meditacion that ca^ be. We may see also in
Christ crucified, The beauty of the soul.
the beauty of the soul, better then in all the books of ye world. For who
that with lively faith, sees and feleth in spirit, that Christ the son of
god, is dead for the satisfiyng and the purifiyng of the soul, shall see that
his soul, is appointed for the very tabernacle, and mansion of the inestimable
and incomprehensible majesty and honor of god. John. xi^ii.
We see also in Christ crucified, The wor^te Uayne.
how vain and folyshe the world is, and how that Christ being most wise,
despised the same. We see also how blind it is, B^ynde.
because the same knows not Christ, but persecuteth him. Unkynde
We see also how unkind the world is, by the kylling of Christ, in the time
he did show it most favor. How hard, and obstinate was it that would not be
mollified with so many tears? such sweat, and so much blood shed of the
Son of God, suffering with so great and high chariti^? Therefore he is now
very blind that sees not how vain, foolish, false, ingrate, crewell, hard,
wicked, Sina^.
and evil the world is: we may also in Christ crucified, ^eye our sins, as
in a divine balance, how grievous and how weyghty they be, seeing they have
crucified Christ: for they would never have been cou^terpaysed but with the great
and precious weight of the blood of the Son of God. And therefore God of his
high goodness, determined that his blessed son should rather suffer
bloudeshead, then our sins should have condemned us. We shall never know our
own miserye and wretchedness, but with the light of Christ crucif^ed. The^ we
shall see our own cruelty, when we feel his mercy: our own vnrightwisenes
and Iniquity, when we see his rightwisenes and holiness. Therefore to learn to
know truly our own sins, A christian man's book.
is to study in the book of the crucifixe, by continual conversation in
faith: and to have perfect and plentiful charity, is to learn first by faith
the charity that is in god, toward us.

We may see also in Christ, upon the cross, Lessons of ye Crucifi^e.

Pa^ne of hell Joy of Heaven.


how great the pains of hell, and how blessed the Joys of heaven be: and
what a sharp, paynfull thing it shall be to them that from that sweet, happy,
and glorious Joy, Christ, shall be deprived. Then this crucifix is the book, i.
Cor. ii.
wherein God has included all things, and has most co^pendiously written
therein, all truth, profitable and necessary for our salvation. Therefore let us
endeavor our selfs to study this book, that we (being lightened with the
spirit of god) may give him thanks for so great a benefit. If we look
further in this book, Christ's victory.
we shall see Christ's great victory upon the cross, which was so noble and
mighty: that there never was, neither shall be, such. If the victory and glory
of worldly princes were great, because they did ouercu^ great hosts of men,
how much more was Christ's greater? which vanquished not only the prince of
the world, but all the ennemies of god: triumphing over persecucion, Collo. ii.
Injuries, villainies, sclaunders, yea death, the world, sin, and the devil:
and brought to confusion, all carnal prudence. The princes of the world, never
did fight without the strength of the world. Christ contrary, went to war
even against all the strength of ye world. He would fight as David did with
Golias, Sapi. ^vii.
unarmed of all human wisdom, and policy, and without all worldly power and
strength. Dau^d and Christ compared in fight.


Nevertheless he was fully replenished and armed with the whole armor of ye
spirit And in this one battle, he overcame for ever, al his enemies. There
was never so glorious a spoil, neither a more rich and noble, then Christ was
upon the cross: which delivered al his elect, from such a sharp miserable
captivity. He had in this battle many strypes, yea, and lost his life, but
his victory was so much the greater. Therefore when I look upon the son of
god with a supernatural faith and light, so unarmed, naked, given up, and alone
with humility patience, liberality, modesty gentleness, and with all other
his divine virtues, Spiritual Armure,
beating down to the ground al gods enemies, Ephe. v.
and making the soul of man so fair, and beautyfull, I am forced to say that
his victory and triumph, was merueylouse. And therefore Christ deserved to have
this noble title. Mat. xxvii.


Jesus style.
Jesus of Nazareth, king of the Jews. But if we will perticulerlie unfold, and
see his great victories, let us first behold how he overcame sin, with his
Innocence: and confounded pride, with his humility: Quenched all worldly
love, with his charity: appeysed the wrath of his father, with his mekenes:
turned hatred into love, with his so many benyfites, and godly zele. Christ
has not only ouercum sin, Uictory over sin

Collo. i.


but rather he has killed the same: in as much as he has satisfied for it him
self, with the most holy sacrifice and oblacion of his precious body, Acts.
vii^
in suffering most bitter and cruel death. Also after an other sort: that is.
He gives to al those that love him, so much spirit, grace, virtue, and
strength, Romans vi. vii
that they may resist, impugn, and overcome sin, and not consent, neither
suffer it to reign in them. He has also vanquished sin, because he has
taken away the force of the same: that is, he has cancelled the law, C^llo.
ii.
which was in evil men, the occasion of sin. Therefore sin has no power
against them, S^n hurts not the elect.
that are with ye holy ghost united to Christ. In them there is nothing worthy
of damnacio^. And although the dregs of Adam, do remain, that is our
concupiscences, which in deed be sins: Co^cup^sce^ce the ori^inall sin,
nevertheless they be not Imputed for sins, if we be truly planted in Christ.
It is true that Christ might have taken away all our immoderate affeccions,
Romans viii.
Obiec^ion. Solucion.
but he has left them for the greater glory of his father, and for his own
greater triu^ph. As for an example: When a prince fyghting with his enemies, A
similitude.
which so^time had ye soueraintie over his people, and subdewing the^, may kill
them if he will, yet he preserves and saves them: And whereas they were
lords over his people: he makes them after to serve, whom they before had
rewled.

Now in such a case, the prince does show him self a greater conqueror, in
that he has made them which were rewlers to obey: and the subjects to be
lords over them, to whom they served, then if he had utterly distroyed them
upon the conquest. For now he leaves continual victory to them, whom he
redeamed, whereas otherwise thoccasion of victory, was taken away, where none
were left to be the subjects. Even so in like case, Christ has left in us
these concupiscences, Applicacion of the similitude.
to thintente they should serve us, to the exercise of our virtues, where first
they did reign over us, to thexercice of our sin. And it may be plainly
seen, that whereas first they were such impedimentes to us, yt we could not
move our selves toward god, now by Christ we have so much strength, that
not withstanding the force of them, we may assuredly walk to heaven. And
although the children of god su^time do fall by frailty, into sum sin, yet
that falling makes them to humble the^ selves, and to reknowelege the goodness
of god, and to cum to him for refuge and help. Uictory over the deuell.
Likewise Christ with his death, has ouercum the prince of deuilles with all
his host, Collo. ii.
and has distroyed them all. For as Paul says, this is verefied yt Christ
should break ye serpents head, Genue. iii.
prophesied by GOD. And although the devil tempte us, yet if by faith we be
planted in Christ, we shall not perish: but rather by his temptacion, take
great force and might. So it is evident, that the triumph, victory and glory
of Christ, is the greater, having in such sort subdewed the devil, that
whereas he was prince and lord of the world, holding all creatures in
captivity, now Christ uses him as an Instrument to punish the wicked, and
to exercise and make strong the elect of god, in christian war fare.

Christ likewise has ouercum death in a more glorious manner, Uictory oue^
death.
(if it be possible) because he has not taken it away, but leuing universally
al subject to the same. He has given so much virtue, and spirit, that whereas
before we passed thereto with great fear, now we be bold through the spirit,
for the sure hope of resurrection, that we receive it with Joy. It is now no
more bitter, but sweet: no more feared, but desired: It is no death, but life.
And also it has pleased god that the infirmities and adversities do remain
to the sight of the world: but the children of God are by Christ made so
strong, Phil. iiii. ii. Cor. i.
rightwise, whole, and sound, that the troubles of the world, be comfortes of
the spirit: The passions of the flesh, All things proffit the chosen.
are medicines of the soul. For all manner things works to their commodity
and profit: for they in spirit feel, Roma. viii.
that god, their father, does govern them, and disposes all things for
their benefit: therefore they feel them selves sure. In persecucion, they are
quiet, and peaceful: in time of trouble, they are without werynes, fears,
anxcieties, suspicions, miseries: and finally all the good, and evil of the
world, works to their commodity. Moreover they see that the triumph of
Christ has been so great, that not only he has subdewed and vanquished all our
enemies, and the power of them, but he has overthrown and vanquished them,
after such a sort, that al things serve to our health: he might, and could
have taken them all away, but where then should have be^ our victory, palm,
and crown? For we daily have fightes, in the flesh, and by the succor of
grace, have continual victories, over sin, whereby we have cause to glorify
god, that by his son, has weakened our enemy the devil: and by his spirit,
geuith us strength to vanquishe his ofspringes. So do we knowelege daily the
great tryumphe of our Savior, and rejoice in our own fightes, the which we
can no wise impute to any wisdom of this world: seeing sin to increase by
it. And where worldly wisdom most governs, there most sin rules: For as
the world is enemy to god, so also the wisdom thereof, The wisedo^ of the
world.
is adverse to god. And therefore Christ has declared and discovered the same
for folishnes. i. Cor. ii.iii.
And although he could have taken away all worldly wisdom, yet he has left
it for his greater glory, and tryumphe of his chosen vessels. For before,
whereas it was our ruler against god, now by Christ we are served of it for
God, as of a slave in worldly things. Albeit in supernatural things the
same is not to be understand. And further, if any time men would impugn, and
gaynsaye us, with the wisdom of the world, yet we have by Christ, so much
supernatural light of the trut^e, that we make a mock of al those that repugne
the truth. Uictory over the world.
Christ also upon the c^osse, has triumphed over the world. First because
he has discovered the same to be naught, John. xiiii.
that whereas it was covered with the veil of Ipocrisie, and the vesture of
moral virtues, Christ has showed that in gods sight, the r^ghteousnes of
the world, is wickedness: and he has yielded witness, that the works of men,
not regenerated by him in faith, are euel. John. iii. Romans xiiii.
And so Christ has judged, and condemned the world, for naught. Furthermore
he has given to al his, so much light, and spirit, that they know it, How
Christians regard the world.
and disprayse the same: yea and tread it under their feet, with al vain
honors, dignities, and pleasures: not taking the fair promises, neither the
offers, which it does present. Nay, they rather make a scorn of them. And as
for the threatenings and force of the world, they nothing fear. A conclusion
of the victories.
Now therefore we may see how great the victory and tryumphe of Christ is,
who has delivered all those the father gave him, John. xvii.
from ye power of the devil, Collo. ii.
cancellynge upon the Cross, the writing of our dertes: For he has delivered
us, from the condemnacion of sin, from the bondage of the law, from the
fear of death, from the daungier of the world, and from all euylles: in this
life, and in the other to cum. And he has enriched us, made us noble, and most
highly happy, after such a glorious, and tryumphant way, as can not with
tongue, be expressed. And therefore we are forced to say his triu^phe is
merueylous. Christ is Messiah.


It is also seen and known, ye Christ is the true Messiah, for he has
delivered man from all euylles, and by him, man has all goodness: so that he is
the true Messiah. Therefore al other helpers be but vain, and counterfeyted
Saviors, seeing that by this our Messiah, Christ, wholly and only, we be
delivered from all euylles: and by him, we have all goodness. And that this is
true, it is euidente and clear, because the very true christian, is a
christian by Christ. And the true christian fealeth inwardly by Christ, so
much goodness of god, that even troublouse life and death be sweet unto him,
ii. Cor. iiii.
and miseries happy: the true christian by Christ, To. vii.
is disburdened from the servitude of the law, having the law of grace (graven
by the spirit) inhabiting his heart, and from sin, that reigned in him, from
the power of the infernal spirits, from da^nacion, and from every evil: And
is made a son of God, The title of a christian.
a brother of Christ, heir of heaven, and lord of the world. So that in
Christ, and by Christ, Romans viii.
he possesses al good things. But let us know, that Christ yet fights in
spirit, in his elect vessels, and shall fight even to the day of judgment.
At which day, shall that great enemy death, be wholly distroyed, and shall be no
more. Then shall the children of god rejoice on him, saying: O death where is
thy victory and sting? Osee. xiii.
There shall be the^ no more trouble, nor sin, nay, rather none evil: but
heaven for the good, and hell for the wicked. Then shall wholly be discovered
the victory and triumph of Christ: i. Cor. xv.
who (after Paul) shall present unto his father, the kingdom togithers with
his chosen, saved by him. It was no little favor toward his children, y^
Christ was chose^ of god, to save us his elect, so highly, Salvation by ye
Cross.

To. iiii.


by the way of the cross. Paul calls it a grace, and a most singular
grace. We may well think, that he having ben to the world so valiaunte a
Captain of God, was full of light, grace, virtue and spirit.

Therefore he might iustelie say: Consu^matum e^t. We seeing then yt the
tryumphe and victory of our captain Christ, ^o. xix.
is so merueilous, glorious and noble, to the which war we be appointed,
let us force our selves to follow him, with bearyng our cross, that we may
have felowshyppe with him in his kingdom. To. viii.
Truly it may be most justly verified yt to behold Christ crucified, ^he
book ^f the cruci^ix.
in spirit, is the best meditacion that can be. I certeynlye never knew mine
own miseries; and wretchedness so well, by book, admonicion, or learning, as I
have done by lokyng into the spiritual book of the crucifix. I lamente much
I have passed so many years, A presumtuous trewa^d
not regardyng that divine book, but I judged, and thought my self to be well
instructed in the same: whereas now, I am of this opinion, that if God would
suffer me to live here a.M. year, and should study continually in the same
divine book, A man is never glut with knowledge.
I should not be filled with the contemplacion thereof. Neither hold I my self
contented, but always have a great desire, to learn and study more therein. I
never knew mine own wickedness, The first lesson in the book.
neither lamented for my sins truly, until the time god inspired me with his
grace, that I looked in this book. Then I began to see perfectly, that mine
own power and strength could not help me, and that I was in the Lords hand,
even as the cleye, Hie. xviii.
is in the potters hand: the^ I began to cry, and say: Alas lord that ever I
have so wickedlie offended the, A christien complaynt.
being to me from the beginning so gracious, and so good a father, and most
specially now have declared, and showed thy goodness unto me, when in the time I
have done the most injury, to call me, and also to make me know, and take
the for my savior and redemer: Such be the wonderful works of god, to call
sinners to repentance, and to make them to take Christ his well-beloved son,
Math. ix.
for their savior: this is the gift of god, and of all christians to be
required, Romans vi.
and desiered. For except this great benefit of Christ crucified be felt,
and fixed surely in man's heart, Io. xv.
there ca^ be no good work done, acceptable before god. For in Christ is al
fulness of ye godhead, Christ is ^ fulness of the god head.

Col. ii.


and in him are hid all the treasures of wisedo^e and knowledge: even he is the
water of life, whereof whosoever shall drink, shall never more thyrst, but it
shall be in him, a well of water, Io. iiii.
springinge up into everlasting life. Saynct Paul says there is no
damnacion to them, that are in Christ, To. viii.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Moreover he says:
if when we were ennemies, we were reconciled to god, Paul's argument Romans v.
by the death of his son: much more seeing we are reconcyled, we shall be
preserved by his death. It is no little or small benefit we have received by
Christ, if we consydre what he has done for us, as I have perfectly declared
heretofore. Wherefore I pray the lord yt this great benefit of Christ
crucified, Christian prayer.
may be steadfastly fixed and printed in all christian hearts, that they may be
true lovers of God, and work as children, for love: and not as servants
compelled with threatenings, i. Pet. i.
or provoked with hyer. True christians
The sincere, and pure lovers of god, do enbrace Christ, with such ferue^cie of
spirit, that they rejoice in hope, To. xii.
be bold in daungier, suffer in adversity, co^tinew in prayer, bless their
persecutours: further they be not wise in their own opinion, neither high
minded in their prosperity, neither abashed in their adversity: but humble
and gentle always, to all men. For they know by their faith they are members
all of one body, To. xii. i. Cor. xii.
and that they have possessed all one God, one faith, Ephesians. iiii.
one baptysme, one joy, and one salvation. If these pure, and sincere lovers
of God, were thick sown, there should not be so much conte^cion and strife
growing on the fields of our religion, as there is. Well, I shall pray to the
lord to take all contencion, Prayer.
and strife away, and that the sowers of sedicion, may have mind to cease
their labor, or to sow it amongst the stones, and to have grace, to sow
gracious virtues, where they may both root and bring forth fruit: with
sending also a godly unity, and concord amongst all christians, that we
may serve the lord, Luke. i.
in true holiness of life. The example of good living, is required of all
christians, but especially in the ecclesiastical pastoures, and shepeherdes,
The clergy
for they be called in Scripture, workmen with god, disbursers of gods
secrets, i. Cor. iii.
the light of the world, i. Cor. iiii. Math. v.
the salt of the earth, at whose hands all other should take comfort, in
workyng, knowledge of gods will, and sight, to becum children of the light, and
taste of seasonable wisedo^e. Preaching.
They have or should have, the holy spirit habundauntlie to pronounce, and
set forth, the word of God, in verity and truth: if ygnoraunce and blyndnes
reygne among us, they should with the truth of gods word, ^i. Ti. iiii.
instruct, and set us in the truth, and direct us in the way of the lord. But
thanks be given unto the lord, that has now sent us such a godly and
learned king in these latter days, to reygne over us, King Henrye the.viii.
Moses.
yt with ye virtue and force of gods word, has taken away the vayles, and
mistes of erroures, and brought us to the knowledge of ye truth, by the light
of Gods word, which was so long hydden and kept under, that the people were
nigh famished, and hungered for lack of spiritual food: such was the charity
of ye spiritual curates, and shepherdes. But our Moses, and most godly, wise
governor, and king has delivered us out of the captivity and bondage of
Pharao. I mean by this Moses, king Henry the eight, my most soraigne
favorable lord and husband, one (If Moses had figured any mo then Christ)
through ye excellent grace of god, Judge Christe^ly.
mete to be an other expressed verity of Moses conquest over Pharao. And I
mean by this Pharao the bishop of Rome, Bishop of Rome.
who has been, and is a greater persecutor of al true christians, the^ ever
was Pharao, Pharao.
of the children of Israel. For he is a persecutor of the gospel, and grace, a
setter forth of all supersticion, and counterfeit holiness, brynging many souls
to hell, with his alchimye and counterfeit money, deceyuing the poor souls
under ye pretense of holiness: but so much the greater shall be his damnacion,
because he disceyueth and robs under Christ's ma^tle. A Godly wish.
The Lord keep and defend all me^ from his iugglinges and sleyghtes. But
specially the poor simple unlearned sowles. A sure lesson.
And this lesson I would all men had of him, that when they begin to mislike
his doing, then only begin they to like god, Good prechers
and certeynlye not before. As for the spiritual pastoures, and shepherdes, I
think they will cleave and stycke fast to the word of god even to the death,
to vanquishe all gods enemies, if need shall require, all respects of
honor, dignity, riches, wealth, and their private commodit^es laid apart,
following also the examples of Christ and his chosen apostles in preaching and
teaching sincere, pure, and holsum doctrine, and such things as make for
peace, with godly lessons, wherewith they may edify others, that every man may
walk after his vocation, in holiness of life, in unity and concord, which
unity is to be desired of all true Christians. i. Ti. ii.
It is much to be lamented the Scismes, varieties, Contencions in Religion
conte^cions, and disputacions, that have been, and are in the world about
Christen religion, and no agremente, nor concord of the same, amongst the
learned men. The devil,
Treuly the devil has been the sowier of the seed of sedicion, and shall be the
maynteyner of it, even till gods will be fulfilled. War i^ religion.
There is no war so cruel and evil, as this: for the war with the
sweorde, kylleth but the bodies, and this sleyeth many souls: for the poor
unlearned persons, remain confused, and almost every one believes and
works, ^i. Cor. i. One truth.
after his own way. And yet there is but one truth of gods word, by the
which we shall be saved. Psalm. i.
Happy be they that receive it, and most unhappy are they, which neglecte
and persecute the same. Persecutours of the word Math. x.
For it shall be more easy for Sodom and Gommor at the day of judgment, then
for them: and not without just cause, if we consydre the benevolence, goodness,
and mercy of god: who has declared his charity toward us, greater, and more
inestimable, then ever he did to the Hebrews. Heb. x.
For they lived under shadows and figures, and were bound to the law. And
Christ (we being his greatest ennemies) has delivered us from the bondage of
the law, Ga. liiii.
and has fulfilled all that was figured in their law, Math. xi.
and also in their prophesies, sheadyng his own precious blood, to make us
the children of his father, and his brethren, and has made us free, ii. Cor.
iii.
setting us in a godly liberty: I mean not license to sin, as many be
glad to interpret the same, Chris^en liberty.
when Christien liberty is godly entreated of. Trewlie it is no good spirit
that moves men to find fault, at every thing, and when things may be well
taken, to pervert them into an evil sense and meaning. There bein the world,
many speakers of holiness, and good works, but very rare and and seeldome is
declared, which be the good and holy works. Holy works.
The works of the spirit be never almost spoken of. And therefore very few
know what they be. I am able to justify the ignorance of the people to be
great, Few know the true holiness.
not in this matter alone, but in many other, which were most necessary for
christians to know. Because I have had just proof of ye same, it makes me thus
much to say with no little sorrow and grief in my heart, for such a miserable
ignorance, and blyndnes amongst the people. Math. xii.
I doubt not but we can say al, Lord, Lord: but I fear god may say unto
us, this people honoreth me with their lips but their hearts be far from me.
Mat. xv.
God desires nothing but the heart, and says he will be worshipped in spirit
and truth. Christ condemned all Hypocrisy and feyned holiness, Io. iiii.
and taught sincere, pure, and true godlynes: But we worse the^ frantike, or
blind, will not follow Christ's doctrine, but trust to men's doctrines,
Traditions of men.
judgments, and sayings, which dimineth our eyes: and so the blind leads
the blind, Math. xv.
and both fall into the dyche. Truly in my simple, and unlearned judgment, no
man's doctrine is to be esteemed or preferred like unto Christ's and the
Apostles, nor to be taught as a perfect and true doctrine, The word of god is
ye only sure doctrine.
but even as it does accord and agree with the doctrine of the gospel. But
yet those that he called spiritual pastors, although they be most carnal, as
it does very evidently and plainlye appear, The cause of thestimacion of
tradicions.
by their fruits, are so blinded with the love of them selves, and the world,
that they extol men's inuencions and doctrines, before the doctrine of the
gospel. And when they be not able to maynteyne their own inuencions, and
doctrine with any jot of the scripture, then they most cruellye persecute them
that be contrary to ye same. Be such ye lovers of Christ? nay, nay: they be
the lovers of the wicked Mammo^, neither regardyng God nor his honor. For
fylthy lucre has made them almost mad, but frantyke they be doubteles. Is not
this miserable state of spiritual men in the world, much to be lamented of al
good christians? But yet I cannot allow, neither praise al kind of lame^tacion,
but such as may stand with Christian charity. Charity suffers long, and is
gentle, enuyeth not, vpbraydeth no man, i. Cor. xiii.
casts frowardely no faults in me^nes teath, Charity.
but refers al things to god: being angry without sin, reformyng others
without their sclaunders, Ephe. iiii.
carrieng ever a storehouse of mylde words to perce the stony herted men. I
would all christians, A godly wish.
that like as they have professed Christ, would so endeavor themselves to
follow him, in godly living. For we have not put on Christ to live any more to
our selves, Ephe. iiii.
in the vanities, delites, and pleasures of the world, and the flesh,
suffrynge the concupiscence and carnalitie of the flesh, to have his full
swinge: For we must walk after the spirit, Gala. v.
and not after the flesh, for the spirit is spiritual, and coueteth
spiritual things: To. viii.
and the flesh carnal, and desires carnal things: the men regenerate by
Christ, disspise the world, Christened men.
and all the vanities and pleasures thereof. They be no lovers of themselves,
for they feel how evil and infirm they be, Self love.
not being able to do any good thing without the help of God, from whom they
knowledge all goodness to proceed. Iaco. i.
They flatter not themselves, with thinkyng every thing which shyneth to the
world, Worlds love.
to be good and holy, for they know all externe and outward works be they
never so glorious and fair to ye world, may be done of the evil, as well as of
the good: and therefore they have in very little estimacion, the outewarde show
of holiness, because they be all spiritual, castyng up their eyes upon heavenly
things: neither lokyng nor regarding the earthly things, for they be to them
vile, and abject. They have also the simplicity of the dove, Simple wisdom in
men.
and the policy of the Serpent: for by simplicity, they have a desire to do
good to all men, Mat. x.
and to hurt no man, no though they have occasion given. And by policy they
give not, nor minister any just cause to any man, whereby their doctrine
might be reproved.

They be not also as a reed shaken with every wind, Christen consta^tues.
Math. xi.
when they be blasted with the tempests, and storms of the world, the^
remain they most firm, stable, and quiet, feling in spirit, that god (as
their best father) does send and suffer all things for their benefitte, ii.
Cor. iiii.
and commodity. i. Pet. ii.
Christ is to the^ a rule, Example of a christen man.
a line, an example of Christien life. They be never offended at any thing,
although occasion be ministered unto them: Christen co^tentacion.
for like as Christ when Peter would have withdrawe^ him from death, answered,
and said: go back from me Satan, for thou offendest me, Math. xvi.
that is: as much as lies in the, thou gyuest me occasion with thy words, to
make me withdraw my self from death, although I yielded not thereto, for this
thy procuremente can not extinguisshe the brennynge desire I have, to shead
my blood for my chosen: Even so the perfect men are never offended at any
thing. For although the world were full of sin, they would not withdraw
themselves from doing of good, nor wax cold in the love of the lord. And
much less they would be moved to be evil: yea rather they be so much the
more moved to do good. The regenerated by Christ, The works of god offend not
the christian.
are never offended at the works of god, because they know by faith, that
God does all things well. And that he can not err neither for want of power,
nor by ygnorau^ce nor malice: for they know him to be almighty, Heb. iiii.
and that he sees all things, and is most habundauntlye good: they see and
feel in spirit, that of that will, most highl^e perfect, can not but
proceade most perfect works. Likewise they be not offended at the works of
men: The works of me^ offend not the Christian.
for if they be good, they are moved by them to take occasion to follow them,
and to reknowledge the goodness of god, with giving of thanks, and praising his
name, daily ye more: but if they be indifferent, and such as may be done with
good and evil ententes, they judge the best part, Mat. vii.
thinking they may be done to a good purpose, and so they be edified: but if
they be so evil, that they can not be taken in good part, by any means,
yet they be not offended although occasion be given, nay rather they be
edyfied, in as much as they take occasion to be better although the contrary
be ministered unto them. Ephesians. v.
Then begin they to think and say thus: The christian profits by sin.
if god had not preserved me with his grace, I should have committed this
sin, and worse. O how much am I bound to confess, Ps. cxlv.
and knowledge the goodness of god. They go also thinking and saying further. He
that has sinned, may be one of gods elect: peradventure the lord has
suffered him to fall, to the entente he may the better know himself. I know
he is one of them that Christ has shead his blood for, and one of my christen
brethren. Truly I will admonyshe, and rebuke him, and in case I find him
desperate, I will comfort him, and show him the great goodness and mercy of
God, in Christ: and with godly consolations I will see, if I can lift him up.
And thus ye may see how ye men regenerated by Christ, of every thing,
win, and receive fruit. weaklynges mislike al things.
And contrary the younglinges and imperfect, are offended at small tryfles,
taking every thing in evil part, grudging and murmuryng against their
neighbor: and so much the more as they show them selves fervent in their so
doing, Act. xiii.
they are judged of the blind world, and of them selves, great zealebearers
to god. If this were the greatest evil of these younglinges, it were not the
most evil: but I fear they be so blind and ignoraunte, that they are
offended also at good things: and judge nothing good but such as they enbrace
and esteem to be good, with murmuringe against al such, as follow not their
ways. If there be any of this sort, Godly.
the lord give the^ light of his truth yt they may increase and grow in godly
strength. I suppose if such yo^glinges and imperfect, had seen Christ, and his
disciples, eat meat with unwashed hands, Mat. xv.
or not to have fasted with ye Phariseis, Mat. ix.
they would have been offended, sei^g him a breaker of me^nes traditions: their
affections dispose their eyes to se through other men, and they se nothing in
themselves: where charity (although it be most fullest of eyes to see the
faults of others, whom it coueteth to amend) thinks none evil, i. Cor.
xiii.
but discretely and rightly interprets all things: by ye which more justly
and truly, every thing is taken. Now these supersticious weaklinges, if they
had been co^uersau^t with Christ, and seen him lead his liefe sumtime with
weme^, sumtime with Samaritanes, with Publicanes, sinners, and with the
phariseis, they would have murmured at him. Also if they had seen Mary power
upon Christ, the preciouse oyntmente, they would have said with Judas, mat.
xxvi.
this oyntmente might have been sold, and given to the poor. If they also had
seen Christ with whippes drive out of the temple, Mat. xxi.
those that bought and sold, they would furthwith have judged Christ to have been troubled and moved with anger, and not by zeal of charity. How would they
have been offended, Io. vii.
if they had seen him gooen to the Jews feast, Mat. xii.
heal a syckeman upon the Saboth day, Io. iiii.
practyse with the woman of Samary, ye and show unto her, of his most divine
doctrine and life? They would have taken occasion to have hated and persecuted
him, as the Scribes and Phariseis did. And even so should Christ the Savior
of the world, have been to them an offense and ruin. Romans ix.
There be an other kind of litleones imperfect, which are offended after this
sort and manner: A second sort of weaklynges.
as when they see one that is reputed and esteemed holy, to commit sin,
furthwith they learn to do that, and worse, and wax cold in doing of good,
and confirm themselves in evil: and then they excuse their wicked life,
publishyng the same, with the sclau^der of their neyghbor. If any man reprove
them, they say: such a man did this, and worse. So it is evident that such
persons would deny Christ, if they saw other men do the same. If they went
to Rome, and saw the enormities of the prelates which is said to reign there
emonges: I doubt not if they saw one of them sin which were reputed and
taken for holy, their faith should be lost, but not the faith of Christ,
which they never possessed: but they should lease that humayne opinion, which
they had of the goodness of prelates. For if they had the faith of Christ, the
holy ghost should be a witness unto them, Ephe. i.
which should be mighty in them, that in case all the world would deny Christ,
they would remain firm and stable in the true faith. The phariseis also,
took occasion of ye evil of others, Phariseis.
to wax hautie and proud, taking themselves to be men of greater perfection
the^ any other, because of their virtue, even as the Pharisei did, when he saw
the publicanes submission: Lu. xviii.
and so they be offended, with every little thing, judging evil, murmuring
against their neighbor, and for the same, they are of many, reputed and taken
for the more holy and good: whereas in dead, they be the more wicked.

The most wicked persons are offended even at themselves: for at their little
stabilitie in goodness, and of their detestable and evil life, they take
occasion to despair: Where they ought the more to commit themselves to god,
asking mercy for their offenses. And furthwith to give thanks, yt it has
pleased him of his goodness, to suffer them so long a time. Wicked men mislike
good things.
But what neadeth it any more to say, the evil men are offended eue^ at the
works of god. They see god suffer sinners, therefore think they, sin
displeases him not: And because they se not the good rewarded with riches,
oftentimes they imagine, that god loves them not: it seameth to them god is
parciall, Ps. xxxvii
because he has elected sum, and sum reproved. Offense of Gods election.
And therefore they say, that the elected be sure of salvation, Romans ix. Romans
xi.
taking by yt, occasion to do evil enough, saying: whatsoever god has
determined, Ps. xxxiii.
shall be performed. If also they see the good men oppressed, and the evil men
exalted, they judge god unjust, taking occasion to live euelly, saying:
inasmuche as god favors the naughty men, let us do evil enough, to
thentent, he do us good. If then the wicked be offended even at god, Roma.
iii.
it is no wondre if they be offended at those that follow, and walk in his
paths and ways. Now I will speak with great dolor, Uayne gospellers.
and heaviness in my heart, of a sort of people, which be in the world that be
called professors of the gospel, and by their words do declare and show,
they be much affected to the same. But I am afraid, sum of them do build
upon the sand, as Simon Magus did, Acts. xiii.
making a weak foundation. I mean, they make not Christ their chiefest
foundation, professing his doctrine of a sincere, pure, and zealous mind, but
either for because they would be called gospellers to procure sum credit, and
good opinions, of the true and very favorers of Christ's doctrine, either to
find out sum carnal liberty, Gal. v.
either to be contencious disputers, fynders, or rebukers of other men's
fautes, orelles finally to please and flatter the world: such gospellers are
an offense, Roma. ii.
and a ^klaunder to the word of God, and make the wicked to rejoice, and laugh
at them, saying: behold I pray you their fair fruits. What charity? what
discrecion? what godlynes? holiness, or purity of life is amongst the^? Be they
not great aue^gears, foul glottons, slaunderers, backbyters, aduouterers,
fornicatours, swearers, and blasphemers? yea, and wallow, and tumble in all
sins: These be ye fruits of their doctrine. And thus it may be seen how the
word of GOD is evil spoken of through licencious and evil living: Evil living
^laundereth the best profession.
and yet the word of God is all holy, pure, sincere, Psalm. xii.
and godly, being the doctrine and occasion of al holy and pure living: It is
the wicked that peruerteth all good things, into evil, Math. vii.

A similitude.

Math. xiii.


for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. And when good seed is sown
in a barreyne and evil ground, it yeldeth no good corn and so it fares by
the word of god: For when it is heard and known of wicked me^, Applicacio^
it brings forth no good fruit: but when it is sowe^ in good ground, I mean
the hearts of good people, it brings furthe good fruit abundantly: so that
the want and fault is in men, and not in the word of god. I pray god all men
and women may have grace to becum meet tillage for the fruits of the gospel,
Prayer.
and to leave only the iangling of it: for only speaking of ye gospel, John.
i.
makes not men good christians, but good talkers, except their factes and
works agree with the same: so then their speech is good, Math. xii.
because their hertes be good. And eue^ as much talk of the word of God,
without practicing the same in our living is evil and detestable in the sight
of god, Psalm. i.
so it is a lamentable thing to hear how there be many in ye world, that do
not well digest the reading of scripture, Readyng of the scripture.
and do commend and praise Ignorance, and say that much knowledge of gods
word, is the original of al discencion, scismes, and contencion, and makes
me^ hawte, proud and presumptuous by reading of the same. This manner of saying
is no less than a plain blasphemy against the holy ghost. The word of God.
For the spirit of God is the author of his word, and so the holy ghost is
made the author of evil, John. xvi.
which is almost great blasphemy and (as the scripture says) a sin that
shall not be forgeuen in this world, neither in the other to cum. It were al
our parts and duties, Math. xii.
to procure and seek all the ways and means possible, to have more knowledge
of gods words, set furthe abroad in the world, and not allow Ignorance,
and discommende knowledge of gods word, Knowledge wished against ignorance.
stopping the mouths of the unlearned, with subtle and crafty persuasions of
Philosophy, and Sophistry, whereof comes no ^ruite, but a great
perturbacion of the mind, to the simple and ignorant, not knowing which way
to turn them. For how is it not extreme wickedness, to charge the holy
sanctified word of God, with thoffences of man? To allege the scriptures to be
perilous learning, because certain readers thereof, fall into heresies? These
men might be forced by this kind of argument, to forsake thuse of fire,
Like reason like conclusion.
because fire burned their neighbors house, or to abstain from meat or
drink, because they see many surfeyte.

O blind hate, they sklaunder God for man's offense, and excuse the man whom
they see offend, and blame the scripture, which they cannot improve: Yea I
have heard of sum that have very well understand the latin tongue, that when
they have heard learned men, Good latinistes and evil divines.
persuade to the credit and belief of certain unwritten verities (as they
call them) which be not in scripture expressed, and yet taught as doctrine
apostolic, and necessary to be believed: they have been of this opinion, that
the learned men, have mo Epistles written by thappostes of Christ, Forged
wrytinges.
then we have abroad in the Cannon of tholde and new Testament, or known of
any, but only to them of the Clergy. Which belief I did not a little lament
in my heart, to hear that any creature should have such a blind ignoraunte
opinion. Some kind of simplicity is to be praised, but this simplicity
without the verity, I can neither praise nor allow. And thus it may be seen,
how we that be unlettered, remain confused, without god of his grace, The
unlearned be taught by grace.
lighte^ our hearts with a heavenly light, and knowledge of his will, for we be
given of our selves to believe men better then god. I pray god send all learned
men the spirit of god abundantly, that their doctrine may bring furthe the
fruits thereof. I suppose there was never more need of good doctrine to be
setfurth in the world, This age requires lernyng.
than now in this age: Wordly children.
for the carnal children of Adam be so wise in their generation, that if it
were possible, they would deceive the children of light. Mat. xxiiii
The world loves his own, and therefore their factes and doings be highly
esteemed of the world: but the children of god ar hated, John. xvii. Gods
children.

ii. Cor. v,


because they be not of the world, for their habitacion is in heaven, and
they do despise the world as a most vile slave. The fleshly children of Adam
be so politic, subtle, crafty, and wise, in their kind, that the elect
should be illuded if it were possible: for they are clothed with Christ's
garment, in utter apperaunce, with a fayer show of all godliness, and holiness
in their words, but they have so shorn, nopped, and turned Christ's
garmente, and have so disguysed them selves, that the children of light,
beholding them with a spiritual eye, accounte and took them for men which
have sold their masters garment, and have stolen a piece of every man's
garment: Like garment l^^e men.
yet by their subtle art, and crafty wits, they have so set those
patches and pieces together, that they do make the blind world, Crafty tailors.
and carnal me^, to believe it is Christ's very mantle: but the children of
light, know the contrary, for they are led by the spirit of god to the
knowledge of the truth, Gods children be wise.
and therefore they di^cerne and judge all things right, and know from whence
they cu^, even fro the bishop of Rome, and his members, the head spring of al
pride, B. of Rome:
vain^glorie, ambicion, hypocrisy, and feigned holiness. The children of god be
not abashed, although the world hate them, they believe they are in the grace
and favor of God, and that he as abest father, does govern them in all
things, putting away from them al vain confidence, and trust in their own
doings: for they know, they can do nothing but sin of them selves: Roma.
vii^
they be not so folish and childish, not to give God thanks for their
eleccion, which was before ye beginning of the world: Ephe. i. Sure faith
for they believe most surely, they be of ye chosen, for the holy gooste does
witness to their spirit, Roma. viii:
that they be the children of god, and therefore they believe god better than
man. They say with saint Paul: who shall separate us from the love of god?
Roma. viii.
shall tribulacion? anguish, persecucion, hunger, nakedness, peril, or swearde?
as it is written: for thy sake are we killed all day long, and are counted as
sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless in all these things we ouercum,
through him that loves us: for I am sure, yt neither death, neither life,
neither aungelles, nor rule, neither power, neither things present, neither
things to cum, neither quantity or quality, neither any creature, shall be
able to depart us from the love of god, which is in Christ Jesus our lord They
are not by this godly faith presumptuously enflamed, Of Godly faith no evil
comm^th.
nor by the same becum they leuse, idell or slow in doing of godly works, as
carnal men dream of them: so much the more fervent they be in doing most
holy and pure works, which god has commanded them to walk in: They wandre
not in men's tradicions and inuencions, leaving the most holy and pure
precepts of god undone, which they know they be bound to observe and keep.
Math. xv.
Also they work not like hierlinges for meede, wagies, or reward, but as
loving children without respect of lucre, i. Pe. i.
gain or hyer. They be in such liberty of spirit, and joy somuche in god,
that their inward consolacion can not be expressed with tongue: all fear of
dampnacion is gone from them, for they have put their whole hope of salvation
in his hands, that will and can perform it, neither have they any post or
pillar to lean to, but god and his smothe and vnwrinkled church.

For he is to them all in all things, and to him they leave, as a most sure
square pillar, in prosperity and adversity, nothing doubting of his promises
and couenau^tes, for they b^leue most surely they shall be fulfilled. Also the
children of god be not curiouse in searching the high mysteries of god, Gods
s^cretes.
Eccle. iii.
which be not mete for the^ to know: neither do go about with humayne and
carnal reasons, to interpret scripture, persuading men by their subtle wits
and carnal doctrine, yt much knowl^dge of scripture makes men her^^ikes,
without they tempre it with humayne doctrine, Sophistry, Philosophy, and
Logic: wherewith to be seduced according to the tradicions of men, Collo, ii.
after ye ordenaunces of the world, and not after Christ. i. Timo. vi.
Saint Paul does most diligently admonish us, Prerogative of the s^ripture.
which arts are not convenient and meet to be made chekmate with scripture:
for the scriptures be so pure and holy, that no perfeccion can be added unto
them.

For even as fine gold does excel all other metals, Similitud.
Applicacio^.
so does the word of god, all men's doctrines. I beseech the lord to send
the learned and unlearned such abundance of his holy spirit, that they may
obey and observe the most sincere and holy word of god, and show the fruits
thereof, which consists chieflye in charity and godly unity: that as we
have professed one god, one faith, and one Baptism: So we may be all of one
mind, and one accord, putting away all biting and gnawing: for in bacbiting,
slau^deringe, and misreporting our christen brethren, we show not our selves
the disciples of Christ, whom we profess. Christ is our ^xample.
In him was most high charity, humility, and patience, suffering most
patiently al ignominy, rebukes, and slau^ders, praying to his eternal father
for his enemies, Prayer.
with most fervent charity: and in all things did remit his will, to his
fathers, as the Scripture does witness, when he prayed in the mount: Math,
A goodly example and lession for us to follow at al times and seasons: as well
in prosperity, as in adversity, Psalm. xxxvii
to have no will but gods will, committing and leaving to him, all our cares
and griefs, and to abandon al our policies and inuencions, for they be most
vain, and folish, and in deed very shadows and dreams. But we be yet so
carnal and fleshly, that we cum hedlyng, like vnbridelled coltes, without
snaffle or bit. If we had the love of god printed in our hearts, The love of
God.
it would keep us back from runnyng astray. And until such time as it
please god to send us this bit to hold us in, we shall never run ye right
way, although we speak and talk never somuche of god and his word. Every man
attend to his vocacio^
The true followers of Christ's doctrine, has always a respect, and an eye
to their vocacion. If they be called to ye ministry of Gods word, Preachers.
they preach and teach it sincerely, ii. Cor. iiii.
to the edifiyng of others, and show them selfs in their living, Lay men.
Ephe. vi.
folowers of the same. If they be married men, having children and family, they
norish and bring them up, without all bytternes, and fiercenes, in the doctrine
of the lord, in all godlynes and virtue, committ^ng the instruccion of others,
which apperteyneth not to their charge, to the reformacion of god, and his
ministers, which chiefly be kings, and princes, bearing the sword even for
that porpose, to punish evil doers. If they be children they honor their
father and mother, Roma. xiii. Children.
knowing it to be gods commandment, and that he has thereto annexed a
promise of long life. If they be servants, they obey and serve their masters
with all fear and reverence, Deuteronomy. v. Servants
even for the lords sake, neither with murmuring nor grudgyng, Ephe. vi.
husbands
but with a free heart and mind. If they be husbands, they love their wifes,
Ephe. v.
as their own bodies, after the example as Christ loved the congregation, and
gave him for it, to make it to him a spouse, without spot or wrinkle. If they
be women married, they learn of Saint Paul, Wives. Obedience.
to be obedient to their husbands, and to keep silence in the congregation,
i. Timo. ii. Silence.
and to learn of their housbandes, at home. Also they wear such appare^l as
becummeth holiness, Apparel. ii. ^imo. ii. i. Petri. iii.
and comely usage, with sobernes: not being accusers, or d^tractours, not g^u^n
to much eating of dilicate meats, and drynking of wine, but they teach
honest things, to make the youg women sobre minded, to love their housbandes,
to love their children, to be discrete, chaste, huswiflie, good, obedient unto
their husbands: that the word of god be not evil spoken of. Uerely if all
sorts of people would look to their own vocacion, and ordeyne the same
according to Christ's doctrine we should not have so many eyes and ears to
other men's fautes as we have. For we be so busye and glad to find and epsy
out other men's doings, Overmuch ^ie sight.
that we forget, and can have no time to weye and ponder our own, which
after the word of god, Math. vii.
we ought first to refourme: and then we shall the better help an other with the
straw out of his eyes. But alas we be so much given to love and to flatter
our selfs, Self love.
and so blinded with carnal affeccions, that we can see and perceive no fault
in our selfs. And therefore it is a thing very requisite and necessary for us
to pray all with one heart, and mind to god, to give us an heavenly light and
knowledge of our our own mis^ries, and calamities ye we may see them and
acknowledge them truly before him. A conclusion with an answer to objections.
If any man shall be offended, at this my lamenting ye fautes of me^, which be in
the world, fantasiyng with them selves, that I do it either of hatred, or of
malice, to any sort or kind of people: verily in so doing they shall do me
great wrong, for I thank God by his grace. I hate no creature: yea, I would
say more to give witness of my conscience, ye nether life, honor, riches,
neither what soever I possess here, which apperteyneth unto mine own private
commodity, be it never so deerlie beloved of me, but most willingly and
gladly I would leave it to win any manne to Christ, of what degree or sort,
soever he were. And yet is this nothing in comparison to the charity that God
has showed me, in sending Christ to dye for me: no if I had all the charity
of Aungelles and apostles, it should be but like a spark of fire compared to
a great heap of burning cooles. God knows of what intent and mind I have
lamented mine own sins, and fautes, to the world. I trust no body will
judge I have done it for praise, or thank of any creature, since rather I
might be ashamed then rejoice, in rehersall thereof. For if they know how
little I esteem, and wey the praise of the world, that opinion were soon
removed and taken away: It is lawef^^ to bost in god
for I thank God (by his g^ac^) I know the world to be a blind Judge, and
the praises thereof, vain, and of little moment: And therefore I seek not the
praises of the same, neither to satisfy it, none other wise, then I am taught
by Christ to do, according to Christen charity. I would to god we would al
(when occasion does serve) confess our faults to the world, Godly wish.
al respects to our own commodity, laid aparte. But alas, self love does
so much reign among^st us, that as I have said before, we can not epsy our
own fautes. Shame hinders confesc^on.


And although sometime we find our own gilte, either we be favorable to
interpret it no sin, orelles we be ashamed to confess our selfs thereof. Yea
and we before offended and grieved to hear our fautes charitablie, and godly
cold us of other, putting no difference between charitable warning, and
malicious accusinge. Truly if we sought gods glory, i. Cor. vi.
as we should do in all things, we should not be ashamed to confess our
selfs, to digress from gods precepts and ordinances, when it is manifest
we have done and daily do. I pray god our own fautes and deades condemn us
not, at ye last day, when every ma^shalbe rewarded, Math. xxv.
according to his doings. A true ^h^eruing.
Truly if we do not redress and amend our living, according to the doctrine
of the gospel, we shall receive a terrible sentence, of Christ the son of god,
Domesdaye compared to a lawedaye.
when he shall cum to judge and condemn al transgressors and breakers of his
precepts, and commandments, and to reward al his obedient and loving
children, we shall have no man of law to make our plea for us, neither can
we have the day deferred, neither will the just judge be corrupted with
affeccion, bribes, or reward, neither will he hear any excuse or delay,
neither shall this Saint, or that martyr, help us, be they never so holy,
neither shall our ignorance save us from damnacion. W^lfull syn is ye greatest.
But yet wilful blindness, and obstinate ignorance, shall receive greater
punishment, and not without just cause. The^ shall it be known who has walked
in the dark, for all things shall appear manifest, before him. No man's
deades shall be hidden, no, Apo. xxii.
neither words, nor thoughts: the poor and simple obseruers of gods
commandments, shall be rewarded with everlasting life, as obedient children to
the heavenly father. And ye transgressors, adders, Reward of sinners.
and diminishers of the law of god, shall receive eternal damnacio^, for their
just reward. I beseech god we may escape this fearful sentence, Prayer:
and be found such faithful servants, and loving children, that we may
hear the happy, comfortable, and most joyful sentence, ordained for the
children of God, which is: Come hither ye blessed of my father, Math. xxv.
and receive the kingdom of heaven, prepared for you before the beginning of ye
world: Unto the Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost, be all honor and glory
world without end. Amen.

Finis.
Imprinted at London, in Fleet street, at the sign of the Sun, over against
the Conduyte, by Edward Whitchurche, the.v. day of November, in the year of
our Lord. 1547.

Cum priu^legio ad imprimendum solum.


