The traduction and marriage of the princess.
marriage of the princess Katherine
A re^memembrau^ce for the traduction of the Princess Kateryne daughter to the
right high and right mighty Prince the king and queen of Spain as here in
articles it does ensue.
IN primis it is agreed that in the monethe of August or of Septembre next
coming the said princess kateryne with her company shall be transported god
willing in to Hampton watur / It is thought good for asmoche as the ships
which shall pass which her noble person shall mo we to come nere by iij or
iiij miles unto the kyngis port and Town of Southamp / ton / That the two
Berkis which the king our souereyne lord caused tobe rigged anenst the last
via / ge and arm by watir that his grace did tobe made into Scotlonde be
richely appointed and other bargis and great bootis to attend upon the said
company be in like wise well arraied and well furnsshed for to bring her seide
noble person and them of her company the more esely and the more assuerdly
unto the kings town and port aforesaid.

Item it is according that in the said ij Barkys there be so^me noble
personagis of men to receive the same pryncesse at her Ship.

Item there be lordis spu^all and te^porall appointed to attend upon the
londynge and first metyng on land / whose names be in the roll of the first
metynge / And therefore letters be necessary tobe sent unto them for the same
purpose in time convenient

Item there be ladies also appointed for to give their attendaunce upon the
said pryncesse at her landynge whose names be in a roll specified /
wherefore it is requisite that the queen's letters be semblably sent furthe unto
the same ladies for that entente.

Item that a proposicyon be made at the first receyuynge of the said
pryncesse into my lord Stuardes hands by such one as my said lord shall
meue the king to do that act.

And since forth with upon the landyng of the said pryncesse / It seems
that she and her company owe to enter into the charge of the king / his grace
should appoynte some head offycer and other of his most noble householde to
make her costis and expenses and the prouis you for the same.

Item that these.x. persons following be appointed to attend upon my lord
Stuarde when he shall call or send for them.

(...) ^ter to be done. Than that.xii. or.xx. gentilined with short tippid
stauys. and.lxxx. or a.. tall yomen / and likly personagis with long tipped
stauys do thoffice that unto them in such case apperteyneth.

Item that in asmoche as sir Thomas Brandon and sir John Digby be head officers
under the marshall of England / it is thought that they should have the
conduyt of all typped stauys foresaid / And beside those estates and other
knights that the kyngys highness has appointed to give their attendaunce
upon the said Duke / as in the same Roll for the Duke of york apperyth. It
is thought that the said Duke of yorkis counsel should beside the kings
letters do make out the Dukys own writyngis for that cause to such as be and
shall be retained with his grace.

By the queen's commandment.

Item before this enter into london the said princess must have the richer
lytter to sir in as it is before rehersyd and the same lytter to be with her at
croydon at good hour for the same intent.

By the queen's commandment.

Item that such prouysyon be made by A B etc. that.iii. henxmen in side
sadillis and hurnes all of one suit do follow next to the said lytter.

Item that a fair Palfrey with a pylion richely arraied and led in houde for
the said pryncesse do follow next to the said Henxmen.

By the queen's commandment.

Item that xi palfreis all in a suyt be ordained for such ladies as shall be
appointed to follow next unto the pillion.

Item that v Chares be ordained dyuersly appareilled whereof one of the chieffe
must be richely garnysshed for the said pryncesse / and the other iiij to
serve such ladies as shall be appointed to follow in order by. A.B. having the
charge of the seide charis

Item and any other charys happyn to come beside these v before provided / than
they so to be ordered as shall accord with thestatis of them that shall be in
them.

The iiij metynge

Item the forth attendaunce shall be made by the Maire of London and by the
citezeins of the same like as it is agreed bitwene the said maire and diverse
of the kings counsel to deuyse the manner thereof with all other solempnytes /
and ceremonies necessary for the honor of the cite and of the feste.

My lord Stuarde.

And sithen it is but.vii. small miles bitwene the said Croydon and the Cite of
London. It is thought that the said Pryncesse Katheryne should be straight
conveyed through the high stretis of London in such case accustomed to the
west door of the church of Poules there to be received with procession.

Item and since this Pryncesse shall be receiuid with procession at the weste
door of Poules / It is thought that the Bishop of london being in
pontificalibus and acompanyd with as many myters of his diosise as he can get
attend at the said west door there to receive this said pryncesse. And from
thens with the quere of the church processionally to goo before her to the
high altar and further to do them and there as in such case it is accustomed.

By the queen's apoyntement.

Item that after this Pryncesse shall have made her offrynge / it seems unto
us that a lady of great estate assigned thereto by the king should give her
attendaunce upon the said princess at the litel door against the concistorie
in the church that ledith into the bishop of Londons palys and so from that
door to conduyte the pryncesse into her chamber.

My lord Stuarde.

Master Controllor.

And by cause the said pryncesse shall be labored and trauayled in her journey.
It is thouhte good therefore and for other consideracyons that she tarry at the
said bishoppis palys one hole day at the least before the day of the said
marriage.

Item after the day of the marriage It seems unto us that her conueyaunce from
Hampton should be so ordered that the Pryncesse should come too the Bisshoppis
palys of London upon a Thursday or ellis upon a friday rather than otherwise
too thentent that the day of the fest of the marriage should be upon a sunday
for the more solempnyte of the same

Item that the marriage take beginning somewhat before ix at the clock.

And in asmoche as the Cardynall archebysshop of Canterbury has taken upon him
tobe executir officii at the marriage of the said Pryncesse. It is thought good
that the bisshop^ of his prouynce / and great abbottis lords of the
parlyament should in pontificalius give their attendaunce upon him for the more
honor of the said marriage wherefore it is necessary that the kings letters be
directed out unto the said bisshoppis and abbottis to advertise the^ thereof
to thentent that every of them may be the more ready to do that unto him
belongethe in that behalf / and in like wise that every bisshoppe / and abbot
lord of the perlyament make ready a barge or a boat to awayte upon the king in
his going to his paleys of westmynster as in another article it is expressed
more at large.

And because the prince should be more in a redynesse It is thought according
that the same prince should lodge at the deane of poulis place the night
before the said marriage / and for to make his enter i^to the church before
the princess come thider which enter is devised to be at the south door next
west ward to our lady of grace in the body of the church and with the pryncez
householde seruau^tis to give their attendau^ce and convey him to the haute
place to be made byforne the Consistory in the said body of the church.

Item that the seide Princess kateryne goo out at the great gate of the
Bisshoppis paleys / and accompanied with great astatis of lordis and ladies
she make her enter at the great west door of the church and so to goo to the
same haute place led with such it great estatis Bachelors that have not be
married as the king shall assign

Clerk of the werkis by the oversight of master Comptroller.

Item for the more easy coming of the seide princess. It is devised that
barris shall be made fro the seide palleis gate unto the seide great west door of
the church / And from the said great weste door so all alonge the church to
the quere door of the same.

Md also that the church of Powlis be hangyd with arays against the said
marriage.

Item that the trompettis stand on loft over the same west door and blow
co^tynuelly after the first coming out of the princess out of the great
gate of the said paleys till the time she be in the church upon the haute
place / and than forth with wha^ she shall be there the trompettis to scase.

Clerk of the werkis by the over sight of master comptroller.

This haute place is devised tobe set in the naue and body of the church
even anenst the Consistory to thentent that the king and the queen may
secretly goo out into the Bisshoppis paleys and see and here the Seremonyes of
their marige at their pleasure. And for this cause a back door must be made
there in the same consystory by thaduys of warkemen which may be sone done and
at litell charge / for the said Consystory has been well over sen^ by us.

Item this said haute place in facyon is devised to be made like unto an haute
place at a Coronacion or semblable to the hawte place at a crystenynge of one
of the kings children with brood and large greeys and steppis and with a good
large space all on hight on loft to thentent that the Cardinal and the
mynystres of the church necessary for that act. And the prince and the
princess may be to gedyr and no man above in the seide space all on hight on
lotte than be necessary / And the Bisshoppis abbotis and other prelatis and
Officers may stand lower upon the said steppis and of haute place / so as
thereby there grow none Impedyment to the sight of the people.

Master Secretery / and the Master of the Rollis.

And when the said Prince and princess shall be on the said haute place on
loft and the Bannes asked than some doctor of the law named i^ the roll
bring in obieccions openly against the said Bannes and marriage allegginge
that the said marriage can not be lawful for such reasons as he shall exhibit
there supposed to be grounded in the law of cry stis church. whereunto so^me
other famous doctor named also in the roll as the^ master of the Rollys and
the Secretery if it so please the king shall reply and declare solemply the
said marriage tobe good and effectuell in the said law of crisths church the
same obiecco^ns made or any other to be made against the same natwistandinge
this dialoge and relplica / cion to be had for the more honor of the said
mary age / and though there be no cause of substance nor in effect why the
same ought to be done.

And in Case it be requysyte after the manner of Spay: be as it is after the
custom of England that so^me man shall give the bride. Thank who shall give
this pryncesse as bride. Is to be respyted unto further knowledge be had. Who
shall have co^missyon from the king and queen of Spain so to do. and ellis
the matter to be remitted unto the kings highness as the cas shall require.

Ite^ when all shall be fynysshed that is to be done upon the said haute place
for the matrimony than shall the prince and the princess go to geder hand in
hand all alonge the body of the said Church straight before head up to the
quere and through the quere towardis the high auter to their Places appointed
there.

Item as soon as the seide prince and princess shall begin to depart from
the said haute place than shall all the mynstrellis every man after his
faculte being all on hight in the vawtis of the church do their poyntis in
music co^tynuelly as it shall come to their course / and as the prince and
princess shall before the seide high auter / and than all the mynstrellis to
sease.

And to thentent that the Prince and the Pryncesses may have alwey some place
secretly to resort unto for such casueltees may fall during the high mass. It
is forseyne that the prince shall have a

(...) Item the Cardynall tharchebisshop of york the duk of Bukyngham the
lord marquis with other lords spiritual and temporal and with abbots lords
of the parliament tobe in bargys or botes either of there own or else boroed or
hired and to attend upon the king queen prince and pryncesse foresaid that
day.

Item besydis this provision that there be one barge purposely devised and kept
for such estrangers as shall come with the said pryncesse.

Item that the mayre of london the aldermen and every craft and felyship
being in the clothe of their craft after one suete and lyuerey of the same
craft have their barges or great botis in like wise appointed as they be vsid
yearly tobe when they go for the presentment of their Mayre for to take his
oath at the kings eschequer at westmynster.

Item that the mayre and the Cite be warned at season conuement of the kings
determynacion to go to westmynster by water to the intent that they make in
time and at good leyser puision for their bargis and for their great botys
shypbotis or other for by lyklynesse it shall be needful they so to do. Si^hen
the bargis and botis of the lords spiritual and temporal that were wont to
serve the said Cite at the presentment of their mayre must of necessite now
serve for the lords them silfe.

And when al these bargis and botis not only of the lordis spirituel and
temporell / but as well of the abbottis as of the maire and of the crafts of
London shall be disapoynted / Than the said lordis abbottis the mayre and the
craftis forsaide / houer and attend every man in his barge or bote for his
part upon the kings barge at the said beynardis castle Than all the other
bargis and botis to row by the king after the king and about the king as
the space of the river with thebbe or flode as good order shall led them to
the time his grace shall be landyd ad the great bridge of westmynster and no
barge nor bote to land but such as shall be assygned / All the other to houer
still to the time the king and the lordis appointed be landyd. And after that
done al other bargis and botis not apoyntid to land shall depart to their
lodgings with the kings special thanks.

And as Iustys Torneys and such other Ceremonies it is remitted to the said
master Co^ptroller Sergeaunt of the kings armory.

Md to know bitwene the king and the bishop of london how the bishops paleys
shall be repaired

(...) Richard: pynson
printer's device of Richard Pynson (1492-1530) with his monogram on a shield,
which is held up by a girl and a boy and surmounted by a helmet


