THE COVRTYER OF COUNT BALDESSAR CAstilio divided into four books.

Very necessary and profitable for young Gentilmen and Gentilwomen abiding in
Court, Palaice or Place, done into English by Thomas Hoby.

Imprinted at London by wyllyam Seres at the sign of the Hedghogge. 1561.

The contents of the book
The first book, entreats of the perfect qualities of a Courtier.
The second, of the use of them, and of merry Iestes and Pranckes.
The third, of the conditions and qualities of a vvaytinge Gentillvvoman.
The fourth, of the end of a Courtier, and of honest love.
The Printer to the reader, greetyng.
Now at the length (gentle reader) through the diligence of Master Hoby in
penninge, and mine in printing, thou have here set forth unto thee, the book
of the Courtier: which for thy benifite had been done long since, but that
there were certain places in it which of late years being misliked of some,
that had the perusing of it (with what reason judge thou) the Author thought
it much better to keep it in darkness a while, then to put it in light
imperfect and in peecemeale to serve the time. Use it the^fore, and so peruse
it that for thy profit, first he, and then I, may think our travail herein
well employed.

Fare well.
THOMAS SACKEVYLLE IN commendation of the work. to the Rreader
THese royal kings, that rear up to the sky
Their Palaice tops, and deck them all with gold:
With rare and curious works they feed the eye:
And show what riches here great Princes hold.
A rarer work and richer far in worth,
Castilios hand presents here to the,
No proud ne golden Court does he set furt^
But what in Court a Courtier ought to be.
The Prince he raises houge and mighty walls,
Castilio frames a wight of noble fame:
The king with gorgeous Tyssue claddes his halles,
The Count with golden virtue deckes the same,
VVhos passing skill ^o Hobbies pen displaise
To Britain folk, a work of worthy praise.
TO THE RIGHT HONOrable the Lord Henry Hastinges, son and heir apparent to
the noble Earl of Huntyngton.
THEMISTOCLES THE NOBLE ATHENIEN IN HIS BANISHEMENT Entertained most
honorably with the king of Persia, willed upon a time to tell his cause by a
spokesman, compared it to a piece of tapistrie, that being spread abroad,
discloseth the beauty of the woorkemanship, but foulded together, hides it,
and therefore demanded respite to learn the Persian tunge to tell his own
cause: Right so [honorable Lorde] this Courtier has long straid about this
realm, and the fruit of him either little, or imperfectly received to the
commune benefit: for either men skilful in his tunge have delited in him for
their own private commodity, or else he has eftsoon spoken in peecemeale
by an interpreter to such as desired to know his mind, and to practice his
principles: the which how imperfect a thing it is, The* mystocles and
experience teach. But now, though late in deed, yet for all that at length,
beside his three principal languages, in the which he has a long time haunted
all the Courts of Christendom, he is beecome an Englishman [whiche many a
long time have wyshed, but few attempted and none atchieued] and welwilling
to dwell in the Court of England, and in plight to tell his own cause. In whose
commendation I shall not need to use any long process of words, for he can
so well speak for himself, and answer to the opinion men have a long time
conceived of him, that whatsoever I should write therein, were but labor in
waste, and rather a diminishing, then a setting forth of his worthiness, and
a great deal better it were to pass it over with silence, then to use
briefness. Only for the little acquaintance I have with him, and for the
general profit is in him, my desire is he should now at his first arrival, a
new man in this kind of trade, be well entertained and much honored. And
forsomuche as none, but a noble young Gentleman, and trained up all his life
time in Court, and of worthy qualities, is meet to receive and enterteine so
worthy a Courtier, that like may fellowship and get estimation with his like,
I do dedicate him unto your good lordeship, that through your means, and under
your patronage he may be commune to a great meany. And this do I not, for
that I suppose you stand in need of any of his instructions, but partly
because you may see him confirm with reason the Courtly facions, comely
exercises, and noble virtues, that unawares have from time to time crept in to
you, and already with practice and learning taken custom in you: And partly to
get him the more authority and credit through so honorable a Patron. For
no doubt, if you beseene willingly to embrace him, other young and Courtly
Gentlemen will not shonn his company: And so both he shall get him the
reputation now here in England which he has had a good while since beyond
the sea, in Italy, Spain and France, and I shall think my small travail well
employed and sufficiently recompensed. The honor and entertainment that your
noble Ancestors showed Castilio the maker, when he was in this realm to be
installed knight of the Order for the Duke his Master, was not so much as
presently both he, and this his handywoorke shall receive of you. Generally
ought this to be in estimation with all degrees of men: For to Princes and
Great men, it is a rule to rule themselves that rule others, and one of the
books that a noble Philosopher exhorted a certain king to provide him, and
diligently to search, for in them he should find written such matters, that
friends durst not utter unto kings: To men grown in years, a pathway to the
behoulding and musing of the mind, and to whatsoever else is meet for that
age: To young Gentlemen, an encouraging to garnishe their mind with moral
virtues, and their body with comely exercises, and both the one and the other
with honest qualities to attain unto their noble end: To Ladies and
Gentlewomen, a mirror to deck and trim themselves with virtuous conditions,
comely behauiours and honest enterteinment toward al men: And to them all in
general, a storehouse of most necessary implements for the conversation, use,
and training up of man's life with Courtly demeaners. Were it not that the
auncientnesse of time, the degree of a Consul, and the eloquence of Latin style
in these our days bear^ a great stroke, I know not whether in the invention
and disposition of the matter, as Castilio has followed Cice^o, and applied to
his purpose sundry examples and pithie sentences out of him, so he may in
feate conueyaunce and like trade of writing, be compared to him: But well I
wotte for renown among the Italians, he is not inferior to him. Cicero an
excellent Orator, in three books of an Orator unto his brother, facioneth
such a one as never was, nor yet i^ like to be: Castilio an excellent Courtier,
in three books of a Courtyer unto his dear friend, facioneth such a one as is
hard to find and perhaps impossible. Cicero brings in to dispute of an
Orator, CRAS^VS, SCEVOLA, ANTONIUS, COTTA, SVLPITIVS, CATVLVS, and CAESAR his
brother, the noblest and chiefest Orators in those days: CASTILIO to reason
of a Courtier, the Lord OCTAVIAN FREGOSO, SIR FRIDERIKC^ his brother, the
Lord IVLIAN DE MEDICIS, the L. CAESAR GONZAGA, the L. FRANCESCOMA^IA DELLA
ROVER^, COUNT LEWIS OF CANOSSA, the L. GASPAR PALLAVICIN, BEMBO, BIBIENA, and
other most excellent Courtiers, and of the noblest families in these days in
Italy, which all afterward became Princes, Cardinals, Bishops and great
Lords, and some yet in life. Both Cicero and Castilio profess, they follow
not any certain appointed order of precepts or rules, as is used in the
instruction of youth, but call to rehearsal, matters debated in their times
too and fro in the disputacion of most eloquent men and excellent wits in
every worthy quality, the one company in the old time assembled in
Tusculane, and the other of late years in the new Palaice of Vrbin. Where
many most excellent wits in this realm have made no less of this book then
the Great Alexander did of Homer, I cannot sufficiently wonder that they have
not all this while from time to time done a commune benefit to profit others
as well as themselves. In this point [I know not by what destinye]
Englishemen are much inferior to well most all other Nations: For where they
set their delight and bend themselves with an honest strife of matching others,
to turn into their mother tunge, not only the witty writings of other
languages, but also of all the Philosophers, and all Sciences both Greek and
Latin, our men ween it sufficient to have a perfect knowledge, to no other
end, but to profit themselves, and [as it were] after much pains in
breaking up a gap, bestow no less to close it up again, that others may with
like travail follow after. And where our learned men for the most part
hold opinion, to have the sciences in the mother tunge, hurts memory and
hinders lerning, in my opinion, they do full ill consider from whence the
Grecians first, and afterward the Latins ^et their knowledge. And without
wading to any farther reasons that might be alleged, if they will mark well
the truth, they shall see at this day, where the Sciences are most turned
into the vulgar tunge, there are best learned men, and comparing it with the
contrary, they shall also find the effects contrary. In Italye [where the
most translation of authors is] not only for Philosophy, Logike Humanity and
all liberal Sciences both in Greek and Latin [leauing a part BARBARVS,
NAVG^RIVS, SANNAZARVS, BEMBVS, LAZARUS and the rest that of very late days
floryshed] GENVA, TOMITANVS, ROBERTELLVS, MANVTIVS, PICCOLHOMINEVS, are
presently very singular, and renowned throughout all Christendom: but also
for the same in the vulgar tunge with little or no sight at al in the latin,
ARETINO, CELLI [a tailor in Florence] THE L. VICTORIA COLVMNA, the. L. DIONORA
SANSEVERINA, the. L. BEATRICE ^OFFREDA, VERONICA* GAMBERA, VIRGINEA SALVI and
infinite other men and women are most famous thoroughout Italy, whose divine
works and excellent style both in rhyme and prose give a sufficient
testimonye, not only of their profounde knowledge and noble wit, but also that
knowledge may be obtained in studying only a man's own native tunge. So that
to be skillful and exercised in authors translated, is no less to be called
learning, then in the very same in the Latin or Greek tunge. Therefore the
translation of Latin or Greek authors, does not only not hinder learning,
but it furthereth it, yea it is learning it self, and a great stay to youth,
and the noble end to the which they ought to apply their wits, that with
diligence and study have attained a perfect understanding, to open a gap for
others to follow their steps, and a virtuous exercise for the vnlatined to
come by learning, and to fill their mind with the moral virtues, and their
body with ^iuyll conditions, that they may both talk freely in all company,
live uprightly though there were no laws, and be in a readiness against all
kind of worldly chances that happen, which is the profit that comes of
Philosophy. And he said well that was asked the question* How much the learned
differed from the unlearned, So much (quoth he) as the well broken and ready
horses* from the unbroken. Wherefore I wot not how our learned men in this case
can avoid the saying of Isocrates* to one that among soundrye learned
discourses at Table ^pake never a word: If thou be unlearned, thou dooest
wiselye* but if thou be learned, vnwyselye, As who should say* learning is
ill bestowed where others be not profited by it. As I therefore have to my
small skill bestowed some labor about this piece of work, even so could I
wish with all my heart, profounde learned men in the Greek and Latin should
make the like proof, and every manne store the tunge according to his
knowledge and delight above other men, in some piece of learning, that we alone
of the world may not be still counted barbarous in our tunge, as in time
out of mind we have been in our manners. And so shall we perchance in time
become as famous in England* as the learned men of other nations have been and
presently are. And though the hardness of this present matter be such, and
mine vnskylfulnesse to undertake this enterprise so great, that I might with
good cause have despaired to bring to an end it, that many excellent wits
have attempted, yet could I not chouse but yield to the continual ^equestes
and often persuasions of many young gentlemen, which have may chance an opinion
that to be in me, that is not in deed, and unto whom in any reasonable matter I
were skillful in neither I could nor ought of duty to want in fulfillyng
their desire. Notwithstanding a great while I forbear and lingered the time to
see if any of a more perfect understanding in the tunge, and better practiced
in the matter of the book [of whom we want not a number in this realm] would
take the matter in hand, to do his country so great a benefit: and this
imagination prevailed in me a long space after my duty done in translating
the third book [that entreats of a Gentl^woman of the Courte] persuaded
thereto, in that I was enfourmed* it was as then in some forwardness by an
other, whose wit and style was greatly to be allowed, but sins prevented by
death he could not finish it. But of late being instantly craved upon a fresh,
I whetted my style and settled my self to take in hand the other three books
(that entreat of the perfection of a Gentilman of the Court) to fulfill their
peticion in what I am able, having time and leyser thereto, the which I have
done, though not in effect* yet in appearance and that in a great deal shorter
time, then the hardness of the matter required. And where it shall not
perhaps thoroughly please by reason my small understanding in the tung, and
less practice in the matters herin contained, is not of force to give it the
brightness and full perfection in this our tung that it has in the Italian, it
shall suffice yet that I have showed my self obedient in the respect a man
ought to have toward his betters: And no more can they avoid the blame to
charge me withal, then I to undertake it. Beside that, I have declared my good
will and well meaning no less then if my counning were greater, and could
extend much farther. But parauenture the rudeness of this shall be an
encouragyng of some other to give the onsett upon other matters with a better
ripeness of style and much more aptness, and so shall this yet somewhat profit
both ways. But the estimation it must get by your honor, is the principal
cause that sets it out, and makes it worn with the hands of heedfull
readers: For in case you cheerfullye receive it, men will reckon it good: If
you allow it, worthy to be practiced: If you commend it, worthy to pass from
hand to hand. Therefore among the other good opinions men generally houlde of
you, let it not be the least, that they may houlde also no less of this that
you allow and commend. And so shall you show undeserved kindness, I, bounden
duty, and all others good will to embrace and to welcome it out of Italy into
England And thus shall Cast^lio be esteamed such a one as he is indeed, and
wexe familiar with all men, that of late was known of very few, and so
mangled with varietye of judgments, that he was (in a manner) maimed, and lost
a good piece of his estimation. But in case judgments now feint, or mine
interpretation seem not pithie but rude, not proper, but cold, there is no
more imperfection in this Courtier, then in Cirus himself in the translation of
Xenophon into the Italian or any other tung, the one as necessary and proper
for a Gentilman of the Court, as the other for a king. And I shall desire my
labor may so be taken well in worth, as I have endeavored my self to follow the
very meaning and words of the Author, without being mislead by fancy, or
leaving out any percell one or other, whereof I know not how some interpreters
of this book into other languages can excuse themselves, and the more they be
conferred, the more it will perchance appear. Wherefore receive you this, as a
token of my good will, and so receive it, that the fruit, what ever it be, may
be acknowleaged at your hands: and you, pass the expectation of men in this,
as in all other things, which, no doubt, is very great of you: and I, to
acknowleage this benifit, where my ability stretches to nothing else, shall
at the least evermore wish unto your Lordshipp long lief, that you may go
forward, as you do, in these beginninges, which promise a luckie end, to the
honor of your self, comefort of your friends, and forwardness of the commune
^eale of your country.

1.5.5.6.

Your L. most bounden Thomas Hoby.

UNTO THE REVEREND and honorable Lord Mychaell de Sylua Bishop of viseo.
AFter the Lord Guidubaldo of Montefeltro Duke of Urbin was departed out of
this life, certain other Gentilmen and I that had bine servants to him,
continued in service with Duke Francescomaria Della Rouere his heir and
successor in the state: Francescomaria della Rou^r^.
And while the savor of the virtues of Duke Guidubaldo was fresh in my mind,
and the great delight I took in those years in the loving company of so
excellent Personages as then were in the Court of Urbin: I was provoked by the
memory thereof to write these books of the Courtier. The which I accomplished
in a few days, myndinge in time to amend those faults that spronge of the
desire that I had speedily to pay this debt. But fortune now many years
has always kept me under in such continual trauayles, that I could never
get leyser to bring it to the pass that my feeble judgment might be
thoroughly satisfied with all. At such time therefore as I was in Spain, being
advertised out of Italy how the Lady Uittoria Colonna Marquess of Pescara, L.
vittoria Colonna.
unto whom in foretime I had granted a Copy of this book, contrary to her
promise, had made a great part of it to be copied out: it grieved me somewhat
whether I would or no, standinge in doubt of the sundry inconveniences that in
the like cases may happen. Yet had I a hope that the wit and wisdom of that
Lady (whose troth I have always had in reverence, as a matter from above) was
sufficient to provide, not to be harmfull unto me my beeinge obedient to her
commandment. At last I hard an yncklinge that part of the book was rief in
Naples in many men's hands: and as men are always desirous of novelty, it was
thought that they attempted to imprint it. Wherefore I, amassed at this
mischaunce, determined with my self to ouerlooke by and by that little in the
book that time served me thereto, with intent to set it abroad, thinking it
less hurtful to have it somewhat corrected with mine own hand, then much
mangled with an other man's. Therefore to have this my purpose take effect, I
took in hand to read it over afresh, and sodeinlie at the first blush by
reason of the title, I took no title grief, which in proceadinge forward
increased much more, remembringe that the greater part of them that are brought
in to reason, are now dead. For beside those that are mentioned in the Proheme
of the last book, M. Alphonsus Ariosto.
M. Alphonsus Ariosto him self is dead, unto whom the book was dedicated, Duke
of Nemours.
a noble young Gentilman, discreet, full of good conditions, and apt unto
every thing meet for one living in court. Likewise Duke Julian de Medicis,
whose goodness and noble Courtesy deserved to have been a longer time enjoyed
of the world. Cardinal of S. Maria in Portico.
Also M. Bernard, Cardinal of S. Maria in Portico, who for his lively and
pleasant promptness of wit, was most acceptable unto as many as knew him,
Duke of Genua.
and dead he is. The Lord Octauian Fregoso is also dead, a man in our times
very rare, of a most noble courage, of a pure lief, full of goodness, wit,
wisdom and Courtesy, and a very friend unto honor and virtue, and so worthy
praise, that his very ennemies could say none other of him, then what sounded
to his renoume: And the mishappes he has borne out with great steadiness,
were sufficient inoughe to give evidence, that Fortune, as she has always
been, so is she in these days also an enemy to virtue. There are dead in like
manner many other that are named in this book, unto who^ a man would have
thought that nature had promised a very long lief. But the thing that should
not be rehearsed without tears is, Duchess of Vrbin.
that the Duchess she is also dead. And if my mind be troubled with the
loss of so many frindes and good Lords of mine, that have left me in this
lief, as it were in a wilderness full of sorrow, reason would it should with much
more grief bear the heaviness of the Duchess death, then of all the rest,
because she was more worth then all the rest, and I was much more bound unto
her then unto all the rest. Therefore for leesinge time to bestow that of duty
I ought upon the memory of so excellent a Lady, and of the rest that are no
more in lief, provoked also by the ieopardye of the book, I have made him to
be imprinted, and setforth in such sort, as the shortness of time has served
me. And because you had no acqueintance, neither with the Duchess, nor with any
of the rest that are dead, saving only with Duke Julian, and with the Cardinal
of S. Maria in Portico. while they lived, therefore to the intent, in what I can
do, you may have acqueintance with them after their death, I send unto you this
book, as a purtraict in peinctinge of the Court of Urbin: Not of the
handiwoorke of Raphael, or Michael Angelo, but of an unknown peincter, and
that can do no more but draw the principal lines, without settingfurth the
truth with beawtifull colors, or making it appear by the art of Prospectiue
that it is not. And where I have enforced my self to setfurth together with the
comunication the propreties and conditions of such as are named in it, I
confess I have not only not fully expressed, but not so much as touched the
virtues of the Duchess Because not only my style is insufficient to express
them, but also mine understanding to conceive them. And if in this behalf, or
in any other matter worthy reprehention (as I know well there want not many
in the book) fault be found in me, I will not speak against the truth. But
because men sometime take such delight in finding fault, that they find fault
also in that deserves not reproof, unto some yt blame me because I have not
followed Boccaccio, Boccaccio.
nor bound my self to the manner of the Tuscane speech used nowadayes, Tuscane
tung.
I will not let to say, for all Boccaccio was of a fine wit, according to
those times, and in some part writ with great aduisement and diligence: yet
did he write much better when he let him self be guided with wit and his own
natural inclination, without any other manner study or regard to polish his
writings, then when with all travail and bent study he enforced him self to
be most fine and eloquent. For his very favorers affirm that in his own
matters he was far deceived in judgment, little regarding such things as have
gotten him a name, and greatly esteaminge that is nothing worth. Had I then
followed that trade of writing which is blamed in him by such as praise him in
the rest, I could not have eschewed the very same reprooffes that are laid to
Boccaccio himself as touching this. And I had deserved so much the more, for
that his error was then, in beleauyng he did well, and mine should be now, in
knowinge I do amiss. Again if I had followed that trade which is reckened of
many to be good, and was little regarded of him, I should appear in following it
to disagree from the judgment of him whom I followed: the which thing (in mine
opinion) were an inconvenience. And beeside if this respect had not moved me, I
could not follow him in the matter, for so much as he never wrott any thing in
treatise like unto these books of the Courtier: And in the tunge, I ought not
in mine advise, because the force or rule of speech does consist more in use,
then in any thing else: and it is always a vice to use words that are not
in commune speech. Therefore it was not meet I should have used many that are
in Boccaccio, which in his time were used, and now are out of use emonge the
Tuscanes them selves. Neither would I bind my self to the manner of the Tuscane
tunge in use now a days, because the practicing emonge sundry Nations, has
always been of force to transport from one to an other (in a manner) as
merchaundise, so also new words, New Words.
which afterward remain or decay, according as they are admitted by custom
or refused. And this beside the record of ancient writers, is to be evidently
seen in Boccaccio, in whom there are so many words French, Spanish, and
prouincial, and some perhaps not well understood of the Tuscanes in these
days, that whosoever would pick them out, should make the book much the lesser.
And because (in mine opinion) the kind of speech of the other noble Cities of
Italy, where there resort men of wisdom, understanding and eloquence, which
practice great matters of government of states, of letters, arms, and diverse
affairs, ought not altogether to be neglected for the words which in these
places are used in common speech: I suppose that they may be used welinough,
writing such as have a grace and comlynesse in the pronuntiation, and communly
counted good and of propre signification, though they be not Tuscane, and have
also their origion out of Italy. Beeside this in Tuscane they use many words
clean corrupt from the Latin, Derived words from the Latin.
the which in Lumbardye and in the other parts of Italy remain wholl and
without any change at al, and they are so universally used of every man,
that of the best sort they are allowed for good, and of the commune people
understood with out difficulty. Therefore I think I have committed no error at
all. If in writing I have used any of these, and rather taken the wholl and
pure word of mine own Country, then the corrupt and mangled of an other.
Neither does that rule seem good unto me, where many say ye vulgar tung, the
less it is like unto the Latin, the more beawtiful it is: And I can not
perceive why more authority should consist in one custom of speech, then in
an other. For if Tuscane be sufficient to authorize corrupt and mangled* Latin
words, and to give them so great a grace, that mangled in such sort every
man may use them for good (the which no man denies) should not Lumbardy or any
other country have the authority to allow the very Latin words that be
pure, sound, propre and not broken in any part so, but they may be well borne?
And assuredly as it may be called a rash presumption to take in hand to forge
new words, or to set up ye old in spite of custom: So is it no less, to
take in hand against the force of the same custom to bring to naught, and (as
it were) to burye alive such as have lasted now many years, and have been
defended from the malice of the time with the shield of use, and have preserved
their estimation and dignitye, when in the wars and turmoiles of Italy,
alterations were brought up both of the tunge, buildinges, garments and
manners. And beeside the hardness of the matter, it seems to be (as it were)
a certain wickedness. Therefore where I have not thought good in my writing to
use the words of Boccaccio which are used no more in Tuscane, nor to bind my
self to their law that think it not lawful to use them that ye Tuscan^s use not
nowadayes, me think I ought to be held excused. But I suppose both in the
matter of the book and in the tunge, for so much as one tung may help an other,
I have followed Authors as much worthy praise, as Boccaccio. And I beleaue it
ought not to be imputed unto me for an error, that I have chosen to make my
self rather known for a Lumbard, in speaking of Lumbard, then for no Tuscan,
in speaking of tomuch Tuscan. Because I will not do as Theophrastus did, Cicero
in Biuto.
which for speaking tomuch the mere Athenian tunge, was of a simple old woman
known not to be of Athens. But because in this point there is sufficyent talk
in the first book, I will make no more a do. And to avoid al contention I
confess to my faultfinders, that I have no knowleage in this their Tuscan
tunge so hard and secret: and I say that I have written it in mine own, and
as I speak, and unto such as speak as I speak: and so I trust I have offended
no man. For I beleaue it is forbed no man that is, to write and speak in his
own tunge, neither is any man bound to read or hear that contenteth him
not. Therefore if they will not read my Courtier, they shall offend me nothing
at all. Other say, because it is so hard a matter and (in a manner) impossible
to find out a man of such perfection, as I would have the Courtier to be,
Courtier.
it is but superfluous to write it: For it is a vain thing to teach that can
not be learned. To these men I answer, I am content, to err with Plato,
Xenophon, and M. Tullius, leaving apart the disputing of the intelligible world
and of the Ideas or imagined fourmes: in which number, as (according to that
opinion) the Idea or figure conceived in imagination of a perfect commune
weal, and of a perfect king, and of a perfect Orator are contained: So is it
also of a perfect Courtier. To the image whereof if my power could not draw nigh
in style, so much the less peynes shall Courtiers have to draw nigh in effect
to the end and mark that I in writing have set before them. And if with all
this they can not compass that perfection, such as it is, which I have
endeavored to express, he that cummeth nighest shall be the most perfect: As
among many Archers that shute at one mark, where none of them hitteth the
pinn, he that is nighest is out of doubt better then ye rest. Some again say
that my meaning was to facion my self, persuading my self that all such
qualities as I appoint to the Courtier are in me. Unto these men I will not
clean deny that I have attempted all that my mind is the Courtier should
have knowleage in. And I think who so has not the knowleage of the things
entreated upon in this book, how learned so ever he be, he can full il write
them. But I am not of so sclender a judgment in knowing my self, that I will
take upon me to know what soever I can wish. The defense therefore of these
accusations and peraue^ture of many mo, I leave for this once* to the judgment
of the commune opinion: because for the most part the multitude, though they
have no perfect knowleage, yet do they feel by the instinct of nature a
certain savor of good and ill, and can give none other reason for it: One
tastes and takes delight, an other refuses and is against his stomach.

Therefore if the book shall generally please, I will count him good, and think
that he ought to live: But if he shall displease, I will count him naught, and
beleaue that the memory of him shall soon perish. And if for all this mine
accusers will not be satisfied with this commune judgment, let them content
them selves with the judgment of time, which at length discovers the privy
faults of every thing: And because it is father to truth and a judge without
passion, it accustometh evermore to pronounce true sentence of the life or
death of writings.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Courtier of Count Baldessar Castilio, unto Master
Alphonsus Ariosto.
I Have a long time doubted with my self [most loving M. Alphonsus] which of
the two were harder for me, either to deny you the thing that you have with
such instance many times required of me, or to take it in hand: Because on
the one side me thought it a very hard matter to deny any thing,
especially the request being honest, to the person whom I love deerlye, and
of whom I perceive my self deerlye beloved. Again on the other side, to
undertake an enterprise which I do not know my self able to bring to an
end, I judged it uncomely for him that wayeth due reproves so much as they
ought to be wayed. At length after much debatynge, I have determined to prove
in this behalf what aid that affection and great desire to please, can bring
unto my dilygence, which in other things is wont to increase the labor of
men. You then require me to write, what is (to my thinking) the trade and
manner of Courtyers, which is most sitting for a Gentilman that lives in the
Court of Princes, by the which he may have the knoweleage how to serve them
perfectlye in every reasonable matter, and obtain thereby favor of them and
praise of other men. Fynallye, of what sort he ought to be that deserves to be
called so perfect a Courtyer, that there be no want in him? wherefore I,
considering this kind of request, say, that in case it sh^ulde not appear to
my self a greater blame to have you esteame me to be of small frendeshippe,
then all other men of little wisdom, I would have ryd my hands of this
labor* for fear leas^e I should be counted rash of all such as know,
what a hard matter it is, emonge such diuersitye of manners, that are used in
the Courts of Christendom, to pick out the perfectest trade and way, and (as
it were) the flower of this Courtiership. Because use makes us many times to
delight in, and to set little by the self same things: whereby sometime it
preceadeth that manners, garments, customs, and facions which at sometime
have been in price, becu^me not regarded, and contrarywyse the not regarded,
becu^me of price. Therefore it is manifestlye to be descerned, that use has
greater force then reason, to bring up neweinuentions emonge us, and to
abolishe the old, of the which who so goes about to judge the perfection, is
often times deceived. For which consideration, perceyuinge this and many other
lettes in the matter propounded for me to write upon, I am constreyned to make
a piece of an excuse, and to open playnelye that this error (if it may be
termed an error) is commune to us both, that if any blame happen to me about
it, it may be also partned with you. For it ought to be reckned a no less
offense in you to lay upon me a burden that passes my strength, then in me
to take it upon me. Let us therefore at length settle our selves to begin that
is our purpose and drifte, and (if it be possible) let us facion such a
Courtier, as the Prince that shall be worthy to have him in his service,
although his state be but small, may notwythstandynge be called a mighty
Lord. We will not in these books follow any certain order or rule of
appointed precepts, the which for the most part is wont to be observed in
the teaching of any thing whatsoever it be: but after the manner of men of
old time, renuinge a grateful memory, we will repeat certain reasoninges
that were debated in times past between men very excellent for that purpose.
And although I was not there present, but at the time when they were debated,
it was my chance to be in England, yet soon after my return, I heard them
of a person that faythfullye reported them unto me. And I will endeavor my
self, for so much as my memory will serve me, to call them perticularly to
remembrance, that you may see what, men worthy great commendacion, and unto
whose judgment a man may in every point give an undoubted credyt, have
judged and believed in this matter. Neither shall we swar^e from the purpose to
arryue in good order at the end unto the which all our communication is
directed, if we disclose the cause of the reasoninges that hereafter follow.

As every man knows the little City of Vrbin is sytuated upon the side of
the Appennine (in a manner) in the mids of Italy toward the Golf of Venice.
Situation of Urbin.
The which for all it is placed emonge hills, and those not so pleasant as
perhaps some other that we behoulde in many places, Mare adriaticum.
yet in this point the element has been favorable unto it, that all about,
the country is very plentyfull and full of fruits: so that beside the
holsomenesse of aer, it is very abundant and stored with all things
necessary for the lief of man. But among the greatest felycityes that men can
reckon it to have, I count this the chief, that now a long time it has
always been governed with very good Princes, although in the commune
calamyties of the wars of Italy it remained also a season with out any at
all. But without searching further of this we may make a good proof with the
famous memory of Duke Fridericke, who in his days was the light of Italy.
Neither do we want true and very large testimonies yet remayninge of his
wisdom, courtesye, Duke Frydericke.
justice, liberalitye, of his invincible courage and pollycy of war. And of
this do his so many vyctoryes make proof, chyeflye his conquerynge of places
impregnable, his sodeyne redynesse in setting forward to give battle, his
putting to flight sundry times with a small number, very great and
puissaunte armies, and never sustained loss in any conflict: So that we may,
not without cause, compare him to many famous men of old time. This man among
his other deeds praisworthy, in the hard and sharp situation of Vrbin buylt a
Palaice, to the opinion of many men, The palaice of Urbin.
the fairest that was to be found in all Italy, and so fornished it with
every necessary implement belonging thereto, that it appeared not a palaice,
but a City in form of a palaice, and that not only with ordinary matters,
as Silver plate, hanginges for chambers of very rich cloth of gold, of silk
and other like, but also for sightlynesse: and to deck it out withal, placed
there a wondrous number of ancient images of marble and metal, very
excellent peinctinges and instruments of musycke of all sorts, and nothing
would he have there but what was most rare and excellent. To this with very
great charges he gathered together a great number of most excellent and rare
books, in Greek, Latin and Hebrew, the which all he garnished with gold and
silver, esteaming this to be the chieffest ornament of his great palaice. This
duke then following the course of nature when he was.lxv. years of age, as he
had lived, so did he end his lief with glory. And left Duke after him a child
of.x. years, Guidubaldo duke of Urbin.
having no more male, and without mother, who hight Guidubaldo. This child as
of the state, so did it appear also that he was heir of all his fathers
virtues: and suddenly with a marvelous towardnes beeganne to promise so much of
himself, as a man would not have thought possible to be hoped of a man
mortal. So that the opinyon of men was, that of all duke Friderickes notable
deeds there was none greater then that he begat such a son. But fortune
enuyinge this so great virtue, wythall her might gainstoode this so glorious a
beginnynge, in such wise that before duke Guidubaldo was.xx. years of age, he
fell sick of the gout, the which encreasinge upon him with most bitter
pains, in a short time so nummed him of all his members, Troubled with the
gout.
that he could neither stand on foot nor move himself. And in this manner
was one of the best favored and towardlyest personages in the world deformed
and marred in his green age. And beside, not satisfied with this, fortune was
so contrary to him in all his pourposes, that very sildome he brought to
pass any thing to his mind. And for all he had in him most wise counsel,
and an invincible courage, yet it seemed that whatsoever he took in hand
both in feats of arms and in every other thing small or great, His ill
luck.
it came always to ill success. And of this make proof his many and diverse
calamityes, which he always bore out with such stou^enesse of courage, that
virtue never yielded to fortune. But with a boulde stomach despising her
storms, lived with great dignytye and estimation emonge all men: in
sickness, as one that was sound, and in aduersitye, as one that was most
fortunate. So that for all he was thus diseased in his body, he served in time
of war with most honorable enterteinmente under the most famous kings of
Naples, His service with princes and commonweals.
Alphonsus and Ferdinande the younger. Afterward with Pope Alexander the.vi.
with the lords of Venice and Florence. And when Julius the ii. was created
Pope, he was then made general Captain of the Church: at which time
proceadynge in his accustomed usage, he set his delight above all things to
have his house furnished with most noble and valyaunte Gentylmen, with whom he
lived very famylyarly, enjoying their conversation, wherein the pleasure which
he gave unto other men was no less, His propreties and qualityes.
then that he received of other, because he was very well seen in both tunges,
and together with a loving behauyour and plesauntnesse he had also accompanied
the knowleage of infinite things. And beside this, the greatness of his
courage so quickened him, that where he was not in case with his person to
practice the feats of Chiualrye, as he had done long before, yet did he take
very great delight to behoulde them in other men, and with his words sometime
correctinge, and otherwhyle praysinge every man according to his deserts, he
declared euydentlye how great a judgment he had in those matters. And upon
this at Tylt, at Tourneye, in riding, in playinge at all sorts of weapon,
also in inuenting deuyces, in pastymes, in music, fynallye in all exercises
meet for noble Gentilmen, every manne stryued to show himself such a one,
as might deserve to be judged woorthye of so noble an assemblye. Therefore were
all the hours of the day divided into honorable and pleasant exercyses,
as well of the body as of the mind. But because the Duke used continuallye, by
reason of his infirmytye, soon after supper to go to his rest, every man
ordinarelye, Elizabeth gonzaga duchess of Urbin.
at that hour drew where the Duchess was, the Lady Elizabeth Gonzaga. Where
also continuallye was the Lady Emilia Pia, who for that she was endowed with so
liuelye a wytt and judgment as you know, seemed the maistresse and ringe
leader of all the company, L. Emilia Pia.
and that every manne at her received understanding and courage. There was
then to be heard pleasant communication and merye conceytes, and in every
man's countenance a man might perceive peyncted a loving iocoundenesse. So
that this house truly might well be called the very mansion place of Mirth
and Joy. And I beleaue it was never so tasted in other place, what manner a
thing the sweet conuersatyon that is occasyoned of an amyable and loving
company, as it was once there. For leaving aparte what honor it was to all
us to serve such a Lord, as he whom I declared unto you right now, every
man conceived in his mind an high contentacyon every time we came into the
duchess sight. And it appeared that this was a chain that kept all lincked
together in love, in such wise that there was never agreement of will or hearty
love greater between brethren, then was there beetweene us all. The like was
beetweene the women, with whom we had such free and honest conversation,
that every manne might commune, sit, da^y, and laugh with whom he had lusted.
The behauyoure of the Duchess.
But such was the respect which we bore to the Duchess will, that the self
same liberty was a very great bridle. Neither was there any that thought it
not the greatest pleasure he could have in the world, to please her, and the
greatest grief to offend her. For this respect were there most honest
conditions coupled with wondrous great liberty, and devises of pastimes and
laughinge matters tempred in her sight, beside most wyttye iestes, with so
comelye and grave a majesty, that the very sober mood and greatness that did
knyt together all the acts, words and gestures of the Duchess in jesting
and laughing, made them also that had never seen her in their lief before, to
count her a very great Lady. And all that came in her presence having this
respect fyred in their breast, it seemed she had made them to her beck* so
that every man enforced himself to follow this trade, taking (as it were) a
rule and enample of fair conditions at the presence of so great and so
virtuous a Lady. Whose most excellent qualities I entend, not now to express,
for it is neither my purpose, and again they are well inoughe known to the
world, and much better then I am able either with tunge or with pen to
endite. And such as would perhaps have lien hid a space, fortune, as she that
wondreth at so rare virtues, has thought good with many adversities and
temptatyons of miseries to disclose them, to make trial thereby that in the
tender breast of a woman, in company with synguler beawtye, there can dwell
wisdom, and stoutenes of courage, and all other virtues that in grave men them
selves are most seldom. But leaving this apart, I say that the manner of all
the Gentilmen in the house was immedyatelye after supper to assemble together
where the duchess was. Where emonge other recreations, music and dauncynge,
which they used contynuallye, sometime they propounded feate questions,
otherwhyle they invented certain wytty sportes and pastimes, at the deuyse
sometime of one sometime of an other, in the which under sundry couertes,
often times the standers bye opened subtylly their imaginations unto whom they
thought best. At other times there arrose other disputations of diverse
matters, or else iestinges with prompt inventions. Many times they fell into
pourposes, as we now a days term them, where in this kind of talk and
debating of matters, Noble personages in the Court of Urbin.
there was wondrous great pleasure on all sides: Because (as I have said) the
house was replenyshed with most noble wits. Emonge which (as you know) were
most famous the Lord Octauian, Fregoso, Sir Friderick his brother the L.
Julian de Medicis, M. Peter Bembo, the L. Caesar Gonzaga, Count Lewis of
Canossa, the L. Gaspar Pallauicin, the L. Lodouicus pius, M. Morello of Ortona,
Peter of Naples, M. Robert of Bari, and infynyte other most woorthye knights
and Gentylmen. Beesyde these there were many that for all ordinarilye they
dwelled not there, yet spent they most of their time there, as, M. Bernard
Bibiena, Vnico Aretino, Iohnchristopher Romano, Peter Mount, Therpander, M.
Nicholas Phrisio, so that thither ran continually poets, musitiens, and al
kind of men of skyll, and the excellentest in every faculty that were in all
Italy. After pope Julius the ii. had with his own presence by the aid of the
Frenchmen brought Bolonia to the obedyence of the Apostolyke Sea again, in the
year MDvi. in his retourn toward Room he took Vrbin in his way, where he was
received as honorably as was possible, and with as sumptuous and costlye
preparation, as could have bine in any other City of Italy whatsoever it be.
So that beeside the Pope, all the Cardinals and other Courtyers thought
themselves thoroughly satisfied. And some there were that provoked with the
sweetness of this company, after the Pope and the Court was departed,
continued many days together in Vrbin. At which time they did not only
proceade in their accustomed trade of disportinge and ordinary recreations, but
also every man set to his helpinge hand to augment them somewhat, and
especially in pastymes, which they had up almost every night. And the order
thereof was such, that as soon as they were assembled where the Duchess was,
every man satt him down at his will, or as it fell to his lot, in a circle
together, and in s^ttinge were divided a man and a woman, as long as there
were women, for always (lightlye) the number of men was far the greater. Then
were they governed as the Duchess thought best, which many times gave this
charge unto the L. Emilia. So the day after the Pope was departed, the
company beeinge gathered to the accustomed place, after much pleasant talk,
the Duchess pleasure was that the L. Emilia should begin these pastimes:
Diuises of pastimes.
and she after a little refusing of that charge, said in this manner: Sith it is
your pleasure (Madam) I shall be she that must give the onsett in our pastimes
this night, because I ought not of reason disobey you, I think meet to
propounde a pastyme, whereof I suppose shall ensue little blame, and less
travail. And that shall be to have every man, as nigh as he can, propounde a
deuyse not yet heard of, then shall we choose out such a one as shall be
thought meet to be taken in hand in this company. And after she had thus
spoken, she turned her unto the L. Gaspar Pallauicin, willing him to
propounde his: who immediatlye made answer: But first (madam) you must
beeginne to propound yours. Then said the L. Emilia: I have already done. But
your grace must command him (Madam) to be obedient. Then the Duchess
laughing to the intent (quoth she) every man shall obey you, I make you my
deputy, and give unto you all mine aucthority. It is surely a great matter,
answered the L. Gaspar, that it is always lawful for women to have this
privilege, to be exempt and free from pains taking, and truly reason would
we should in any wise know why. But because I will not be he that shall give
example to disobey, I shall leave this until an other time, The L. Gaspars
devise.
and will speak of that I am now charged withal, and thus I begin. Mine
oppinion is, that our minds, as in other things, so also in loving are
diverse in judgment, and therefore it chances often times, that the thing
which is most acceptable unto one, is most abhorred of an other. Yet for all
that they always agree in that every man counts most dear the wight
beloved. So that many times the overmuch affection in lovers does so deceive
their judgment, that they ween the person whom they love, to be so garnished
with all excellent virtues and without fault, that he has no peer in the
world But because the nature of man does not admytte such full perfectyons,
and there is no mann that has not some defaulte or want in him, it can not be
said that such as these be are not deceived, and that the lover does not
become blind as touching the beloved. I would therefore our pastyme should
be this night to have every manne open what virtues he would principally the
person he loves should be endowed with all. And seeing it is so necessarilye
that we all have some spotte, what vice he would also have in him: to see who
can find out most praise woorthye and manlye virtues, and most tolerable
vices, that should be least hurtefull both to him that loves, and to the
wyghte beloved. After the L. Gaspar had thus spoken, The L. Co^stance Freg^sa.
the L. Emilia made a sign unto the Lady Constaunce Fregosa, because she was
next in order, to follow: who was now about to speak, when the Duchess
sodeinlye said: Saying the L. Emilia will not take the pain to find out some
pastime, reason wills that the other Ladies should be partakers of the same
privilege, and be also fre from this burden for this night: especially seeing
there are so many men in place, for assure your self we shall want no
pastimes. So shall we do, answered the L. Emilia, and puttinge the L.
Constance to silence turned her to the L. Caesar Gonzaga, that sat next her,
commanding him to speak, The L. Caesar Gonzagas devise.
and thus he began: Whosoever will diligently consider all our doings, he shall
find always in them sundry imperfections. And that happens, because nature
does varye, as well in this, as in all other things. Unto one she has given
the light of reason in one thing, and unto an other, in an other thing.
Therefore it comes to pass, where one man knows that an other knows not,
and is ignoraunte in the thing that the other has understanding in, each man
does* easilye perceive the error of his fellow, and not his own, and we all
think our selves to be very wise and peradventure in that point most, wherein
we are most foolysh. So that we have seen by experience in this house many
men which at the beegynnynge were counted most wise, in process of time were
known to be most foolysh. A kind of spiders, which being diverse of nature
cause diverse effects, some after their biting fall a singyng, some laugh, some
wep^, some watch, some sweat: and this disease is only cured with
ins^rumentes of music, which must never cease until the diseased being
constrained with the melodye thereof to fall a daunsi^ge with long exercise
overcomes the force of this poison.
Which has proceaded of no other thing but of our own dilygence, like, as
it is fayde to be in Pulia of them that are bitten with a Tarrantula, about
whom men occupye many instruments of music, and with sundry sounes go
searchynge out, until the humor that makes this disease by a certain
concordance it has with some of those sounes, feling it, does sodeinly move,
and so stirs the pacient, that by that styrrynge he recouereth his health
again. In like manner we, when we have felt some privy operacion of folly we
provoke it so subtillye, and with such sundry persuasions, and so diverse ways
that at length we understand whether it tended. Afterward the humor known, we
so stir it that always it is brought to the perfection of open folly. And some
is wexed foolish in verses, some in music, some in love, some in daunsinge,
some in making antiques, some in rydinge, some in playnge at fence, every man
according to the moine of his metal, whereby has ensued (as you know)
marvelous great pastime. I houlde therefore for certain, that in every one of
us there is some seed of folly, the which being stirred may multiplye (in a
manner) infinite. Therefore I would this night our pastime were to dispute upon
this matter: and that every man might say his mind, seeing I must be openly
foolysh, in what sort of folly I am foolysh, and over what matter, iudginge it
the issue for the sparkles of folly that are daily seen to proceade from me.
And let the like be said of all the rest, kepinge the order of our devises,
and let every man do his best to ground his opinion upon some sure sign and
argument, and so by this our pastime shall every one of us get profit, in
that we shall know our defaultes, and there shall we the better take heed. And
in case the vein of folly which we shall discover, be so rank that it shall
appear to us past remedy, we will set thereto our helpyng hand, and according
to the doctrine of Friar Marian, we shall gaigne a soul which shall be no small
gaigne. Friar Marian.
At th^^ devise there was much laughing, and none cold refrain^ from speakinge.
One said, I should be found foolysh in imagining. An other, in viewinge. An
other said, he was already become foolysh for love: and such like matters.
Then friar Seraphin after his manner, laughing. This (quoth he) should be to
tedious a matter. Friar Seraphin.
But if you will have a pretye pastime, let every man tell his opinion, ho^ it
cummeth that (in a manner) all women abhor rattes, love serpents, and you
shall see that none will hit upon it, but I, that know this misterye by a
strange mean And now began he to enter into his triflyng tales, but* the L.
Emilia commanded him to silence, and ouerscipping the Lady that satt there,
Unico Arettinos devise
made a sign to Vnico aretino that was next in order, and he without looking
for any more biddyng, I (quoth he) would gladlye be a judge of aucthoritye
that I might with all kind of tourment bolte out the truth of offenders: and
that, to discover the deceytes of an ungrate woman, who with the eyes of an
angel, and heart of a Serpent, never agrees her tongue with her mind, and
with a feygned deceyuable compassion, purposes nothing else but to make
Anatomy of hearts. Neither is there in all the sandy country of Libia to be
found so venomous a serpent that is so desirous of man's blood, as is this false
creature. Which not only for the sweetness of voice and pleasant soune of
words, but also for her eyes, for her laughing, for her countenance, and for
all her gestures is a most perfect meremayden. Therefore seeing it is not lawful
for me, as I would, to use chains, ropes, or fire, to understand a matter of
troth, my desire is to compass the knowledge of it with a mirye pastyme,
which is this: That every man should express his fansye what the S does
signify that the duchess carries in her foreheade. For although this be also
an artificial covert, the better to beguile, perhaps there may be an
interpretacion which she never thought upon. And who knows whether fortune,
with pity behoulding the torments of men, has stirrid her with this small
token to discover against her will the inward desire she has to slay and
bury alive in calamity him that honors and serves her. The duchess
laughed* and Vnico, perceiving she would have excused her self of this
interpretacion, no (quoth he) speak you not (madam) for it is not your turn
to speak now. The L. Emilia then turned her and said. M* Vnico, there is
none of us all here that gives not place to you in eueryethyng, and
especially in knowing the disposicion of the Duchess. And as you by your
dyuyne wit know her better then all the rest, so do you love her better then
all the rest, which like birds of a feeble sight, that cannot look stedfastlye
into the circle of the Sun, cannot so well perceive the perfection of it.
Therefore all labor were in vain in cleeryng of this doubt, saving your
judgment alone. This interprise then is reserved only to you, as unto him
that alone can bring it to an end, and none other. Vnico, after he had pawsed
a while being still called upon to say his fansy, at length rehearsed a rhyme upon
the aforesaid matter, expoundynge what signified the letter S. the which many
judged to be made at the first sight. But because it was more witty and better
knitt then a man would have believed the shortness of time required, it was
thought he had prepared it before. So after men's favorable voice given in the
praise of this rhyme, and after sufficient talk, the L. Octauian Fregoso whose
turn was then next, began in this sort smilyng: The L. Octauian Fregosos
devise.
My lords, if I should say unto you that I never felt passion of love in my
days, I am sure the Duchess and the L. Emilia, although they believed it not
in deed, yet would they make semblant to believe it, and would say that it
proceeded because I mistrusted I should never frame any woman to love me. The
which truly I have not hitherto proved with such instance, that of reason I
should dispare to obtain it once. Neither have I forborne the doing of it,
because I set so much by my self and so little by women, that I think none
worthy to bestow my love and service upon. But rathe^ amassed at the continual
bewailings of some lovers, that with their palenes, sorrow, and silence, it
appears they have evermore their own discomfort painted in their eyes. And
if they speak, accompanyinge every word with certain treblefolde syghes,
they reason of nothing else, but of tears, of tourmentes, of desperacions,
and of longyng for death. So that whansoeuer any sparckle of love has beegonne
to kyndle in my breast, I have by and by enforced my self with all dyligence to
quench it, not for any hatred that I have conceived against women (as these
Ladies suppose) but for mine own health. On the other side, I have known some
other clean contrary to these sorrowful, which do not only auaunce and
content theymselues with the cherefull looks, louinge words, and sweet
countenances of their ladies, but also sauce their sorrows with sweetness, so
that they count the debates, the angers and the disdeignes of them, most
sweet. Therefore these men seem unto me to be much more then happy, for
whereas they find so much sweetness in the amorous disdeignes, which some
men reckon much more bitter then death, I believe in loving gestures they should
feel that wonderful bliss, which we seek for in vain in this world.
Therefore would I our pastyme were this night to have every manne show, where
there must be a dysdeygne against him in the person beloved, what the cause
should be that should make the person conceive this disdeygne. For if there be
any here that have proved those sweet disdeignes, I am sure they will desire
for courtesy one of these causes that make them so sweet. And perhaps I shall
with a better will proceade somewhat farther in love, in hope that I shall also
find this sweetness, where as some find bitterness, and so shall not these
Ladies give me any more this slanderous report, that I am not in love. M.
Peter Bembos deuyse.
This pastime was much praised, and therefore did every man setle himself to
reason upon this matter. But the Lady Emilia holdyng her peace M. Peter Bembo,
that satt next in order, spoke in this manner: My Lords, this pastime that the
L. Octauian has propounded has raised no small doubt in my mind, where he has
reso^ed of the disdiegnes of love, the which though they be sundry, yet unto
me have they always bin most bitter. Neither do I believe that I can learn any
sauce yt shall be sufficient to sweten them. But peradventure they are the more
and the less bitter according to the cause whereof they arrise. For I have in
my days (I remember) seen the woman whom I served, stirred against me, either
upon a vain suspicyon that she conceived her self of my trustiness, or else
upon some other false opinyon that had bine put into her head by some men's
report to my hindraunce, so that I beleaued no grief might be compared to mine.
And me thought that the greatest sorrow I felt was to suffer without deseruyng,
and to sustain this affliction, not for any offense of mine, but for the small
love that was in her. At other times I saw her disdeignefull for some oversight
of mine, and knew that her anger proceaded of mine offense, and at that
instante I judged the former ve^ation to be very light in comparison to that
which I felt then. And me thought to be in displeasure, and that for mine own
trespass, with the person whom only I coueted and with such diligence sought
to please, was the greatest torment of all other. Therefore would I our
pastyme were to have every man declare his opinion, where there must be a
disdeigne against him in the person beloved, of whom he would the cause of
this disdeigne should have his beeginning, whether of her or of him self: to
know which is the greater grief, either to dysplease the wight beloved, or to
receive dyspleasure of the wight beloved. Every man looked what the L. Emilia
would make answer to this, but without any word speaking to Bembo, she
turned her and made a sign to Sir Friderick Fregoso to show his deuyse. S.
Friderick Fregosos divise.
And he incontinentlye beegan thus: Madam, I would it were lawful for me, as
the manner is many times to remytte me to the judgment of an other, for I for
my part would with all my heart allow some of the pastymes that have bine
already propounded by these Lords, because in deed me think they would be
worth the hearing. Yet least I should break the order, this I say: who so
would take in hand to praise our Court, leaving a part the deserts of the
duchess, which ghostly spirit, with her influence, is sufficient to draw
from the earth up into heaven the simplist wits in the world, he might well
do it without suspicion of flattery. Good Courtyers in the court of Urbin.
For peradventure in all Italy a man shall have much a do to find out so many
gentlemen and noble personages that are so worthy, and beside the principal
profession of Chiualrye so excellent in sundry things, as are presently here.
Therefore if in any place men may be found y^ deserve the name of good
Courtye^^, and can judge what belongs to the perfeccion of Courtyership, by
reason a man may believe them to be here. To disgrace therefore many untowardly
asseheades, that through malepertnes think to purchase them the name of a good
Courtyer, I would have such a pastime for this night, that one of the company
might be picked out who should take in hand to shape in words a good
Courtyer, specifying all such conditions and particular qualities, as of
necessity must be in him that deserves this name. And in such things as
shall not appear necessary, that it may be lawful for every man to replye
against them, as the manner of Philosophers schools is against him that keeps
disputacions. Sir Friderick proceaded still forward, in his talk, when the L.
Emilia: interruptyng him, said: If it be my L. the duchess pleaser, this
shall be our pastime for this once. The duchess answered: I am well pleased.
Then (in manner) all the company began to say both to the duchess, and among
themselves that this was the trimmest pastyme they could have, and without
looking for answer the one of the other, they craved upon the Lady Emilia to
appoint who should first begin. Who tournynge her toward the duchess,
said: Command you (madam) whom shall please you to take this enterprise in
hand, for I will not by chousing more one then an other, declare my self to
judge in this behalf, whom I think to be better skilled then the rest, and so
do wrong to some. The duchess answered: make you this cho^se your self, and
take heed that in disobeying you be not a president to the rest to be
disobedient. Then the Lady Emilia said laughyng unto Lewis count of Canossi:
therefore for leesyng any more time, you (Count) shall be he that shall take
this enterprise upon him in form and manner as Sir Friderick has declared.
Not for that we know ye are so good a Courtyer that you have at your fingers
ends that belongs thereto: but because in repeatinge every thing arsiuersy,
as we hope ye will, we shall have so much the more pastyme, and every one shall
be able to answer you, where if an other more skillful then you should take it
in hand, there should be nothing said against him for tellyng the truth,
and so should we have but a cold pastime. The Count answered by and by: we
need not fear (madam) that we shall want contrarying in words against him
that tells the truth, as long as you be here. And after they had laughed a
while at this answer, he proceeded on: but truly I would with all my heart be
rid of this burden, for it is to hard for me. And I know that to be most
true in me which you have spoken in jest: namelye, that I have no
understanding in that belongs to a good Courtyer. And this do I not seek
to prove with any other trial, for seeing I do not the deeds, a man may
judge I understand it not, and I believe I am the less to be blamed. For out
of doubt it is a worse matter not to do well, then not to understand how
to do it. Yet seeing your pleaser is, that I shall take this charge upon
me, I can not, nor will refuse it, for withstandyng your order and judgment,
the which I know is much better then mine. Then the L. Cesa^ Gonzaga. Because
it is now (quoth he) well forward in night, and have here ready for us other
sorts of pastimes peradventure it should not be amysse to defer this
resonynge until to morrow, and the Count shall have leisure to think better
upon that he has to say: for in very deed to entreat upon such a
matter at the first syghte, it is a hard thing. Then answered the Count: I
will not do as he did, that strypped himself into his dublette, and leaped
less ground then he did before in his Coat. And me think my luck is good
that it is late, because the shortenesse of time shall make me use few
words, and the sodeinnesse of the matter shall so excuse me, that it shall be
lawful for me to speak without blame whatsoever comes first to mind.
Because I will not therefore carye this burden of duetye any longer upon my
shoulders, this I say: The true perfeccion in things.
in every thing it is so hard a matter to know the true perfeccion, that it
is almost impossible, and that by reason of the variety of judgments.
Therefore many there are, that delight in a man of much talk, and him they
call a pleasant fellow. Some will delight more in modesty, some other will
fansye a man that is actyue and always doing: other, one that shows a
quietness and a respect in every thing. And thus does every man praise or
dysprayse according to his fansye, always covering a vice with the name of
the next virtue to it, Uice cloked with ye name of a virtue, and contrariwise.
and a virtue with the name of the next vice: as in calling him that is
sawcye, bold: him that is sober, dry: him that is seelye, good: him that is
unhappy, witty: and likewise in the rest. Yet do I think that each thing
has his perfeccion, although it be hid, and with reasonable dyscourses might
be judged of him that has knowledge in ye matter. And for as much as the truth
(as I have said) is ofte^tymes hid, and I take not upon me to have this
knowledge I can not praise, but that kind of Courtyers which I set most by, and
allow that which seems unto me most nigh the truth, in my small judgment.
The which you shall follow if ye think it good, or else stick to your own, if
it shall vary from mine. Neither will I (for all that) stand stiff that mine is
better then yours, for not only one thing may seem unto you, and an other
to me, but also unto my self it may appear sometime one thing, sometime another.
I will have this our Courtyer therefore to be a Gentleman borne and of a good
house. The facioni^g of a Courtyer
For it is a great deal less dyspraise for him that is not born a gentleman
to fail in the acts of virtue then for a gentleman. A Gentleman borne.
If he swarne from the steps of his ancestors, he stayneth the name of his
family, and does not only not get, but loses that is already gotten. For
nobleness of birth (is as it were) a clear lamp that shows forth and
brings into light, works both good and badde, and enflameth and provoke
unto virtue, as well with the fear of slander, as also with the hope of
praise. And whereas this brightness of nobleness does not discover the works
of the unnoble, they have a want of provocation and of fear of slander, and
they reckon not themselves bound to wade any further then their auncetours
did before them, whereas the noble of birthe count it a shame not to arrive
at the least at the bounds of their predecessors set forth unto the^.
Therefore it chances always (in a manner) both in arms and in all other
virtuous acts, that the most famous men are gentlemen. Because nature in
every thing has depely sowed that privy sede, which gives a certain force
and property of her beginning, Gentlemen of most prowess
unto whatsoever springs of it, and makes it like unto her self. As we see
by exaumple not only in the race of horses and other beasts, but also in
trees, whose slippes and graftes always for the most part are like unto the
stock of the tree they came from: and if at any time they grow out of kind,
the fault is in the husbandman. And the like is in men, if they be trained up
in good nourtour, Good bringi^g up in youth.
most commonly they rese^ble them from whom they come and often times pass
the^, but if they have not one that can well trayn them up, they grow (as it
were) wild, and never come to their ripeness. Truth it is, whether it be
through the favor of the stars or of nature, Some borne full of graces and
comelines.
some there are borne endowed with such graces, that they seem not to have
been borne, but rather facioned with the very hand of some God, and abound
in all goodness both of body and mind. As again we see some so unapt and
dull, Some ^orne very asse^eds
that a man will not believe, but nature has brought them into the world for a
spite and mockery. And like as these with continual diligence and good
bringyng up for the most part can bring small fruit: even so the other with
little attendance clime to the full perfeccion of all excellency. Mark me the
Lord Hyppolitus da Este Cardinal of Ferrara, he has had so happy a
birthe, that his person, his countenance, his words, and all his gestures
are so facioned and compact with this grace, Hypolitus da Este brother to the
Duke of Ferrarra.
that among the most aunciente prelates (for all he is but young) he does
represente so grave an authority, that a man would ween he were more meet
to teach, then needful to learn. Likewise in company with men and women of
all degrees, in sporting, in laughing, and in jesting he has in him a
certain sweetness, and so comely demeanours, that whosoever speaks with him or
yet beholds him, must needs bear him an affeccion for ever. But returnyng
to our purpose I say, that between this excellent grace, and that fond
foolyshnesse there is yet a mean, and they that are not by nature so perfectly
furnished, with study and diligence may polishe and correct a great part of
the defaultes of nature. The Courtyer therefore, beside nobleness of birthe, I
will have him to be fortunate in this behalf, and by nature to have not only a
wit, and a comely shape of person and countenance, but also a certain grace,
and (as they say) a hew, that shall make him at the first sight acceptable and
loving unto who so beholds him. And let this be an ornament to frame and
accompanye all his acts, and to assure men in his look, such a one to be
worthy the company and favor of every great man. Here without any longer
tariyng the L. G^sper Palla^icin said: that our pastime may have the form
and manner agreed upon, and least it should appear that we little esteem the
authority given us to contrary you, I say (in mine advise) that this
nobl^nesse of birthe is not ^o necessary for the Courtyer. And if I wiste that
any of you thought it a strange or a new matter, I would allege unto you
sondrye, who for all they were borne of most noble blood, yet have they been
heaped full of vices: And contrariwise, many unnoble that have made famous
their posterity. And if it be true that you said before, that the privy
force of the first seed is in every thing, we should al be in one manner
condition, for that we had all one self beginning, and one should not be
more noble then an other. But beside the diuersityes and degrees in us of high
and low, I believe there be many other matters, wherein I judge fortune to be
the chief, because we see her bear a stroke in all worldly things, and (as it
were) take a pastime to exalt many times who^ pleases her without any desert
at all, and bury in the botomles depth the most worthy to be exalted. I
confirm your saying as touching the happiness of the^ that are borne abounding
in all goodness both of mind and body: but this is seen as well in the unnoble,
as in the noble of birthe, for nature has not these so subtle distinctions:
yea (as I have said) we se many times in persons of most base degree, most
high gifts of nature. Therefore seeing this noblenes is gotten neither with wit,
force, nor art, but is rather a praise of our ancestors the^ our own, me
think it a strange opinion that ye pare^tes of our Courtyer being unnoble, his
good qualities should be defaced, and those ou^ good conditions which you have
named should not be sufficient to bring him to the top of al perfeccion: yt is
to say, wit, beauty of fisnamy, disposition of person, and ye grace which at
the first sight shall make him most acceptable unto all me^. The^ answered
Count Lewis: I deny not, but in me^ of base degree may reign the very same
virtues yt are in gentlemen. But to avoid rehearsal of that we have already
said, with many other reasons that might be alleged in commendacion of
nobleness, the which is evermore honored of al me^ because it stands with
reason yt good should spring of good, for so much as our ente^^ is to facion a
Courtyer without any manner default or lack in him, and heaped with all praise,
me think it a necessary matter to make him a gentleman, as well for many
other respects, as also for the common opinion, which by and by does lean to
nobleness. For where there are two in a noble man's house which at the first
have given no proof of themselves with works good or bad, Noblenes of birthe
in estimacion with all men.
as soon as it is known that the one is a gentleman borne, and the other not,
the unnoble shall be much less esteemed with every manne, then the gentleman,
The imprintinges or conceiuinges of ye mind with expectacion.
and he must with much travail and long time imprint in men's heads a good
opnion of himself, which the other shall geat in a moment, and only for that
he is a gentleman: and how waightye these imprintinges are every man may
easily judge. For, to speak of our selves: we have seen men come to this
house, which for all they were fools and dulwitted, yet had they a report
through all Italye of great Courtyers, and though at length they were
discovered and known, yet many days did they beguyle us, and mainteyned in
our minds that oppinion of themselves, which at the first they found there
imprinted, although they wrought according to their small skill. We have seen
other at the first in very small estimation, The ill inclynacion of princes in
^uouring the^ that deserve it not
and afterward in the end have acquitted themselves marvelous well. And of
these errors there are diverse causes and among other the obstinatenes of
princes, which to prove mastries oftentimes bend themselves to favor him, that
to their seeming, deserves no favor at all, and many times in deed they are
deceived. But because they have always many yt counterfeit the^, a very great
report depends upon their favor, yt which most commonly judgments follow.
And if they fi^d any thing yt seems contrary to ye common opinion, they ar in
doubt for deceiving themselves, We be moved to passions without any manifest
cause why.
and always look for some matter secretly because it seems, yt these general
opinions ought to be founded upon a trothe, and arise of reasonable causes. And
for so much as our minds are very apt to love and to hate: as in the sightes of
combats and games and in all other kind of contencion one with an other, it
is seen that the lookers on many times bear affeccio^ without any manifest
cause why, unto one of the two parties, with a gredy desire to have him get the
victory, and the other to have the overthrow. Also as touching the opinion of
men's qualities, the good or ill report at the first brunt moves our mind to
one of these two passions: therefore it comes to pass, that for the most
part we judge with love or else with hatred. You see then of what importance
this first imprinting is, and how he ought to endeavor himself to get it good
in princes, if he entende to be set by, and to purchase him the name of a good
Courtyer. But to come to some particularitie, I judge the principal and true
profession of a Courtyer ought to be in feats of arms, Arms the Courtyers
chief profession.
the which above all I will have him to practice lively, and to be known
among other for his hardiness, for his acheuing of enterprises, and for his
fidelity toward him whom he serves. And he shall purchase himself a name
with these good co^dicions, in doing the deeds in every time and place: for it
is not for him to feint at any time in this behalf without a wondrous
reproach. That he take no foil.
And even as in women honestye once stained does never return again to the
former astate: So the fame of a gentleman that carries weapon, if it once take
a foil in any little point through dastardlines or any other reproach, does
evermore continue shameful in the world and full of ignorance. Therefore the
more excellent our Courtyer shall be in this art, the more shall he be worthy
praise: albeit I judge not necessary in him so perfect a knowledge of things
and other qualities yt is requisite in a captain. But because this is
ouerlarge a scope of matters, we will hold our selves contented (as we have
said) with the uprightness of a well meaning mind, and with an invincible
courage, and that he always show himself such a one: for many times me^ of
courage are sooner known in small matters then in great. Often times in
dangers that stand them upon, Cowardes sometime hardy.
and where many eyes be, ye shall see some that for all their heart is dead in
their body, yet pricked with shame or with the company, go forward (as it
were) blindfield and do their duty. And god knows both in matters that
little touch them, and also where they suppose that without missynge they may
convey themselves from danger, how they are willingynough to sleep in a whole
skin. Who have ye stoutness of courage.
But such as think themselves neither marked, seen, nor known, and yet
declare a stout courage, and suffer not the least thing in the world to pass
that may burden them, they have ye courage of spirit which we seek to have
in our Courtyer. Yet will we not have him for all that so lusty to make
bravery in words, and to brag that he has wedded his harneys for his
wife, and to threaten with such grim looks, as we have seen Berto do
oftentimes. For unto such may well be said that a worthy Gentlewoman in a
noble assembly spoke pleasauntly unto one, that shall be namelesse for this
time, whom she to show him a good countenance, desired to dance with her,
and he refusing both that, and to hear music and many other entertainmentes
offered him, always affirmyng such trifles not to be his profession, at last
the Gentlewoman demaundyng him, what is then your profession? He answered with
a frowning look, to fight. Then said the Gentlewoman: seeing you are not now
at the war nor in place to fight, I would think it best for you to be
well besmered and set up in an armorie with other implementes of war till
time were that you should be occupied, least you wa^e more rustier then you are.
Thus with much laughinge of the standers by she left him with a mock in his
foolish presumpcion. He therefore that we seek for, A stoutherted man.
where the enemies are, shall show himself most fierce, bitter, and evermore
with the first. In every place beside, lowly, sober, and circumspecte,
fleeing above all thing, To avoid prai^ing a man's self.
bragginge and vnshamefull praising himself, for therewith a man always
purchases himself the hatred and ill will of the hearers. And I, answered the
L. Gaspar, have known few men excellent in any thing whatsoever it be, but
they praise the^ selves. And me think it may well be borne in them: for he that
is of skill, when he sees that he is not known for his works of the
ignoraunte, has a disdeigne that his conning should lie buried, Estimation
the reward of vertious acts.
and needs must he open it one way, least he should be defrauded of the
estimation that belongs to it, which is the true reward of virtuous
travails. Therefore among the ancient writers he that much excels does
sildome forbear praisyng himself. They in deed are not to be borne withal
that having no skill in them, will praise themselves: but we will not take our
Courtyer to be such a one. Then the Count, if you have well understood (quoth
he) I blamed the praysynge of a man's self impudently and without respect.
And surely (as you say) a man ought not to conceive an ill oppinion of a
skillful man that praises himself, dyscretely, but rather take it for a more
certain witness, then if it came out of an other man's mouth. I agree well that
he, which in praising himself falls not into error, nor purchases himself
lothsomenes or hatred of the hearers, is most discrete: and beside the praises
which he gives himself, deserves the same of other men also, because it is
a very hard matter. Then the L. Gaspar, this (quoth he) must you teach us.
The Count answered: Among the ancient writers there has not also wanted
that has taught it. In what sort a man may praise himself
But in mine opinion, all does consist in speaking such things after a sort,
yt it may appear that they are not rehearsed to that end: but that they come
so to purpose, that he can not refrain tellyng them, and always seeming to
flee his own praise tell the truth. But not as those lusty laddes do, that
open their mouth and thruste out words at adventure they care not how. As
within these few days one of our company being pusshed through the thygh
with a pyke at Pysa, Brave roysters.
thought that it was the bytynge of a fly. And an other said that he occupied
no lookynge glass in his chamber, because in his rage he was so terrible to
behold, that in lookynge upon his own countenance he should put himself
into much fear. At this every one laughed. But the L. Caesar Gonzaga said unto
them: At what laugh you? Know ye not that the great Alexander, Anaxagoras.
hearing a certain Philosophers oppinion to be that there were infinite
worlds, fell in weping: And when he was asked the question why he wept, he
answered: Because I have not yet one in hand, as though his mind was to
have them all. Do you not think that this was a greater bravery, then to
speak of the fly biting: So was Alexander a greater person then he that so
said, answered the Count. But excellent me^ in very deed are to be held
excused, when they take much upon them: because he that undertakes great
enterprises must have a boldness to do it, and a confidence of him self,
and not of a bashful or cowardly mind, but yet sober in words: showing as
though he took less upon him then he does in deed, so that his taking upon
him do not extend unto rashness. Here the Count respetyng a while M. Bernard
Bibiena said merelye: I remember you said before, that this our Courtyer
ought of nature to have a fair comeliness of fisnamye and person, with the
grace that ought to make him so amyable. As for the grace and beauty of
fisnamie, I think not the contrary but they are in me, and therefore do so
many women burn for the love of me, as you know. But for the comeliness of
person, I stand somewhat in doubt, and especially by reason of my legs
here, for me think in deed they are not so well made as I could wish they
were: the body and the rest is meetely well. Therefore declare some what more
particularly this comelines of person, what it should be, that I may be out of
this doubt and set my heart at rest. When they had a while ughed at this, the
Count said: Certes, ye grace of ye fisnamy, may well be said to be in you
without any lie. And no other exaumple do I allege but this, to declare what
manner thing it should be: for undoubtedly we see your countenance is most
acceptable and pleasant to behold unto every man, although the proporcio^ and
draughtes of it be not very delicate, but it is manly and has a good grace
withal. And this quality have many and sundry shapes of visages. The
countenance of the Courtyer.
And such a countenance as this is, will I have our Courtyer to have, and not
so soft and womanishe as many procure to have, ye do not only courle the
hear, and pick the brows, but also paumpre themselves in every point like the
most wanton and dishonest women in the world: and a man would think the^ in
going, Men that would appear women.
in standing, and in all their gestures so tender and feint, that their members
were ready to flee one from an other, and their words they pronounce so
drawningly, that a man would ween they were at that instant yelding up the
ghost: and the higher in degree the men are they talk withal, the more they
use such facyons. These men, seeing nature (as they seem to have a desire to
appear and to be) has not made them women, ought not to be esteamed in place
of good women, but like common Harlottes to be banished, not only out of
princes courts, but also out of the company of Gentlemen. To come therefore
to the quality of the person, I say he is well, Good to be of a mean stature.
if he be neither of y^ least, nor of the greatest sise. For both the one and
the other has with it a certain spytefull wonder, and such men are marueyled
at, almost, as much as men marvel to behoulde monstrous things. Yet if
there must needs be a defaulte in one of the two extremities, it shall be less
hurtful to be somewhat of the least, Rather with the lowest then to high.
then to excede the common stature in height. For me^ so shut up of body,
beside that many times they are of a dull wit, they are also unapt for all
exercyses of nimeblenesse, which I much desire to have in the Courtyer. And
therefore will I have him to be of a good shape, and well proporcioned in his
lymmes, and to show strength, lightness, and quickenesse, To be a man of war.
and to have understanding in all exercises of the body, that belong to a man
of war. And herein I think the chief point is to handle well all kind of
weapon both for footeman and horseman, To handle al kind of weapon.
and to know the vaun^ages in it. And especially to be skillful on those
weapons that are used ordinarily among gentlemen, for beside the use that he
shall have of them in war, where peradventure needs no great connyng, there
happen often times variaunces between one gentleman and an other, whereupon
ensues a combat. And many times it shall stand him instead to use the
weapon which he has at that instant by his side, therefore it is a very sure
thing to be skillful. And I am none of them which say, Fightinge makes not a
man to forget his fence.
that he forgets his conning when he comes to the point: for to abide by,
whosoever loses his conning at that time, shows that he has first lost his
heart and his spirits for fear. I think also it will serve his turn greatly,
to know ye feate of wrestling, Wrastlynge.
because it goes much together with all weapon on foot. Again it is
behouffull both for him self and for his friends, To know what is to be done
in quarrels when they happen.
that he have a foresight in the quarelles and controversies that may happen,
and let him beware of the vauntages, declarynge always in every point both
courage and wisdom. Neither let him ru^ne rashely to these combattes, but
when he must needs to save his estimation withal: Not rash to fight
combattes.
for beside the great danger that is in the doubtful lotte, he that goes
headlonge to these things and without urgent cause, deserves very great
blame, although his chance be good. But when a man perceives that he is
entered so far that he can not draw back without burdeyn, he must, How
a man ought to behave himself in fightyng a combatte.
both in such things he has to do before the combat and also in the combat
be utterly resolved with himself, and always show a readiness and a
stomach. And not as some do, pass the matter in arguing and points, and
having the choice of weapon, take such as have neither point nor edge. And
arm themselves as though they should go against the shot of a Cannon. And
weening it sufficye^t not to be vanquished, stand always at their defense and
give ground, in so much that they declare an extreme faint heart, and are a
mocking stock to the very children. As those two of Ancona: that a while a
go fought a combat beside Perugia, and made them to laughe that looked on. And
what were they, quoth the L. Gaspar Palla^icin. The ^. Caesar answered: Cousins
Germains of two sisters. Then said the Count: at the combat a man would have
thought them natural brethren, then he went forward. Also men occupy their
weapon oftentimes in time of peace about sondrie exercises, and gentlemen are
seen in open shows in the presence of people, women and Princes. Therefore
will I have our Courtyer a perfect horseman for every saddle. A perfect
horseman.
And beside the skyll in horses and in whatsoever belongs to a horseman, let
him set all his delight and dylygence to wade in every thing a little farther
then other men, so that he may be known among al men for one that is
excellent. Alcibiades excelled other nations in their own ^eates.
As it is read of Alcibiades, that he e^celled all other nations wheresoever
he came, and every manne in the thing he had most skyll in. So shall this
our Courtyer pass other men, and every manne in his own profession. And
because it is the peculyer praise of us Italians to ride well, to manege with
reason, Property of Italians.
especially roughe horses, to run at the ring and at tyl^e, he shall be in
this among the best Italyans. At tourneymente, in keeping a passage, in
fightinge at barriers, Property of Frenchmen.
he shall be good among the best Frenchemen. At Io^o di can, runninge at
Bull, castinge of spears and darts, he shall be among the Spaniardes
excellent. But principallye let him accompanye all his mocion with a certain
good judgment and grace, Property of Spaniardes
if he will deserve that general favor which is so much set by. There be
also many other exercises, the which though they depend not throughlye upon
arms, yet have they a great agreemente with them, and have in them much
manlye a^tiuitie. Hunt^^^.
And of them me think hunting is one of the chiefest, for it has a certain
likeness with war, and truly a pastyme for great men, and fit for one
living in court. And it is found that it has also been much used among
them of old time. It is meet for him also to have the art of swimming, to
leap, to run, Swimming Leapyng. Runnyng. Castyng the stone.
to cast the stone: for beside the profit that he may receive of this in the
wars, it happens to him many times to make proof of himself in such
things, whereby he gets him a reputacion, especially among the multitude,
unto whom a man must sometime apply himself. Also it is a noble exercise and
meet for one living in court to play at tenyse, where the disposition of the
body, Play at tenyse.
the quickenesse and nimeblenesse of every member is much perceived, and
almost whatsoever a man can see in all other exercises. And I reckon vautyng
of no less praise, which for all it is peynefull and hard, Uawting.
makes a man more light and quicker then any of the rest: and beside the
profit, if that lightness be accompanied with a good grace, it makes (in my
judgment) a better show then any of the rest. If our Courtyer then be
taught these exercises more then indifferently well, I believe he may set a
side tumblyng, clymynge upon a cord, and such other matters y^ taste somewhat
of iugglers craft, Tumbling not fit for a Gentleman.
and do little beseem a Gentleman. But because we can not always endure
emonge these so paynefull doings, beside that the contynuaunce goes nyghe to
give a man his fill, and takes away the admyracion that men have of
things sildome seen, we must contynuallye alter our life with practysynge
sondrye matters. To frame himself to the company.
Therefore will I have our Courtyer to descend many times to more easy and
pleasant exercyses. And to avoid envy and to keep company pleasauntlye
with every man, let him do whatsoever other men do: so he decline not at any
time from commendable deeds, but governs himself with ye good judgment y^
will not suffer him to enter into any folly: but let him laugh, dalie, jest,
and dance, yet in such wise that he may always declare himself to be
witty and discrete, and every thing that he does or speaks, let him do
it with a grace. Truly, said then the L. Caesar Gonzaga the course of this
communicacion should not be stopped: but if I should houlde my peace, I
should not satisfy the liberty which I have to speak, nor the desire that I
have to understand one thing. And let me be pardoned if where I ought to speak
against, I demand a question: because I suppose I may lawfully do it after
the example of* M. Bernard, who for the to great desire he had to be counted
a welfauoured man, has offended against the laws of our pastime in demanding
without speakinge against. Behoulde I beseech ye, said then the duchess,
how one error brings in a great sort. Therefore who so offends and gives
ill example, as M. Bernard has done, deserves to be punished not only for
his own offense, but for other men's also. Then answered the* L. Caesar:
Therefore must I (madam) escape punishmente, for that M. Bernard ought to be
punished for his own offense and mine both. Nay (quoth the duchess) you
ought to have both double punishmente. He for his offense, and for being an
occasion for you to commit the like: and you for your offense and for taking
him for a president that did offend. I have not hitherto offended madam,
answered the L* Caesar. Therefore because I will leave the whole punishmente for
M. Bernard I will keep silence. And now he held his peace, when the L. Emilia
answered: say what pleases you, for (by the duchess leave) I perdone this
fault, and whosoever shall offend in so small a trespace. Upon that the
duchess said: I am well pleased. But take ye heed that ye deceive not your
self, thinking peradventure to be better reported of for mercy then for
justice. For in perdoning the offendour to much, ye do wrong to him that does
not offend. Yet will not I have my rigor at this time in accusing your mercy
to be the cause that we shall lose the hearing of this the L. Cesars demand.
So he, after the duchess and the L. Emilia had made a sign to him, said by
and by: if I do well bear in mind, me think (Count Lewis) you have this night
oftentimes repeted, that the Courtier ought to accompany all his doings,
gestures, demeaners, finally al his mocions with a grace, and this, me think,
^e put for a sauce to every thing, without the which all his other properties
and good conditions were little worth. And I believe verily that every man would
soon be persuaded therein, Grace.
for by the virtue of the word a man may say, that whosoever has grace is
gracious. But because you have said sundry times that it is the gift of nature
and of the heavens, and again where it is not so perfect, that it may with
study and diligence be made much more they that be borne so happy and so
welthye with such a treasure (as some that we se (me think therein they have
little need of any other teacher, because the bountiful favor of heaven does
(as it were) in spite of them, guide them higher then they covet, and makes
them not only acceptable, but marvelous unto all the world. Therefore I do not
reason of this, because the obtainynge of it of our selves lies not in our
power: but such as by nature have one^y so much, that they be apt to beecome
gracious in bestowinge labor, exercise, and diligence, I would feign know
with what art, with what learning, and by what mean they shall compass this
grace, as well in the exercises of the body (wherein ye think it so necessary a
matter) as in all other things that they do or speak. Therefore as you have
in praysinge this qualytye to us engendered (I believe) in all a fervent thi^st to
comeby it, by the charge ye received of y^ L. Emilia, so with ^eaching it us,
ye are bound to quench it. Bound I am not (quoth the Count) to teach you to
have a good grace, nor any thing else, saving only to show you what a perfect
Courtyer ought to be. Neither will I take upon me to teach you this perfeccion,
sins a while a go, I said, that ye Courtier ought to have the ^eate of
wrastlyng and vawtinge, and such other things, the which how I should be able
to teach them not having learned them my self, I am sure ye know it all. It
suffices that as a good souldyer cann speak his mind to an armourer of what
facion, of what temper and goodness he will have his harneys, and for all that
cannot teach him to make it, nor to hammer or temper it: So perhaps I am able
to tell you what a perfect Courtyer ought to be, but not to teach you how ye
should do to be one. Notwithstanding to fulfill your request in what I am
able, although it be (in manner) in a proverb that Grace is not to be learned,
Grace not to be learned.
I say unto you, wh^so minds to be gracious or to have a good grace in the
e^ercises of the body, (presupposing first that he be not of nature unapt)
ought to begin betimes, and to learn his principles of cunning men. The which
thing how necessary a matter Philip king of Macedonie thought it, a man may
gather in that his will was that Aristotel so famous a philosopher, Ari^^otle
the first that taught the great Alexander.
and perhaps the greatest that ever h^th bine in the world, should be the man
that should instruct Alexander his son in the first principles of letters.
And of men whom we know nowadayes, mark how well and with what a good grace Sir
Galiazzo Sanseuerino M. of the horse to the French king, S. Galeaz^o
Sanseueri^o.
does all e^ercises of the body: and that because, beside the natural
disposition of person that is in him, he has applied all his study to learn
of cunning men, and to have continually e^cellent men about him, and of every
one to choose the best of that they have skill in. For as in wrestling, in
vawting, and in learning to handle sundry kind of weapons he has taken for
his guide our M. Peter Mount, who (as you know) is the true and only master
of al artificial force and slight: A good scoler must seek to be like his
master.
So in ridyng, in iustyng, and in every other feate, he has always had
before his eyes the most perfectest that has been known to be in those
professio^s: He therefore that will be a good scolar, beside ye practysing of
good things, must evermore set al his diligence to be like his master, and
(if it were possible) change himself into him. And when he has had some
entrey, it profits him much to behold sondrye men of that profession: and
governing himself with that good judgment that must always be his guyds, go
about t^ pyke out, sometime of one and sometime of an other, sundry matters.
And even as the be in the green meadows flees always about the grass
chousynge out flowers: How grace is to be atte^ned
So shall our Courtyer steal this grace from them that to his seming have it,
and from each one that percell that shall be most worthy praise. And not do, as a
friend of ours, whom you al know, that thought he resembled much king
Ferdinande the younger of Aragon, and regarded not to resemble him in any other
point but in the often lyftyng up his head, wrying therewythall a part of his
mouth, the which custom the king had gotten by infyrmitye. And many such
there are that think they do much, so they resemble a great man in somewhat,
and take many times the thing in him that woorst becomes him. But I,
imagynyng with my self oftentimes how this grace comes, A general rule
leaving a part such as have it from above, find one rule that is most general
which in this part (me thynk) takes place in all things belongyng to man in
word or deed above all other. And that is to eschew as much as a man may, To
avoid curiosity
and as a sharp and dangerous rock, Affectation or curiosity and (to speak a
new word (to use in every thing a certain Reckelesness, to cover art withal,
and seem whatsoever he does and says to do it without pain, and (as it were)
not myndyng it. And of this do I believe grace is much deryued, Reckelesnes,
for in rare matters and well brought to pass every man knows the hardness of
them, so that a redines therein makes great wonder. And contrariwise to use
force, and (as they say) to hale by the hear, gives a great disgrace, and
makes every thing how great so ever it be, to be little esteemed. Therefore yt
may be said to be a very art that appears not to be art, To cover art
neither ought a man to put more diligence in any thing then in covering it:
for in case it be open, it loses credit clean, and makes a man little set by.
And I remember that I have read in my days, that there were some most
excellent Orators, which among other their cares, enforced themselves to make
every man believe that they had no sight in letters, and dissemblinge their
cunning, made semblant they* orations to be made very simply, and rather as
nature and truth lead them, then study and art, the which if it had been
openly known, would have put a doubt in the peoples mind, for fear least
he beguiled them. You may see then how to show art and such bent study
takes away the grace of every thing. To seem not to mind the thing a man
does excellently well*
Which of you is it that laugheth not when our M. Peterpaul dau^seth after his
own facion with such fine skippes and on tipt^ without moving his head, as
though he were all of wood, so heedfullie, that truly a man would ween he
coun^ed his paces. What eye is so blind that perceives not in this the
disgrace of curiosity, and in many men and women here present the grace of that
not regarded agylitie and s^^ghte conueyaunce (for in the mocions of the body
many so term it) with a kind of speaking or smiling, or gesture, betokening
not to pass upon it, and to mind any other thing more then that, to make
him believe that looks on that he can not do amiss. Here M. Bernard Bibiena
not forbearing any longer, said: you may se yet that our M. Robert has found
one to praise his manner of daunsing, though the rest of you set little by it.
For if this excellency does consist in Reckelesness, and in showing not to
pass upon and rather to mind any other thing then that a man is in hand
withal M. Robert has no peer in the world. For that men should well perceive
that he little minds it, many times his garments fa^l, from his back, and
his slippers from his feet, and dau^seth on still without taking up again
any of both. Then answered the Count: Seeing you will needs have me speak, I
will say some what also of our vices. To you not mark, this that you call in
M. Robert Reckelesness, is a very curiosity? for it is well kn^wen that he
enforces himself with all diligence possible to make a show not to mind it,
and that is to mind it to much. And because he passes certain limits of a
mean, that Reckelesne^^ of his is curious, and not comely, and is a thing that
comes clean contrary to pass from the dryfte, (that is to wit) to cover
art. Therefore I judge it a no less vice of curiositye to be in Reckelesness
(which in it self is praise worthy) in lettynge a man's clothes fall of his
back, then in Preciseness (which likewise of it self is praise worthy) to
carry a man's head so like a malthorse for fear of ruffling his hear,
Precisene^^*
or to keep in the bottom of his cappe a looking glass, and a comb in his
sleeue, and to have always at his heels up and down the streets a page with
a sponge and a brushe: for this manner of Preciseness and Reckelesness are to
much in the extremity, which is always a vice and contrary to that pure and
amiable simplicity, which is so acceptable to men's minds. Mark what an ill
grace a man at arms has, when he enforces himself to go so bolt upright
settled in saddle (as we use to say after the Venetian phrase) in comparion of
an other that appears not to mind it, and sits on horseback so nimbly and
close as though he were on foot. How much more do we take pleaser in a
gentilman that is a man at arms, and how much more worthy praise is he if he
be modest, of few words, and no bragger, then an other that always craketh of
him self, and blaspheming with a bravery s^emeth to threaten the world. And
this is nothing else but a curiosity to seem to be a roister. The like
happens in all exercises, yea in every thing in the world that a man can
do or speak. Then said the L. Julian: Music
this in like manner is verified in music: where it is a very great vice to
make two perfect cords, the one after the other, so that the very sense of
our hearing abhors it, and often times deliteth in a second or in a seven,
which in it self is an unpleasant discord and not tolerable: and this
proceadeth because the continuance in the perfect tunes engenders vrkesomnesse,
and betokens a to curious harmonye the which in mynglyng therwythall the
imperfect is avoided with making (as it were) a comparason, whereby our ears
stand to listen and gredely attend and taste the perfect, and are otherwhyle
delyted with the disagrement of the second or seven, as it were with a thing
little regarded. Behold ye then, answered the Count that curiousness hurts
in this as well as in other things. They say also that it has been a proverb
emonge some most excellent poincters of old time, that To much diligence is
hurtful, and that Apelles ^ound fault with Protogenes because he could not
keep his hands from the table. To much diligence hurtful
Then said the L, Caesar: The very same fault (me think) is in our Friar
S^r^phin that he cannot keep his hands from the table, especially as long as
there is any meat styrryng. The Count laughed and went forward: Apelles meaning
was, that Protogenes knew not when it was well, which was nothing else but to
reprehend, his curyousnesse in his works. This virtue therefore contrary to
curiosity which we for this time term Reckelesness, beside that it is the true
fountain from the which all grace spryngeth, it brings with it also an other
ornamente, which accompanyinge any^ deed that a man does, (...) is thought
(...) to be more cunning (...),
how little so ever it be does not only by and by open the knowledge of him
that does it, but also many times makes it to be esteemed much more in effect
then it is, because it imprinteth in the minds of the lookers on an opinyon,
that whosoever can so sleyghtly do well, has a great deal more knowledge then
indeed h^ has: and if he will apply his study and dilygence to that he does,
he might do it much better. And to repete even the very same examples, Mark a
man that takes weapon in hand: ^f going about to cast a darte, or houldyng in
his hand a sword or any other waster, he se^leth him self lightsomely (not
thinking upon it) in a ready aptness with such actiuity, that a man would
ween his body and all his members were naturally settled in that disposition
and without any pain, though he does nothing else, yet does he declare
himself unto every man to be most perfect in that exercise. Likewise in
daunsinge, one measure, one mocion of a body that has a good grace, not being
forced, does by and by declare the knowledge of him that daunseth. A musitien,
if in singing he roll out but a plain note endinge in a dooble relise with a
sweet tune, A slight trick betokens knowledge
so easily that a man would judge he did it at adventure, in that point alone he
does men to understand that his knowledge is far greater then it is indeed.
Oftentimes also in peinctinge, one line not studied upon, one draught with the
pensel slightly drawn, so it appears the hand without the guiding of any
study or art, tends to his mark, according to the peincters purpose, does
evidently discover the excellency of the workman, about the opinion whereof
every man afterward contendeth according to his judgment. The like happens
also, in a manner, about every other thing. Therefore shall our Courtyer be
esteemed excellent, and in every thing he shall have a good grace, and
especially in speaking, if he avoid curiositye: into which error many men
run, and some time more then other, certain of our Lumbardes, men that w^ b^
deemed to be (...)
which after a years travail abroad, come home and begin by and by to speak
the Romayne tunge, sometime the spanish tunge, or the French, and God wotteth
how. And all this proceadeth of an over great desire to show much knowledge:
and in this wise a man applies his study and diligence to get a most odyous
vice. And truly it were no small travail for me, if I should use in this
communycatyon of ours, those ancient Tuscane words, that are not in use
among the Tuscanes now a days, Ancient ^uscane words
and beesyde that, I believe every manne would laughe at me. Then spoke Sir
Friderick, In deed reasoning together as we now do^e, peradventure it were
not well done to use those ancient Tuscane words: for (as you say) they
would be a lothsomnesse both to the speaker and to the hearer, and of many
they should not be understood without much a do. But he that should write,
I would think he committed an error in not using them: because they gave a
great grace and authority unto writings, and of them is compact a tongue more
grave and more full of majesty, then of the new. I know not answered the
Count, what grace and aucthority those words can give unto writings that
ought to be eschewed, Old words to be esch^ewed both in speaking and writing.
not only in the manner of speech that we now use (which you your self confess)
but also in any other manner that can be imagined. For if any man, of how good
a judgment so ever he were, had to make an oration of grave matters in the
very Counsel chamber of Florence which is the head of Tuscane: or else to
common privately with a person of estimacion in that city about waightye
affairs: or also with the familiarst friend he has about pleasant matters: or
with women or gentilmen about matters of love, either in i^sting or daliyng,
banketting, gaming, or where ever else: or in any time or place, or purpose, I
am ass^red he would flee the using of those ancient Tuscane words. And in
vsyng them, beside that he should be a laughing stock, he should bring no
small lothesomenesse to him that heard them. Therefore me think it a strange
matter to use those words for good in writing, that are to be eschewed for
naughty in every manner of speech: and to have that which is never proper in
speech, What (...)
to be the proprest way a man can use in writing, for so much as (in mine
opinion) writing is nothing else, but a manner of speech, that remains still
after a man has spoken, or (as it were) an Image, or rather the life of the
words. And therefore in speech, which as soon as the son is pronounced
vanishes a way, peradventure somthinges are more to be borne withal, then in
writing. Because writing keeps the words in store, and refers them to
the judgment of the reader, and gives time to examyne them depely. And
therefore reason wills that greater diligence should be had therein to make
it more trim and better corrected: yet not so, that the written words should
be unlike the spoken, but in writing to choose out the fairest and proprest of
significacion that be used in s^eaking. And if that should be lawful in
writing, which is not lawful in speaking, there should arise an inconvenience
of it (in my judgment) very great: namely, that a man might use a greater
liberty in the thing, where he ought to use most diligence, and the labor he
bestows in writing, instead of furtherance should hinder him. What is allowed
in w yting, is allowed in speaking.
Therefore it is certain, whatsoever is allowed in writing, is also allowed in
speaking: and that speech is most beautiful that is like unto beautiful
writings. And I judge it much more behoufful to be understood in writing then
in speaking, because they that write are not always present with them that
read, as they that speak with the^ that speak. Why writi^g ought to be more
understood, then speaking.
Therefore would I commend him, that beside the eschewing of many ancient
Tuskane words, would apply himself also to use both in writing and
speaking, such as now a days are in use in Tuscane and in other parts of
Italy, and that have some grace in the pronunciation. And (in my mind) whosoever
follows any other trade is not assured not to run into that curiosity so
much blamed, which we have spoken of before. The^ spoke Sir Frederick: I
cannot deny you, Count Lewi^, that writing is not a manner of speaking. But
this I say, if the words that are spoken have any darkness in them, that
communicacion perceth not the mind of him that hears: and passing without
being understood, wexeth vain and to no purpose: the which does not happen
in writing, for if the words that the writer uses bring with them a little (I
will not say diffycultie) but covered subtilty, and not so open, as such as
be ordinarily spoken, they give a certain greater aucthoritye to writing, and
make the reader more hedefull to pause at it, and to ponder it better, and he
takes a delight in the wittiness and learning of him that writes, and with a
good judgment, after some pains taking, he tastes the pleaser that
consists in hard things. And if the ygnoraunce of him that reads be
such, that he cannot compass that difficulty, there is no blame in the
writer, neither ought a man for all yt to think that tunge not to be fair.
Therefore in writing, I houlde opinion it is necessary for a man to use the
Tuscane words, and only such as have been used among the ancient Tuskans: for
it is a great testimonial and approved by time, that they be good and of
pithie signification in that they be applied to. And beside this they have that
grace and majesty that antiquity gives not only to words, but unto
buildinges, images, pein^tinges, and to every thing that is of force to
preserve it. And many times with this only brightness and dignity they make
the form of sentences very fair, and through the virtue and eleganciethereof,
every matter how base so ever it be, may be so decked out, that it may
deserve very great commendacion. But this your custom, that you make so
much a do of, appears unto me very dangerous, and many times it may be
naught. And if any vice of speech be taken up of many ignorant persons, me
think for all that it ought not to be received for a rule, nor followed of
other. Besides this, customs be many and diverse, So many Cities so many
diverse manner of speeches in Italy.
and ye have not a notable City in Italy that has not a diverse manner of
speech from all the rest. Therefore if ye take not the pains to declare
which is the best, a man may as well give him self to the Bergamask tunge,
as to the Florentine, and to follow your advise it were no error at all. The
bargamask tunge ye most barbarous in Italy.
Me seems then who so will be out of doubt and well assured, it is requisite
for him to determyne with him self to follow on^, that by all men's accord is
judged good, and to take him for a guide always and for a shield against
such as will go about to find fault, Petrarca. Boccaccio.
and that I think ought to be none other, (I mean in the vulgar tunge) but
Petrarca and Boccaccio: and who so swarueth from these two, goes at all
adventure, as he that walks in the dark without light, and therefore many
times strayeth from the right way. But we are so hardye nowadayes, that we
disdeigne to do as other good men of ancient time have done: that is to
say, to take dylygente heed to folowinge, without the which I judge no man
can write well. Imitation.
And me think Virgill declarethe a great trial of this, Uirgil.
whoo for all that with his so divine a wit and judgment he took all hope
from his posteritye for any to follow him at any time, yet would he follow
Homer. Then the L. Gasper Pallauicin, This disputacion (quoth he) of writing
in very deed is woorthe the hearing: Yet were it more to our^ purpose, if
you would teach in what sort the Courtier ought to speak, for me think he
has more need of that, and he serves his turn oftener with speaking the^
with wrytinge. The L. Julian answered: There is no doubt, but so excellent and
so perfect a Courtier has need to understand both the one and the other, and
without these two qualyties parauenture all the rest should not be much
woorthye praise: therefore if the Count will fulfill his charge, he shall
teach the Courtier not only to speak but also to write well. Then sa^d the
Count: I will not (my Lord) undertake this enterprise, for it should be a
great folly for me to teach an other that I understand not my self. And
though I were skillfull in it, yet can I not see how I should think to do
the thing in so few words, which great Clearkes have scase done with such
great study and diligence, unto whose writings I would remit our Courtyer, if
it were so yt I were bound to teach him to write and to speak. The L* Caesar
then said: the L. Iulia^ means the speaking and writing of the vulgar tunge,
and not Latin, therefore those writings of great Clearkes are not for our
purpose. But you must show us in this behalf as much as you know, as for
the rest, ye shall be held excused. I have already said, answered the Count.
But in reasoning upon the Tuskane tunge, perhaps it were rather the L.
Iulian^ part, then any man's else to give judgment in it. The L. Julian said: I
cannot, nor of reason ought to speak against him that says the Tuskane tunge
is fairer then all the rest Truth it is, there are many words in Petrarca and
Boccaccio worn out of use now a days: Words in Petrarca, and in Boccaccio
not to be used
and such would I never use neither in speaking nor in writing, and
peradventure they themselves if they were now alive would use them no more.
Then spoke Sir Frederick: no doubt but they would use the^ still. And you
Lords of Tuscane ought to renew your tunge, and not to suffer it decay, as
you do for a man may say now, that there is less knowledge in Florenc^, then
in many other places of I^aly. Then answered M Bernar^: those words that
are no more in use in Florenc^, do still continue among the men of the
country, and are refused of the gentlemen for words corrupt and decayed by
antiquity. Then the duchess, let us not swerve (quoth she) from our first
purpose, but let us make Count Lewis teach the Courtyer to speak and to
write well, be it Tuscane or what ever else. The Count answered: I have
already spoken (madam) what I know. And I suppose the very same rules that
teach the one, may also serve to teach the other. But sins ye command me*
I will make answer unto ^^r Frederick what comes in my head, for I am of a
contrary opinion to him. And parauenture I shall be drieuen to answer somewhat
more darkely then will be allowed, but it shall be as much as I am hable to
say And first I say, The vulgar tunge of Italy is a new tunge.
that (to my judgment) this our tunge, which we name ye vulgar tunge, is
tender and new, for all it has been now used a long while. For in that Italy
has been, not only ve^ed and spoiled, but also inhabited a long time with
barbarous people, by the great resort of those nations, the latin tunge was
corrupted and destroyed, How the Italian tunge was corrupted.
and of that corruption have spronge other tunges. The which like the ryuers
that depart from the top of the Appenn^ne and run abroad toward the two
s^as: so are they also divided, and some died with the latin speech have spread
abroad sundry ways, some into one part, and some into another, and one dyed
with barbarousnesse has remained in Italy. This then has a long time been
among us out of order and diverse, because there was none that would bestow
diligence about it, nor write in it, ne yet seek to give it brightness or any
grace. Yet has it been afterward brought into better frame in ^usc^n^, then
in the other parts of Italye. And by this it appears that the flower of it
has remained there ever since those first times, because that nation has kept
proper and sweet accentes in the pronunciatio^ and an order of grammar, where
it was meet, more then the other. And h^th had three noble wri^ers, which
wittily both in the words and terms that custom did allow in their time,
have expressed their conceits and that has happened (in my mind) with a
better grace to ^etrarca in matters of love, the^ to any of ye other. Petrarca.
Dante. Boccacci^,
Where there arose afterward from time to time, not only in ^uscan, but in all
Italy, among gentlemen brought up in court, in arms and in letters, some
study to speak and to write more finely then they did in that first rude age,
when the turmoyle of the miseries that arose through barbarous nations was not
as yet quieted, many words have been left out as well in Florence it self,
and in all ^uscan^, as in the residue of Italy, and other brought in, in their
stead, and made in this behalf the alteration that happens in all worldly
things: the which also has evermore chanced in other tunges. For in case
those ancient latin writings had lasted hitherto, Speeches change from time
to time.
we should see that Euan^e^ and Turnus and the other La^in* in those days
spoke otherwise the^ did afterward the last kings of the Romans and the
first Co^su^. You may see the verses song by the Sa^^i were scantly understood
of their posterity: The priests o^ Mar^.
but because it was so ordained by the first inuentours of it, they were not
altered for reverence of religion. So from time to time Orators and Poets
forsook many words that had been used among their predecessors: for
An^onius, Cr^ssus, (...), and Ci^^ro eschewed many that Ca^o had used, and
Virgill many of E^^ius, and so did the rest. For albeit they had antiquity in
great reverence, Men never delited in words w^rne out with time. Horace. Ci^ero
yet did they not esteem the^ so much, that they would be so bound to them,
as you will have us now. Yea, where they thought good, they spoke against them,
as (...), that says, his predecessors did foolyshlye praise Pla^^us, which
would that we should have the authority to bring up new words. And Cicero
in many places reprehendeth many of his predecessors, and to blame S Galb^^,
he says that his Oracions smelled of antiquity. And affirms that E^nius
also in some points set little by his predecessors, so that if we will follow
the^ of old time, we shall not follow them. And Virgi^ that you say followed.
^omer, followed him not in the tunge. Therefore would I (for my part) always
shonne the use of those ancient words, except it were in certain clauses,
and in them very seldom. And (in my judgment) he that uses them otherwise,
commits a no less error, then whosoever would to follow them of old time,
feed upon maste, where he has now abundance of corn found out. And
because you say the ancient words only with ye brightness of antiquity
deck out so highlye every matmatter, how base so ever it be, that it may
make it worthy great commendacion: I say unto you that not of these ancient
words only, but of those that be good in deed, I make so small account, that
I suppose without the juice of fair se^tences they ought of reason to be little
set by. Words without fair sentences little worth.
For to divide the sentences from the words, is the dividing of the soul
from the body, the which cannot be done, neither in the one nor in the other,
without destruccio^ ensue upon it. That therefore which is ye principal matter and
necessary for a Court yet to speak and write well, Knowledge necessary to
speak and write well.
I believe is knowledge. For he yt has not knowledge and the thing in his mind
yt deserves to be understood, can neither speak nor write it. The^ must he
couch in a good order that he has to speak or to write, and afterward
express it well with words: what word^ ought to be.
the which (if Ibe not deceived) ought to be apt, chose^, clear, and well
applied, and (above al) in use also among the people: for very such make the
greatness and gorgeousnes of an Oracio^, so he yt speaks have a good judgment
and heedfulnes withal, and the understanding to pike such as be of most proper
significacion for yt he entendeth to speak and commend, and tempring the^ like
were after his own mind, applies them in such part and in such order,
that at the first show they may set forth and do men to understand the
dignity and brightness of the^, as tables of pein^^ing placed in their good and
natural light. Things necessary in spekinge.
And this do I say as well of writing as of speaking, wherein certain things
are requisite that are not necessary in writing, as a good voice, not to
subtle or soft, as in a woman: nor yet so boisterous and roughe, as in one of
the Country, but shrill, The voice*
clear sweet and well framed with a prompt pronunciacion and with fit manners
and gestures, which (in my mind) consiste in certain mo^ions of all the body
not affected nor forced, but tempred with a manerly countenance and with a moving
of the eyes, that may give a grace and accord with the words, and (as much as he
can) signify also with gestures the intent and affeccio^ of the speaker. But al
these things were in vain and of small acco^pte if the se^te^ces expressed by ye
words should not be fair, witty, The se^te^ce^.
subtle, fine and grave according to y^ matter, I doubt, said the^ M Mo^^^lo, if
this Cour^yer speak with such finenesse and gravity among us, there will be some
yt will not understand him. Nay, every one shall understand him, answered ye
Count for finenes hinders not ye easines of understanding. Neither will I have
him to speak always in gravity, What he must speak of.
but of pleasant ma^ters, of merry co^ceits, of honest diuises, and of iestes
according to ye time, and in all notwtsta^ding after a pithy manner, and with
redines and variety without co^fusio^, neither shall he in any part show vanity
or childish folly. And wha^ he shall then common of a matter yt is dark and
hard, I will have him both in words and sentences well pointed, to express his
judgment, and to make every doubt clear and plain after a certain diligent
sort without tediousness. Likewise (when he shall see time) to have the
understanding to speak with dignity and vehemence, To speak to raise
a^f^^tyons.
and to raise those affections which our minds have in them, and to inflame
or stir them according to the matter: sometime with a simplicitye of such
meekness of mind, that a man would ween nature her self spoke, to make
them tender and (as it were) dronken with sweetness: and with such
conueiaunce of ^asinesse, that whosoever hears him, may conceive a good oppinion
of himself, and th^nke that he also with very little a do, might attain to
that perfection, but when he comes to the proof shall find himself far
wide. I would have our Courtyer to speak and write in y^ sort, and not only
choose gorgeous and fine words out of every part of Italye, but also I would
judge him worthy praise to use some of those terms both French and
Spanishe, which by our custom have been admitted. Therefore it should not
mislike me, Certain terms out of the French and Spanishe, which ^ound not so
well in English nor can be applied t^ our phrase.
falling so to purpose, to say, Vauntcourrour* to say, to acertain, to
adventure* to say* to p^rce through a body with talk, meaning thereby to use a
familiarity with him, and to grope him to geat of him some perfect knoweledge:
to say, a royal gentleman, a nete man ^o be about a Prince, and such other
terms, so he may think to be understood. Sometime I would have him take
certain words in an other significacion then that is proper to them, and
wrasting them to his purpose (as it were) graffe them like a graffe of a tree
in a more luckye stock, Words i^ an other sygnificacion.
to make them more sightly and fair, and (as it were) draw the matters to the
sense of the very eyes, and (as they say) make them felt with hand, for the
delight of him that hears, or reads. Neither would I have him to stick to
forge new also, To forge new words
and with new figures of speech, deriuing them featly from the Latin^, as the
Latins in old time, derived from the (...). In case then of such learned men
both of good wit and judgment, as now a days may be piked out among us,
there were some that would bestow their trauail to write after the manner that
we have spoken of, in this tongue things worth the readinge, we should soon
set it in good frame and flowinge with terms and good phrases, and so copious
that a man might as well write in it as in any other tongue: and though it
were not the mere ancient Tuscane tongue, yet should it be the Italian
tongue, commune, plentiful, and variable, and (as it were) like a delicious
gardein full of sundry flowers and fruits. Neither should this be a new
matter: for of the four tongues that were in use among the Greek writers, U.
tunges of Gre^ce.
pikinge out of every word, moodes and rules as they thought meet, they
raised thereby an other, which was named the Commune tongue, and afterward all
five they called with one name the Greek tongue. And albeit the Athenian
tongue was more fine, purer, and eloquenter then the rest, yet did not the good
writers that were not of Athens borne, so affect it, but in the style of
writing, and (as it were) in the smack and propretie of their natural speech
they were welinough known: neither were they any whit the less regarded for
all that, but rather such as would appear over mere Athenians were blamed for
it. Among the Latin writers in like case many there were in their days much
set bye that were no Romans although there appeared not in them that propre
and peculiar pureness of the Roman tongue, which men of an other nation
can very seldom attain. In times past T. Liuius was not neglected, T.
Liuius. Uirgill.
although some one said he found in him mere Padowan: Nor Virgil, for that
he was reprehended that he spoke not Roman. And (as you know) there were also
read and much setbye in Room many writers of Barbarous nations. But we more
precise a great deal then they of old time, do bind our selves with certain
new laws out of purpose: and having the broad beaten way before our eyes,
seek through gappes to walk in unknown paths. For in our own tounge^
whose office is (as all others) to express well and clearlye the conceits of
the mind, we delight in darkness, and calling it the vulgar tongue, The
vulgar tunge ought not to be dark
will use in it words, that are not only not understood of the vulgar
people, but also of the best sort of men and that men of learning, and are
not used in any part, not regarding that all good writers of old time blamed
such words as were refused of custom, the which you (in my mind) do not well
know, for somuche as you say, if any vice of speech be taken up of many
ignorant parsons, it ought not to be called a custom nor received for a rule
of speech. And (as at other times I have hard you say) ye will have again in
the stead of Capitolio, we should say Campidoglio: for Hieronymo, Girolam^:
Aldace, Mere Tuscane writing of c^^taine words.
for Audace: and for Patron, padrone: and such corrupt and mangled words,
because they have been found so written by some ignorant Tuscane of old time,
and because the men of the Countr^y speak so in Tuscane now a days. The good
use of speech therefore I believe arises of men that have wit, and with
learning and practice have gotten a good judgment, and with it consent and
agree to receive the words that they think good, which are known by a
certain natural judgment, and not by art or any manner rule. Figures of
speech, Abuse of grammar rules.
Do you not know that figures of speech which give such grace and brightness
to an Oration, are all the abuse of Grammar rules, but yet are received and
confirmed by use, because men are able to make no other reason but that they
delight, and to the very sense of our ears it appears they bring a lief and
a sweetness? Good custom.
And this beleaue I is good custom, which the Romans, the Napolitans, Things
good in every ^unge.
the Lombardes, and the rest are as apt to receive, as ye Tuscanes. Truth it
is, in every tongue some things are always good, as easiness to be
understood, a good order, variety, piked sentences, clawses well framed: and
on the other side Affectation, and the other contrary to these are to be
^honned. But of words some there are that last a good time and afterward
were stale and clean lose their grace: other some take force and creep into
estimation, for as y^ seasones of the year make leaves and fruits to fall, and
afterward garnish the trees a fresh with other: Euenso, does time make those
first words to fall, and use makes other to spring afreshe and gives them
grace and estimation, until they in like sort consumed by little and little
with the enuyous biting of time come to their end, because at the last both we
and whatsoever is ours, are mortal. Tunges decayed with time.
Consider with your selves that we have no more any knoweleage of the Osca
tunge. The provincial tung, that (a man may say) the last day was renowned of
noble writers, now is it not understood of the inhabitants of the country. I
beleaue therefore (as the L. Julian has said) that were Petrarca, and
Boccaccio, at this present in lief, they would not use many words that we see
in their writings. Therefore (in mine opinion) it is not well done to follow
them therein. Yet do I much commend them that can follow that ought to be
followed: but notwithstanding I believe it be possible enough to write well
without following, and especially in this our tunge, wherein we may be helped by
custom, the which I will not take upon me in the Latin. Then Sir Friderick,
why, will you (quoth he) custom should be more appriced in the vulgar tunge,
then in the Latin? Nay, both in the one and the other (answered the Count) I
judge custom ought to be ye maistresse. But forsomuche as those men, unto
whom the Latin tunge was as proper, as is the vulgar tunge now to us, are no
more in the world, we must learn of their writings that they learned by use
and custom: neither does ancient speech signifye any thing else but an
ancient custom of speech: Aun^ient speech ancient custom of speech.
and it were a fond matter to love the ancient speech for nothing else but to
speak rather as men did speak, then as men do speak. Did not they then of
old time follow, answered Sir Fridericke? I beleaue, Old writers did not
imitate in all points.
quoth the Count, many did follow, but not in every point. An if Virgill had
altogether followed Hesiodus, he should not have passed him nor Cicero Crassus,
nor Ennius his predecessors. Behold Homer, who is so ancient that he is
thought of many to be the first heroical Poet as well of time, as also of
excellency of phrase: and whom will you have him to have followed? Some other,
answered Sir Friderick, more ancient then he was, which we hear not of, by
reason of tomuch antiquity. Whom will you say then Petrarca and Boccaccio
followed, said the Count, which (a man may say) were but three days agoo in the
world* I know not, answered Sir Fridericke, but it is to be thought they in
like wise bent their mind to folowinge, though we know not of whom. The
Count answered: a man may beleaue that they that were followed, were better
then they that did follow: and it were to great a wonder that their name and
renown (if they were good) should so soon be clean lost. But I beleaue their
very master was wit, and their own natural inclination and judgment. A
man may write well without imitation.
And thereat no man ought to wonder, for (in a manner) always a man by sundry
ways may clime to the top of all perfection. And their is no matter, that
has not in it many things of like sort unlike the one to the other, which
for all that among them selves deserve a like praise. Mark me music, Music.
wherein are harmonies sometime of base soune and slow, and otherwhile very
quick and of new diuises, yet do they all recreat a man: but for sundry
causes, as a man may perceive in the manner of singinge that Bidon uses,
Sundry sorts of music and all delight
which is so artificial, counninge, vehement, stirred, and such sundry
melodies, that the spirits of ye hearers move al and are enflamed, and so
listening a man would wene they were lift up in to heaven. And no less does
our Marchetto Cara move in his singinge, but with a more soft harmonye, that
by a delectable way and full of mourninge sweetness makes tender and perceth
the mind, and sweetly imprinteth in it a passion full of great delight. Sundry
things in like manner do equally please our eyes somuche, that a man shall
have much a do to judge in which they most delight. Sundry peincters perfect in
sundry kind of trades.
Behold in peincting Leonard Vncio, Mantegna, Raphael, Michelangelo, George of
Castelfranco: they are all most excellent dooers, yet are they in working
unlike, but in any of them a man would not judge yt there wanted ought in his
kind of trade: for every one is known to be of most perfection after his
manner. The like is of many Poets both Greek and Latin, which being diverse in
writing are alike in praise. Orators also have always had such a diuersitye
among them, as (in a manner) every age has brought forth and set by one sort
of Orators peculiar for that time, which have been unlike and disagreing not
only to their predecessors and folowers but also among themselves. Greek
orators,
As it is written emonge the Grecians, of Isocrates, Lysias, Eschines and many
other, al excellent, but yet like unto none saving themselves. And among ye
Latins, Carbo, Laelius, Scipio Affricanus, Galba, Sulpitius, Cotta, Graccus,
Marcus Antonius, Crassus and so many, Latin orators.
that it should be long to repete them, all good and most diverse one from an
other. So that whosoever could consider all the Orators that have been in the
world, So many orators so many kinds of speech.
he should find so many Orators, so many kinds of speech. Me think I
remember also that Cicero in a place brings in Marcus Antonius to say unto
Sulpitius yt there are many that follow no man, and yet clime they to a high
degree of excellency. D^ oratore lib. ^.
And speaks of certain that had brought up a new style and phrase of speaking
fair, but not used of ye Orators of that time wherein they followed none but
themselves. Therefore he affirms also that masters should consider ye nature
of their scolers, and taking it for their guide, Lib. ii.
direct and prompt them in the way that their wit and natural inclination
moves them unto. For this cause therefore Sir Fridericke do I believe if a man
have not an inclination unto some author whatsoever he be, it were not well done
to force him to following. Because ye virtue of that disposicion of his, soon
^^inteth and is hindered, by reason that it is a stray out of the way in which
he would have profited, had he not been stopped in it. I know not then how it
will stand well, in stead of enriching this tunge, and of geuyng it majesty
and light, to make it poor, sclender, bare and dark, and to seek to shut it
up into so narrow a rowme, that ^uerye man should be compelled to follow only
Petrarca and Boccaccio, and that we should not also in that tung, credit
Laurence de Medicis, Francis Diaceto, and certain other that notwithstanding
are Tuscanes, An error to t^^^ate none but Boccaccio and Petrarca.
and perhaps of no less learning and judgment then Petrarca and Boccaccio.
And truly it should be a great miserye to stop without wading any farther
then almost the first that ever wrote: and to despair, that so many and so
noble wits shall never find out any mo then one good manner of speech in ye
tung that unto them is proper and natural. But now a days there be some so
scrupulous, that (as it were) with a religion and high mysteries of this their
Tuscane tung, put as many as hears them in such dread, that they bring in
like case many gentilmen and learned men into such an awe, that they dare not
open their mouth: and confess plainly, that they can not speak ye tung which
they have learned of their nurses, even from their cradel. But in this point
(me think) we have spoken tomuch. Therefore let us now procead in our
communication of the Courtier. Then answered Sir Friderick: but first I will
say this little, which is that I deny not but the opinions and wits of men
are diverse among themselves: neither do I judge it comelye for one that is
vehement and quick of nature to take in hand to write of soft and quiet
matters. Nor yet for an other that is severe and grave to write of merry
conceits. For in this point (me think) it is reason every man should apply him
self to his own proper inclination, and of this I believe spoke Cicero, when he
said that masters should have a consideration to the nature of their scholars,
least they should do like the ill husbandmanne, that sometime in a soil that
is good only for vynes will sow grain. But it will not sink into my head
why in a particular tunge, that is not so proper unto all men, as are
discourses and con^eites, and many other operations, but an inuencion con^ained
under certain terms, a man may not with more reason follow them that speak
best, then speak at al adventure. And that, as in the Latin tunge a man ought
to apply himself to be in the tunge like unto Virgil and Cicero, rather then
Silius ane Cornelius Tacitus, so in the vulgar tunge why it were not better to
follow the tunge of Petrarca and Boccac^io then any man's else: and therein
express well his own conceits, and so apply himself as ( Cicero says) to
his own natural inclination. And thus shall the difference which you say is
between the good Orators, be found to consist in the senses and not in the
tunge. Then the Count, I fear me (quoth he) we shall enter into a large sea,
and leave our first purpose of the Courtyer. But I would know of you, wherein
consists the goodness of this tunge? Sir Fridericke, answered: In keeping well
the property of it: and in taking i^ in ye significacion (using ye same style
and measur) that al such have done as have written well. I would know then,
quoth ye Count, whether this style and measure which you speak of, Wherein
consists the goodness of the tung.
arise of the sentences or of the words? Of the words, answered Sir
Friderick. Do you not think then, quoth the Count, that ye words of Silius
and Cornelius Tacitus, are ye very same that Virgil and Cicero use? and taken
in the same signification? Sir Fridericke answered: they are the very same in
deed, but some ill applied and dyuerslye taken. The Count answered: in case a man should pyke out of a book of Cornelius and of Silius, all the words
placed in other signification then is in Virgil and Cicero, (which should be
very few) would you not then say that Cornelius in the tongue were equal
with Cicero, and Silius with Virgil? Then the L. Emilia, me think (quoth she)
this your dysputation has lasted to long, and has been very tedyouse,
therefore it shall be best to defer it until an other time. Sir Fridericke,
began still to make answer, Many talkers of imitat^^^*
but the L. Emilia always interrupted him. At last the Count said: many
will judge of styles and talk of numbers and measures, and of following, but
they cannot do me to understand what manner a thing style and measure is, and
wherein following consists: Nor why, things taken out of Homer or any other,
are so well couched in Virgil, that they appear rather amplyfied then followed,
and peradventure the occation thereof is that I am not able to conceive it. But
because a great argument that a man understands a thing, is the
understanding that ^e has to teach it, I fear me they themselves have small
understanding in it, and praise Virgil and Cicero, because they hear them
praised of many, not for that they know the difference between them and
others, which out of peradventure consists not in the observation of two, or
three, or of ten words used after a diverse manner from other. In Salust, in
Caesar, in Varro, and in other good writers, there are found some terms
applied otherwise then Cicero applies them, and both the one and the other
does welinough. Because in so trifling a matter the goodness and perfection
of a tunge does not consiste as Demosthenes answered Eschines well that had
taken him up, demaundinge him of certain words which he had used and yet
were not ancient, Demosthenes answer to Eschines.
what monsters or wondrous matters they were? Whereat Demosthenes laughed, and
answered him, that the fortunes of Greece depended not upon them. Even so would
I pass full little if a Tuscane should reprehende me for speaking rather
Satisfatto, then Sodisfatto: and Honoreuole, Diversity of certain Tuscane
words with the rest of Italy
then Horreuole: and Causa, then Cagione and Populo, then Popolo, and such
other matters. Then arose Sir Friderick upon his feet and said: I beseech ye
give the hearing of these few words. The L. Emilia answered laughing: upon
my displeasure I forbid any of you to talk any more in this matter, for I
will have you to break it of until an other night. But you Count, proceade
you in your communication of the Courtyer, and let us see how good a memory you
have: for I believe, if ye can knitt it again where you brake of, ye shall not
do a little. Madam, answered the Count, me think the third is broken in sunder,
but if I be not deceived, I trow we said that pestylent curiosity does
always give an il grace unto al things: and contrariwise simplicity and
Reckelesness a maruailous good grace. In commendation whereof and in dispraise
of curiosity, many other things might be said, yet will I allege but one mo,
and then have done. All women generally have a great desire to be, Women that
peincte them selves to seem fair to men.
and when they can not be, at the least to appear beawtyfull. Therefore where
nature in some part has not done her deuoyr therein, they endeavor them selves
to supply it with art. Of this arises the trymming of the face, with such
study and many times peines, the pilling of the brows and forehead, and the
using of all those manner ways, and the abydyng of such lothsomenesse, as you
women beleaue are kept^ very secret from men, and yet do all men know them. The
La. Constance Fregosa laughed at this, and said: you should do much better to
go forward in your communication, and declare how a man may attein a good
grace, and speak of courtynge, then to discover the faults of women without
purpose. Nay it is much to purpose, answered the Count, because these defaultes
that I talk of take this grace from you: for they proceade of nothing else but
of curiousness, whereby ye discover openly unto every man the over great
desire that ye have to be beawtiful. Do you not mark how much more grace is
in a woman, that if she does trim her self, does it so scacely and so little,
that whosoever behouldeth her, stands in doubt whether she be trimmed or no: then
in an other so bedawbed, that a man would wene she had a viser on her face and
dares not laugh for making it chappe: nor at any time changes her color,
but when she apparayleth her self in the morninge, and all the rest of the day
stands like an image of woodde without mouinge, shewinge her self only in
torche light, as craftye marchaundmen do their clothes in their dark lights.
Women that bestow no pain in settinge out themselves.
How much more then does a man delight in one, I mean not foul, that is
manyfestlye s^ene she has nothing upon her face, though she be not so white
nor so red, but with her natural^ color somewhat wan, sometime with
blusshinge or through other chance dyed with a pure rednes, with her hear by
hap out of order and ruffled, and with her simple and natural gestures,
without showing her self to bestow diligence or study, to make her fair? This
is that not regarded pureness which best pleases the eyes and minds of men,
that stand always in awe to be deceived by art. White teath.
White teeth is a good sight in a woman, for sense they are not in so open
sight as is the face, but most communly are hid, a man may think she bestows
not so much labor about them, to make them white, as she does in the face:
yet who so should laughe without cause purposly to show them, should discover
the art, and for all their fair whiteness should appear unto all men to have
a very ill grace, Fair hands.
as Egnatius in Catullius. The like is in the hands, which being delicate,
smooth and fair, if they be showed bare at a time when occasyon is to occupye
them, and not of purpose to show the beawtye of them, they leave a very great
desire of themselves, and especially after they are covered with gloves
again, for a man would judge that in putting them on again she passes not
and little regards whether they be in sight or no, Clenlye and precise in
places sildome seen.
and that they are so fair rather by nature, then by any study or dilygence.
Have ye not had an eye otherwhyle, when either in the streets going to
Church, or in any other place, or in sportyng, or by any other chance it
happens that a woman lyfteth up her clothes so high, that she shows her
foot, and sometime a little of her pretye leg vnwittinglye? And seems she
not to you to have a very good grace, if ye behold her then with a certain
womanlye dysposition, cleanlye and precise, with her shoes of vellute, and her
hose sittynge clean to her leg? Truly it deliteth me much, and I believe all
of you, for every manne supposes that Preciseness in so secret a place and so
sildom seen, to be unto that woman rather natural and propre then forced, and
that thereby she thinks to get her no commendation at all. In such sort is
curiousenesse avoided and covered, the which you may now conceive how
contrary it is, and takes away the grace of every operation and deed,
as well of the body as of the mind, The mind.
whereof hitherto we have spoken but little, and yet ought it not to be omitted,
for as the mind is much more worthy then the body, so deserves it also to
be better decked and polished. And how that ought to be in our Courtyer
(leaving a part the precepts of so many wise Philosophers that write in
this matter and define the virtues of the mind, and so subtillye dyspute of
the dignitye of them) we will express in few words, applyinge to our
purpose, that it is sufficient he be (as they term it commonly) an honest
manne and welmeaning: for in this is comprehended the goodness, the wisdom,
the manlynesse and the temperaunce of the mind, and all other qualityes that
belong to so worthy a name. To apply a man's good will is profeting.
And I reckon him only a true moral Philosopher that will be good, and to
that, he needs few other precepts then that will of his. And therefore
said Socrates well, that he thought his instructions had brought forth
good fruit when by them he had provoked any one to apply his will to the
knoweleage and learning of virtue. For they that are come to the point that
they couette nothing more then to be good, do easyly attain the
understanding of all that beelongeth thereto: therefore herein we will make no
more a do. But beside goodness, the true and principal ornament of the mind
in every manne (I beeleaue) are letters, although the Frenchmen know only
the nobleness of arms, The French men make none acco^pte of learning.
and pass for nothing beside: so that they do not only not set by letters,
but they rather abhor them, and all learned men they count very rascalles,
and they think it a great vilany when any one of them is called a clarke. Then
answered the L. Julian, you say very true, this error in deed has long
reigned among the frenchemen. But if Monseigneur de Angoulism have so good luck
that he may (as men hope) succeed in the Croun, Francis.i. French king
ye glory of arms in France does not so florishe nor is had in such
estimation, as letters will be, I beleaue. For it is not long sins I was in
France, and saw this Prince in the Court there, who seemed unto me beside the
handsomeness of person and beawty of visage, to have in his countenance so
great a majesty, accompanied nevertheless with a certain louelye courteisy,
that the realm of France should ever seem unto him a small matter. I
understood afterward by many gentilmen both French and Italian, very much of
the most noble conditions, of the greatness of courage, prowess and
liberality that was in him: and emonge other things, it was told me that he
highly loved and esteamed letters, and had in very great reputation all
learned men, and blamed the Frenchemen themselves that their minds were so
far wide from this profession, Uniuersitye of Paris.
especially having at their doors so noble an university as Paris is, where
all the world resorteth. Then spoke the Count: It is great wonder that in these
tender years only by the provocation of nature, contrary to the manner of the
country he has given himself to so good a way. And because subjects follow
always the co^dicions of the higher powers, it is possible that it may come to
pass (as you say) that the Frenchmen will yet esteem letters to be of that
dignity that they are in deed. The which (if they will give ear there to) they
may soon be persuaded, for so much as men ought to covet of nature nothing so
much and that is more proper for them, Knowleage.
then knowleage: which thing it were a great folly to say or to hold opinion
that it is not always good. And in case I might commune with them, or with
other that were of a contrary opinion to me, I would do my diligence to show
them, how much letters (which undoubtedly have been granted of God unto men
for a sovereign gift) are profitable and necessary for our lief and
estimation. Neither should I want thexamples of so many excellent capitaines of
old time, which all joined the Ornament of letters, with the prowess of arms.
How the great Alexander esteamed Homer, Plutarck, in the life of Alexander.
For (as you know) Alexander had Homer in such reverence, that he laid his
Ilias always under his beds head: and he applied diligently not these
studies only, but also the speculations of Philosophye under the discipline of
Aristotle. Alcibiades increased his good conditions and made them greater with
letters, and with the instructions of Socrates. Alcibiades Socrates scholar
Also what dyligence Caesar used in study, those things which he has so
divinely written him self, make trial. I. Caesar.
It is said that Scipio Africanus carried always in his hand the books of
Xenophon, Scipio Africanus.
wherein under the name of Cyrus he instructs a perfect king. Paidia
Xenophontis.
I could recite unto you Lucullus, Sylla, Pompeius, Brutus, and many other
Romans and Gretians, but I will do no more but make mention of Hanibal,
Hannibal learned.
which being so excellent a captain (yet for all that of a fierce nature, and
void of all humanitye, an untrue dealer, and a despiser of men and of the
Gods) had also understanding in letters, and the knowleage of the Greek tunge.
And if I be not deceived (I trow) I have read in my time that he left a book
behind him of his own making in the Greek tunge. But this kind of talk is
more then needs, for I know all you understand how much the Frenchemen be
deceived in houlding opinion letters to do any hurt to arms. G^orye*
You know in great matters and auenturous in wars the true provocation is
glory: and whosoever for lucres sake or for any other consideration takes it in
hand (beside that he never does any thing worthy praise) deserves not the
name of a gentleman, but is a most vile merchant. And every man may conceive
it to be the true glory, that is stored up in the holy treasure of letters, In
letters the true glory.
except such unlucky creatures as have had no taste thereof. What mind is so
fainte, so bashefull and of so base a courage, that in reading the acts and
greatness of Caesar, Alexander, Scipio, Hannibal, and so many other, is not
incensed with a most fervent longing to be like them: Noble courages enflamed
in readyng the acts of famous captains.
and does not prefer the gitting of that perpetual fame, before this rotten
life that lasts two days? Which in despite of death makes him live a
great deal more famous then before. But he that sauoureth not the sweetness
of letters, cannot know how much is the greatness of glory, which is a long
while preserved by them, The unlearned know not glory.
and only measures it with the age of one or two men, for farther he bears
not in mind. Therefore can he not esteem this short glory so much as he
would do that, which (in a manner) is everlasting, if by his ill hap he were
not barred from the knowleage of it. And not passing upon it so much, reason
persuades and a man may well beleaue he will never hasard him self so much to
come by it, Why the unlearned seek not to be famous.
as he that knows it. I would not now some one of the contrary part
should allege unto me the contrary effects to confute mine opinion with
all: Italians ^aint in arms.
and tell me how the Italians with their knowleage of letters have showed small
prowess in arms from a certain time hitherto, the which nevertheless is to
true. But in very deed a man may well say that the offense of a few, has
brought (beside the great damage) an everlasting reproach unto all other. And
the very cause of our confusion, and of the neglecting of virtue in our minds
(if it be not clean dead) proceaded of them. But it were a more shameful
matter unto us to publishe it, then unto the Frenchmen the ignorance in
letters. Therefore it is better to pass that over with silence that cannot be
rehearsed without sorrow, and leaving this purpose into y^ which I am entered
against my will, The Courtier ought to be learned.
return again unto our Courtier, whom in letters I will have to be more
then ^ndyfferentlye well seen, at the least in those studyes, which they call
Humanity, In h^m^nity

In the latin and G^e^^e tung.


and to have not only the understanding of the Latin tunge, but also of the
Greek, because of the many and sundry things that with great excellencye
are written in it. Let him much exercise him self in poets, In poets.

In orators.


and no less in Orators and Historiographers, and also in writing both rhyme
and prose, and especially in this our vulgar tunge. In Historiographers.
For beside the contentation that he shall receive thereby himself, he shall
by this means never want pleasant interteinments with women which ordinarylye
love such matters. In writynge ryme and prose.
And if by reason either of his other business beside, What is to be done of a
man's writings.
or of his slender study, he shall not attain unto that perfection that his
writings may be worthy much commendation, let him be circumspect in keeping
them close, least he make other men to laugh at him. Only he may show them to
a friend whom he may trust, for at the least wise he shall receive so much
profit, that by that exercise he shall be able to give his judgment upon
other men's doings. For it happens very sildome, that a man not exercised
in writing, The not practiced can not judge.
how learned so ever he be, can at any time know perfectly the labor and toil
of writers, or taste of the sweetenes and excellencye of styles, and those inner
observations that often times are found in them of old time. And beside that,
those studyes shall make him copyous, and (as Aristippus answered that Tiran)
bold to speak upon a good ground with every manne. Dionisius*
Notwithstanding I will have our Courtier to keep fast in his mind one
lesson, and that is this, To be rather wary then bold in all things.

The words of flatterers sweet


to be always wary both in this and in every other point, and rather fearful
then bold, and beware that he persuade not him self falsely to know the thing
he knows not indede. Because we are of nature al ye sort of us much more
gredy of praise then is requisite, and better to our ears love ye melody of
words sou^ding to our praise, then any other song or soune yt is most sweet.
And therefore many times, like the voices of Meremaydens, they are the cause of
drownyng him that does not well stop his ears at such deceitful harmony.
This danger being perceived, there has been among the ancient wise men that
has written books, Men take no head to flatterers.
how a man should know a true friend from a flatterer. But what aauaileth
it? If there be many of them (or rather infinite) that manifestly perceive there
are flatterers, and yet love him that flattereth them, and hate him that
tells them the trothe, and often times (standinge in opinion that he that
praises them is to scace in his words) they themselves help him forward,
and utter such matters of themselves, that the most impudent flatterer of all
is ashamed of. Let us leave these blind busardes in their own error, Men
flatter themselves.
and make our Courtyer of so good a judgment, that he will not be given to
understand black for white, nor presume more of him self then what he knows
very manifestlye to be true, and especially in those things, which (if he
bear well in mind) the L. Caesar rehearsed in his divise of pastimes, that we
have many times used for an instrument to make many become foolysh. But
rather, that he may be assured not to fall into any error, How he should
avoid flatterers.
where he knows those praises that are given him to be true: let him not so
openly consent to them, nor confirm them so without resistance, but rather
with modesty (in a manner) deny them clean, showing always and countynge in
effect, arms to be his principal profession, and all the other good qualities
for an ornament thereof, and pryncypallye among soldiers, Letters an
ornamente of arms.
least he be like unto them that in learning will seem men of war, and among
men of war, learned. In this wise for the reasons we have said he shall avoid
curyousnesse, and the mean things which he takes in hand, shall appear very
great. Here M. Peter Bembo answered: I know not (Count Lewis) how you will
have this Courtier, being learned and of so many other virtuous qualities, to
count every thing for an ornament of arms, and not arms and the rest for an
ornamente of letters. The which without other addicyon are in dignity so
much above arms, as the mind is above the body: because the practicing of
them belongs properly to ye mind even as the practicing of arms does to
the body. The Count answered then: Arms belong to the mind and body both*
nay the practisinge of arms beelongeth as well to the mind as to ye body. But I
would not have you (M. Peter) a judge in this cause, for you would be to partial
to one of the parts. And for so much as this disputation has already been
tossed a long time by most wise men, we need not to renew it, but I count it
resolved upon arms side, and will have our Courtier (since I have the faci^ning
of him at mi will) think thus also. And if you be of a contrary opinion, tarry
til you hear a disputation, where it may be as well lawful for him yt takes
part with arms, to use his arms, as they yt defend letters use in the defense
ye very same letters. Oh (quod M. Pet^r) you rebuked the Frenchmen before for
setting little by letters, and declared what a great light of glory they show
unto men and how they make them immortal: Petrar^a^ Son. 155.
and now it seems you are in an other opinion^ Do you not remember that. The
great Macedo, when he proched near
Fires Achils famous Toumb, thus said and sight:
O happy Prince that found a Tromp so clear, Alexander. Homer.

And happy he that praysd so worthy a wight.
And if Alexander envied Achilles not for his deeds but for his fortune that
gave him so great luck to have his acts renowned by Homer, Quint. Curt. lib. ^
a man may gather he esteemed more the letters of Homer then ye arms of
Achilles. What other judge then or what other sentence look you for, as
touching ye dygnity of arms and letters, then that which was given by one of
the greatest capitaines that ever were? the Count answered: I blame ye
Frenchmen because they think letters hurt the profession of arms: The Courtyer
a man of war and learned,
and I hold opinion yt it is not so necessary for any man to be learned, as it
is for a man of war. And these two points linked together and aided the one by
the other (which is most fit) will I have to be in the Courtier. Neither do I
think my self for this to be in an other opinion, but (as I have said) I will
not dispute: which of them is most worthy praise, it suffices that learned
men take not in hand at any time to praise any but great men, and glorious
acts, which of themselves deserve praise by their proper essential virtues
from whence they arrise. Glorious acts a noble Thereat.
Beside yt, they are a most noble Theme for writers, which is a great ornament,
and partly the cause of continuance of writings, that parauenture should not
be so much read and set by, if there wanted in them noble matter, but counted
vain and of small reputation. Alexander thought not himself inferior. to
Achilles.
And if Alexander envied Achilles because he was praised of him that did it,
yet does it not consequently follow that he esteamed letters more then arms.
Wherein if he had known himself so far wide from Achilles, as in writing he
thought al they would be from Homer yt should go about to write of him, I am
sure he would much sooner have desired well doing in himself then well speaking
in an other. Therefore think I that this was a close praise of himself, and a
wishing for that he thought he had not, namelye the high excellency of a
writer, and not for that he thought with himself he had already obtained, that
is to say, the prowess of arms, wherein he counted not Achilles any whit his
superior, What Alexander meant by calling Achilles happy
wherefore he called him happy, as it were signifiyng, where his fame in
foretime was not so renowned in the world, as was the fame that by so divine a
Poem was clear and excellent, it proceaded not for that his prowes and
deserts were not such and worthy so much praise: but it arose of fortune that
had before hand prepared for Achilles that miracle of nature for a glorious
renown and trompet of his acts. And peradventure again he minded thereby to
stir up some noble wit to write of himself, declaring thereby how acceptable
it should be to him, for so much as he loved and reverenced the holy monumentes
of letters: about the which we have now spoken sufficient. Nay more then
sufficient, answered the L. Lodouicus pius. For I believe there is never a
vessel in ye world possible to be found so big that shall be able to receive
all the things that you will have in this Courtyer. Then the Count, abide yet a
while (quoth he) for there be many other things to be had in him yet. Peter
of Naples answered: after this manner Cras^us de Medicis shall have great
auantage of M. Peter Bembo, at this they all laughed. And the Count beginning
a fresh, my Lords (quoth he) you must think I am not pleased with the
^^urtyer if he be not also a musitien, and beside his understanding and couning
upon the book, have skill in like manner on sundry instruments. The Courtyer a
musitien.
For if we way it well, there is no ease of the labors and medicines of
feeble minds to be found more honest and more praise worthy in time of
leyser then it. And princypally in Courts, where (beside the refreshing of
vexacyons that music brings unto each man) many things are taken in hand
to please women withal, whose tender and soft breasts are soon perced with
melody and filled with sweetness. Therefore no marvel that in the old times
and now a days they have always been inclined to musitiens, and counted this
a most acceptable food of the mind. Then the L. Gaspar, I believe music
(quoth he) together with many other vanities is mete for women, and
paraduenture for some also that have the lykenes of men, but not for them that
be men in deed: who ought not with such delicacies to womannishe their minds,
and bring themselves in that sort to dread death. Speak it not, answered the
Count. For I shall enter into a large sea of the praise of Music, and call to
rehearsal how much it has always been renowned among the^ of old time, and
counted a holy matter: Music in estimation in old time.
and how it has been ye opinion of most wise Philosophers yt the world is made
of music, and the heavens in their moving make a melody, and our soul framed
after ye very same sort, and therefore lifts up it self and (as it were)
reuiueth the virtues and force of it with music: wherefore it is written that
Alexander was sometime so feruentely styrred with it, Alexander styrred with
music.
that (in a manner) against his will he was forced to arise from bankettes and
run to weapon, afterward the musitien changing the stroke and his manner of
tune, Xenofant. musitien.
pacified himself again and returned from weapon to banketting. And I shall
tell you yt grave Socrates when he was well stricken in years learned to play
upon the harp. Socrates being old learned upon the harp.
And I remember I have understood that Plato and Aristotle will have a man
that is well brought up, to be also a musitien: and declare with infin^^^
reasons the force of music to be to very great purpose in us, and for many
causes (that should be to long to rehearse) ought necessarilye to be learned
from a man's childhoode, Why music is good.
not only for the super ficial melody that is hard, but to be sufficient to
bring into us a new habit that is good, and a custom enclyning to virtue,
which makes the mind more apt to the conceiving of felicity, even as bodily
exercise makes the body more lusty, and not only hurts not ciuyl matters
and warrelyke affairs, but is a great stay to them. Also Lycurgus in his
sharp laws allowed music. And it is read that the Lacedemons, Lycurgus. The
Lacedemons.

The Cretenses.

Epaminondas.

Themistocles the less esteemed for not being a musitien. Chiron. Achilles a
musitien.


which were valiant in arms, and the Cretenses used harpes and other soft
instruments: and many most excellent captains of old time (as Epaminondas)
gave themselves to music: and such as had not a sight in it (as
Themistocles) were a great deal the less set by. Have you not read yt among
the first instruccions which the good old man Chiron taught Achilles in his
tender age, whom he had brought up from his nurse and cradle, music was one?
And the wise master would have those hands that should shed so much Troyan
blood, to be oftentimes occupied in playing upon the harp? What souldyer is
there (therefore) that will think it a shame to follow Achilles, omitting many
other famous captains that I could allege? Do ye not then deprive our
Courtyer of music, which does not only make sweet the minds of me^, but
also many times wild beasts tame: and whosoever sauoureth it not, Wielde beasts
delight in music.
a man may assuredly think him not to be well in his wits. Behold I pray
you what force it has, that in times paste allured a fish to suffer a man to
ride upon him through the tempestious sea. Dolphines delight in music.
We may see it used in the holy temples to render laud and thanks unto God,
Music acceptable to God.
and it is a credible matter that it is acceptable unto him, and that he has
given it unto us for a most sweet lightning of our travails and vexations. So
that many times the boisterous laborers in the fields in the heat of the
sun beguyle their pain with rude and cartarlyke singing. Laborers.
With this the unmannerly countreywoman that aryseth before day out of her
sleep to spinne and card, Countreywomen.
defends her self and makes her labor pleasant. This is the most sweet
pastime after reign, wind, and tempest unto the miserable mariners. Mariners.
Pylgroms. Prisoners.
With this do the weary pilgromes comfort themselves in their troublesome and
long viages. And often times prisoners in adversity, in fetters, and in
stocks. In like manner for a greater proof that the tunablenes of music
(though it be but rude) is a very great refreshi^g of al worldly pains and
griefs, a man would judge that nature has taught it unto nurses for a
special remedy to the contynuall waylinges of sucking babes, which at the
soune of of their voice fall into a quiet and sweet sleep, Suckyng babes.
forgetting the tears that are so proper to them, and given us of nature in
that age for a guess of the rest of our life to come. Here the Count pausing
a while the L. Julian said: I am not of the L. Gaspars opinion, but I believe
for the reasons you allege and for many other, that music is not only an
ornament, but also necessary for a Courtyer. But I would have you declare how
this and the other qualities which you appoint him are to be practiced, and at
what time, and in what sort. Because many things that of the^ selves be
worthy praise, oftentimes in practisyng them out of season seem most
foolish. And contrariwise, some things yt appear to be of small moment, in the
well applying them, are grea^ly esteemed. Then said the Count: before we enter
into this matter, I will talk of an other thing, which for that it is of
importance (in my judgment) I b^^eue our Courtyer ought in no wise to leave
it out. And yt is ye cunning in drawyng, and the knowledge in the very art of
peincting. Peincting.
And wonder ye not if I wish this feat in him, which now a days perhaps is
counted an handycraft and full little to become a gentleman, for I remember I
have read that the men of old time, and especially in all Greece would have
Gentlemen's children in the schools to apply peincting, Gentlemen's children
learned to peinct.
as a matter both honest and necessary. And this was received in the first
degree of liberal arts, afterward openly enacted not to be taught to
servants and bondmen. Peincting for^id to bondme^
Among the Romans in like manner it was in very great reputacion, and thereof
sprung the surname of the most noble family of Fabii, for the first Fabius was
surnamed ^ictor, Fabius Pictor.
because in deed he was a most excellent peinter and so addicted to peincting,
that after he had peincted the walls of the temple of Health, he writ
therein his name thinking with himself, Temple of health.
that for all he was borne in so noble a familye which was honored with so
many titles of Co^sulshi^pes and triumphs and other dignities, and was learned
and well seen in the law, and reckened among Orators, to give also an
increase of brightness and an ornament unto his renown, by leauyng behind
him a memory that he had been a peinter. There have not in like manner wanted
many other of notable famylyes that have been renowned in this art, of the
which (beside that in it self it is most noble and worthy) there ensue many
commodities, Necessary in war*
and especially in war to draw out countries, plattefourmes, ryuers,
brydges, castelles, houldes, fortresses, and such other matters, the which
though a man were hable to keep in mind (and that is a hard matter to do)
yet can he not show them to others. And in very deed who so esteameth not
this art, is (to my seemyng) far wide from all reason: forsomuche as the
engine of the world that we behoulde with a large sky, so bright with shining
sterres, and in the mids, The world (...) peincting.
the earth environed with the Seas, severed in parts with Hills, Dales, and
Rivers, and so decked with such diverse trees, beawtifull flowers and herbs,
a man may say it to be a noble and a great peincting, drawn with the hand
of nature and of God: the which whosoever can follow in mine opinion he is woorthye
much commendacion. Neither can a man atteyne to this without the knoweledge of
many things, as he well knows that tries it. Therefore had they of old
time in very great estimation both the art and the artificers, so that it came
to the top of all excellencye. And of this may a man gather a sufficient
argument at the ancient images of marble and metal, which at this day are
to be seen. And though peincting be a diverse matter from caruing, yet do they
both arise of one self fountain (namelye) of a good pattern. Ancient images.
And even as the images are divine and excellent, Caruing.
so it is to be thought peinctinges were also, and so much the more, for that
they contain in them a greater workemanshipp. Then the L Emilia tourning her
unto Iohnchristopher Romano that sat there among the rest, how think you (quoth
she) to this judgment, will you grant that peincting contains in it a
greater workmanship, then caruing? Iohnchristopher answered: In my mind
caruing is of more travail, of more art, and of a more dignitye then
peincting. Then said the Count. Because images are more durable, perhaps a
man may say that they are of a more dignity. For since they are made for a
memory, they better satisfy the effect why the^ be made, then peincting. But
beside memory, both peincting and caruing are made also to set out a thing, and
in this point has peincting a great deal the upper hand, yt which though it
be not so long lastyng (to term it so) as caruing is, yet does it for all that
endure a long time, and for the while it lasts, is much more sightly. Then
answered Iohnchristopher* I beleaue verelye you think not as ye speak, and
all this do you for your Raphaelles sake. And peradventure to, Raphael.
you judge the excellency you know to be in him in peincting to be of such
perfection, that caruynge in marble cannot come to that degree. But weye with
your self, that this is the praise of the artificer and not of the art. Then
he proceaded: and I judge also both the one and the other to be an artifici^ll
following of nature. But yet I know not how you can say, that ye truth and
property that nature makes, cannot be followed better in a figure of marble or
metal, whe^in the members are all round, proporcioned and measured as nature
her self shapeth them, then in a Table where men perceive nothing but the
outward sygh^ and those colors that deceive the eyes: and say not to me that
being, is not nigher unto the truth then seeming. Why caruing is harder then
peinctyng.
Again, I judge caruing in marble much harder, because if ye make a fault it
cannot be amended again, for marble cannot be joined together, but ye must be
drieuen to make a new ^mage, the which happens not in peincting, for a man
may alter, put to, and diminish, always making it better. The Count said
laughing: I speak not for Raphaelles sake, neither ought you to think me so
ignorant a person, but I understand the excellency of Michelangelo,
Michelangelo
of you your self, and of other men in caruyng of marble, but I speak of the
art and not of the artificers. And you say well, that both the one and the other
is the following of nature. But for all that, it is not so, that peinting
appears and caruing is: for although images are all round like the lively
pattern, and peinctyng is only seen in the outward appearance, yet want there
many things in images, that want not in penctinges, and especially lights
and shadows, for fl^she gives one light, and Marble an other, and that does
the Peincter naturally follow with clear and dark, more and less, as he sees
occasion, which the grauer in marble can not do. And where the Peincter makes
not his figure round, he makes the muscules and the members in round wise, so
that they go to meet with the parts not seen, after such a manner, that a man
may very well gather the peincter has also a knowleage in them and
understands them. And in this point he must have an other craft that is
greater to frame those members, that they may seem short and diminishe
according to the proportion of the sight by the way of prospectiue,
Prospectiue*
which by force of measured lines, colors, lights and shadows discover unto
you also in the outward sight of an upright wall the plainness and farnesse,
more and less, as pleases him. Wherein the p^in^^^r passes the caruer.
Think you it again a trifling matter to counterfeyt natural colors, flesh,
clothe, and all other colored things? This can not now the grauer in marble
do, ne yet express the grace of the sight that is in the black eyes or in
azurre with the shininge of those amorous beams. He can not show the color
of yelow hear, nor ye glistring of armor, nor a dark night, nor a Sea
tempest, nor those twincklinges and sperkeles, nor the burninge of a City, nor
the rising of the morning in the color of roses with those beams of purple
and gold. Finallye he can not show the sky, the sea, the earth, hills,
woddes, meadows, gardeines, rivers, Cities, nor houses, which the peincter
does all. For this respect (me think) peincting is more noble, and conteyneth
in it a greater workman ship then grauing in marble. And among them of old
time I believe it was in as high estimation as other things, Remnants of
p^inctinge in Room.
the which is also to be discerned by certain little remnantes that are to be
seen yet, especially in places under ground in Room, but much more euidentlye
may a man gather it by old wrytinges, wherein is so famous and so often
mention both of the works and workmen, that by them a man may understand in
what high reputation they have been always with Princes and Commonweals.
Therefore it is read that Alexander loved highlye Appelles o^ Ephesus, and
so much, Ale^ander (...) Appelles.
that after he had made him draw out a woman of his, naked, whom he loved most
deerly, and understanding that this good peincter, for her marvelous beauty
was most fervently in love with her, without any more a do, he bestowed her
upon him. Alexanders gift to Appelles.
Truly a worthy liberalitye of Alexander, not to give only treasures and
states, but also his own affections and desires, and a token of very great
love toward Appelles, not regarding (to please him with all) the displeasure
of the woman that he highly loved, who it is to be thought was sore agreued to
change so great a king for a peincter. Only Appelles drew (...) his picture.
There be many other signs rehearsed also of Alexanders good will toward
Appelles, but he showed plainlye in what estimation he had him, when he
commanded by open proclamation no other peincter should be so hardy to draw
out his picture. Here could I repete unto you the contentions of many noble
peincters with the greatest commendation and marvel (in a manner) in the
world. I could tell you with what solemnity the Emperors of old time decked
out their tryumphes with peinctinges, and dedicated them up in hau^ted places
and how dear it rest them. Estimation of peincting.
And that there were some Peincters that gave their works freely, seeming unto
them no gold nor silver was enough to value them. And how a table of
Protogenes was of such estimation, that Demetrius lying encamped before Rhodes,
where he might have entered the city by setting fire to the place where he
wiste this table was, A table where in Bacchus was peinted.
for fear of burning it, staid to bid them ba^taile, and so he wan not the
city at al. And how Metrodorus a Philosopher and a most excellent peincter was
sent out of Athens to L. Paulus to bring up his children and to deck out his
triumph he had to make. Metrodorus
And also many noble writers have written of this art, which is a token great
enough to declare in what estimation it has been. But I will not we proceed
any farther in this communication. Therefore it suffices only to say yt our
Courtier ought also to have a knowledge in peincting, since it was honest and
profitable, Profit of peincting.
and much set by in those days when me^ were of a more prowess then they are
now. And though he never geat other profit or delight in it (beside that it is
a help to him to judge of the excellencye of images both old and new, of
vessels, buildinges, old coins, cameses, grauings and such other matters) it
makes him also understand the beawtye of liuelye bodies, and not only in the
sweetness of the fisnamy, but in the proportion of all the rest, as well in
men as other living creatures. Lovers ought to have a ^igh^ in (...).
S^ then how the knowleage in peinctinge is cause of very great pleasure. And
this let them think that do enjoy and view the beauty of a woman so thoroughly
that they think them selves in paradise, and yet have not the feate of
peinctinge: the which if they had, they would conceive a far greater
contentation, for then should they more perfectly understand the beauty that in
their breast engenders such hearts ease. Here the L. Caesar laughed and said: I
have not the art of peincting, and yet I know assuredly I have a far greater
delight in behoulding a woman in the world then Appelles himself that was so
excellent whom ye named right now, could have if he were now in lief again. The
Count answered: Affection of love.
this delight of yours proceadeth not wholly of the beawty, but of the affection
which you perhaps bear unto ye woman. And if you will tell ye troth, the
first time you beheld that woman, ye felt not the thousandeth part of ye delight
which ye did afterward, though her beauty were the very same* Therefore ye may
conceive how affection bears agreater stroke in your delight then beauty. I
deny not that (quoth ye L. Caesar: but as delight arises of affection, so does
affection arise of beauty, therefore a man may say for all ye, that beauty is the
cause of delight. The Count answered: there be many other things also that
beside beawty often times inflame our minds, as manners, knowleage, speech,
gestures and a thousand mo (which peradventure after a sort may be called
beauty to) and above all the knowing a man's self to be beloved: so that without
ye beautye you reason of, a man may be most feruentlye in love, but those loves
that arise only of the beauty which we dyscerne superficially in bodies,
without doubt will bring a ^arre greater delight to him that has a more skill
therein then to him that has but a little. Therefore retourning to our purpose,
I believe Appelles conceived a far greater joy in behoulding the beawty of
Campaspes then did Alexander, for a man may easilye believe that the love of
them both proceaded of that beawtye, Campaspes.
and perhaps also for this respect Alexander* determined to bestow her upon
him, that (in his mind) could know her more perfectlye ^hen he did. Have you
not read of the five daughters of Croton, U^^oug^te^s of Croton.

Zeu^is.


which among the rest of that people, Zeusis the peincter chose to make of all
five one figure that was most excellent in beawty, and were renowned of many
Poets, as they that were allowed for beaw^ifull of him that ought to have a most
perfect judgment in beawty? ^ere the L. Caesar, declaring him self not satisfied
nor willing to consent by any means, that any man could t^st of the delight
that ^e felt in beholding the beawty of a cert^in woman, but he him self, began
to ^peake* and then was there hard a great scraping of fete in the floor with
^herme of loud speaking, and upon that every man tourninge him self about,
saw at the Chamber door appear a light of torches, L. Franciscomaria del^a
Rouere.
and by and by after entered in the L. General with a great and noble train,
who was then returned from accompaninge the Pope a piece of the way. And at
his first entrey into the Palaice demaundinge what the Duchess did, he was
certe^ied what kind of pastime they had in hand that night, and how the charg
was committed to Count Lewis to entreat o^ courting. Therefore he hasted him as
much as he could to come betime to hear somewhat. And as soon as he had saluted
the Duchess and settled the ^es^e that were risen up at his coming, he satte
him down in the circ^e among them and certain of the chief of his train,
among which were the marquess Phoebus of Ceua, and Ghirardin ^rethern M.
Hector of Room, Vince^t Calmeta, Horace Floridus and many other* And when al
was whist, the L. General said: my Lords, my coming should be to
hurtefull, if I should hindre such good communication as I guess was even now
among you. Therefore do you me not this injury to deprive both your selves and
me of this pleasure. Then answered Count Lewis I beleaue (my Lord) silence
ought rather to please all parties then speakinge. For saying it has been my
lot this night before all other to take this travail in hand, it has now
w^ried me in speakinge and I wene all the rest in hearing: because my talk
has not been worthy of this company, nor sufficient enough for the
waightinesse of the matter I have been charged withal, wherein sins I have
little satisfied my self, I reckon I have much less satysfied others. Therefore
(my Lord) your luck has been good to come at the latter end, and now shall
it be well done to give the enterprise of that is behind to an other that may
succeed in my room. For whosoever he be, I know well he will much better
acquit him self then I should do if I went forward with it, being thus weary
as I am. This will I in no wise permit, answered the L. Julian to be deceived
of the promise ye have made me. And I know well the Lord General will not be
against the understanding of that point. And what promise was that, quoth the
Count? The L. Julian answered: To declare unto us in what sort the Courtyer
ought to use those good conditions and qualities which you say are meet for
him. The Lord General, though he we^ but a child in years, yet was he wise
and descreete more then a man would think belonged unto those tender years of
his, and in every gesture he declared with a greatness of mind a certain
liveliness of wit, which did sufficiently pronosticate the excellent degree
of honou^e, and virtue whereunto afterward he ascended. Wherefore he said
incontinentlye: if all this be behind yet to be spoken of (me think) I am
come in good season. For understanding in what sort the Courtier must use his
good conditions and qualities, I shall know also what they are, and thus shall
I come to the knowleage of all that have been spoken hitherto. Therefore stick
not (Count) to pay this debt, being already discharged of one part thereof. I
should not have so great a debt to discharg, answered the Count, if the peynes
were equallye divided, but the fault has been, in geuinge a Lady authority
to command, that is to partial: and so smiling he beheld the Lady Emilia,
which said immediately: you ought not to complain of my partiality, yet sins ye
do it against reason, we will give one part of this honor, which you call
peynes, unto an other: and tourninge her unto Sir Friderick Fregoso, you (quoth
she) propounded this devise o^ the Courtier, therefore reason wills ye should
say somewhat in it: and that shall be to fulfill the L. Iulians request, in
declaring in what sort, manner and time the Courtier ought to practice his good
conditions and qualityes, and those other things which the Count has said are
meet for him. Then Sir Friderick, Madam (quoth he) where ye will sever the
sort, the time and the manner of good conditions and qualityes and the well
practisinge of the Courtyer, ye will sever that can not be sundred: for it is
these things y^ make the conditions and qualityes good and the practicing
good. Therefore sins the Count has spoken so much and so well, and also said
somewhat of these circumstances, and prepared for the rest in his mind that he
had to say, it were but reason he should go forward until he came to the end.
The Lady Emilia answered: Set the case you were the Count your self, and spoke
that your mind gives you he would do, and so shall all be well. Then said
Calmeta, My Lords, sins it is late, least Sir Friderick should find a scuse to
utter that he knows, I believe it were well done to defer the rest of the
communication until to morrow, and bestow the small time that remains about
some other pastyme without ambicion* The which being agreed upon of all hands*
the Duchess w^lled the Lady Margaret and the Lady Consta^ce Fregosa to show
them a dance. Wherefore Barletta immediately, a very pleasant musi^ien and an
excellent daunser, who continually kept all the Court in mirth and joy, began to
play upon his instruments, and they hand in hand, showed them a dance or
two with a very good grace and great pleasure to the lookers on: That done,
because it was far in night, the Duchess arrose upon her feet, and so
every man taking his leau^ reuerentlye of her, departed to his rest.

THE SECOND BOOK OF the Courtier of Count Baldessar Castilio unto. M.
Alphonsus Ariosto.
NOt without marvel many a time and often have I considered with my self how
one error should arise, the which because it is generallye seen in old men,
a man may beleaue it is proper and natural unto them: and that is, In erro^r
in age.
how (in a manner) all of them commend the times past, and blame the times
present: dispraising ^ur doings and manners: and whatsoever they did not in
their youth: affirmynge moreover every good custom and good trade of living,
every virtue, finally each thing to declyne always from ill to worse. And in
good sooth it seems a matter very wide from reason and worthy to be noted,
that ripe age which with long practice is wont to make men's judgments more
perfect in other things, should in this behalf so corrupt them, that they
should not discern, if the world wexed worse and worse, and the fathers were
generally better then the children, we should long ere this time have been come
to that utmost degree of ill that can not wexe worse. And yet do we see not
only in our days, but also in times past that this has always ben the
peculier vice of that age. The which is to be manifestlye gathered by the
writings of many most ancient aucthours, and especyally comedy writers,
which express better then the rest, the trade of man's life. The cause
therefore of this false opinion in old men, I believe (in mine opinion) is,
for that, years wearing away, carry also with them many commodities, The cause
of the error.
and emonge other take away from the blood a great part of the lively
spirits that alters the complexion, and the instruments wexe feeble,
whereby the soul works her effects. Therefore the sweet flowers of delight
vade away in that season out of our hearts, as the leaves fall from the trees
after harvest, and in stead of open and clear thoughts there enters cloudy
and troublous heaviness accompanied with a thousand heart grieffes: so that
not only the blood, but the mind is also feeble, neither of the former
pleasures receives it any thing else but a fast memory and the print of
the beloved time of tender age, Time of youth.
which when we have upon us, the heaven, the earth, and each thing to our
seeming reioiceth and laugheth always about our eyes, and in thought (as in a
sauoury and pleasant gardein) florisheth the sweet spring time of mirth, so
that peradventure it were not unprofitable, when now in the cold season, the
Son of our lief (taking away from us our delites) begins to draw toward
the Weste, to lose in like case therwithal the mindefulnesse of them, and to
find out (as Themistocles says) an art to teach us to forget: for the senses
of our body are so deceyuable, that they beguile many times also the judgment
of the mind. Senses of the body
Therefore (me think) old men be like unto them, that saylinge in a vessel
out of an haven, behoulde the ground with their eyes, and the vessel to there
seeminge stands still and the shore goes: and yet is it clean contrary, for
the haven, and likewise the time and pleasures continue still in their astate,
and we with the vessel of mortalitye flying away, go one after an other
through the tempestuous sea that swaloweth up and deuoureth al things, neither
is it granted us at any time to come on shore again, but always beaten with
contrary winds, at the end we break our vessel at some rock. The mind of
old age.
Because therefore the mind of old age is without order subject to many
pleasures, it can not taste them: and even as to them that be sick of a fever
when by corrupt vapors they have lost their taste, all wines appear mo^^e
bitter, though they be precious and delicate in deed: so unto old men for
there vnaptenes (wherein notwithstanding desire fails them not (pleasures
seem without taste and cold, much differing from those they remember they
have proved in foretyme, although the pleasures in themselves be the self
same. Therefore when they feel themselves void of them, it is a grief, and
they blame the time present for ill, not perceyuinge that this change
proceadeth of themselves and not of the time. And contrarywyse when they call
to mind the pleasures past, they remember therwithall the time they had them
in, and therefore commend it for good, Things beloved that accumpanye pleasures.
because to their weening it carries with it a savor of it, which they felt in
them when it was present, by reason that in effect our minds conceive an
hatred against all things that have accompanied our sorrows, and love such
as have accompanied our pleasures. Upon this it comes that unto a lover it
is most acceptable sometime to behoulde a window though it be shut, because
otherwhiles it may be his chance to see his maistresse there: in like manner to
see a ring, a letter, a gardein or any other place or what ever other thing
he supposes has been a wittinge testimonial of his pleasures. And
contrariwise, often times a fair trymmed and well decked chamber is abhorred
of him that has been kept prisoner in it, or abidde therein any other sorrow.
And in my days I have known some that will never drink of a cup like unto
that wherein in their sickness they had taken a medicin. For even as that
window, ringe or letter, does bring to the mind a sweet remembrance unto
the one that so much pleases him, for that he imagines it was a percell of his
pleasures, so unto the other the chamber or cup seemet h to bring with the
memory, his sickness or imprisoninge again. The very same cause (I beleaue)
moves old men to praise the times past and discommend the present. Therefore as
they talk of other things, so do they also of Courts, affirminge such as
have been in their memory to be much more excellent and far better furnished
with notable men, then we see them to be that are now a days. And immediately
when they enter into this kind of talk, they begin to extol with in finyte
praises the Courts of Duke Philip, or of Duke Borso, and declare the sayings
of Nicholas Piccininus and rehearse that in those times a man should very
^ildome have heard of a murder committed, Old men's opinion of Courts.
and no combattes, no crafts nor deceites: but a certain faithful and loving
good meaning among all men and an upright dealing. And in Courts at that time
there reigned such good conditions and such honesty that the Courtyers were
(in a manner) religious folk: and woe unto him that should have spoken an ill
word of an other, or made but a sign otherwise then honestly to a woman. And
on the other side, they say in these days every thing is clean contrary, and
not only that brotherlye love and manerlye conversation lost emonge
Courtyers, but also in Courts there reigns nothing else but envy and
malice, ill manners, and a m^st wanton life in every kind of vice: Envy. Women
wanton. Men womanish. A paraile.
the women enticefull past shame, and the men womanishe. They disprayse also
the apparalle to be dishonest and to soft. To be short, they speak against
infinite things, emonge the which many in very deed deserve to be
discommended, for it cannot be excused, but there are many ill and naughty
men emonge us, and this our age is much more full of vices, then was that
which they commend. But (me think) they do full ill skanne the cause of
this difference, and they be fond persons, because they would have all
goodness in the world without any ill, which is impossible. Contraries
For fynce ill is contrary to good, and good to ill, it is (in a manner)
necessary by contrarietye and a certain counterpese the one should
vnderprompe and strengthen the other, and where the one wants or increases,
the other to want or increase also: because no contrary is without his
other contrary. Who knows not that there should be no Justice in the
world, were it not for wrongs? no stoutness of courage, were there not
feynthearted? nor continency, were there not incontinencie? nor health, were
there not sickness? nor truth, were there not lies? Socrates. Esopus.
nor happiness were there not mischaunces? Therefore Socrates says well in
Plato that he marueyleth that Esope made not an Apologus or fable, wherein he
might have feigned that God, since he could never coople pleasure and sorrow
together, might have knit them with an extremity, so that the beginning of
the one should have been the end of the other. For we see no pleasure can
delight us at any time if sorrow goes not before. One contrary follows an
other.
Who can love rest well unless he have first felt the grief of weariness?
Who sauereth meat, drink, and sleep, if he have not first felt hunger,
thirste, and watchinge? I beleaue therefore passions and dyseases are given to
men of nature, not principallye to make them subject to them, for it were not
mete that she, which is the mother of all goodness, should by her own
purposed advise give us so many euilles, but since nature does make health,
pleasure and other goodness, consequentlye after these, were joined diseases,
sorrows and other euilles. Therefore since virtues were granted to the world
for a favor and gift of nature, by and by were vices by that lincked
contrariety necessarily accompanied with them: so that the one increasing or
wanting, ye other must in like manner increase or want. Therefore when our old
men praise the Courts of times past because there were not in them so vicious
men, as some that are in ours, they do not know that there were not also in
them so virtuous men, Better wits now then in fore^ime.
as some that are in ours: the which is no wonder, for no ill is so evil, as
that which arriseth of the corrupt seed of goodness. And therefore where
nature now brings forth much better wits then she did tho, even as they
that be given to goodness do much better then did those of their time, so
also they that be given to ill do much worse. Therefore it is not to be
said, that such as absteyned from doing ill because they knew not how to
do it, deserved in that case any praise: for although they did but a little
ill, yet did they the woorste they knew. And that the wits of those times
were generally much inferior to these now a days, a man may judge by all that
has proceaded from the^, letters, peynctynges, statures, buildinges and al
other things. Again these old men discommende many things in us, which of
themselves are neither good nor badde, only because they did them not: and
say it is no good sight to see young men on horseback about the streets and
especially upon Mules, nor to wear furs, nor side garments in winter,
Things neither good nor badd.
norto wear a cappe before a man be at the least xviii. years of age, and
such other matters, wherein truly they be much deceived. For these facions
(beside that they be commodious and profitable) are brought up by custom, and
generallye men delight in them, as at that time they were contented to go in
their iacket, Facions set-by in the old time.
in their breechelesse hose and in their low shoes with lachettes, and (to
appear fine) carye all day long a hawk upon their fiste, without purpose,
and dance without touching a woman's hand, and used many other facions, the
which as they are now stale, so were they at that time much set by. Therefore
may it be lawefull for us also to follow the custom of our times, without
controulment of these old men, which going about to praise themselves, say:
When I was xx. years old I lay with my mother and sisters, The saying of
old men.
nor a great while after wiste I what women meant: and now children are not so
soon crepte ^ute of the shell, but they know more naughtynesse, then they
that were come to man's state did in those days: neither be they aware in so
saying that they confirm our children to have more wit then their old men.
Let them leave therefore speakinge against our times, as full of vices: for in
taking away them, they take also a way the virtues. And let them remember
that among the good men of ancient time, when as the glorious wits flourished
in the world, which in very deed were of most perfection in every virtue, and
more then manlye, there were also many most mischeuous, which if they had
still lived, should have excelled our ill men so much in ill, as those good
men in goodness, and of this do all Histories make full mention. But unto these
old men I ween I have made a sufficient answer. Therefore we will leave
aparte, this discourse, perhaps to tedious, but not altogether out ^f
purpose: and being sufficient to have declared that the Courts of our time
are worthy no less praise, then those that old men commend so much, we will
attend to our communication that was had about ye Courtier, whereby a man may
easily gather, in what degree the Court of Vrbin was emonge the rest, Noble
wits in the Court of vr^in.
and what manner a Prince and Lady they were that had such noble wits
attendyng upon them, and how fortunate all they might call them selves that
lived in that familiar fellowship. When the day folowinge therefore was come,
there was great and sundry talk between the Gentlemen and Ladies of the
court upon the disputacion of the night before: which arrose a great part
of it, upon the L. Generalles greedy desire, to understand as much as had been
said in the matter, who had enquired it almost of every manne: and (as it is
always wont to come to pass) it was reported unto him sundry ways, for some
praised one thing, some an other, and also ^mo^g many there was a contencion of
the Countes oune meaning, for every man did not so fullye bear in mind the
matters that had been spoken. Therefore almost ye whol^ day was spent about
talking in this, and as soon as night drue on, the L. General commanded meat
to be set on the board, and took all the Gentelmen with him, and immediatlye
after supper he repaired to the Duchess side* who beehouldinge so great a
company assembled sooner then they had done at other times, said: me think,
it is a great weight, Sir Friderick that is laid upon your shoulders, and a
great expectacion that you must satisfy. Here not tariynge for Sir Friderickes
answer, and what great weight (I beseech ye) is it, said then Vnico Aretino?
Who is so foolish that when he can do a thing, will not do it in a fit and
due time? reasoning in this wise about the matter, every man satte him down in
his wonted place and manner with very heedfull expectacion of the propounded
talk. Then Sir Friderick tourninge him to Vnico, do you not think then, M.
Vnico (quoth he) yt I am laden this night with a great and peinful burden,
since I must declare in what sort, manner and time, the Courtier has to
practice his good co^dicions and qualities, and to use those other things that
are already said to be mete for him? Me think it is no great matter,
answered Vnico: and I believe a good judgment in the Courtyer is sufficient for all this, which the Count said well yesterday night that he ought to have:
and in case it be so, without any other precepts, I suppose he may practyse
welynough the thing that he knows in due time and after a good sort. The
which to bring more particularly into rule were to hard a matter, and
perhaps more then needs, for I know not who is so fond to go about his
fence, when the rest be in their music: or to go about the streets daunsing
the Morisco, though he could do it never so well: or goinge about to comfort
a mother that had buried her child, to begin to talk with her of pleasant
matters and merry conceits. I believe surely no gentleman will do this, unless
he were clean out of his wits. Me think (M. Vnico) quoth Sir Friderick then,
ye harp to much upon your extremities. For it happens otherwhile a man is
so fond that he remembers not himself so easilye, and ouersightes are not all
alike. And it may be, that a man shall abstain from a common folly which is to
manifest, as that is you speak of, To observe time.
to go dance the Morisco in the market place, and yet shall he not refrain
from praising himself out of purpose, from using a noisome sauciness, from
casting out otherwhile a word thinking to make men laughe, which for that it
is spoken out of time will appear cold and without any grace, and these
ouersightes often times are covered with a certain veil that suffers a man not to forget who does them, unless he take no heed to them: and
although for many causes our sight descerneth but little, yet for ambicions sake
it is darkened in especyall, for every man willingly sets forth himself in
that he persuades himself he knows* whether this persuasion of his be ^^ue
or false. Therefore the well behauing of a man's self in this case (me think)
consists in a certain wisdom and judgment of choice, and to know more and
l^sse what increases or diminishes in things, to practice them in due time
or out of season. And for all the Courtyer be of so good a judgment that he
can descerne these differences, yet shall he the sooner compass that he
seeks, if his imagination he opened with some rule, and the way^s showed him,
and (as it were) the places where he should ground himself upon, then if he
should take him self only to the generaltie. Forsomuche as therefore the Count
ye^sterday night entreated upon Courtyership so c^piously and in so good a
manner, he has made me (truly) conceive no small fear and doubt that I shall
not so thoroughly satisfy this noble audience in the matter that lies upon me
to discourse in, as he has done in that was his charge. Yet to make my self
partener in what I may of his praise, and to be sure not to err (at the least
in this part) I will not contrary him in any point. Wherefore agreing to his
opinions, and be^ide the rest, as touching noblenes of birthe, wit and
disposition of person and grace of countenance, I say unto you that to get
him praise worthily and a good estimation with all men, and favor with such
great m^n as he shall attend upon, me think it behouffull he have the
understanding to frame all his life and to set forth his good qualities
generally in company with all men without purchasing himself envy. The which
how hard a matter it is of it self, a man may consider by the sildomenesse
of such as are seen to attain to that point: because we are all the sort of us
in very deed more inclined of nature to dispraise faults, then to commend
things well done. And a man would think that many by a certain rooted malice,
Many^ (...) to find faults.
although they manifestly descerne the goodness, enforce themselves with all
study and diligence to find in us either a fault or at the least^ the likeness
of a fault. Therefore it behooves our Courtyer in all his doings to be charie
and heedfull, and what so he says or does to accompany it with wisdom, and
not only to set his delight to have in himself parts and excellent qualities,
but also to order the tenor of his life after such a trade, that the whole
may be answerable unto these parts, and see the self same to be always and
in every thing such, that it disagree not from it self, but make one body of
all these good qualities, so that every deed of his may be compact and framed
of all the virtues, as the Stoikes say the duty of a wiseman is: although not
withstanding always one virtue is the principal, Stoic^,
but all are so knit and linked one to an other, that they tend to one end,
and all may be applied and serve to every purpose. Therefore it behooves he
have the understanding to set them forth, To set out one qualytie with another
and by comparason and (as it were) contrariety of the one, sometime to make
the other the better known: as the good p^inct^rs with a shadow make the
lights of high places to appear, and so with light make low the shadows of
plains, and meddle diverse colors together, so that through that diversity
both the one and the other are more sightly to behoulde, and the placing of
the figures contrary the one to the other is a help to them to do the feate
that the peincters mind is to bring to pass. Loweline^se.
So that lowlines is much to be commended in a Gentleman that is of prowess
and well seen in arms: and as that fearcenesse seems the greater when it is
accompanied with sobermoode, even so does sobermood increase and show it
self the more through fierceness. Therefore little speaking, much doing,
and not praising a man's own self in commendable deeds, dissemblyng them
after an honest sort, does increase both the one virtue and the other in a
person that can discreatly use this trade: and the like is to be said in all
the other good qualities. Therefore will I have our Courtyer in that he does
or says to use certain general rules, General rules.
the which (in my mind) contain briefly as much as belongs to me to speak.
And for the first and chief let him avoid (as the Count said well in that
behalf yester night) above all things curiosity. Avoid curiosity^.
Afterward let him consider well what the thing is he does or speaks, the
place where it is done, in presence of whom, in what time, the cause why he
does it, his age, his profession, Circumstances.
the end whereto it tends, and the means that may bring him to it: and so
let him apply himself discreatly with these aduertisementes to whatsoever he
minds to do or speak. After Sir Fridericke had thus said, he seemed to
stay a while Then said M. Morello of Ortona: Me think these your rules teach
but little. And I for my part am as skillful now as I was before you spoke
them, although I remember I have hard them at other times also of friars with
whom I have been in confession, and I ween they term them circumstances. Then
laughed Sir Fridericke and said: if you do well bear in mind, the Count
willed yesternighte that the chief profession of the Courtyer should be in
arms, and spoke very largely in what sort he should do it, therefore will we
make no more rehearsal thereof: An example of the circumstances.
yet by our rule it may be also understood, that where the Courtyer is at a
skirmishe, or assault, or battle upon the land, or in such other places of
enterprise, he ought to work the matter wisely in seperating himself from the
multitude, and undertake his notable and bold feats which he has to do with
as little company as he can, and in the sight of noble men that be of most
estimation in the camp, and especially in the presence and (if it were
possible) before the very eyes of his king or great parsonage he is in
service withal: for in deed it is mete to set forth to the show things well
done. And I beleaue even as it is an ill matter to seek a false renoume, and in
the thing he deseru^th no praise at all, so is it also an ill matter to
defraude a man's self of his due estimation, Praise to be sought for.
and not to seek that praise, which alone is the true reward of virtuous
enterprises. And I remember I have known of them in my time that for all they
were of prowess, Grosheaded persons.
yet in this point they have showed themselves but grossheaded, and put their
life in as great hasard to go take a flock of shiepe, as in being the foremost
to scale the walls of a batred town, ye which our Courtyer will not do if he
bear in mind the cause that brings him to the war, The cause to venture
life is estimacion.
which ought to be only his estimation. And if he happen moreover to be one to
show feats of Chivalry in open sightes at tilt, turney, or Ioco di can or
in any other exercise of the person, Open shows.
remembryng ye place where he is, and in presence of whom, he shall provide
before hand to be in his armor no less handsome and sightly then sure, Ready
in his armor.
and feed the eyes of the lookers on with all things that he shall think may
give him a good grace, and shall do his best to get him a horse set out with
fair harneis and sightly trappinges, A horse well trimmed.
and to have proper deuyses, apt poesies, and witty inventions that may draw
unto him the eyes of the lookers on, Wittye inventions.
as the Adamant stone does iron. He shall never be among the last that come
forth into the listes to show themselves, considering the people, and
especially women take much more head to the first then to the last: Not of
the last to come furthe.
because the eyes and minds that at the beginning are greedy of that noueltye,
note every little matter and printe it, afterward by continuance they are not
only full, but weery of it. Therefore was there a noble Stageplaier in old
time that for this respect would always be the first to come forth to play
his part. Q. Roscius co^oe^us.
In like manner also if our Co^rtier do but talk of arms, he shall have an eye
to the profession of them he talks withal and according to that frame
himself, A respect to the talk of arms.
and use one manner of talk with men, and an other with women: and in case he
will touch any thing sounding to his own praise, he shall do it so
dissemblinglye as it were at a chance and by the way and with the discretion
and wariness that count Lewis showed us yesterday. Do you not now think (M.
Morello) that our rules can teach somewhat? Trow you not that friend of ours
I told you of a few days a go had clean forgotten with whom he spoke, and
why? When to entertein a gentilwoman whom he never saw before, at his first
entering in talk with her, he began to tell how many men he had slain and what
a hardy fellow he was, and how he could play at twohandsworde and had never
done until he had taught her how to defend certain strokes with a Pollaxe
being armed and how unarmed, and to show how (in a man's defense) to lay
hand upon a dagger, so that ye poor gentilwoman stood upon thorns, and
thought an hour a thousand year till she were got from him, for fear least
he would go nigh to kill her as he had done those other. Into these errors
run they that have not an eye to the circumstances which you say ye have
heard of Friars. Therefore I say of ye exercises of the body, some there are
that (in manner) are never practiced but in open show, as runninge at Tilt,
Barriers, Ioco di Can, and all the rest that depend upon Arms. Therefore
when our Courtyer takes any^ of these in hand, first he must provide to
be so well in order for Horse, Harneys, Well provided for open shows.
and other fournitures beelongynge thereto, that he want nothing. And if he
see not him self throughelye fournyshed in all points, let him not meddle
at all. For if he do not well, it can not be scused that it is not his
profession. After this, he ought to have a great consideration in presence of
whom he shows himself, and who be his matches. For it were not meet that a
Gentilman should be present in person and a doer in such a matter in the
country, where the lookers on and the doers were of a base sort. Then said
the L. Gaspar Pallauicin. In our country of Lumbardy these matters are not
passed upon, for you shall see there young Gentilmen upon the holy days come
dance all the day long in the Sun with them of the country, and pass the
time with them in casting the bar, in wrestling, running and leaping. And I
believe it is not ill done. For no comparason is there made of nobleness of
birth, but of force and slight, in which things many times the men of the
country are not a whit inferior to Gentilmen, and it seems this familiar
conversation contains in it a certain lovely freeness. This dau^sing in the
son, answered Sir Fridericke, can ^ in no case away withal: and I can not see
what a man shall gain by it. How to practice feats with men of the country.
But whosoever will wrestle* run and leap with men of the country, ought (in my
judgment) to do it after a sort: to prove himself and (as they are wont to
say) for courtesy, not to try maistry with them: and a man ought (in a
manner) to be assured to get the upper hand, else let him not meddle with all,
for it is to ill a sight and to foul a matter and without estimation to see a
Gentilman overcome by a Cartar and especially in wrestling. Therefore I believe
it is well done to abstain from it, at the leastwise in the presence of many,
because if he overcome, his gain is small, and his loss in being overcome
very great. Also they play at tenise (in manner) always in open sight, and this
is one of the commune games which the multitude with their presence much set
forth. Play at tenise.
I will have our Courtier therefore to do this and all the rest beside handlyng
his weapon, as a matter that is not his profession: and not seem to seek or
look for any praise for it, nor be acknowen y^ he bestows much study or time
about it, The fond toys of some.
although he do it excelle^tly well. Neither shall he be like unto some yt have
a delight in music, and in speaking with whom soever always when he makes a
pause in their talk, begine in a voice as though they would sing. Other
walking in the streets or in the churches, go always daunsing. Other meetyng
in the market place or whersoeuer any friend, make a gesture as though they
would play at sense, or wrestle, according as their delight is. Here said the L.
Caesar Gonzaga, we have in Room a young Cardinal that does better then so,
which feeling him self lusty of person leads as many as come to visit him
(though he never saw them before) into a gardein, and is very instant upon
them to strippe themselves into their dublet to leap with him. Sir Fridericke
laughed, afterward he proceaded on. There be some other exersices that may be
done both openly and privately, as dauncyng: and in this I believe the Courtier
ought to have a respect, for if he daunseth in the presence of many and in a
place full of people, he must (in my mind) keep a certain dignity, Daunsing.
tempred notwithstanding with a handsome and sightly sweetness of gestures,
and for all he feels himself very nimble and to have time and measure at
will, yet let him not enter into that swiftness of feet and doubled
footinges, Daunsing^ priuatlye.
that we see are very comely in our Barletta, and peradventure were unseemly
for a Gentilman, although privately in a chamber together as we be now, I will
not say but he may do both that, and also dance the morisco and braulles,
yet not openly unless he were in a mask. And though it were so that all
men knew him, it skilleth not, for there is no way to that, if a man will
show himself in open sightes about such matters, whether it be in arms, or
out of arms. To be i^ mask.
Because to be in a mask brings with it a certain liberty and license,
that a man may among other things take upon him the form of that he has
best skill in, and use bente study and preciseness about the principal drift
of the matter wherein he will show himself, and a certain Re^keles^ess about
that is not of importance, which augmenteth the grace of the thing, as it
were to disguise ^ young man in an old man's attire, Manner of disguising,
but so that his garments be not a hindrau^ce to him to show his nimblenes of
person. And a man at arms in fourm of a wield shepehearde, or some other such
kind of disguisinge, but with an excellent horse and well trimmed for the
purpose. Because the mind of the lookers on runs furthwith to imagine the
thing that is offered unto the eyes at the first show, and when they behold
afterward a far greater matter to come of it then they looked for under that
attire, it deliteth them and they take pleasure at it. Therefore it were not
meet in such pastimes and open shows, where they take up counterfaiting of
false visages, The prince in mask not to take the shap of a prince.
a prince should take upon him to be like a prince in deed, because in so
doing, the pleasure that the lookers on receive at the noueltye of the matter
should want a great deal, for it is no novelty at all to any man for a prince
to be a prince. And when it is perceived that beside his being a prince, he
will also bear the shape of a prince, he loses the liberty to do all those
things that are out of the dignity of a prince. And in case there should any
contencion happen especially with weapon in these pastimes, he might easily
make men beleaue that he keeps the person of a prince because he will not be
beaten but spared of the rest: beside that, doing in sport the very same he
should do in good earnest when need required, it would take away his
authority in deed and would appear in like case to be play also. But in this
point the prince stripping himself of the person of a prince, and minglinge
himself equallye with his underlings (yet in such wise that he may be
known) with refusing superioritye, let him caleng^ a greater superiority,
namelye, to pass other men, not in authority, but in virtue, and declare that
his prowes is not increased by his being a prince. Therefore I say yt the
Courtier ought in these open sightes of arms to have the self same respect
according to his degree. But in vauting, wrestling, running and leaping, I am
well pleased he flee the multitude of people, or at the least be seen very
sildome times. For there is nothing so excellent in ye world, In some exercises
flee the multitude.
that the ignorant people have not their fill of, and smallye regard in often
beholding it. People have son^ their fill.
The like judgment I have in music: but I would not our Courtier should do as
many do, that as soon as they come to any place, and also in the presence of
great men with whom they have no acquaintance at al, Some set out them selves
unadvisedly.
without much entreating set out themselves to show as much as they know, yea
and many times that they know not, so that a man would ween they came purposely
to show themselves for that, and that it is their principal profession. How to
show music.
Therefore let our Courtier come to show his music as a thing to pass the
time withal, and as he were enforced to do it, and not in the presence of
noble men, nor of any great multitude. And for all he be skillful and does
well understand it, yet will I have him to dissemble the study and peines that a
man must needs take in all things that are well done. And let him make
semblante that he estemeth but little in himself that quality, but in doing it
excellently well make it much esteemed of other men. Then said the L. Gaspar
Pallauicin. There are many sorts of music as well in the breast, as upon
instruments, therefore would I gladly learn which is the best, and at what
time the Courtyer ought to practice it. Me think answered Sir Friderick, prick
song is a fair music, so it be done upon the book surely and after a good
sort. Prick song.
But to sing to the lute is much better, because all the sweetness consists
in one alone, To sing to the l^te.
and a man is much more heedefull and understands better the feate manner
and the aer or vein of it, when the ears are not busyed in hearing any more
then one voice: and beesyde every little error is soon perceived, which
happens not in singing with company, for one bears out an other. But
singing to the Lute with the dyttie (me think) is more pleasant then the
rest, Singinge with (...).
for it adds to the words such a grace and strength, that it is a great
wonder. Instruments with treates.
Also all instruments with freates are full of harmony, because ye tunes of
them are very perfect, and with ease a man may do many things upon them that
fill the mind with the sweetness of music. And the music of a set of
Uioles does no less delight a man, A set of violes.

A man's breast.


for it is very sweet and artificial. A man's breast gives a great
ornament and grace to all these instruments, in the which I will have it
sufficient that our Courtyer have an understanding. Yet the more counninger he
is upon them, the better it is for him, without medlynge much with the
instruments that Minerua and Alcibiades refused, Shalmes. Dulcimers. Harp.
because it seems they are noisome. Now as touching the time and season when
these sorts of music are to be practiced: I believe at all times when a man is
in familiar and loving company, Time to practice music.
having nothing else a do. But especially they are meet to be practiced in
the presence of women, because those sightes sweeten the minds of the hearers,
and make them the more apt to be perced with the pleasantness of music, and
also they quicken the spirits of the very doers. I am well pleased (as I have
said) they flee the multitude, and especially of the unnoble. But the
seasoning of the whole must be discreation, Discreation.
because in effect it were a matter impossible to imagine all cases that fall.
And if the Courtyer be a righteous judge of himself, he shall apply himself
well enough to the time, and shall discern when the hearers minds are
disposed to give ear and when they are not. He shall know his age, for (to
say the truth) it were no meet matter, but an ill sight to see a man of any
estimation being old, Old men.
horeheaded and toothlesse, full of wrinckles with a lute in his arms playing
upon it and singing in the mids of a company of women, although he could do
it reasonablye well. And that, because such songs contain in them words of
love, and in old men love is a thing to be iested at: although otherwhile he
seems emonge other miracles of his to take delight in spite of years to set a
fire frosen herts. Then answered the L. Julian: do you not bar poor old men
from this pleasure [Syr Fridericke] for in my time I have known men of years
have very perfect breasts and most nimble fingers for instruments, much more
then some young men. I go not about quoth Sir Fridericke, to bar old men from
this pleasure, but I will bar you these Ladies from laughing at that folly. And
in case old men will sing to the lute, let them do it secretly, How old me^
should practice music.
and only to rid their minds of those troublesome cares and grievous
disquietinges that our life is full of: and to taste of that excellency which
I believe Pythagoras and Socrates sauoured in music. And set case they exercise
it not at all: for that they have gotten a certain habit and custom of it,
they shall savor it much better in hearing, then he y^ has no knowledge in
it: For like as the arms of a smith that is weak in other things, because
they are more exercised, be stronger then an other bodies that is sturdy, but
not exercysed to work with his arms: even so the ears that be exercised in
music do much better and sooner descerne it, and with much more pleasure
judge of it, then other, how good and quick soever they be that have not been
practiced in the variety of pleasant music: because those musical tunes perce
not, but without leaving any taste of themselves pass by the ears not
accustomed to hear them although the very wild beasts feel some delight in
melodye. This is therefore the pleasure meet for old men to take in music.
The self same I say of daunsing, for in deed these exercises ought to be
left of before age constrains us to leave them whether we will or no. It is
better then, answered here M. Morello half chafed, to except all old men
and to say that only young men are to be called Courtiers. Then laughed Sir
Fridericke and said: Note [M. Morello] whether such as delight in these
matters, if they be not young men, do not study to appear young, and therefore
dye their hear and make their beard grow twice a week, Old me^ that will seem
young against nature.
and this proceadeth upon that nature says to them in secret, that these
matters are not comely but for young men. All ye Ladies laughed, because they
knew these words touched M. Morello, and he seemed somewhat out of patience at
the matter. Yet are there other enterteinmentes with women, said immediately
Sir Fridericke, meet for old men. And what be these, quoth M. Morillo* to
tell fables? And yt to, answered Sir Fridericke. But every age (as you know)
carries with him his thoughts, and has some peculiar virtue and some peculier
vice. And old men for all they are ordinarily wiser then young men, The nature of
old men.
more continent, and of a better foresight, yet are they wtall m ore lauis^ in
words, more greedy, harder to please, more fearful, always chafyng in the
house, sharp to their children, and will have every man wedded to their will.
The nature of young men.
And contrariwise, young men are hardy, easy to be entreated, but more apt to
brawling and chiding, waueringe and unsteadfast, that love and vnloue all at a
time: given to all their delites, and ennemies to them that tell them of their
profit. But of all the other ages, Man's state most temperate.
man's state is most temperate, which has now done with the cursed prankes of
youth, and not yet grown to auncienty. These then that be placed (as it were)
in the extremities, it is behouffull for them to know how to correct the
vices with reason, that nature has bredde in them. Therefore ought old men
to take heed of much praising themselves, The behavior of old men.
and of the other vices, that we have said are proper to them, and suffer the
wisdom and knowledge to bear stroke in them that they have gotten by long
experience, and be (as it were) Oracles, to the which every man should haunt
for counsel, and have a grace in vtteringe that they know, applying it
aptlye to the purpose, accompanying with the grace of years a certain
temperate and meery pleasantness. In this wise shall they be good Courtiers,
and be well entertained with men and women, and every man will at all times
be glad of their company, without singing or daunsynge: and when need
requires they shall show their prowess in matters of weighte. The behavior
of young men.
The very same respect and judgment shall young men have, not in keepynge
the facion of old men (for what is meet for the one, were not in all
poynctes so fit for the other, and it is a commune saying, to much grauytee
in young men is an ill ^igne) but in correctynge the natural vices in them.
Therefore delight I in a young manne, and especially a man at arms, if he have
a certain sagenesse in him and few words, and somewhat demure, Sagenesse.
without those busye gestures and vnquyete manners which we see so many
times in that age: for they seem to have a certain gift above other young
men. Beesyde that, this mylde beehauyour conteyneth in it a kind of
syghtelye fiersenesse, because it appears to be sturred, not of wrath but
of judgment, and rather governed by reason then appetyte: and this (in
manner) always is known in all men of stomach, and we see it likewise in
brute beasts, that have a certain noble courage and stoutness above the
rest: as the Lion and the Egle, Noble corrage in brute beasts.
neither is it void of reason, forsomuche as that violente and sodeyne mocyon
without words or other token of coler which with all force bursteth out
together at once (as it were the shot of a gunn) from quietness, which is
contrary to it, is much more vyolente and furious, then that which
increases by degrees and wexeth hott by little and little. Therefore such as
going about some enterprise, are so full of words, that they leap and skip
and can not stand still, it appears they be rauyshed in those matters, and
(as o^re M. Peter* Mount says well) they do like children, that goinge in
the night singe for fear, as though that synginge of theirs should make them
pluck up their spirits to be ye boulder. Even as therefore in a young man a
quiet and ripe youth is to be commended, because it appears that lightness
(which is the peculiar vice of that age) is tempred and corrected: Lightness.
even so in an old man a grene and lively old age is much to be esteamed,
because it appears that the force of the mind is so much, yt it heateth and
gives a certain strength to that feeble and cold age, and mainteineth it in
that middle state, which is the better part of our life. But in conclusion al
these good qualities shall not suffice our Courtyer to purchase him the general
favor of great men, Gentlemen and Ladies, if he have not also a gentle and
loving behavior in his daily conversation. And of this I believe verily it is
a hard matter to give any manner rule, Behavior in dailye conversation.
for the infinite and sundry matters that happen in practicing one with an
other: for so much as among all the men in ye world, there are not two to be found
that in every point agree in mind together. Therefore he that must be pliable to
be conversant with so many, So many me^ so many minds.
^ughte to guide himself with his own judgment. And knowing the difference of
one man and an other, every day alter facion and manner according to the
disposition of them he is conversant withal. And for my part I am not able in
this behalf to give him other rules then the aforesaid, which our M. Morello
learned of a child in confessing him self. Here the L. Emilia laughed and said:
you would rid your hands of peines taking [Syr Fridericke] but you shall not
escape so, for it is your part to minister talk until it be bed time. And
what if I have nothing to say (madam.) How then? answered Sir Fridericke.
The L. Emilia said: we shall now try your wit. And if al be true I have heard,
there have been men so witty and eloquent, yt they have not wanted matter to
make a book in the praise of a fly, other in the praise of a quartaine fever,
an other in the praise of bauldnes, does not your heart serve you to find out
somewhat to say for one night of Courting? We have already, answered Sir
Fridericke, spoken as much as will go nigh to make two books. But since no excuse
shall serve me, I will speak until you shall think I have fulfilled though not my
duty, yet my pour. I suppose the conversation which the Courtier ought
chiefly to be pliable unto with all diligence to get him favor, Conu^^sati^^
with his prince.
is the very same that he shall have with his prince. And although this name of
conversation brings with it a certain equality that a man would not judge
can reign between the master and the servant, yet will we so term it for
this once. I will have our Courtyer therefore (beside yt he has and does daily
give men to understand that he is of the prowess which we have said ought to
be in him) to turn al his thoughts and force of mind to love, and (as it
were) to reverence the Prince he serves above al other things, and in his
will, manners and facions, to be altogether pliable to please him. Here without
any longer stay, Peter of Naples said: of these* To please his prince.
Courtyers noweadayes ye shall find ynow, for (me think) in few words ye
have peincted us out a ioly flatterer. You are far deceived, answered Sir
Fridericke, Flatterers.
for flatterers love not their Lords nor their friends, the which I say unto
you I will have principally in our Courtyer: and to please him and to obey his
commandments whom he serves, may be done without flattery, for I mean the
commandments that are reasonable and honest, or such as of themselves are
neither good nor bad, as is gaming and pastime, and giving himself more to some
one exercise then to an other. And to this will I have the Courtyer to frame
himself, though by nature he were not inclined to it: so that whansoeuer his
lord looks upon him, His behavior in his princis presence.
he may think in his mind yt he has to talk with him of a matter that he
will be glad to hear. The which shall come to pass if there be a good
judgment in him to understand what pleases his prince and a wit and wisdom
to know how to apply it, and a bent will to make him pleased with the thing
which perhaps by nature should displease him. And having these principles,
he shall never be sad before his prince nor melancholy, nor so solein as many,
that a man would ween were at debate with their Lords, which is truly an
hateful matter. He shall not be ill tunged, and especially against his
superiors, Not ill tunged.
which happens often times: for it appears that there is a storm in
courts that carries this condition with it, that always look who receives
most benifittes at his Lords hands, and promoted from very base degree to
high astate, The most made of worst reporters.
he is evermore complaining and reports woorst of him: which is an uncomely
thing, not only for such as these be, but even for such as be ill handled in
deed. Our Courtier shall use no fond sausinesse. Not saucye. No pratler of
news.
He shall be no carier about of trifling news. He shall not be ouerseene in
speakinge otherwhile words that may offend, where his intent was to please.
He shall not be stubborn and full of contencion, Not stubborn.
as some busy bodies that a man would ween had none other delight but to vere
and stir men like flies, and take upon them to contrary every man
spitefullye without respect. He shall be no babbler, not given to lyghtenesse,
no liar, no boaster, N^ babbler. No liar. No boaster. No flatterer.
nor fond flatterer, but sober, and keapinge him always within his bounds,
use continually, and especially abroad, the reverence and respect that
beecommeth the servant toward the master. And shall not do, as many that
meetinge a Prince how great soever he be, The behavior of some fond persons
toward great men.
if they have once spoken with him before, come toward him with a certain
smiling and frindly countenance, as though they would make of one their
equal, or show favor to an inferior of theirs. Uery sildome or (in manner)
never shall he crave any thing of his Lord for himself, Why he shall not sue
for him self.
least the lord having respect to deny it him for him self, should happen to
grant it him with dyspleasure, which is far worse. Again in suinge for
others, he shall discreatly observe the times, and his suite shall be for
honest and reasonable matters, His suit for others.
and he shall so frame his suite, in leauinge out those poinctes that he shall
know will trouble him, and in making easy after a comely sort the lettes, that
his Lord will evermore grant it him: and though he deny it, he shall not think
to have offended him whom he meant not to do* for, because great men often
times after they have denied request to one that has suid to them with great
instance, The imaginacyon of princes.
think the person that labored to them so earnestly for it, was very greedy
of it, and therefore in not obtaining it, has cause to bear him ill will that
denied him it, and upon this suspicion they conceive an hatred against ye
person, and can never afterward brook him nor aforde him good countenance. He
shall not press into secret places
He shall not covet to press into the chamber or other secret places where
his Lord is withdrawn, unless he be bed, for all he be of great authority
with him: because great men often times when they are privately gotten alone,
love a certain liberty to speak and do what they please, and therefore will
not be seen or herd of any person that may lightly deem of them, and reason
wills no less. Therefore such as speak against great men for making of
their chamber persons of no great quality in other things but in knowing how
to attend about their person (me think) commit an error: Great men should
make of their chamber men of no great estimation.
because I can not see why they should not have the liberty to refresh their
minds, which we our selves would have to refreshe ours. But in case ye
Courtyer that is inured with weighty affairs, happen to be afterward
secretly in chamber with him, he ought to change his coat and to differr
grave matters till an other time and place, and frame himself to pleasante
communicacion, and such as his lord will be willing to give ear unto, least
he hinder that good mood of his. But herein and in all other things, let him
have an especial regard, that he be not combrous to him. And let him rather
look to have favor and promotion offered him, Not to sue for p romotions.
then crave it so openly in the face of the world, as many do, that are so
greedy of it, that a man would ween the not obtaynynge it, greeueth them as
much as the loss of life: The grief of some for anger.
and if they chance to enter into any displeasure, or else see other in
favor, they are in such anguishe of mind, that they can by no means
dissemble ye malice, and so make al men laugh them to scorn: and many times
they are the cause that great men favor some one, The joy of some in a mean
authority.
only to spite them withal. And afterward if they happen to enter in favor yt
passes a mean, they are so dronken in it, that they know not what to do for
joy: and a man would wene that they wist not what were become of their feet and
hands, and (in a manner) are ready to call company to behoulde them and to
rejoice with them, as a matter they have not been accustomed withal. Of this
sort I will not have our Courtyer to be. Behavior in receiuynge promotion.
I would have him esteame favor and promotion, but for all that, not to love it
so much, that a man should think he could not live without it. And when he
has it, let him not show himself new or strange in it: nor wonder at it when
it is offered him: nor refuse it in such sort as some, yt for very ignorance
receive it not, and so make men believe that they acknowledge themselves
unworthy of it. Yet ought a man always to humble himself somewhat under his
degree, and not receive favor and promocions so easilye as they be offered him,
but refuse them modestlye, showing he much estemeth them, and after such a
sort, that he may give him an occasion that offreth them, to offer them with a
great deal more instance: because the more resistance a man makes in such
manner to receive them, the more does he seem to the prince that gives them
to be esteemed, and that the benefit which he bestows is so much the more,
as he yt receives it seems to make of it, thinking himself much honored
thereby. And these are the true and perfect promotions that make men esteamed of
such as se them abroad: Promotions not begged.
because when they are not craved, every man coniectureth they arrise of true
virtue, and so much the more, as they are accompanied with modesty. Then said
the L. Caesar Gonzaga: me think ye have this clause out of the Gosspell where
it is written: When thou art bed to a marriage, go and sit thee down in the
lowest rowme, that when he comes that bed thee, he may say, Friend come
higher, and so sha^^ it be an honor for thee in the sight of the gestes. Sir
Fridericke laughed and said: It were to great a sacrilege to steal out of the
Gospel But you are better learned in scripture then I was aware of: then he
proceaded. See into what danger they fall sometime, yt rashly before a great
manne enter into talk unrequired: The rashness of some.
and many times that Lord to skorne them withal, makes no answer and
tourneth his head to the other hand: and in case he does make answer, every
man perceyueth it is done full skornfullye. Therefore to purchase favor at
great men's hands, there is no better way then to deserve it. Neither must a man hope when he sees an other in favor with a Prince, for what^oeuer
matter, To deserve favor.
in folowinge his steps to come to the same, Not to counterfeit other men's
doings Some ready in their iestes
because every thing is not fit for every man. And ye shall find otherwhile
some one that by nature is so ready in his meerye iestes, that what ever he
speaks brings laughter with it, and a man would ween that he were borne
only for that: and if another that has a grave facion in him, of how good a
wit so ever he be, attempt the like, it will be very cold and without any
grace, so that he will make a man abhor to hear him, and in effect will be
like the ass, that to counterfeyt the dog would play with his master.
Therefore it is meet each man know himself and his own disposicion, and
apply himself thereto, and consider what things are mete for him to follow,
and what are not. Before ye go any farther, said here M. Vincent Calmeta, if
I have well marked, me thaught ye said right now, that the best way to purchase
favor, is to deserve it: and the Courtier ought rather to tarry till
promotions be offered him, then presumptiously to crave them. I fear me least
this rule be little to purpose, and me think experience does us very
manifestly to understand the contrary: because noweadayes very few are in
favor with Princes but such as be malapert. And I wot well you can be a good
witness of some, that perceiuyng themselves in small credit with their
Princis, are come up only with presumption. As for such as come to promotion
with modesty, I for my part know none, and if I give you respite to bethink
your self, I believe ye will find out but few. And if you mark the French
Court, which at this day is one of the nobleste in all Christendom, ye shall
find yt all such as are generally in favor there, have in them a certain
malapertn^sse, and yt not only one with an other, but with the king himself.
Do you not so say, answered Sir Fridericke, for in France there are very
modest and courtious gentlemen. The french gentlemen without ceemonies.
Truth it is, that they use a certain liberty and familiarity without
ceremonies, which is proper and natural unto them, and therefore it ought not
to be termed malapertnesse. For in that manner of theirs, although they laugh
and ieste at such as be malapert, yet do they set much by them that seem to
them to have any prowess or modesty in them. Calmeta answered: Spaniardes
mark ye Spaniardes ye seem the very masters of Courtly facions, and consider
how many ye find yt with women and great men are not most malapert, and so
much worse then the Frenchemen, in that at the first show they declare a
certain modesty. And no doubt but they be wise in so doing, because (as I have
said) the great men of our time do al favor such as are of these conditions.
Then answered Sir Friderick: I can not abide (M. Vincent) yt ye should defame
in this wise the great men of our time, because there be many notwithstanding
ye love modesty: the which I do not say of it self is sufficient to make a man
esteamed, but I say unto you, when it is accompanied with great prowess it
makes him much esteamed that has it. And though of it self it lie still, the
woorthye deeds speak at large, and are much more to be wondered at, then if
they were accompanied with presumption or rashness. Many spaniardes be sawcye.
I will not now deny but many Spaniardes there be full of malapertnesse: but
I say unto you, they that are best esteamed, for the most part are very
modest. Again some other there be also so cold, that they flee the company of
men to out of measure, and pass a certain degree of mean: so yt they make
men deem them either to fearful or to high minded. And this do I in no case
allow, What modesty ought to be.
neither would I have modesty so dry and withered, that it should become
rudeness. But let the Courtier, when it comes to purpose, be well spoken,
and in discourses upon states, wise and expert: and have such a judgment that
he may frame himself to the manners of the country where ever he comes.
Then in lower matters, let him be pleasauntly disposed, and reason well upon
every matter, but in especial tend always to goodness. No envious person,
no caryar of an ill tunge in his head: nor at any time given to seek
prefarmente or promotion any naughty way, nor by the mean of any subtle
practice. Then said Calmeta: I will assure you all the other ways are much
more doubtful and harder to compass, then is that you discommende: because
now a days (to rehearse it again) great men love none but such as be of
that condition. Do you not so say; answered then Sir Fridericke, for yt were to
plain an argument that ye great men of our time were all vicious and
naught, which is untrue, for some there be that be good. But if it fell to
our Courtyers lot to serve one that were vicious and wicked, as soon as he
knows it, let him forsake him, What he must do in service with the wicked.
least he taste of the bitter peine that all good men feel that serve the
wicked. We must pray unto god, answered Calmeta, to help us to good, for
when we are once with them, we must take them with all their faults, for
infinite respects constrain a Gentleman after he is once entered into service
with a Lord, not to forsake him. But the ill luck is in the beginning: and
Courtyers in this case are not unlike unlucky fowls bread up in an ill vale.
Me think, quoth Sir Fridericke, duetye ought to prevail before all other
respects, When a man may forsake his master*
but yet so a gentleman forsake not his Lord at the war or in any other
adversity, and be thought to do it to follow Fortune, or because he wanted
a mean to profitte by, at al other times I believe he may with good reason,
and ought to forsake that service, that among good men shall put him to shame,
for all men will imagine that he that serves ye good, is good, and he that
serves the ill, is ill. I would have you to clear me of one doubt that I have
in my head, quoth then the L. Lodouicus Pius, namely, whether a gentleman be
bound or no, How and in what princis are to be obeyed.
while he is in his Princis service, to obey him in all things which he shall
command, though they were dishonest and shameful matters. In dishoneste
matters we are not bound to obey any body, answered Sir Fridericke. And what
(replied the L. Lodouicus Pius) if I be in service with a Prince who handles
me well, and hops that I will do any thing for him that may be done, and he
happen to command me to kill a man, or any other like matter, ought I to
refuse to do it? You ought, answered Sir Fridericke, to obey your Lord in all
things that tend to his profitt and honor, not in such matters that tend
to his loss and shame. Therefore if he should command you to conspire
treason, ye are not only not bound to do it, but ye are bound not to do
it, both for your own sake and for being a minister of the shame of your
Lord. Things oth^rwhile seem good that be ill.
Truth it is, many things seem at the first sight good, which are il: and
many ill, yt notwithstanding are good. Therefore it is lawful for a man
sometime in his Lords service to kill not one manne alone, but ten
thousand, and to do many other things, which if a man way them not as he
ought, will appear ill, and yet are not so in deed. Then answered the L.
Gaspar Pallauici^. I beseech you let us hear you speak somewhat in this case,
and teach us how we may descerne things good in deed, from such as appear
good. I pray you pardon me, quoth Sir Fridericke, I will not at this time enter
into that, for there were to much to be said in it: but all is to be referred
to your discretion. Clear ye me at the least of another doubt, replied the L.
Gaspar. And what doubt is that, quoth Sir Fridericke? This answered the L.
Gaspar: I would know where I am charged by my master in express words in an
interprise or business what ever it be, Whether a man may follow a part of his
own mind in a commission.
what I have to do therein: if I, at the deed doing thinking with my self
in doing it more or less, or otherwise then my commission, to bring it more
prosperouslye to pass and more for his profit that gave me that commission,
whether ought I to govern my self according to the first charge without
passinge the bounds of the commission, or else do the thing that I judge to
be best? Then answered Sir Friderick: In this point I would give you the
judgment with the example of Manlius Torquatus, T. Manlius Torq. caused his
^onne to be slain for fighting contrary to commandment
which in that case for overmuch affeccion slew his son, if I thought him
worthy great praise, which (to say the troth) I do not: although again I
dare not discommende him, contrary to the opinion of so many hundredth years.
For out of doubt, it is a dangerous matter to swerve from ye commandments
of a man's superiors, trusting more in his own judgment then in theirs,
whom of reason he ought to obey: Because if his imagination fail him and the
matter take ill success, he renneth into the error of disobedience, and
marreth that he has to do, without any manner excuse or hope of pardon. Again
in case ye matter come well to pass according to his desire, Commandments
of the superioure poures are to be obeyed.
he must thank his fortune, and no more a do. Yet in this sort a custom is
brought up to set little by the commandments of the superior poures. And by
his example yt brings the matter to good pass, which parauenture is a wise
man and has discoursed with reason and also aided by fortune, afterward a
thousand other ignorant persons and light headed will take a stomach to
adventure in matters of most importance to do after their own way, and to
appear wise and of authority, will swerve from the commission of their heads,
which is a very ill matter, and often times the cause of infinite errors.
what he that receives a charge ought to do.
But I beleaue in this point, the person whom the matter touches ought to
skanne it depely, and (as it were) put in a balaunce the goodness and
commodity that is like to ensue unto him in doing contrary to that he is
charged, admytting his purpose, succeed according to his hope: and counterpose
on the other side the hurt and discommoditie that arriseth, if in doing
otherwise then he is commanded, ye matter chance to have ill success: and
knowing that the hurt may be greater and of more importance, if it succeed
ill, then the profitt, if it happen well, he ought to refrain, and in every
point to observe his commission. And contrariwise, if the profitt be like to
be of more importance, if it succeed well, then the hurt, if it happen
amiss, I believe he may with good reason take in hand to do the thing that
reason and judgment shall set before him, and leave somewhat a side the very
form of the commission, after the example of good merchant men, that to
gain much, adventure a little, and not much, to gain a little. I allow well
that he have a regard to the nature of the Lord he serves, The nature of the
L. ^o be considered
and according to that, frame himself. For in case he be rigorous (as many
such there are) I would never counsel him, if he were my friend, to varye
in any parcel from the appointed order, least it happen unto him, as a master
Inginner of Athens was served, unto whom P. Crassus Mut^anus being in Asia and
going about to batter a town, The crueltye of Mutianus.
sent to demand of him one of ye two shipmastes that he had seen in Athens to
make a Ramm to beat down the walls, and said he would have the greater.
This Inginner, as he that was very counnynge in deed, knew the greater
would not very well serve for this purpose, and because the lesser was more
easy to be carried, and also fytter to make that ordinance, he sent that to
Mutianus. After he had understood how the matter passed, he sent for the
poor Inginner and asked him why he obeyed him not, and not admyttynge any
reason he could allege for himself, made him to be strypped naked, beaten
and whipped with rods, so that he died, ^eemyng to him in steed of obeying
him, he would have counseled him: therefore with such rigorous men, a man
must look well to his doings. But let us leave a part now this practyse
of the superiors, Conversation with a man's equalles.
and come down to the conversation that a man has with his equalles or
somewhat inferiors, for unto them also must a man frame himself, because it
is more universally frequented, and a man finds himself oftener emonge
them, then among his superiors. Although there be some fond persons that
being in company with the greatest friend they have in the world, Some
fellowship them selue s always with the best apparailed.
if they meet with one better apparailed, by and by they cleave unto him: and
if an other come in place better then he, they do the like unto him. And
again, when the Prince passes through ye market place, through churches, or
other haunted places, they make all men give them rowme with their elbowes till
they come to their heels, Men that will se^me to be in favor.
and though they have nothing to say to him, yet will they talk with him and
keape him with a long tale, laugh, clappe the hands, and nod ye head, to seem
to have weighty business, that the people may see they are in favor. But
because these kind of men vouchesafe not to speak but with great men I
will not we should vouchsafe to speak of them. Then the L. Julian, Since ye
have (quoth he) made mention of these that are so ready to fellowship
themselves with the well apparailed, I would have you to show us in what sort
the Courtier should apparayle himself, what kind of garment does best become
him, and how he should fit himself in all his garments about his body:
because we see infinite variety in it, and some are arrayed after the French
facion, some after the Spanyshe attier, an other will seem a Dutcheman.
Neither want we of them also that will cloth themselves like Turks: Some
wear beardes, other do not. Of raiment and apparail.
Therefore it were a good deed in this variety, to s^ewe how a man should
chouse out the best. Sir Fridericke said: In very deed I am not able to
give any certain rule about raiment, but that a man should frame himself to
the custom of the most. And since (as you say) this ^ustome is so variable,
and Italians are so desirous to take up other men's facions, I beleaue eue^y
manne may lawfullye apparail^ himself at his pleasure. But I know not by
what destinye it comes that Italy hath^ not, as it was wont to have, a
facion of atti^r known to be^ the Italian facion, for although the bringing up
of these new faci^ns make^h the first to appear very gross, yet were they
perauenture a token of liberty, where these have been a pronosticate of
bondage, the which (me think) now is plainly enough fulfilled. And as it is
written, when Darius the year before he fought with Alexander had altered his
swerd he wore by his side, which was a Persian blade, into the facion of
Macedony, it was interpre^ed by the Sothsayers, how this signified, Caldaei.
that they into whose facion Darius had altered the form of his Persian blade
should become rulers of Persia: Even so where we have altered our Italian
facions into strange, me think, it signified, that all they into whose
facions ours were changed, should come in to ouerrunne us: I taly a prey to
all nations
the which hath^ be^n ^o true, for there is not now a nation left that has
not made us their prey, so that there remains little behind to prey upon,
and yet for all that cease they not to prey still. But I will not enter into
communication of sorrow: therefore it shall be well to speak of the raiment of
our Courtyer, the which so it be not out of use, nor contrary to his
profession, in the rest (I think) it will do welynough, so the wearer be
satisfied withal. Frenchemen use long was^es.

Dutchmen short.


Truth it is, that I would love it the better if it were not extreme in any
part, as the Frenchman is wont to be sometime over long, and the Dutchmanne
ouershorte, but as they are both the one and the other amended and brought
into better frame by the Italians. Grave apparaile.
Moreover I will houlde always with it, if it be rather somewhat grave and
ancient, Black color.
then garishe. Therefore me think a black color has a better grace in
garments then any other, and though not thoroughly black, yet somewhat dark,
and this I mean for his ordinary apparaile. For there is no doubt, but upon
armor it is more meet to have sightly and meery colors, Colors upon
armor.
and also garments for pleasure, cut, pompous and rich. Likewise in open
shows about triumphs, games, maskeries, and such other matters, because so
appointed there is in them a certain liveliness and mirth, which in deed
does well set forth feats of arms and pastimes. But in the rest I could
wish they should declare the solemnity yt the Spanyshe nation much
observes, Solemnity of spaniardes
for outward matters many tim^s, are a token of the inward. Then said the
L. Caesar Gonzaga: I would not stick much at this, for so a gentleman be of
worthiness in other matters, his garments neither increase nor minishe
reputation. Sir Friderick answered: ye say true. Yet which of us is there,
that seeing a gentleman go with a garment upon his back quartred with sundry
colors, or with so many points tied together, and al about with lases and
fringes set overthwart, will not count him a very disard or a commune iestar?
Neither disard, quoth M. Peter Bembo, nor iestar would a man count him, that
had lived any while in Lumbardy, for there they go all so. Why then, answered
the Duchess smylyng, if they go all so, it ought not to be objected to them
for a vice, this kind of attier being as comely and proper to them, as it is
to the Venetians to wear their long wide sleeves, and to the Florentines,
their hoodes. I speak no more of Lumbardy, quoth Sir Fridericke, then of other
places, for in every nation ye shall find both foolish and wise. But to
speak that I think is most requisite as touching apparaile, I will have the
Courtier in all his garments handsome and clenlye, and take a certain delight
in modest Preciseness, but not for all that after a womanish or light manner,
neither more in one point, then in an other, as we see many so curious about
their hear, Delites of men.
that they forget all the rest. Other delight to have their teeth fair. Other
in their beard. Other in buskines. Other in cappes. Other in coyffes. And so it
comes to pass, that those few things which they have clenly in them,
appear borrowed ware, and all the rest, which is most fond, is known to be
their own. But this trade will I have our Courtier to flee by my counsel, with
an addition also, that he ought to determine with himself what he will appear
to be, and in such sort as he desires to be esteamed so to apparaile
himself, and make his garments help him to be counted such a one, even of
them that hear him not speak, nor see him do any manner thing. I think it
not meet, quoth then the L. Pallauicin, neither is it used among honest men
to judge men's conditions by their garments, and not by their words and
deeds, for many a man might be deceived: and this proverb arriseth not
without cause: the habit makes not the Monk. I say not* answered Sir
Friderick, that men should give a resolute judgment by this alone, of
men's conditions, and that they are not known by words and deeds, more then
by ye garments. But I say that the garment is withal no small argument of
the fancy of him that wears it, The ^arme^t judges the mind.
although otherwhile it appear not true. And not this alone, but all the
beehauiours, gestures and manners, beeside words and deeds, are a judgment of
the inclination of him in whom they are seen. And what things be those,
answered the L. Gaspar, that you find we may give judgment upon, yt are
neither words nor deeds. Then said Sir Fridericke: You are to subtle a
Logicien, but to tell you as I mean, Operations.
some Operations there are that remain after they are done, as buylding,
writynge, and such other: Some remayn not, as these yt I mean now. Therefore
do I not count in this purpose, going, laughyng, lookyng, and such matters
to be Operations, and notwithstanding outwardly do give many times a
knowledge of that is within. Tell me, did you not give your judgment upon
that friend of ours we communed of this morning paste, to be a foolish and
light person, as soon as you saw he wried his head and bowed his body, and
invited with a cheerful countenance ye company to put of their cappes to
him? So in like manner when you see one gase earnestely with his eyes abashed,
like one that had little wit: or that laugheth so fondly as do those dombe
men, Gozzuti, Men in the mountains with great bottles of flesh under their
chin, through the drinki^g of snow water.
with the great wennes in their throat, that dwell in the Mountains of
Bergamo, though he neither speak ne do any thing else, will you not
count him a very fool? Ye may see them that these beehauiours; manners and
gestures, which I mind not for this time to term Operations, are a great
matter to make men known. But me think there is an other thing that gives
and dimynisheth much reputation: nam^ly, the choice of friends, with whom a man must have inward conversation. For undoubtedly reason wylleth that such
as are coopled in streicte amity and inseparable company, should be also
alike in will, in mind, Chois^ of fri^nd^s.
in judgment and inclination. So that who so is conuersaunt with the
ignorant or wicked, he is also counted ignorant and wicked. And contrariwise
he that is conuersaunt with the good, wise, and dyscreete, he is reckened such
a one. For it seems by nature, that every thing does willingly fellowship
with his like. Therefore I beleaue that a man ought to have a respect in the
first beeginning of these frendshippes, for of two near friends, who ever
knows the one, by and by he ymagineth the other to be of the same condition.
Then answered M. Peter Bembo: To be bound in frendshyppe with such
agreemente of mind as you speak of, me think in deed a man ought to have
great respect, not only for getting or leesing reputation, but because now
adays ye find very few true friends. Neither do I beleaue yt there are any
more in the world, those Pylades and Orestes, Theseus and Perithous, nor Scipio
and Laelius* but rather it happens dailye, I wot not by what destinye, that
two friends which many years have lived together with most hearty love, yet
at the end beguile one an other, in one manner or other, either for malice, or
envy, or for lightness, or some other ill cause: and each one imputes the
fault to his fellow, of that which perhaps both the one and the other
deserves. Therefore because it has happened to me more then once to be
deceived of him whom I loved best, and of whom I hoped I was beloved above
any other person, I have thought with my self alone otherwhile to be well
done, never to put a man's trust in any person in the world, nor to give
himself so for a prey to friend how dear and loving so ever he were, that
without stop a man should make him partaker of all his thoughts, as he
would his own self: because there are in our minds so many dens and
corners, that it is impossible for the wit of man to know the
dissymulations that lie lurking in them. I beleaue therefore that it is well
done to love and away with one more then another, according to the deserts
and honesty: but not for all that so to assure a man's self, with this sweet
bait of friendship, that afterward it should be to late for us to repent.
Then Sir Fridericke, Truly (quoth he) ^he loss should be much more then the
gain, if that high degree of friendship should be taken from the
fellowship of man, Frendshippe necessary for the life of man
which (in mine opinion) ministers unto us all the goodness contained in our
life: and therefore will I in no case consent to you, that it is reasonable;
but rather I can find in my heart to conclude, and that with most evident
reasons, that without this perfect friendship, men were much more unlucky, then
all other living creatures. And albeit some wicked and profane taste of this
holy name of friendship, yet is it not for all that to be so rooted out of
men's minds; and for the trespass of the ill, to deprive the good of so
great a felicity. And I beleaue verily for my part, there is here among us
more then one couple of friends, whose love is indissoluble and without any
guile at all, and to endure until death, with agreement of will, no less then
those men of old time, whom you mentioned right now. And so is it always,
when beside the inclination that comes from above, a man chouseth him a
friend like unto himself in conditions. And I mean the whole to consist
among the good and virtuous men, because the friendship of the wicked, Friend
ship of two together.
is no friendship. I allow well that this knott, which is so streicte, knitt
or bind no mo then two, else were it in a hasarde: for (as you know) three
instruments of music are hardlier brought to agree together then two. I
would have our Courtier therefore to find him out an especial and hearty
friend, if it were possible, of that sort we have spoken of. Then according to
their deserts and honesty, love* honor, and observe all other men, and
always do his best to fellowship himself with men of estimation that are
noble and known to be good, more then with the unnoble and of small
reputation, so he be also beloved and honored of them. And this shall come to
pass if he be gentle, lowely, freeherted, easy to be spoken to, A man's duty
toward his friend.
and sweet in company, humble and diligent to serve, and to have an eye to his
friends profitt and estimation, as well absente as present, bearing with their
natural defaultes that are to be borne withal, without breaking with them
upon a small ground, and correcting in himself such as lou^ngly shall be
toulde him, never prefarring himself before other men in seeking the highest
and chief rowmes of estimation, neither in doing as some that a man would
ween despised the world, and with a noisome sharpnes will tell every manne
his duty, and beside that they are full of contention in every trifling
matter, and out of time, they comptroule whatsoever they do not themsel^es,
and always seek cause to complain of their friends, which is a most
hateful thing. Here when Sir Friderick had made a stay, the L. Gaspar
Pallauicin said: I would have you to express somewhat more particularlye this
conversation with friends, then you do, for in deed ye keep your self to
much in the general, and touch unto us things (as it were) by the way. How
by the way answered Sir Fridericke? Would you have me to tell you also the
very words that a man must use? Suppose you not then we have
sufficientlye communed of this? I think yea, answered the L. Gaspar. Yet do
I desire to understand also some particular point of the manner of enterteinment
among men and women, which (me think) is a very necessary matter,
considering the most part of a man's time is spent therein in Courts, and if
it were always after one manner wise, a man would soon wexe weerye of it. Me
think, aun^wered Sir Fridericke, we have given the Courtier a knowledge in so
many things, that he may well varye his conversation and frame himself
according to the inclination of them he accompanyeth himself withal,
presupposyng him to be of a good judgment, and therewithal to guide himself.
And according to the time otherwhile, have an eye to grave matters and sometime
to pastimes and games. And what games, quoth the L. Caspar? Sir Friderick
answered: Let us ask counsel of Friar Seraphin that daily inuenteth new.
But in good earneste, replied the L. Gaspar, do you not think it a vice in
the Courtier to play at Dice and Cards? Dice and Cards.
I think it none, quoth Sir Fridericke, unless a man apply it tomuch, and by
reason of that, sets aside other things more necessary, or else for none
other intent but to get money, and to beguile his fellow, and in his loss, fume
and take on so, that it might be thought a token of covetousness. The L,
Gaspar answered: The play at Chestes.
and what say you to the game at chestes? It is truly an honest kind of of
enterteynmente and witty, quoth Sir Friderick. But me think it has a fault,
which is, yt a man may be to couning at it, for who ever will be excellent in
the play of chestes, I beleaue he must beestowe much time about it, and apply
it with so much study, that a man may as soon learn some noble science, or
^ompase any other matter of importance, and yet in the end in beestowing all
that labor, The mean knowledge is best inthe play at Chestes.
he knows no more but a game. Therefore in this I beleaue there happens a
very rare thing, namely, that the mean is more commendable, then the
excellency. The L. Gaspar answered: There be many Spaniardes excellent at it,
and in many other games, which for all that bestow not much study upon it,
nor yet lay aside ye compassing of other matters. Beleaue not the contrary
answered Sir Fridericke, Spaniardes dissemble their study in the play at
Chestes.
but they beestowe much study upon it, although feiningly. As for those other
games ye speak of beeside chestes, parauenture they are like many which I have
seen that serve to small purpose, but only to make the common people wonder.
Therefore (in mine opinion) they deserve none other praise or reward, then the
great Alexander gave unto him, ye standing a far of, did so well broch Chiche
peason upon a nedle. But because fortune, as in many other things, so in the
opinion of men seems to bear a great stroke, it is ^omtime seen yt a
gentleman, Some worthy in deed. smally regarded of great men.
how well conditioned ever he be, and endowed with many qualities, shall be
little set by of a great man, and (as they say) grows not in favor with him,
and without any cause why, that a man may discearn. Therefore when he comes
into his presence without any acquaintance before hand, with the rest about
him, though he be witty and ready in his answers, and shows himself
handsomely well in his beehauiours, in his conditions and words, and in what
ever belongs unto him, yet will that Lord set light by him, and rather give
him an ill countenance, then esteame him: and of this will arrise that the rest
immediately will frame themselves to their lords mind, and it shall seem unto
every man yt he is little worth, neither will any manne regard him, or make of
him, or laugh at his pleasante sayings, or set any thing by him, but will
beeginne all to serve him sluttish pranckes, and make him a Cousin, neither
shall good aunsweres suffyce the poor soul, nor yet the taking of things as
spoken in ieste, for even the very Pages will be at him, so that were he the
fairest condicioned man in the world, he can not chouse but be thus ba^ted and
iested at. And contrariwise, Ignorant men otherwhile ^n favor.
if a Prince be inclined to one that is most ignorant, that can neither do
nor say any thing, his manners and beehauiours (be they never so fond and
foolish) are many times commended with acclamation and wonder of all men, and
it seems that all the Court behouldeth and observes him, and every manne
laugheth at his boording and certain cartarlike ^estes, that should rather
move a man to vomit, then to laughe: so addicted and stiff men be in the
opinions that arrise of the favors and disfauoures of great men. Therefore
will I have our Courtier the best he can (beside his worthiness) to help
himself with wit and art, and when ever he has to go where he is strange
and not known, let him procure there go first a good opinion of him, before
he come in person, and so woork, that they may understand there, how he is in
other places with Lords, Ladies and gentlemen in good estimation: Good opinion.
because that fame, which seems to arrise of the judgments of many,
engenders a certain assured confidence of a man's worthiness, which
afterward finding men's minds so settled and prepared, is easily with deeds
maintained and increased, beeside that a man is eased of the trouble that I
feel, when I am asked the question who I am, and what is my name. I can not
see what this can help, answered M. Bernard Bibiena, for it has sundry times
happened unto me, and I believe to many more, after I had grounded in my mind by
report of many men of judgment a matter to be of great perfection
before I had seen it, when I had once seen it, it feinted much, and I was
much deceived in mine imagination, and this proceaded of nothing else, but of
giving to much credit to fame and report, Report deceives.
and of conceiuinge in my mind so great an opinion, that mea^uring it
afterward with the truth, the effect, though it were great and excellent,
yet in comparison of that I had imagined of it, seemed very sclender unto me.
Even so (I fear me) may also come to pass of the Courtyer. Therefore I can
not see how it were well done to give these expectations, and to send that
fame of a man before: because our minds many times facion and shape
things, which is impossible afterward to answer to and fulfill, The report
of things that the eye is judge of* may deceive.
and so does a man lose more then he gayneth by it. Here Sir Friderick said:
Things that unto you and many more are less in effect then the fame is of
them, are for the most part of that sort, that the eye at the first sight may
give a judgment of them. As if you have never been at Naples or at Room,
when you here men common of it, you imagine much more of it, then perhaps
you find afterward in sight. But in the conditions of men it is not alike,
because that you see outwardly is the least part. Therefore in case the first
day you hear a gentlemanne talk, ye perceive not the worthiness in him that
you had before imagined, you do not so soon lose the good opinion of him, as
you do in the things wherein your eye is by and by a judge. But you will
look from day to day, Things in the judgment ^f the mind.
to have him disclose some other hid virtue, keeping notwithstanding always
that steadfast imprinting which you have, risen by the words of so many.
And this man then being (as I set case our Courtyer is) of so good qualities,
he will every hour strengthen you more and more, to give credence to that
fame, for that with his doings he shall give you a cause, and you will ever
surmise somewhat more to be in him, then you see. And certainly it can not be
denied, but these first imprintinges, The fir^^ conceiving of a thing in ones
mind.
have a very great force, and a man ought to take much heed to them. And that
you may understand of what weight they be, I say unto you, that I have known
in my days a gentleman, An example what report can do.
who albeit he was of sufficient manerly beehauiour and modest conditions and
well seen in arms, yet was he not in any of these qualities so excellent,
but there were many as good and better. Notwithstanding as luck served him)
it beefell that a gentlewoman entered most fervently in love with him, and this
love daily increasing through declaration that the young man made to agree with
her in that beehalf, and perceiuinge no manner mean how they might come to
speak together, the gentlewoman provoked with to great passion opened her
desire to an other gentlewoman, by whose mean she hoped upon some commodity,
this woman neither in blood nor in beauty was a whitt inferior to the first.
Upon this it came to pass that she, perceiving her talk ^o effectuallye of
this young manne, whom she never saw, and knowinge how that gentlewoman, whom
she wist well was most discreet and of a very good judgment, loved him
ertreemelye, imagyned furthwyth that he was the fairest, the wisest, the
discreetest, and finally the worthiest manne to be beloved that was in the
world: and so without seeinge him fell so deep in love with him, that she
practiced what she could to come by him, not for her friend, but for her own
self, and to make him answerable to her in love, the which she brought to
pass without any great a do, for (to say the troth) she was a woman rather
to be sought upon then to seek upon others. Now hear a pretye chance. It
happened no long time after, that a letter which this last gentlewoman writ
unto her lover came to the hands of another, that was a noble woman of
excellent qualities and singular beawtye, who beeinge (as the most part of
women are) inquisitiue and greedy to understand secrets and especyallye of
other women, opened the letter, and in readinge it perceived it was written
with an extreme affection of love. And the sweet words full of fire that
she read, first moved her to take compassyon on that Gentlewoman (for she
knew very well from whom the letter came and to whom it went) afterward they
had such force, that skanning them in her mind, and consideringe what manner a
man this was like to be, that could bring ye woman into such love, by and by
she fell in love with him, and that letter was more effectual to work in
this case, then peradventure it would have been if it had been sent her from
the young man himself. And as it chances sometime, poison prepared in a
dishe of meat for some great man, kills him that tastes first of it, so
this poor gentlewoman because she was to greedye, drank of the amorous poison
that was ordained for an other. What shall I say to you? The matter was very
open and spread so abroad, that many women beeside these, partlye in despite of
the other, and partly to do as the other did, bent all their study and
diligence to enjoy his love, and for a season played as children do at
^hopch^rie, and the wholl proceaded of the first opinion which that woman
conceived that heard him so praised of an other. Women's deeds out of reason.
Now the L. Gaspar Pallauicin answered here smilinge: You to confirm your
judgment with reason, allege unto me women's doings, which for the most part
are void of al reason. And in case you would tell all, this good fellow thus
favored of so many women was some doult, and a man in deed not to be
regarded, because the manner of them is always to cleave to the woorst, and
like sheep to do that they see the first do, be it well or ill: beeside that
they be so spiteful among themselves* that if he had been a monstrous creature
they would surely have stolen him one from an other. Here many began and (in
manner) all, to speak against the L. Gasp^r, but the Dutches^e made them all
to houlde their peace. Afterward she said smilinge: If the ill which you speak
of women were not so far wide from the truth, that in speakinge it, it hurts
and shameth rather the speaker then them, I would suffer you to be answered.
But I will not have you, in speaking against you with a number of reasons,
forsake this your ill custom, because you may be sharply punished for this
offense of yours: which shall be with the ill opinion that all they will
conceive of you that hear you talk in this wise. Then answered Sir
Fridericke: Say not, my L^ Gaspar, that women are so void of reason, though
sometime they apply themselves to love more, through the judgment of others
then their own, for great men and many wise men, do often times the like. And
if it be lawful to tell ye troth, you your self and all we here have many
times, and do at this present credit the opinion of others, more then our
own. And that it is true, not long ago there were certain verses showed here,
that bore the name of Sanazarus, and were thought of every body very
excellent, and praised out of reason, What opinion does.
afterward when they were certainly known to be an other man's doing, they
lost by and by their reputation, and seemed worse then mean. And where there
was song in the Duchess presence, here a certain Antheme, it never delited
nor was reckened good, until it was known to be the doing of Iosquin de Pris.
But what token will you have more plainer of opinion? Do you not remember
where you your self drank of one self wine, sometime ye said it was most
perfect, and an other time, without al taste? and that because you had been
persuaded they were two sorts, the one of the Coost of Genua, and the other of
this soil: and when the error was opened, by no means you would beleaue it:
that false opinion was grounded so stiffly in your head, which arrose
notwithstanding of other men's words. Therefore ought the Courtier
diligently to apply in the beeginning to give a good imprinting of himself,
and consider what a harmefull and deadly thing it is, to run in the
contrary. Men that conter^eit to be pleasant
And in this danger more then other men do they stand that will make
profession to be very pleasant and with this their meerie facion, purchase
them a certain liber^ie, that lawfully they may say and do what comes in
their mind, without thinking upon it. For such men many times enter into
certain matters, which when they can not get out again, will afterward help
them selves with raising laughter, and it is done with so ill a grace yt it
will in no wise frame, whereby they bring a very great lothsomenesse upon as
many as see or hear them, and they remain very cold and without any grace or
countenance. Sometime thinking thereby to be subtle witted and full of iestes,
in the presence of honorable women, yea, and often times to them themselves,
Filthy talk.
they thrust out filthy and most dishonest words: and the more they see them
blush at it, the better Courtiers they reckon themselves, and still they laugh
at it, and rejoice among themselves at this goodly virtue they think they
have gotten them. But they practice this beastliness for none other cause, but
to be counted Good fellows. Good fellows.
This is the name alone which they deem worthy praise, and which they
bragg more of, then of any thing else, and to get it them, they speak the
foulest and shamefullest villainies in the world. Many times they shoulder one
an other down the stayers, Ruffianlye pranckes.
and hurl billettes and brickes, one at an others head. They hurl handfulles
of dust in men's eyes. They cast horse and man into ditches, or down on the
side of some hill. Then at table, potage, sauce, gelies, and what ever comes
to hand, into the face it goith. And afterward laughe: and whosoever can do most
of these tricks, he counts himself the best and galantest Courtyer, and
supposes that he has won great glory. And in case otherwhile they get a
gentleman in these their pleasant pastimes, that will not give himself to
such horseplay, they say by and by: He is to wise, we shall have him a
Counselor, he is no good fellow. But I will tell you a worse matter. Some
there be that contend and lay wager, who can eat and drink more unsavory
and stinking things, and so abhorryng and contrary to man's senses, that it is
not possible to name them, without very great lothsomenesse. And what things
be those, quoth the L. Lodouicus Pius? Sir Friderick answered: Let the
Marquess Phoebus tell you, for he has often seen it in France, and
perauenture felt it. The Marquess Phoebus answered: I have seen none of these
things done in France more then in Italy. But look what good things the
Italyans* have in their garments, in feastinge, Italyans borow of the French
man.
in bancketting, in feats of arms and in every other thing that belongs to
a Courtier, they have it all of the Frenchmen, I deny not, answered Sir
Friderick, but there are also among the Frenchmen very honest and sober
gentlemen, and for my part I have known many (without perauenture) worthy
all praise. But yet some there are of little good manner: Spanya a^ree with
Italians in conditions.
and to speak generally (me think) the Spaniardes agree more with Italyans,
in conditions, then Frenchmen: because (in my mind) the peculiar quiet
gravity of the Spaniardes is more agreeable to our nature then the quick
liveliness that is perceived in the French nation almost in every gesture:
Grauitye in Spaniardes.
which is not to be discommended in them, Liuelines in French men.
but is rather a grace, for it is so natural and propre to them, that there is
no manner affecting or curiosity in it. There are many Italians that would
feign counterfeit their facion, and can do naught else but shake the head in
speakinge, and make a leg with an ill grace, and when they come out of their
doors into the City, French facions.
go so fast that good footmen can scant overtake them, and with these
manners they ween themselves good Frenchmen, and to have of that liberty:
which (ywisse) chaunseth very sild^me sauinge to such as are brought up in
France and have learned that facion from their childhood. The like is to be
said in the knowleag of sundry tunges, which I commend much in our Courtier,
and especially Spanish and French, because the intercourse of both the one
nation and the other is much hau^ted in Italy, To have sundry languages*
and these two are more agreeable unto us then any of the rest, and those two
Princes for that they are very mighty in war and most riall in peace, have
their Court always fournished with valiant gentlemen, which are dispersed
throughout the world, and again we must needs practice with them. I will not
now proceade to speak any more particularly of matters to well known, as that
our Courtier ought not to profess to be a glutton nor a dronkard, nor riotous
and inordinate in any il condition* nor filthy and uncleanly in his living, with
certain rude and boisterous beehauiours that smell of the plough and cart a
thousand mile of, for he that is of that sort, it is not only not to be hoped
that he will make a good Courtier, but he can be set to no better use then to
keep sheep. And to conclude, I say that (to do well) the Courtier ought to
have a perfect understanding in that we have said is meet for him, so that
every possible thing may be easy to him, and all men wonder at him, and he at
no man: meaning notwithstanding in this poinct yt there be not a certain
loftye and vnmanerlye stubburnnesse, Some commend not things well done.
as some men have that show themselves not to wonder at the things which
other men do, because they take upon them that they can do them much better:
and with their silence discommend them as unworthy to be spoken of, and will
make a gesture (in a manner) as though none beeside were (I will not say their
equal, but) able to conceive the understanding of ye profoundnes of their
couning. Therfo^e ought the Courtier to shonn these hateful manners, and with
gentleness and courtesy praise other men's good deeds: and though he perceive
himself excellent and far above others, yet show that he esteameth not
himself for such a one. But because these so full perfections are very sildome
found in the nature of man, and perhaps never, yet ought not a man yt
perceyueth himself in some part to want, to lay aside his hope to come to a
good pass, Many places to be commend^d beeside the best.
though he can not reach to that perfect and high excellency which he aspireth
unto: because in every art there be many other places beeside the best, all
praiswoorthye: and he that strives to come by ye highest, it is sildome seen
that he passes not ye mean. I will have our Courtier therefore, if he find
himself excellent in any thing beeside arms, How a man should show his
counin^.
to set out himself, and get him estymatyon by it after an honest sort, and
be so dyscreete and of so good a judgment, that he may have the
understanding after a comelye manner, and with good purpose to allure men to
hear or to look on that he supposes himself to be excellent in: making
semblant always to do it, not for a brag and to show it for vainglory, but
at a chance, and rather prayed by others, then coming of his own free will.
And in every thing that he has to do or to speak, if it be possible, let
him come always provided and think on it before hand, showyng
notwithstanding, the whole to be done ex tempore, and at the first sight. As
for the things he has but a mean skill in, let him touch them (as it were)
by ye way, without grounding much upon them, yet in such wi^e yt a man may
believe he has a great deal more cunning therein, then he utters: as certain
Poets sometime that harped upon very subtle points of Philosophy, or other
sciences, and parauenture had small understanding in the matter. And in that he
knows himself altogether ignorant in, Sometime a man's ignorance is to be
con^essed.
I will never have him make any profession at all, nor seek to purchase him
any fame by it: but rather when occasion serves, confess to have no
understanding in it. This, quod Calmeta, would Nicholetto never have done,
which being a very excellent Philosopher, and no more skillful in the law
then in fleeing, when a Governor of Padoa was minded to give him one of those
Lectures in the law, he would never yield at the persuasion of many Scholars,
to deceive the opinion which the governor had conceived of him, and confess
that he had no understanding in it: but said still that he was not in this
point of Socrates opinion, for it is not a Philosophers part to say at any
time, that he has no understanding. I say not, answered Sir Fridericke, that
the Courtyer should of himself go say he has no understanding, without it be
required of him: for I allow not this fondness to accuse and debase himself.
Again I remember some otherwhyle ye in like sort do willingly disclose some
matters, Men utter things to their shame many times.
which although they happened perhaps without any fault of theirs, yet
bring they with them a shadow of sclaunder, as did a gentleman (whom you all
know) which always when he heard any mention made of the batta^^e beeside
Parma against king Charles, he would by and by declare how he fled away, and
a man would ween that he saw or understood nothing else in that journey:
Afterward talking of a certain famous just, he rehearsed continually how he
was overthrown: and many times also he seemed in his talk to seek how he
might bring into purpose to declare that upon a night as he was going to
speak with a gentlewoman, he was well beaten with a cudgel. Such triflinge
folyes I will not have our Courtier to speak of. But me think when occasion
is offered to show his skill in a matter he is altogether ignoraunte in, it is
well done to avoid it. If necessity compel him, How he should do in a
matter he has no skill in.
let him rather confess plainly his lack of understanding in it, then hasard
himself, and so shall he avoid a blame that many deserve nowadayes, which I
woote not through what corrupt inward motion or judgment out of reason, do
always take upon them to practice the thing they know not, and lay aside that
they are skillful in: and for a confirmation of this, I know a very excellent
musitien, Men that take in hand things they have no skill in.
which leaving his music a part has whollye given himself to versifiynge,
and thinks himself a great clearke therein, but in deed he makes every man
to laughe him to skorne, and now has he also clean lost his music. An other,
one of the chieffest peincters in the world, neglectinge his art wherein he was
very excellent* has applied himself to learn Philosophye, wherein he has
such strange conceits and monstrous fansyes, that withal the peinctinge he
has he can not peinct them. And such as these there be infinite. Some there be
that knowing themselves to have an excellency in one thing, make their
principal profession in an other, in which not withstanding they are not
ignorant, but when time serves to show themselves in that they are most
skillful in, they do it always very perfectlye: and otherwhile it comes so
to pass, that the company p^rceiuinge them so couning in that which is not
their profession, they imagine them to be much better in that they profess in
deed. This art in case it be coopled with a good judgment, discontenteth me
nothing at all. Then answered the L. Gaspar Palauicin: I think not this an
art, but a very deceit, and I beleaue it is not meet for him that will be
an honest man to deceive at any time. This quoth Sir Fridericke, is rather an
ornament that accompanyeth the thing he does, then a deceit: and though it
be a deceit, yet is it not to be disalowed. Will you not say also, that he
that beats his fellow, where there be two plaiyng at fence together,
beeguyleth him, and that is because he has more art then the other. And where
you have a jewel that vnsett seems fair, afterward when it comes to a
goldsmithes hands that in well setting it makes it appear much more fairer,
will you not say that the goldsmith deceives the eyes of them that look on
it? And yet for that deceit, deserves he praise, for with judgment and art a
couninge hand does many times ad a grace and ornament to yuorie, or to
silver, or to a stone that is fair in sight, settinge it in g^lde. We say not
then that this art or deceit (in case you will so term it) deserves any
manner blame. Also it is not ill for a man that knows himself skillful in a
matter, to seek occasyon after a comelye sort to show his feat therein, and
in lykecase to cover the parts he thinks scante woorthye praise, yet
notwitastandinge all after a certain warye dyssymulacion. king Ferdinand of
Naples.
Do you not remember how king Ferdinande without making any show to seek
it, took occasion very well to stryppe himself sometime into his doblet? and
that because he knew he was very well made and nymble wythall. And because
his hands were not all of the fairest, he sildome plucked of his gloves, and
(in manner) never. And few there were that took heed to this wariness of
his. Me think also I have read, I. Caesar
that Julius Caesar ware for the nones a garlande of Laurel, to hyde his
baldenesse withal. But in these matters a man must be very circumspecte
and of a good judgment least he pass his bounds: for to avoid one error
often times a man falls into an other, and to get him praise, purchases
blame. Therefore the surest way in the world, is, for a man in his living and
conversation* In honest mean (...) living.
to govern himself always with a certain honest mean, which (no doubt) is a
great and most sure shield against envy, the which a man ought to avoid
in what he is able. I will have our Courtier also take heed he purchase not
the name of a liar, nor of a vain person, which happens many times and to
them also that deserve it not. No liar.
Therefore in his communicatyon let him be always heedefull not to go out of
the lykelyhoode of truth, yea and not to speak to often those truths that
have the face of a lie, as many do, that never speak but of wonders, and
will be of such authority, that every vncredyble matter must be beleaued at
their mouth. Other, at the first entringe into a frendshipp with a new
friend, to get favor with him, the first thing they speak, swear that
there is not a person in the world whom they love better and they are willing
to ieoparde their life for his sake, and such other matters out of reason, and
when they part from him makewi^e to weep, and not to speak a word for
sorrow, Thus because they would be counted to loving woormes, they make
men count them liars, and fond flatterers. But it were to long a matter
and tedyous to reckon up all vices that may happen in conuersatyon.
Therefore, for that I desire in the Courtyer, it suffyceth to say (beesyde the
matters rehearsed) that he be such a one that shall never want good
communycatyon and fytte for them he talks wythall, and have a good
understanding with a certain sweetness to refresh the hearers minds, and
with meerie conceits and Iestes to provoke them to solace and laughter,
Conc^ytes and iestes.
so that without being at any time lothesome or satiate he may evermore delight
them. Now I hope my L. Emilia will give meleaue to houlde my peace, which in
case she deny me, I shall by mine own words be convicted not to be ye good
courtier I have told you of, for not only good communication, which neither at
this time nor perhaps at any other ye have heard in me: but also this I have,
such as it is, does clean fail me. Then spoke the L. General: I will not
have this false opinion to stick in the head of any of us, that you are not
a very good Courtier, for (to say ye truth) this desire of yours to houlde
your peace proceadeth rather because you would be rid of your peine, then for
that ye want talk. Therefore that it may not appear in so noble assemblye as
this is, and in so excellent talk, any percell be left out, say you not nay
to teach us how we should use these Iestes you have made mention of, This
discourse of Iestes* is taken out of Cicero de Orat. lib. ii.
and show us the art that beelongeth to all this kind of pleasant speech to
provoke laughter and solace after an honest sort, for (in mine opinion) it is
very necessary and much to purpose for a Courtier. My Lord, answered Sir
Friderick, Iestes and meerie conceits are rather a gift, and a grace of
nature, then of art, but yet there are some nations more redier in it then
other some, as the Tuscanes, which in deed are very subtle. Also it appears
propre to the Spaniardes to invent meerie conceits. Yet are there many
notwithstanding both of this nation and other also that in to much babblinge
pass sometime their bound^s and were unsavory and fond, Respects in i^s^ing.
because they have no respect to the condition of the person they commune
withal, to the place where they be, to the time, to the gravity and modestye
which they ought to have in themselves. Then answered the L. General: You
deny that there is any art in Iestes, and yet in speaking against such as
observe them not with modestye and gravity and have not respect to the time
and to the person they commune withal, me think ye declare that this may also
be taught and has some doctrine in it. These rules my Lord, answered Sir
Fridericke, be so general that they may be applied to every matter, and
help it forward. But I have said there is no art in Iestes, Ca^illatio.
because (me think) they are only of two sorts: whereof the one is enlarged
in communication that is long and without interruption: as is seen in some
men that with so good an utterance and grace and so pleasantly declare and
express a matter that happened unto them or that they have seen and heard,
that with their gesture and words they set it before a man's eyes, and (in
manner) make him feel it with hand, and this perauenture for want of an other
term we may call Festiuitie or else Civility. Dic^citas.
The other sort of Iestes is very breef, and consists only in quick and
subtle sayings, as many times there are heard among us, and in nickes,
neither does it appear that they are of any grace without that little bitynge,
Di^^^.
and these among them of old time were also called Sayings, now some term
them Privy tauntes. I say therefore in the first kind, which is a meerye
manner of expressinge, there needs no art, because very nature her self
creates and shapeth men apt to express pleasantly and gives them a
countenance, gestures, a voice, and words for the purpose to counterfeit
what they lust. In the other of Privy tauntes what can art do? Sins that
quippie ought to be shot out and hit the prick before a man can descerne
that he that speaks it can think upon it, else it is cold and little
worth. Therefore (think I) all is the work of wit and nature. Then took M.
Peter Bembo the matter in hand, and said: The L. General denies not that you
say: namely that nature and wit bear not the chieffest stroke, especially as
touching invention, but it is certain that in each man's mind, of how good a
wit soever he be, there arrise conceits both good and badd, and more and
less, but then judgment and art d^eth polishe and correct them, and chouseth
the good and refuses the bad. Therefore laiynge aside that beelonge^h to wit,
declare you unto us that consists in art: that is to weete, of Iestes and
meery conceits that move laughter, which are meet for the Courtier and
which are not, and in what time and manner they ought to be used: for this is
that the L. General demands of you. Then Sir Frid^ricke said smiling:
There is never a one of us here that I will not give place unto in every
matter, and especially in Iestinge, unless perhaps folies: which make
men laugh many times more then witty sayings* were also to be allowed for
Iestes. And so tourning him to Count Lewis and to M. Bernarde Bibiena, he said
unto them. These be the masters of this faculty, of whom in case I must
speak of meerie sayings, I must first learn what I have to say. Count Lewis
answered: Me think you beegin now to practice that you say ye are not
skillful in, which is, to make these Lords laughe in mocking M. Bernarde and
me, because every one of them woteth well that ye thing which you praise us
for, is much more perfectly in you. therefore in case you be weerie, it is
better for you to sue to ye Duchess that it would please her to deferr the
remnaunt of our talk till to morrow, then to go about with craft to rid your
hands of peines taking. Sir Friderick beegan to make answer, but the L.
Emilia int^rrupted him immediatlye and said: It is not the order that the
disputacion should be consumed upon your praise, it suffices ye are very
well known all. But because it comes in my mind that you (Count) imputed to
me yesternyght, that I divided not the pains taking equallye, it shall be
well done that Sir Frydericke rest him a while and the charge of speaking of
Iestes we will commytte to M. Bernarde Bibiena, for we do not only know him
very quick wytted in talking without intermission, but also it is not out
of our memory that he has sundry times pormysed to write of this matter.
And therefore we may thyn ke he has very well thought upon it all this
while, and ought the better to satysfie us in it. Afterward when there shall
be sufficientlye spoken of Iestes* Sir Fridericke shall proceed forward
again with that he has yet beehinde concerning the Courtier. Then said Sir
Fridericke: Madam, I know not what I have left beehinde any more, but like a
trauailer on the way now weerie of the peinefulnesse of my long journey at
noone tide, I will rest me in M. Bernardes communication at the sown of his
words, as it were under some fair free that casts a goodlye shadow at the
sweet roaringe of a plentiful and liuelye spring: afterward (may hap)
beeinge somewhat refreshed I may have somewh^t else to say. M. Bernarde
answered laughing: If I show you the top ye shall see what shadow may be
hoped for at the leaves of my tree. To hear the roaringe of the liuelye
spring ye speak of, it may happen be your chance so to do, for I was once
turned into a spring: not by any of the gods of old time, but by our
friar Marian. And from that time hitherto I never wanted water. Then beegan
they all to fall in a laughing, because this pleasante matter which M.
Bernarde meant that happened to him in Room^ in ye presence of Galeotto Cardinal
of S, Petro in Vincula, was well known to them all. After they had ceased
laughinge the L. Emilia said: Leave now making us laugh with practisynge of
Iestes, and teach us how we should use them, and whence they are deryued, and
what ever else ye know in this matter. And for losing any more time beegyne
out of hand. I doubt me, quoth M. Bernarde, it is late, and least my talk
of pleasant matters should seem unpleasant and tedyous, perhaps it were good
to deferr it till to morrow. Here incontinentlye ma^ye made answer yt it lacked
yet a good d^ale of the ^oure when they were w^nt to leave of reasoning. Then
M. Bernarde tourning to ye Duchess and the to L. Emilia, I will not refuse this
labor (quoth he) although I be wont to marvel at the boldness of them
that dare take upon them to sing to the lute, when our James Sausecondo
stands by, even so ought not I in the presence of hearers that have much
better understanding in that I have to say, then I my self, take upon me to
entreat of Iestes. Nevertheless least I should show a president to any of
these Lords to refuse that they shall be charged withal, I will speak as
breeflye as I can possible what comes in my mind as touching matters yt
cause laughter, Homo animal risibile.
which is so propre to us that to describe a man the commune saying is, He i^ a
living creature that can laugh: because this laughing is perceived only in
man, and (in manner) always is a token of a certain iocundenesse and meerie
mood that he feels inwardly in his mind, which by nature is drawn to
pleasantness and coueteth quietness and refreshing, for which cause we see
men have invented many matters, as sportes, games and pastimes, and so many
sundry sorts of open shows. And because we bear good will to such as are
the occasion of this recreation of ours, the manner was emonge the kings of
old time, among the Romans, the Athenians and many other, To ^^ne the eyes
of the ^^ople.
to get the good will of the people withal, and to feed the eyes and minds
of the multitude, to make great Theaters, and other publyque buildinges, and
there to show new devises of pastimes, running of horses and Charettes,
fightinges of men together, strange beasts, Comedies, Tragedies, and daunses
of Antique. Neither did the grave Philosophers shonn these sightes, for many
times both in this manner and at banckettes they refreshed their weeryesome
minds, in those high discourses and divine imaginations of theirs. The which
in likewise all sorts of men are wyllinge to do, for not only Ploughmen,
Mariners, and all such as are inured with hard and boisterous exercises, with
hand, but also holy religious men and prisoners that from hour to hour wait
for death, go about yet to seek some remedy and medicine to refreshe
themselves. Whatsoever therefore causes laughter, the same makes the mind
iocunde and gives pleasure, nor suffers a man in that instant to mind the
troublesome greeffes that our life is full of, Therefore (as you see) laughing
is very acceptable to all men, and he is much to be commended that can cause
it in due time and after a comlie sort. But what this laughing is, and where it
consists, and in what manner sometime it takes ye veins, the eyes, the mouth
and the sides, Wherein laughing matters consist.
and seems as though it would make us burst, so that what ever resistance we
make, it is not possible to keep it, I will leave it to be disputed of
Democritus, the which also in case he would promise us, he should not
perform it. The place therefore and (as it were) the hedspring that laughing
matters ar^ise of, consists in a certain deformity or ill fauourednesse,
because a man laugheth only at those matters that are disagreeing in
themselves, and (to a man's seeminge) are in ill plight, where it is not so in
deed. I wot not otherwise how to expound it, but if you will beethinke your
self, ye shall perceive the thing that a man always laugheth at, is a matter
that sounds not well, and yet is it not in ill syttinge. What kind of ways
therefore th^se be that the Courtier ought to use in causing laughter and of
what scope, I will assay in what I can to utter unto you as far as my
judgment can give me, because to make men laughe always is not comely for
the Courtier, nor yet in such wise as frantike, dronken, foo^i^he and fond
men and in like manner commune iesters do: And though to a man's thinkinge
Courts cannot be without such kind of persons, ^
yet deserve they not the name of a Courtier, but each man to be called by his
name and esteamed such as they are. The scope and measure to m^ke (...) laughe
in tauntinge must also be diligently^ (...) who he is that is taunted, for it
provoke no laughter to mock and skorne a seelye soul in misery and
calamity, nor yet a naughty knave and commune ^ibaulde, because a man would
think that these men deserved to be otherwise punished, then in iestinge at.
And men's minds are not bent to scoff them in misery, onelesse such me^ in
their mishapp br^gg and boast of them selves and have a proud and haughtye
stomach. Again a respect must be had to them that are gen^rallye favored and
beloved of every man, and that bear stroke, because in mockinge and scorninge
such a one, a man may sometime purchase himself dangerous enimitie. Who are
to be ies^ed at.
Therefore it is not amysse to scoff and mock at vices that are in persons not
of such misery^ that it should move compassion, nor of such wickidness^ that a
man would think they deserved not to go on the ground, nor of such
authority that any little displeasure of theirs may be a great hindraunce to a
man. You shall understand moreou^r that out of the places iestinge matters are
derived from, a man may in like manner pike grave sentences to praise or
dispraise. And otherwhile with the self same words: as to praise a liberal
man yt partaketh his gooddes in commune with his friends, Pr^ise or dispraise
in the self words.
the commune saying is, That he has is none of his own: The like may be said
in dispraise of one that has stolen or compased that he has by other ill
means. It is also a commune saying, she is a woman of no small price when a
man will praise her for her virtues, for her wisdom and goodness: The very
same may be said of a woman that looks to be kept sumptiouslye: But it comes
oftener to purpose that a man in this case serves his turn with ye self same
places then with the self same words. As within these few days three
Gentilmen standinge at mass together in a Church where was a gentilwoman one
of the three was in love withal, there came a poor beggar and stood before
her requiringe her alms, and so with much instance and lamenting with a
groaning voice repeted many times his request: yet for all yt did she not give
him her alms, nor deny it him in making sign to depart in Gods name, but
stood musing with her self as though she minded another matter. Then said the
gentilman y^ loved her to his two companions, see what I may hope for at my
maistresse hands, which is so cruel, yt she will neither give the poor naked
soul dead for hunger, that requires her with such passion and so instantly,
her alms, ne yet leave to depart, so much she rejoices to beehoulde with her
eyes one that is brought low with misery and that in vain requires her
reward. One of the two answered: it is no crueltye, but a privy admonicion for
you to do you to weete that your maistresse is not pleased with him that
requires her with much instance. The other answered: Nay, it is rather a
lesson for him, that although she give not yt is required of her, yet she is
willing enough to be suid to* See here, because the gentilwoman sent not the
poor man away, there arrose one saying of great dispraise, one of modest
praise and another of nipping board. To retourn therefore to declare the kinds
of Iestes apperteining to our purpose, I say (in mine opinion) there are of
three sorts, although Sir* Friderick* Re.
has made mention but of two. The one a civil and pleasant declaration
without interruption, which consists in the effect of a thing. The other a
quick and subtle readiness, Dicto.
which consists in one saying alon^. Therefore will we ad a third sort to
these, which we call Boordes or meerie Prankes, wherein ye process is long and
the sayings short and some deeds with all. Cicero ^^^tioneth not this last
kin^ of iestes.
The first therefore that consists in communication without interruption are
in ye sort (in a manner) as though a man would tell a tale. And to give you an
example, when Pope Alexander the sixte died and Pius the third created,
beeinge then in Room and in the Palaice, your Sir Anthonye Agnello of Mantua
my L. Duchess, and communynge of the death of the one and creatyon of the
^ther, and therein making sundry discourses with certain friends of his, he
said: Sirs, in Catullus time gates beegan to speak without tunge and to hear
without ears and in that sort discovered aduouteries. Now although men be not
of such worthiness as they were in those days, yet perhaps the gates that
are made, a great sort of them, especially here in Room, of ancient Marble,
have the same virtue they had then. And for my part I beleaue that these two
will clear us of all our doubts, in case we will ask counsel of them. Then
those Gentilmen mused much at the matter and attended to see to what end it
would come, when Sir Anthony folowinge on still up and down lift up his
eyes, as at a sodeine, to one of the two gates of the hall where they walked:
and stayinge a while with his finger he showed his company the inscriptyon
over it, which was Pope Alexanders name, and at the end of it was V and I,
because it should signify (as ye know) the sixth. Alexander PP. VI.
And said: See here, this gate says Alexander PaPa. VI. which signifies he
has bin Pope through the force he has used, and has prevailed more thereby
then with right and reason. Now let us see if we may of this other understand
any thing of the new Bishop: and tournyng him as at adventure to the other
gate, pointed to the inscription of one N. two PP. and ene V. which signifies
Nicholaus Papa Quintus, N. PP. V.
and immediately he said: Good Lord ill newis, see here this gate says Nihil
Papa Valet. See now how this kind of Iestes is propre and good and how sitting
it is for one in Court, whether it be true or false a man says, for in this
case it is lawful to feign what a man lusts without blame: and in speakinge
the truth, to set it furthe with a feat lie, augmentinge or diminishinge
according to the purpose. But the perfect grace and very pith of this, is to
set forth so well and without pein^ not only in words but in gestures, the
thing a man pourposeth to express, that unto the hearers he may appear to
do before their eyes the things he speaks o^. And this expressed manner in
this wise has such force, that otherwhile it sets forth and makes a
matter delight very much, which of it self is not very meerie nor witty.
And although these protestacions need gestures, and the earnestness that a
lively voice has, yet is ye force of them known also otherwhile in writing.
Giornata. vii^. Nouella. ii.
Who laugheth not when John Boccaccio in the eight journey of his hundredth
tales declares how the priest of Varlungo strayned himself to singe a Kyrie
and a Sanctus, when he perceived Belcolore was in the Church? These be also
pleasant declarations in his tales of Calandrino and many other. Gior. viii.
Nouel. ii. and vi. Gior. ix. Nouel. iii. and v.
After the same sort seems to be the making a man laughe in counterfeitinge
or imitatinge (how ever we list to term it) of a man's manners, wherein
hitherto I have seen none pass our M. Robert of Bari. This were no small
praise quod M. Robert, if it were true* for then would I surely go about to
counterfeite rather the good then the bad: and if I could liken my self to some
I know, I would think my self a happy man. But I fear me I can counterfeite
nothing but what makes a man laughe, which you said before consists in
vice. M. Bernarde answered: In vice in deed, but that that stands not in ill
plight. And weete you well, that this counterfeitinge we speak of, can not be
without wit, for beeside the manner to apply his words and his gestures, and
to set before the hearers eyes the countenance and manners of him he speaks
of, he must be wise, and have great respect to the place, to the time and to ye
persons with whom he talks, and not like a commune Iester pass his bounds,
which things you wonderfully well observe, and therefore I beleaue ye are
skillful in all. Counterfeiters of m^ns manners.
For undoubtedly it is not meet for a Gentlemanne to make weepinge and
laughing faces, to make sounes and voices, and to wrestle with himself alone
as Berto does, to apparaile himself like a lobb of the Country as does
Strascino, and such other matters, which do well beecome them, bic^use it is
their profession. But we must by the way and privily steal this
counterfeiting, always keaping ye a^^aie of a gentilman, without speaking
filthy words, or doing uncomely deeds, without making faces and antiques,
but frame our gestures after a certain manner, that who so hears and sees us,
may by our words and countenances imagine much more then he sees and hears,
and upon that take occasion to laughe. He must also in this counterfeiting take
heed of to much taunting in touching a man, Nippes that touch a man.
especially in the ill fauourednesse of visage or ill shape of body. For as
the mishappes and vices of the body minister many times ample matter to
laughe at, if a man can discreatly handle it, even so ye vsinge of this manner
to bytingly is a token not only of a commune iester, but of a plain ennemy.
Therefore must a man observe in this poinct (though it be hard) the facion of
our M. Roberte, as I have said, which counterfeiteth al men and not with out
touching them in the matters wherein they be faulty and in presence of
themselves, and yet no man finds himself agreeued, neither may a man think
that he can take it in ill part. And of this I will give you no example,
because we all see infinite in him daily. Also it provoke much laughter
(which nevertheless is contained under declaration) when a man repeteth with a
good grace certain defaultes of other men, so they be mean and not worthy
greater correction: as foolish matters sometime symplye of themselves alone,
sometime annexed with a little ready nippinge fondenesse. Likewise certain
extreme curious and matters. Otherwhile a great and well forged lie: As few
days ago our M. Caesar declared a pretty foolish matter, which was, that
being with the Mayor of this City, he saw a Country man come to him to
complain that he had an Ass stolen from him, Foolish mat^ers.
and after he had toulde him of his poverty and how the thief deceived him, to
make his loss the greater he said unto him: Sir if you had seen mine Ass you
should have known what a cause I have to complain^, for with his pad on his
back a man would have thought him very Tully himself* And one of our trai^
meetinge a herd of Gotes before the which was a mighty great Ramm Got, he
stayed and with a merueilous countenance, said: Mark me this Got, he
seems a Saint Paul. The L. Gasper says he knew an other, which for that he
was an old servant to Hercules duke of Ferrara, did offer him two pretty
boys which he had, to be his pages, and these two died both before they came
to his service. The which when the duke understood, he lamented lovingly with
the father, saying that he was very sorry, because when he saw them upon a
time he thought them handsom^ and witty children. The father made answer, nay
my Lord, you saw nothing, for within these few days they were become much
more handsomer and of better qualities then I would ever have thought, and
sange together like a coople of hawks. And one of these days a Doctor of
ours beehouldinge one that was judged to be whipped about the markett place,
and taking pitye upon him because the poor souls shoulders bled sore, and
went so soft a pace, as though h^ had walked about for his pleasure to pass
the time withal he said to him: Goo on a pace poor fellow that thou may be
the sooner out of thy peine. Then he tourninge about and beehouldynge him that
so said (in a manner) with a wonder, staide a while without any word,
afterward he said: When thou art whipped go at thy pleasure, for now will I
go as I shall think good.

You may remember also the foolyshe matter that not long a go the Duke
rehearsed of the Abbot that being present upon a day when Duke Fridericke
was talking where he should bestow the great quantitye of rubbyshe that was
cast up to lay the foundacyon of this Palayce, woorkynge dailye upon it, The
judgment of an Abbot.
said: My Lord, I have well beethoughte me where you shall beestowe it, let
there be a great pit dug and into that may you have it cast without any
more ado. Duke Fridericke answered him not without laughter: And where shall
we beestowe then the quantity of earth that shall be cast out of that pit?
The abbot said unto him: Let it be made so large that it may well receive both
the one and the other. And so for all the Duke repeted sundry times, the
greater the pit was, the more earth should be cast out of it, yet could he
never make it sink into his brain, but it might be made so large yt it might
receive both the one and the other: and he answered him nothing else but make
it so much the larger. Now see what a good forecast this Abbot had. Then said
M. Peter Bembo: And why tell you not that, of your great Capitain of Florence
that was beeseaged of the Duke of Calabria within Castellina? Where there were
found upon a day in the town certain quarelles poisoned that had bine shot
out of the camp, he wrott unto the Duke, if the war should procead so
cruellye, he would also put a medicin upon his gunnstones, and then he that
has the woorst, has his mendes in his hands. M. Bernarde laughed and said:
If you houlde not your peace (M. Peter) I will tell whatsoever I have seen my
self and heard of your Venetians, which is not a little, and especially when
they play the riders. Do not I beesech ye, answered M. Peter, for I will keep
to my self two other very pretye ones that I know of your Florentines. ^
M. Bernarde said: They are rather of the Seneses, for it often happens
emonge them. As within these few days one of them hearing certain letters
read in the Counsel chamber, in which for auoidinge to often repetition of his
name that was spoken of, this term was many times put in, il Prelabato (which
si^nifieth the aforename?) he saidvnto him y^ read them: Soft, stay there a
little and tell me, this prelibato what is he? A frinde to our Communaltye? M.
Peter laughed, then he proceaded: I speak of Florentines and not of Seneses.
Speak it hardly, quod y^ L. Emilia and bash not for y^ matter. M. Peter said,
when the Lords of Florence were in war against the Pisanes, they were
otherwhile out of money by reason of their great charges, and laying their
heads together upon a day in the counsel chamber what way were best to
make provision to serve their turn withal, after many diuises propounded,
one of the auntientest Citizins said: I have found two ways, A florentines
devise.
whereby without much travail we may in a small while come by a good portion of
money. Whereof the one is (because we have no redier rent then the custom at
the gates of Florence) where we have XI gates, let us with speed make XI mo,
and so shall we double our revenue. The other way is, to set up a mint in
Pistoia and an other in Prato no more nor less then is here within Florence:
and there do nothing else day and night but coin money, and all Ducates of
gold, and this divise (in mine opinion) is the speedier and less chargeable.
They fell a laughing apace at the subtle divise of this Citizin and when
laughinge was ceased the L. Emilia said: Will you (M. Bernarde) suffer M. Peter
thus to ieste at Florentines without a revenge? M. Bernarde answered smilinge:
I pardon him this offense, for where he has displeased me in iestinge at
Florentines, he has pleased me in obeyinge of you, the which I would always
do my self. Then said the L. Caesar: I hea^d a Brescian speak a iolie gross
matter, which beeinge this year in Venice at the feast of the Assention, Upon
the ascension day A ^r^at fair in Uenice^

A fair vessel of pleasure in Uenice made Galliwise.

Every year upon the Ascension day the Duke with all the counsel ^oith in
it a mile or two into the sea, and there casts ^ ring of gold into it
thinking by this yearly ceremonye they so marie the Sea that it will never
leave the City on dry land:


rehearsed in a place where I was to certain mates of his, the goodlye matters
he had seen there, what sundry merchaundise, what plate, what sorts of
spices, and what cloth and silk there was, then how the Signoria issued out
with a great pomp in the Bucentoro to wedd the Sea, in which were so many
gentilmen well apparailed, so many sorts of instruments and melodies that a
man would have thought it a paradise. And when one of his companions demanded
him what kind of music did please him best of all that he had heard there, he
said: All were good, yet among the rest I saw one blow in a strange trumpett,
which at every pushe thrust it into his throat more then two handful, and
then by and by drew it out again, and thrust it in a fresh, that you never
saw a greater wondre. Then they all laughed, understanding the fond
imagination of him that thought the blower thruste into his throat that part
of the Sagbout that is hid in puttinge it back again. Then M. Bernarde went
forward: Those Affectations and curiosities that are but mean, bring a
lothsomnesse with them, but when they be done out of measure they much provoke
laughter. As otherwhile when some men are heard to speak of their auntientrye
and nobleness of birth: sometime women of their beawtie and handsomeness: As
not long ago a Gentilwoman did, which at a great feast being very sad and
musing with her self, it was demanded of her, what she thought upon that
should make her so sad. And she made answer, I thought upon a matter which as
often as it comes into my mind does much trouble me, and I can not put it
out of my heart: which is, where in the day of general judgment all bodies
must arrise again and appear naked before the judgment seat of Christ, I
can not abide the greef I feel in thinking that mine must also be seen naked.
Such Affectacions as these be because they pass the degree, do rather provoke
laughter then lothsomnesse. Those feat lies now that come so well to purpose,
how they provoke laughter ye all know. ^eat lies.
And that friend of ours that suffers us not to want, within these few
days rehearsed one to me that was very excellent. Then said the L. Julian: What
ever it were, more excellenter it can not be, nor more suttler then one y^ a
Tuscane of ours, which is a merchaunt man of Luca, affirmed unto me the last
day for most certain. Tell it us, quoth the Duchess. The L. Julian said
smilinge: This merchaunt man (as he says) beeinge upon a time in Polonia,
Polonia.
determined to buie a quantity of Sables, mindinge to bring them into Italy
and to gaigne greatly by them. And after much practisinge in the matter,
Muscouia*
where he could not himself go into Moscouia because of the war beetweene the
king of Polonia and the Duke of Moscouia, he took order by the mean of some
of the Country that upon a day appointed certain merchau^t men of Moscouia
should come with their Sables into the borders of Polonia, and he promised
also to be there himself to bargain with them. This merchaunt man of Luca
travailing then with his company toward Moscouia, arrived at the river of
Boristhenes, Boristh^^^^*
which he found hard frosen like a marble stone, and saw the Moscouites, which
for suspicion of war were in doubt of the Polakes, were on the other side, and
nearer came not than the breadth of ye river. So after they knew the one the
other, making certain signs, the Moscouites beegan to speak aloud and toulde
the price how they would sell their Sables, but ye cold was so extreme, that
they were not understood, because the words before they came on the other
side where this merchaunt of Luca was and his interpreters, were congeled in
the aere and there remained frosen and stopped. So that the Polakes that knew
the manner, made no more ado but kindled a great fire in the midst of the
river (for to their seeminge that was the point whereto the voice came hott
before the frost took it) and the river was so thick frosen yt it did well
bear the fire. When they had thus done the words that for space of an hour
had bine frosen, beegan to thawe and came down, making a noise as does ye snow
from the mounteignes in May, and so immediatlye they were well understood, but
the men on the other side were first departed, and because he thought that
those words asked to great a price for the Sables, he would not bargain,
and so came away without. Then they laughed all. And M. Bernarde, Truly
(quoth he) this that I will tell you is not so subtle, yet is it a pretye
matter. and this it is. Where talk was a few days ago of the country or
world newly found out by the mariners of Portugal, An ape played at chestes.
and of strange beasts and other mat^ers brought from thens, that friend I
toulde you of, affirmed that he had seen an Ape, very diverse in shape from
such as we are accustomed to see, yt played excellently well at Chestes. And
among other times upon a day before the king of Portugal ye Gentilman that
brought herr played at Chestes with herr, where the Ape showed some draughtes
very suttill* so that she put him to his shifts, at length she gave him
Checkemate. Upon this the gentilman beeinge somewhat vexed (as communlie they
are all that lose at that game) took the king in his hand which was good
and bigg (as the facion is emonge the Portugalles) and reached the Ape a great
knock on the head. To lose at chestes vexes men.
She furthwith leaped aside complaining greatly, and seemed to require justice
at the kings hands for the wrong done her. The gentilman afterward called her
to play with him again, the which with signs she refused a while, but at last
was contented to play an other game, and as she had done the other time
before, so did she now drive him to a narrow point. In conclusion: the Ape
perceiuinge she could give the gentilman the mate, thought with a new divise
she would be sure to escape without any mo knockes, and privily conveyed her
right hand without making semblant what her intent was, under the gentilmans
left elbowe, leaning for pleaser upon a little taffata coushin, and snatchinge
it slightlie away, at one instant gave him with her left hand a mate with a
paune, and with her right hand cast the coushin upon her head to save her
from strokes, then she made a gamboll before the king ioifully, in token (as
it were) of her victory. Now see whether this Ape were not wise, circumspect
and of a good vn^erstanding. Then spoke* the L. Caesar Gonzaga: It must needs
be that this ape was a Doctor among other Apes and of much authority: and I
beleaue the commune weal of the Apes of India sent her into Portugal to get
a name in a strange country. At this every manne laughed, both for the lie
and for the addition made to it by the L. Caesar. So proceadinge on in his talk
M. Bernarde said: You have understood therefore what Iestes are that be of
effect and communication without interruption as much as cummeth to mind:
therefore it shall be well now we speak of such as consist in one saying
alone, and have a quick sharpness that lies breefly in a sentence or in a
word. And even as in the first kind of meerie talk a man must in his
protestacion and counterfeitinge take heed that he be not like commune iesters
and parasites, and such as with fond matters move men to laughe, so in this
breef kind the Courtier must be circumspect that he appear not malicious and
venomous and speak tauntes and quippies only for spite and to touch the quick,
because such men often times for offense of the tunge are chastised in the
wholl body. Of those ready Iestes therefore that consist in a short saying,
such are most lively that arrise of doubtfulnesse, These two examples are put
in Italian, because they have no grace in the En^lish tunge by reason of the
doubtfulnesse of the woo^d^s that may be taken two sundry ways* yet is the
English as pl^ntifull of these (...) as any other tunge, wherein Sir Thomas
Moore e^cell^d in-out time.
though alwais they provoke not laughing, for they be rather praised for
witty, then for matters oflaughter. Come pochi di sono disse il nostro M.
Anniball Palle. otto ad vno che li pro ponea un maestro per insegnare
Grammatica a suoi figliuogli, et poi che gliel hebbe laudato per molto dotto,
venendo al salario, disse, che oltre a^i danari volea vna camera fornita per
habitare et dormire, perch esso non hauea letto. Allhor M. Anniball subito
rispose, and come puo egli esser dotto se non ha letto? See how well he took
advantage at the diverse signification of hauer letto (which is interpreted
both to have a bed and to have read.) But because these doubtful words have
a pretty sharpness of wit in them, being taken in a con^rarie signification
to that al other men take them, it appears (as I have said) that they rather
provoke a man to wondre then to laughe, except when they be joined with other
kinds of sayings. The kind therefore of witty sayings that is most used to
make men laughe, is when we give ear to hear one thing, and he that makes
answer, speaks an other and is alleged contrary to expectacion, and in
case a doubt be annexed therwithall, the^ is it very witty and pleasant. Come
laltr hieri disputandosi di far un bell mattonato nel camerino della S.
Duchessa, Matronato A pa^^ment.
dopo molte parole Voi M. Io. Christoforo diceste, Se noi potessimo hauere il
ves couo di Potentia, and farlo ben Spianare, saria molto a proposito, perch
egli e il pia bell matto nato ch'io vedessi may. Ogn'un rise molto, perch
diuidendo quella parola matto nato faceste lo ambiguo, poi dicendo che Si
hauesse a spianare un vescouo et metterlo per pauime^ to d'un camerino fu fuor
d'opinione di chi ascoltaua, Matto nato A natural fool.
cosi riusci il motto argutissimo et risibile. But of doubtful words there
be many sorts, therefore must a man be circumspect and chouse out terms very
artificiallye, and leave out such as make the Jest cold, and that a man
would ween were haled by the hear, Iestes that are to nipping.
or else (as we have said) that have to much bitterness in them. As certain
companions beeinge in a friends house of theirs, who had but one eye, after he
had desired the company to tarry dinner with him, they departed all saving one,
that said: And I am well pleased to tarry, for I see a void room for one, and
so with his fingre poyncted to the hole where his eye had bine. See how bitter
and discourtious this is passing measure, for he nipped him without a cause
and without beeinge first pricked himself: and he said the thing that a man
might speak against blind men. Such general matters delight not, because it
appears they are thought upon of purpose. And after this sort was the
saiynge to one without a nose: And where do thou fasten thy spectakles? Or,
wherewithal do thou smell roses at the time of the year? But among other
meerie sayings, they have a very good grace that arryse when a man at the
nippynge talk of his fellow takes the very same words in the self same
sense, and retourneth then back again pryckynge him with his own weapon. To
ni^ke a man with his own w^ordes.
As an attorney in the law, unto whom in the presence of the judge his
aduersarye said, what barke^^e thou? furthwyth he answered.: Because I see a
thief. And of this sort was also, Catullus answer to Philippus.
when Galeotto of Narni passing through Siena stayed in a street to enquire
for an y^n, and a Senese seeinge him so corpulente as he was, said laughinge:
Other men carye their bougettes beehynde them, and this good fellow caryeth
his before him. Galeotto answered immediatlye: So must men do in the
Country o^ thieves. To change a letter or sulable.
There is yet an other sort called in Italian Bischizzi, and that consists
in chaungynge or encreasinge, or diminisshinge of a letter or syllable. As he
that said: Thou should be better learned in the Latrine tunge then in the
Greek. And to you (madam) was written in the superscription of a letter, To
the Lady Emilia Impia. It is also a meerye divise to mingle together a verse
or mo, taking it in an other meeninge then the Author does, or some other
commune saying. Sometime in the very same meaning, but altringe a word, as
a Gentilman said that had a foul and scoulinge wief: when he was asked the
question how he did, he answered: Virgil. The (...) churches of Room.
Think thou thy self, for Furiarum maxima iuxta me cubat. And M. Hierom
Donato going a visitinge the Stacions of Room in Lent, in company with
many other Gentilmen, met with a knott of fair Roman Ladies, and when one
of those gentilmen had said. Ovid.

Of wanton dames

Room has like store,

As sterres be in the sky.

As many boys preserude for love,

As Kiddes in pastures lie.


Q^ot coelum stellas, tot habet tua Roma Puellas, by and by he added. Pascua
quotque hoedos, tot habet ^ua Roma cinaedo^, showinge a rout of young men
that came on the other side. And Marcantonio della Torte said after the manner
to the Bishop of Padoa, Where there was a Nounrye in Padoa under the charge
of a religious person much esteamed for his good life and learning, yt
happened that this father hauntinge much to the Nounrye very familiarlie, and
confessing often the Sisters, beegat five of them with child, where there
were not passinge five mo in all. And when the matter was known, the father
would have fled, and wi^t not how. The bishop caused him to be apprehended,
and upon that, he confessed that he had gotten those five Nounnes with child
through the temptacion of the Dyuell, so that the Bishop was fullye bent to
chastise him sore. And because this man was learned, he had many friends,
which altogether assayed to help him, and emonge the rest there went also M.
Marcantonio to entreat for him. The Bishop would in no wise give ear to
them. At length they being instant upon him and c^mmending the gyltie, and
excusinge him through the c^mmoditie, of place, frailtye of man and many
other causes* the Bishop said: I will do nothing for you, because I must make
account unto God of this. And when they had replied again, the Bishop said:
what answer shall I make unto god at ye day of judgment, Yield an account of
thy husbandry.
when he shall say unto me Read Rationem villicationis tue? M. Marcantonio
answered him immediately: Mary my lord the very same yt the Gospel says:
Domine quinque talenta tradidisti mihi, ecce alia quinque superlucratus sum.
Lord, thou deliueredst unto me v. talentes, behold I have gained ^. mo.
Then could not the Bishop abstain laughing and he assuaged much his anger
and the punishmente yt he had ordained for the offender. It is likewise very
pre^ie to allude to names and to feine somewhat, for that he the talk is of, is
so called, or else because he does some such thing. As not long sins Proto da
Luca (which as you know is one meerelie disposed) asking the Bishopprike of
Calio, To allude to names.
the Pope answered him: do thou not know that Calio, in the Spanishe tunge
is as much to say as, I houlde my Peace, and thou art a great prater? Therefore
it were vnsittinge for a Bishop at any time in naminge his title to make a
lie, Dooble signification of Calio.
now Calia, houlde thy peace then. To this Proto gave an answer, the which
although it were not in this sort yet was it no less pretty then this. For
after he had often put him in remembrance of this his suite and saw it take
none effect, at last he said: Holy father, in case your holiness do give me
this bisshoppricke, yt shall not be without a profit to you, for then will I
surrender two offices into your hands. And what offices have thou to surrender
into my hands, quoth the Pope? Proto answered: I shall surrender unto you
Officium principale, and Officium beatae Mariae. Dooble sign^fication of
Off^ciu^.
Then could not the Pope though he were a very grave person, abstain from
laughinge. An other also in Padoa said Ca^phurnius was so named, because he was
wont to heat fourneyses. And upon a day when I asked Phedra how it happens,
where prayer is made in the Church upon goodfridaye not only for Chrystyans,
but also for Paganes and for Jews, there was no mention made of the
Cardinals, as there was of Bishops and other prelates. He answered me, yt the
Cardinals were contained in the Collet, Oremus pro haereticis et
Schismaticis. And our Count Lewis said that I reprehended a lady of love for
occupyinge a certain kind of lie that shined much, because when she was
trimmed therwithall, I might see my self in her face, and for that I was ill
favored I could not abide to look upon my self. In this manner was that M.
Camillo Paleotto said unto M. Anthonio Porcaro, which reasoninge of a
companion of his that under confession had said unto the Priest that he fasted
with all his heart, and went to Mass and to holy service and did all the good
deeds in the world, said: This fellow in stead of accusynge prayseth him
self. Unto whom M. Camillo answered: nay, he rather confesses himself of these
matters, because he reckeneth the doing of them great sin. Do you not
remember how well the L. General said the last day, when Iohnthomas Galeotto
wondered at one that demanded two hundredth Ducates for a horse? for when
Iohnthomas said that he was not worth a farthinge, because among other ill
properties he had, he could not abide weapons, neither was it possible to make
him come nighe where he saw any, the L. General said (willing to reprehende
him of cowardice) if the horse has this property that he can not abide
weapons, I marue^le he asks not a thousand Ducates. Also sometime a man
speaks the very same word, but to another end then the commune use is. As,
when the Duke was passing over a very swift river, he said to the trompetter:
goo on. The trumpetter turned him back with his cappe in his hand and after
a reverent manner, said: It shall be youres my lord. It is also a pleasant manner
of iestinge, when a man seems to take the words and not the meaning of him
that speaks. As this year a Dutch man in Room meetinge in an Eueninge our
M. Phillipp Beroaldo whose Scholar he was, said unto him: Domine magister, Deus
der vobis bonum sero. And Beroaldo answered incontinently: Tibi malum cito. And
Diego de Chignognes beeinge at table with the Great Capitain, Ferdinando
^onsaluo. Note here the doob^e signif catio n of Vino Diego took it not for
wine but for, god came, He came indeed (quoth Diego, meaning it by Chri^^e)
and thou knew him ^ot: whereby he signif ed to the hearers that Spaniarde to
be of the beleaf that Christ is not yet come.
when an other Spaniarde that satt there had said, Vino dios (calling for
wine) Diego answered him again: Vino, y nolo conocistes, to nip him for a
marrane. Also* M, James Sadoleto said unto Beroaldo, that had ^ould him how he
would in any wise go to Bolonia what is the cause that makes you thus to leave
Room where there are so many pleasures, to go to Bolonia full of
disquietnesse? Beroaldo answ^red: I am forced to go to Bolonia for three
Countes. And now he had lift up three fingers of his left hand to allege
three causes of his going, when M. James sodeinlye interrupted him and said:
The three countes that make you go to Bolonia are, Count Lewis da San
Bonifacio, Count Hercules Rangon and the Count of Pepoli. Than they all laughed
because these three Countes ha^ bine Beroaldoes Sc^olers and were propre young
men and applied their study in Bolonia. This kind of meerye iestinge
therefore makes a man laughe much, because it brings with it other manner
answers then a man looks for to hear: and our own error does
naturallye delight us in these matters, which when it deceyueth us of that we
look for, we laughe at it. But the terms of speech and fygures that have
any grace and grave talk, Countes taken here bot^ ^or respects or ca^ses an^
also for Earls.
are likewise (in a manner) always comelye in Iestes and meerye pleasantness.
See how words placed contrarywyse give a great ornament, when a contrary
clause is set against another. The same manner is often times very meerye and
pleasant. As, Contrary words.
a Ge^uese that was very prodigal and lauysh in his expenses beeinge
reprehended by a usurer, who was most covetous, that said unto him: And when
will thou leave casting away* thy substance? Then he answered: When thou
leauest stealinge of other men's. And because (as we have already said) from
the places that we derive Iestes from, that touch a man, we may many times
from the very same take grave sentences to praise and commend, To ent^^^pre
othe^wise then ^ man means
it is a very comelye and honest manner both for the one and the other
purpose, when a man consents to and confirms the self same thing that
the other speaks, but enterpreteth it otherwise then he means. As within
these few days a Priest of the Country saying Mass to his parishioners,
after he had toulde them what holy days they should have that week, he
beegane the general confession in the name of all the people, and said: I
have sinned in ill dooynge, in ill speaking, in ill thinking, and the rest
that follows, making mentyon of all the deadlye sins. Then a Gossippe of
his and one that was very familyar with the Priest to sport with him, said
to the standers bye: Bear record, Sirs, what he confesses with his own
mouth he has done, for I entende to present him to the Bishop for it. The
very same manner used Sallazza della Pedrata to honor a Lady of love
wythall. With whom en^ringe in talk, after he had praised herr beeside her
virtuous qualities for her beawtie also, she answered him that she deserves
not that praise, because she was now well stricken in years. And he then said
to her: That is in you of age, is nothing else but to liken you unto the
aungelles, which were the first and are the auntientest creatures that ever
God made. Also meerie sayings are much to the purpose to nippe a man, as well
as grave sayings to praise one, so the metaphors be well applied, and
especially if they be answered, and he that makes answer continue in the
self same metaphor spoken by the other. And in this sort was answered to M.
Palla Strozzi, Palla Strozzi.
which banished out of Florence, and sendinge thither one of his about certain
affairs, Cosimo de Medici.
said unto him after a threatninge manner: Tell Cosmus de Medicis in my name
that The henn sits abroode. The messenger did the errand to him, as he was
wylled. And Cosmus without any more deliberacion, answered him immediatlye:
Tell M. Palla in my name again, that Hens can full ill sit abroode out of
the nest. With a metaphor also M. Camillo Porcaro commended honorablye the
Lord Marcantonio Colonna, The Lord Marcus Anthonius Columna.
who understanding that M. Camillo in an Oration of his had extolled certain
noble men of Italy that were famous in marcial prowess, and emonge the rest
had made most honorable mention of him, after rendringe due thanks, he said to
him: You (M. Camillo) have done by your friends as some merchaunt men play by
their money, which findinge a counterfeit Ducat, to dispatch him away, cast him
into a heap of good ones and* so vttre him: Even so you, to honor me withal,
where I am little worth, have set me in company with so excellent and virtuous
personages, y^ through their prowess, I may perauenture pass for a good one.
Then M. Camillo made answer: They that use to counterfeit Ducates, gylte them
so that they seem to the eye much better then the good: therefore if there were
to be found counterfeiters of men, as there be of Ducates, a man might have
a just cause to suspect you were false, beeinge (as you are) of much more
fair and brighter metal then any of the rest. You may see that this place is
commune both for the one and the other kind of Iestes, and so are many mo, of
the which a man might give infinite examples, and especially in grave sayings.
As the great Capitain said, which (beeinge set at table and every room
filled) saw two Italian Gentilmen standinge bye that had done him very good
service in the war, suddenly he start up and made all the rest to arrise to
give place to those two, and said: Make room Sirs for these gentilmen to sit
at their meat, for had not they bine we should not have had now wherwithall to
feade our selves. He said also to Diego Garzia that persuaded him to remove
out of a dangerous place that lay open upon gunnshott: Sins god has not put
fear into your mind, put not you it into mine. And king Lewis, Lewis the xij
which is now French king, where it was said unto him soon after his
creation, that then was the time to be even with his enemies that had done him
so much iniurye while he was Duke of Orleans. He made answer: That the French
king has nothing ado to revenge the wrongs done to the Duke of Orleans. A
man touches also in Jest many times with a certain gravity without moving a
man to laughe. As Gein Ottomani ^^other to the great Turk, Gein Ottomani
when he was prisoner in Room, he said: Iustinge (as we used it in Italy)
seemed to him ouergreat a daliaunce, and a tryfle to yt should be in deed. And
he said, when it was told him that king Ferdinande the younger was nimble and
quycke of person in renning, leapinge, vautynge and such matters, in his
country slaves used these exercises, but great men learned from their childhood
liberality and were renowned for that. And in a manner after the same sort,
sauinge it had a little more matter to laughe at, was that the archbishopp of
Florence said unto Cardinal Alexandrino, That men have nothing but Substance,
a body and a soul: Their Substance is at Lawyars disposynge, their Body at
Phisitiens, and their Soul at divines. Then answered the L. Julian: A man might
ad unto this the saiynge of Nicholetto: which is, that it is seldom seen a
Lawyer to go to law, nor a Phisitien take medicin, nor a divine a good
Christian. M. Bernarde laughed, then he proceaded: Of this there be infinite
examples spoken by great Princes and very grave men. Comparasons*
But a man laugheth also many times at comparasons. As our Pistoia wrott unto
Seraphin: I send thee back again thy great male which is like thy self. If
ye remember well Seraphin was much like a male. Again, there be some that have
a pastime to liken men and women to horses, to dogs, to birds, and often
times to coffers, to stools, to carts, to candelstickes, which sometime has a
good grace and otherwhile very stale. Therefore in this point a man must
consider the place, the time, the persons, and the other things we have so
many times spoken of, Then spoke the L. Gaspar Pallauicin: The comparason that
the L. John Gonzaga made of Alexander the great to M. Alexander his son, was
very pleasant. I wot not what it was, answered M. Bernarde. The L Gaspar
said: the L. John was playinge at dice (as his use is) and had lost a number of
Ducates and was still on the losinge hand, and M. Alexander his son, which
for all he is a child delyteth no less in play then his father, stood very
still to beehould him and seemed very sad. The Count of Pianella, that was
there present with many other Gentilmen, said: See (my Lord) M. Alexander is
very heavy for your^ loss, and his heart pants waytinge when luck will
come to you that he may get some of your winninges: therefore rid him of this
grief, and before ye lose the rest, give him at the least one Ducat that he
may go play him too, emonge his companyons. Then said the L. John: You are
deceived, for Alexander thinks not upon such a trifle, but as it is written
of Alexander the great, while he was a child, understanding that Philipp his
father had dyscomfited a great army, and conquered a certain kingdom, he fell
in weepinge, and when he was asked the question why he wept, he answered,
because he doubted that his father would conquerr so many Countries, that he
should have none left for him to conquerr: Even so now Alexander my son is
sorye and ready to weep in seeinge me his father lose, because he doubts
that I shall lose so much, that I shall leave him nothing at all to lose. When
they had a while laughed at this M. Bernarde went forward. A man must take
heed also his ieslynge be not wicked, and that the matter extend not (to
appear quy^witted) to blasphemye, and study therein to invent new ways:
Blasphemye.
Least herein, where a man deserves not only blame, but also sharp
punishment, he should appear to seek a praise, which is an abominable matter.
And therefore such as these be, that go about to show their pregnant wit with
small reverence to Godward, deserve to be excluded out of every Gentylmans
company. And no less, Filthy and baudie persons in talk.
they that be filthye and bawdye in talk, and that in the presence of women
have no manner respect, and seem to take none other delight but to make women
blushe for shame, and upon this go seekynge out meerye and jesting words.
As this year in Ferrara at a banckett in presence of many Ladies there was a
Florentine and a Senese, which for the most part (as you know) are ennemies
together. The Senese said to nipp the Florentine: We have married Siena to the
Emperor and given him Florence in dowerye. And this he spoke because the talk
was abroad in those days, that the Seneses had given a certain quantity of
money to the Emperor, and he took the protection of them upon him. The
Florentine answered immediatlye: But Siena shall be first ridden (after the
French phrase, but he spoke the Italian word) and then shall the do werye
afterward be pleaded for at good leyser. You may see the taunt was witty, but
because it was in presence of women it appeered baw die and not to be spoken.
Then spoke the L. Gaspar Pallauicin: Women have none other delight but to hear
of such matters, and yet will you deprive them of it. And for my part I have
bine ready to blushe for shame at words which women have spoken to me oftener
then men. And I speak not of such women as these be, quoth M. Bernarde, but of
the virtuous that deserve to be reverenced and honored of all gentilmen. The
L. Gaspar said: It were good we might find out some pretty rule how to know
them, because most communlie the best in appearance are clean contrary in
effect. Then said M. Bernarde smylinge: Were not the L. Julian here present
that in every place is counted the protector of women, I would take upon me
to answer you, but I will not take his office from him. Here the L. Emilia in
like manner smilinge, said: Women need no defendoure against an accuser of so
small authority. Therefore let ye L. Gaspar alone in this his froward opinion,
risen more because he could never find woman that was willing to look upon
him, then for any want that is in women, and proceade you in your
communication of Iestes. Then M. Bernarde, truly madam (quoth he) me think I
have named unto you many places, out of the which a man may pike pleasant and
witty sayings, which afterward have so much the more grace, as they are set
forth with a comely protestacion. Yet may there be alleged many other also,
as when to increase or diminish, things be spoken that vncrediblye pass the
likelihoode of truth. And of this sort was that Marius da Volterra said by a
prelate that thought himself so taule a person, that as he went into Saint
Peter's, he stowped for hittinge his head against the great beam over the
porche. Also the L. Julian here said that Golpino his servant was so lean
and dry, that in a morning as he was blowing the fire to kendle it, the smoke
bore him v^ the chimney unto the tonnell, and had gone away with him had he
not stooke on cross at one of the holes above* And M. Augustine Beuazzano
toulde, that a covetous man ne which would not sell his corn while it was at
a hi g he price, when he saw afterward it had a great fall, for desperacion
he hanged himself upon a beam in his chamber, and a servant of his hearing
the noise, made speed, and seeing his master hang, furthwith cut in sunder
the rope and so saved him from death: afterward when the covetous man came to
himself, he would have had his servant to have paid him for his halter that
he had cut. Of this sort appears to be also that Laurence de Medici^ said
unto a cold iester: thou should not make me laugh if thou ticklidest me.
The like he answered unto an other foolish person, who in a morninge had found
him in bed very late and blamed him for sleepinge somuche, saying unto him: I
have now bine in the new and old markett place, afterward I went out at the
gate of San Gallo to walk about the walls, and have done a thousand ^ther
matters, and you are yet in bed. Then said Laurence: that I have dreamed in one
hour is more worth, then all that you have done in four. It is also pretty
when one reprehendeth a thing which a man would not think he minded to
reprehende. As the marquess Friderick of Mantua our Duchess father, beeinge
at table with many gentilmen, one of them after he had eaten up his dishe of
broth, said: By your leave my L. marquess. And when he had so said, he beegane
to suppe up the rest that remained in the dishe. Then said the marquess by and
by: Ask leave of the swyne, for thou do me no wrong at all. Also M.
Nicholas Leonicus said, to touch a noble manne that was falselye reported to be
liberal: Guess you what liberalitye is in him, that does not only give away
his own good but other men's also. That is in like manner an honest and comely
kind of jesting that consists in a certain dissimulacion, when a man
speaks one thing and privily means another. Dissimulacion.
I speak not of the manner that is clean contrary, as if one should call a
dwarf a giaunt: and a black man, white: or one most ill-favored, beawtifull,
because they be to open contraries, although otherwhile also they stir a man
to laughe. But when with a grave and dry speech in sportinge a man speaks
pleasantly that he has not in his mind. As when a gentilman told M.
Augustine Folietta a loud lie and earnestlye did affirm it, because he thought
he scase beleaued it. At last M. Augustine said: Gentilman, if you will ever do
me pleaser, be so good to me as to quiet your self in case I do not beleaue
any thing you say. Yet when he replied again and bound it with an oath to be
true, at length he said: Sins you will have me, I am content to beleaue it
for your sake, for to say the truth I would do a greater thing for you then
this comes to. In a manner after the same sort Don Giouanni di Cardona said
of one that would forsake Rome: In mine opinion this fellow is ill aduysed,
for he is so wicked that in abidinge in Rome it may be his chance in time to
be made a Cardinal. Of this sort is also that Alphonsus Santacroce said,
which a little before having certain injuries done him by the Cardinal of
Pauia, and walking without Bolonia with certain Gentilmen nighe un to the place
of execution, and seeinge one newlye hanged there, turned him that way with a
certain heavy look and said so loud that every man might hear him: Thou art
a happy man that have nothing adoo with the Cardinal of Pauia. Jesting
grounded upon scoffinge meet for great men.
And the kind of iestinge that is somewhat grounded upon scoffinge seems
very meet for great men, because it is grave and witty and may be used both
in sporting matters and also in grave. Therefore did many of old time and
men of best estimatyon use it: As Cato, Scipio, Affricanus minor. But above
all they say Socrates the Philosopher excelled in it. And in our time King
Alphonsus the first of Aragon: which upon a time as he went to diner took
many rich iewelles from his fingers, for wetting them in washinge his hands,
and so gave them to him that stood next him as though he had not minded who
it was. This servant had thought sure the king marked not to whom he gave
them, and because his head was busied with more weighty affairs, would soon
forgete them clean, and thereof he took the more assurance, when he saw the
King asked not for them again. And when the matter was passed certain days,
wekes and months without hearing any word of it, he thought surely he was
safe. And so about the years end after this matter had happened, an other time
as the king was in like manner going to diner, he stepped forth and put out his
hand to take the kings ringes. Then the king rounding him in the ear, said:
The first is well for thee, these shall be good for an other. See this taunt
how pleasant, witty and grave it is, To name an ill thing with honest words.
and worthy in very deed for the noble courage of an Alexander. Like unto
this manner grounded upon scoffinge there is also an other kind, when with
honest words, a man names a vicious matter or a thing that deserves blame.
Frumpe^.
As the great Capitain said unto a Gentilman of his, that after the journey of
Cirignola and when all things were already in safetye, met him as richelye
armed as might be, ready to fight. Then the great Capitain tourninge to him
Don Vgo di Cardona, said: Fear ye not now any more Seatempest, for Saint
Hermus has appeered. And with this honest word he gave him a nicke. Because
you know Saint Hermus does always appear unto Mariners after a tempeste and
gives a token of caulme. And the meaning of the great capitain was, that when
this gentilman appeered it was a sign the danger was already clean past.
Again M. Octauian Vbaldi^o beeinge in Florence in company with certain of the
best Citizins and reasoninge together of soldiers, one of them asked him
whether he knew Antonello da Forli which was then fled out of the state of
Florence. M. Octauian answered: I have no great knowledge of him, but I have
heard him always reported to be a quick soldier. Then said an other
Florentin. It appears he is quick, for he tarried not so long as to ask
leave to depart. They be also pretty tauntes when a man of the very
communication of his fellow takes that he would not, and my meaning is in that
sort, as our Duke answered the Capitain that lost Saint Leo. Pope Alexander.vj.
usurped the dukedom of Vrbin and gave it to his son Caesar Borgia. communlye
called Duca valentino.
When this state was taken by Pope Alexander and given to Duke Valentin, the
Duke being in Venice at that time I speak of, many of his subjects came
continually to give him secret information how the matters of state passed, and
emonge the rest, thither came also this Capitain, which after he had excused
himself the best he could, laiynge the fault in his unluckiness, he said:
My Lord doubt ye not, my heart serves me yet to work a mean that Saint Leo
may be recovered again. Then answered the Duke: trouble not thy self any more
about that, for in losinge it thou haste wrought a mean that it may be
recovered again. Certain other sayings there are, when a man that is known to
be witty speaks a matter that seems to proceed of folly. As the last day
M. Camillo Paleotto said by one: that fool, as soon as he beegane to were
rich, died. There is like unto this manner a certain witty and kind
dissimulacion, when a man (as I have said) that is wise makes semblant not to
understand that he does understand. Dessimulacion.
As the marquess Friderick of Mantua, which being sued too by a prating fellow
yt complained upon certain of his neighbors taking the Pigions of his
Douehouse with snares, and held one continuallye in his hand hanging by the
foot in a snare, which he had found so dead, he answered him that there
should be a remedy for it. This fellow never satisfied, not once but many a
time repeted unto him his loss, showinge always the Pigion so hanged, and
said still: But I beseech you, how think ye (my Lord) what should a man do
in this matter? The marquess at length said: By mine advise ye Pigion ought in
no wise to be buried in ye Church, for sins he has so hanged himself, it is to
be thought that he was desperate. In a manner after the same sort was that
Scipio Nasica said unto Ennius. For when Scipio went unto Ennius house to
speak with him and called to him in the street, a maiden of his made him
answer that He was not at home, And Scipio heard plainlye Ennius himself say
unto his maiden to tell him that he was not at home, so he departed. Within a
while after Ennius came unto Scipioes house, and so likewise stood beneethe
and called him. Unto whom Scipio himself with a loud voice made answer that,
He was not at home. Then said Ennius: What, do not I know thy voice? Scipio
answered: Thou have small Courteysie in thee, the last day I beleaued thy
maiden that thou waste not at home, and now wilt not thou beleaue me my self?
It is also pretty when one is touched in the very same matter that he has
first touched his fellow. To touch in the same matter a man is touched.
As Alonso Carillo beeinge in the Spanishe Court and having committed certain
youthful parts that were of no great importance, was by the kings
commandment carried to prison, and there abode for one night. The next day he
was taken out again, and when he came to the Palaice in the morninge, he entered
into ye chamber of presence that was full of gentilmen and Ladies, and jesting
together at this his imprisonment, maistresse Boadilla said: M. Alonso, I
took great thought for this mishap of yours, for all yt knew you were in fear
least the king would have hanged you. Then said immediatlye Alonso: In deed
maistresse, I was in doubt of the matter my self to, but yet I had a good
hope that you would have begged me for your husband. See how sharp and
witty this is. The manner of Spain.
Because in Spain (as in many other places also) the manner is, when a man is
lead to execution, if a commune harlot will ask him for her husband, it
saves his life. In this manner also did Raphael the pein^ter answer two
Cardinals (with whom he might be familiar) which to make him talk, found
fault in his hearing with a table he had made, where Saint Peter and Saint
Paul were: saiynge, that those two pictures were to red in the face. Then said
Raphael by and by: My lords, wonder you not at it, for I have made them so for
the nones, because it is to be thought that Saint Peter and Saint Paul are even
as red in heaven as you see them here, for very shame that their Church is
governed by such men as you be. A semblant of laughing.
Also those Iestes are pleasant, that have in them a certain privy semblant of
laughter. As when a husband lamented much and bewailed his wief that had hanged
her self upon a figgtree, an other came to him and pluckynge him by the
slieue, said: friend, may I receive such pleaser as to have a graff of that
figgtree to graff in some stock of mine Orcharde? There be certain other
Iestes that be pacient and spoken softly with a kind of gravity. As a man of
the Country caryinge a coffer upon his shoulders, chanced therwithall to give
Cato a hard pushe, and afterward said: Give room. Cato answered: With a
certe^n gravity.
Haste thou any thing upon thy shoulders beeside that coffer? It is also a
matter of laughter when a man has committed an error and to amend it speaks
a matter pourposelye that appears foolish, and yet is applied to the end
that he has appointed, and serves his turn therwithall that he seem not
out of countenance and dismayed. A matter that seems foolish.
As not long sins two ennemies beeinge together in the Counsel chamber of
Florence (as it happens often in those Commonweals) the one of them,
Altouiti.
which was of the house of Altouiti, slept, and he that satt next unto him for
a sport, where his aduersarye that was of the house of Alamanni, Alamanni.
had said nothing neither then nor before, stirringe him with his elbowe made
him awake, and said unto him: Hear thou not what such a one says? Make
answer, for the Lords ask for thine advise. Then did Altouiti all sleepie
arrise upon his feet and without any more deliberation said: My Lords, I say
the clean contrary to that Alamanni has spoken. Alamanni answered: what? I
have said nothing. Altouiti said inmediatlye: To that thou will speak. In
this manner also did your M. Seraphin the Phisitien here in Vrbin say unto a man of the Country, which had received such a stroke upon the eye, that in
very deed it was out, yet thought he best to go seek to M. Seraphin for
remedy. When he saw it though he knew it was past cure, yet to pluck money
out of his hands as that blow had plucked the eye out of his head, he
promised him largelye to heal it. And so he was in hand with him every day
for money, puttinge him in comfort that within six or seven days, he should
beegine to see with it again. The poor country manne gave him the little he
had, but when he saw him so prolonge the matter, he beegane to find himself
agreeued with the Physitien, and said that he was nothing the better, neither
could he see any more with that eye, then if he had hadd none at all in his
head. At length M. Seraphin perceiving there was no more to be gotten at his
hands, said: Brother mine, thou must have patience, thou haste clean lost
thine eye and no remedy is there for it, pray God thou lose not thine other
wythall. The Country manne seeing this, fell in weepynge, and lamented much
and said: Master mine, you have pylled me and robbed me of my money, I will
complain to the Duke, and made the greatest outcryes in the world. Then said
M. Seraphin in a rage and to clear himself: Ah thou vyllein knave: thou
would then have two eyes as Cityzins and honest men have, would thou?
Get thee hence in the Dyuelles name. And these words were thruste out with
such fury that the poor selie manne was dismayed, and held his peace, To
enterpret a matter merely.
and soft and fair departed in gods name, thinking that he himself had bine
in the wrong. It is also pretty when a man declares or enterpreteth a matter
meerilie. As in the Spanishe Court in a morning there came into ye Palaice a
knight who was very ylfauoured: and his wief, that was very beawtifull, both
apparailed in white Damask, Dame ask.
and the Queen said unto Alonso Carillo: How think ye Alonso by these two?
Madam, answered Alonso, me think the Lady is the Dame, and he the ask, which
signifies a foul person and vglesome. Also when Raphael de Pazzi saw a
letter that the Priour of Messina had written to a maistresse of his, the
superscription whereof was: This letter be given to the cause of my grief.
Esta carta s^ha da dar a qui en causa mi penar, me think (quoth he) this
letter is directed to Paul Tholossa. Imagine you how the standers bye laughed
at it, for they all knew that Paul Tholossa had lent tenn thousand Ducates to
the Priour of Messina, and because he was very lauishe in his expenses, he
could find no way to pay his dett. It is like unto this, Familiar admonition
in manner of counsel.
when a man gives familiar admonition in manner of counsel, but
dissemblinglie. As Cosmus de Medicis said unto a friend of his that had more
riches then wit, and by Gosmus means had compassed an office without Florence,
and at his settinge furthe askinge Cosmus what way he thought best for him to
take to execute this office well: Cosmus answered him: Apparaile thy self in
scarlate, and speak little. Of this sort was that Count Lewis said unto one
that would pass for an unknown person in a certain dangerous place, and
wist not how to disguise himself, and the Count beeinge demanded of his
advise therein, answered: Apparaile thy self like a Doctor, or in some other
raiment that wise men use to wear. Also Iannotto de Pazzi said unto one that
minded to make an armynge coat of as many diverse colors as might be invented:
Take the words and deeds of the Cardinal of Pauia. matters disagreeinge:
A man laugheth also at certain matters disagreeinge. As one said the last day
unto M. Antony Rizzo of a certain Forliuese: Guess whether he be a fool or no,
for his name is Bartholomew. That seem to agree.
And an other: Thou seek a rider and have no horses. And this man wants
nothing but good and a horse. And at certain other that seem to agree. As
within these few days where there was a suspicion that a friend of ours had
caused a false aduoucion of a benifice to be drawn out, afterward when an
other Priest fell sick. Antony Torello said unto him: What do thou lingre
the matter, That agree not:
why do thou not send for thy Clerk and see whether thou cannest hit upon
this other benefyce? Likewise at certain that do not agree. As the last day
when the Pope had sent for M. Iohnluke of Pontremolo and M. Dominick dalla
Porta, which (as you know) are both crookbacked, and made them Auditors, The
Rota in Room is such an other matter as the Court of the Arches in England.
saying that he intended to bring the Rota into a right frame M. Latin
Iuuenal said: Our holy father is deceived if he think that he can bring
the Rota into a right frame with two crooked persons. Also it provoke
laughter, when a man grants the thing that is toulde him and more, but
seems to understand it otherwise. As Capitain Peralta being brought into
the listes to fight the combatt with Aldana and Capitain Molart that was
Aldanas patrine requiringe Peralta to swear whether he had about him any Saint
John's Gosspell or charm and inchauntmente, to preserve him from hurt. Peralta
swore that he had about him neither Gosspell, nor inchauntment, nor relike, nor
any matter of devotion wherein he had any faith. Then said Molart to touch him
to be a mar^ane: Well no mo words in this for I beleaue without swearinge
that you have no faith also in Christ. Metaphors*
It is pretty moreover to use metaphors at a time in such pourposes. As our M.
Marcantonio that said to Botton da Cesena, who had vexed him with words:
Botton, Botton, thou shall one day be the botton, and the halter shall be the
bottonhole. And also when Marcanconio had made a comedye which was very long
and of sundry acts* man will use. And although all kind of Iestes move a
man to laugh, Diverse effects in iestes.
yet do they also in this laughter make diverse effects. For some have in them
a certain cleanness and modest pleasantness. Other bite sometime privily,
otherwhile openly. Other have in them a certain wantonness. Other make one
laughe as soon as he hears them. Other the more a man thinks upon them.
Other in laughinge make a man blushe withal. Other stir a man somewhat to
anger. But in all kinds a man must consider the disposition of the minds of
the hearers because unto persons in adversity oftentimes meery toys augment
their affliction: and some infirmities there be, that the more a man occupies
medicine about them, the worse they were. In case therefore the Courtier in
iestinge and speakinge meerie conceytes have a respect to the time, to the
persons, to his degree, and not use it to often (for parde it brings a
lothsomnesse if a man stand evermore about it, all day in all kind of talk
and without purpose) he may be called pleasant and featconceyted. So he be
heedefull also that he be not so bitter and bitinge, that a man might
conjecture he were an envious person in prickinge without a cause, or for
plain malice, or men of to great authority (which is lack of discreation)
or of to much misery (which is crueltye) or to mischeuous (which is vanity)
or else in speakinge matters that may offend them whom he would not offend
(which is ignorance.) For some there be that think they are bound to speak
and to nippe without regard, as often as they can, how ever the matter go
afterward. And emonge these kind of persons are they, The small respect some
have in iestinge.
that to speak a word which should seem to come of a readiness of wit*
pass not for staynynge of a worthy gentilwomans honesty, which is a very
naughty matter and worthy sore punishment. Because in this point women are
in the number of selie souls and persons in miserye, and therefore deserve not
to be nipped in it, for they have not weapon to defend themselves. But beeside
these respects he that will be pleasant and full of iestinge, must be shaped of
a certain nature apt to all kind of pleasantness, and unto that frame his
facions, gestures and countenance, the which ye more grave, steadie and set
it is, so much the more makes it the matters spoken to seem witty and subtle.
But you (Sir Fridericke) that thought to rest your self under this my tree
without leaves and in my withered reasoninges, I beleaue you have repented
your self, and you reckon ye are entered into the baytinge place of
Montefiore. A paltock (...) ynn.
Therefore it shall be well done for you like a well practiced Courrier (to
avoid an ill hos^erie) to arryse somewhat before your ordinarye hour and set
forward on your journey. Nay, answered Sir Fridericke, I am come to so good an
hosterie, that I mind to tarry in it longer then I had thought at the first.
Therefore I will rest me yet a while. until you have made an end of all the
talk ye have beegone withal. Whereof ye have left out one percell that ye
named at the beeginning: which is, Meerie Pranckes, and it were not well done
to deceive the company of it. But as you have taught us many pretty matters
concerning Iestes, and made us hardy to use them through example of so many
singular wits, great men, Princis, Kings and Popes, I suppose ye will
likewise in Meerie Pranckes so boulden us, that we may take a courage to
practice some against you your self. Then said M. Bernarde smilinge: You shall
not be the first, but perhaps it will not be your chance, for I have so
many times bin served with them, yt it makes me look well about me: As
dogs, after they have bine once scaulded with hott water, are aferd of the
cold. How be it sins you will have me to speak somewhat of this to, What is a
Meerye pranck^.
I beleaue I may rid my hands of it in few words. And in mine opinion a
Meerie Prancke is nothing else, but a friendlye deceit in matters that
offend not at all or very little. And even as in Jesting to speak contrary
to expectacyon moves laughter, so does in Meerie Pranckes to do contrary to
(...). And these do so much the more delight and are to be praised, as they be
witty and modest. For he that (...) work a Meerie Prancke without respect,
does many (...) offend and then arrise debates and fore hatred. But the
places that a man may diriue Merry Pranckes from are (in a manner) the very
same that be in Iestes. Therefore to avoid repetition of the^, I will say no
more but that there be two kinds of Meerie Pranckes, every one of which may
afterward be divided into mo parts. The one is, when any man whoeuer he be,
is deceived wittily, and after a feat manner and with pleasantness. The other,
when a man lays (as it were) a nett, and shows a piece of a bayte so,
that a man renneth to be deceived of himself. The first is such, as the Meerie
Prancke was, that within these few days was wrought unto a coople of great
Ladies (whom I will not name) by the mean of a Spaniarde called Castilio. Then
the Duchess, and why (quod she) will you not name them? M. Bernarde
answered: Because I would not have them to take it in ill part. Then said the
Duchess again, smilinge: It is not against good manner sometime to use Meerie
Pranckes with great men also. And I have heard of many that have bine played
to Duke Fridericke, to king Alphonsus of Aragon, to Queen Isabel of Spain,
and to many other great Princis, and not only they took it not in ill part,
but rewarded very largely them that played them those parts. M. Bernarde
answered: neither upon this hope do I entend to name them. Say as pleases you
quoth the Duchess. Then proceaded M. Bernarde and said: Not many days since
in the Court that I mean, there arrived a man of the Country about Bergamo,
to be in service with a Gentilman of the Court: which was so well set out
with garments and so finelye clad; that for all his brynginge up was always
in keapinge Oxen and could do nothing else, yet a man that had not heard
him speak would have judged him a worthy Gentilman. And so when those two
Ladies were enfourmed that there was arrived a Spaniarde, servant to Cardinal
Borgia whose name was Castilio, a very witty man, a musitien, a daunser and
the best Courtier in all Spain, they longed very much to speak with him, and
sent incontinentlye for him, and after they had received him honorablye, they
caused him to sit down, and beegan to entertein him with a very great
respect in the presence of all men, and few there were present that knew him
not to be a Bergamask Cowherd. Therefore seeinge those Ladies enterteine him
with such respect, and honor him so much, they fell all in a laughyng, the
more because the seely fellow spoke still his natyue language the mere
Bergamaske tunge. The woorst speech in all Italy.
But the Gentilmen that divised this Prancke, had first toulde those Ladies
that emonge other things he was a great dissembler and spoke all tunges
excellentlye well, and especially the Country speech of Lumbardye so that
they thought he feigned, and many times they beehelde the one the other with
certain marueilinges, and said: What a wonderful matter is this, how he
counterfeyteth this tunge? In conclusion this communication lasted so long
that every man's sides aked for laughinge, and he could not chouse himself but
vttre so many tokens of his nobleness of birth, that at length those Ladies
(but with much ado) beleaued he was the man that he was in deed. Such Meerie
Pranckes we see daily, When a man is a feared o^ nothing.
but among ye rest they be pleasant that at the first make a man aghast and
after that, end in a matter of surety, because he that was deceived laugheth
at himself when he perceyueth he was a feared of no^^ing. As liynge upon a time
in Paglia, Paglia is a (...) ^illage in the utmost bounds of the territory o^
Siena*
there chanced to be in ye very same ynn three other good fellows, two of
Pastoia and one of Prato, which after supper (as the manner is for the most
part fell to gaming. And not long after, one of the Pistoiens losinge his
rest, had not a farthynge left him to bless himself, but beegan to chafe, to
curse, and to bann and to blaspheme terriblye, and thus tearinge of God he went
to bed. The other two after they had played a while, agreed to work a Meerie
Pranke with him that was gone to bed. And when they perceived that he was
fallen in sleep, they blew out the candels and raked up the fire and beegane
to speak aloude, and to make the greatest hurly burlye in the world, making
wise to contend together about their game. The one said: Thou tookest the
card underneath. The other deniynge it said: Thou have viede upon flush, let
us mount: and such other matters with such noise that he that slept awoke,
and hearing them at play and talkinge even as though they had seen the
cards, did a little open his eyes: when he saw there was no manner light in the
chamber, he said: What a Dyuell mean you to cry thus all night? Afterward
he laid him down again to sleep. The other two companions gave him no manner
answer, but still continued in their purpose until he awoke better and much
wondered, and when he saw for certein^ie yt there was neither fire nor any
kind of light and perceived they played still and fell in contention, he
said: And how can ye see the cards without light? The one of the two answered:
I ween thou have lost thy sight as well as thy money. See thou not that we
have here two candels? He that was in bed lift up himself upon his elbowes and
in a manner angered, said: Either I am dronken or blind, or else you make a
lie. The two arrose and went to bed darkelong, laughinge and making wise to
beleaue that he went about to mock them. And he again said to them: I tell
you troth I see you not. At length the two beegane to seem to wonder much, and
the one said to the other: By good Lord, I beleaue he speaks in good
earnest, reach me the candell, and let us see least perhaps he have some
impediment in his sight. Then thought the poor wretch surely that he had bine
blind, and weeping dounright, said: Oh Sirs, I am blind: The greatest
pilgromag^ in Italy.
and furthwith he beegane to call upon our Lady of Loreto and to beeseche her
to perdon him his blasphemies and cursinge for the loss of his money. But his
two companions put him in good comfort and said: it is not possible but thou
should see us. Yt is some fansye that thou haste conceived in thine head.
Oh good lord answered the other, it is no fansye, nor I see no more then if I
had never had eyes in my head. Thy sight is clear inoughe, quoth the two.
And the one said to the other: Mark how well he opens his eyes? And how
fair they be to look to? And who would beleaue but he could see? The poor
soul wept faster, and cried God mercy. In conclusion they said unto him: See
thou make a vow to go diuoutlye to our lady of Loreto barefoote and
barelegged, for that is the best remedy that may be had. And in the mean
space we will go to Aquapendente and the other towns here about to seek for
some Phisitien, Aquapendente is a town of the Popes xii. miles from Paglia
and will help the in what we can. Then did the seely soul kneel upon his
knees in the bed, and with abundance of tears and very bitter repentance for
his blaspheminge, made a solemn vow to go naked to our lady of Loreto and to
offer unto her a pair of eyes of silver, and to eat no flesh upon the
wenesdaye nor eggs upon the Fridaye, and to fast bread and water every
Saturday in worship of our lady: If she give him ye grace to receive his sight
again. The two companions entringe into an other chamber, lighted a candell,
and came with the greatest laughter in the world before this poor soul, who
for all he was rid of so great an anguish as you may think he had, yet was he
so astonished with his former fear, that he could not only not laugh, but not
once speak a word, and the two companions did nothing else but sturr him,
saiynge that he was bound to perform all those vows, for that he had
received the grace he asked. Of the other kind of Meerie Pranckes when a man
deceyueth himself, I will give you none other example, When a man deceives
himself.
but what happened unto me my self not long sins. For this shroftide that is
past, my Lords grace of Saint Peter ad vincula, which knows full well what a
delight I have when I am in maskerie to play Meerie Pranckes with friars,
having first given order as he had divised the matter, came upon a day with my
L. of Aragon and certain other Cardinals, to the windows in the banckes,
making wise to stand there to see maskers pass to and fro, as the manner of
Room is. I being in maskerie passed bye, and when I beheld on the one side of
the street a friar standinge (as it were) in a study with himself, I judged
I had found that I sought for, and furthwith rann to him, like a greedye hawk
to her preye, and when I had asked him and he toulde me who he was, I made
semblant to know him, and with many words beegane to make him beleaue that
the marshall went about to seek him for certain complaints against him, and
persuaded him to go with me to the Chauncerye and there I would save him. The
friar dismayed and all tremblinge seemed as though he wist not what to do, and
said that he doubted taking in case he should go far from Saint Celso. Still I
put him in good comfort, and said somuche to him that he leaped up beehinde
me, and then me thought my divise was fully accomplished. And I beegane to ride
my horse by and by up and down the merchauntes street, which went kicking and
winsing. Imagine with your selves now what a fair sight it was to beehould a
friar on horseback beehinde a masker, his garments fleeing abroad and his
head shaking to and fro, that a man would have thought he had bine always
falling. With this fair sight, the gentilmen beegane to hurl eggs out at the
windows, and afterward all the bankers and as many as were there, so that the
hail never fell with a more vyolence from the sky, then there fell eggs out
from the windows* which for the most part came all upon me. And I for that I
was in masker^^ passed not upon the matter, and thought verily that all the
laughinge had bine for the friar and not for me, and upon this went sundry
times up and down the Banks always with that furye of hell beehinde me. And
though the friar (in manner) weepinge beesought me to let him go down and
not to show such shame to the weed, yet did the knave afterward privily
cause eggs to be given him by certain Lackayes set there for the nones, and
making wise to greepe me hard for falling, squised them in my bosom, and
many times on my head, and otherwhile in my forehead, so that I was foul
arrayed. Finally when every man was weerye both of laughinge and throwing
eggs, he leaped down from beehind me, and plucking his hoode backward showed
me a great bushe of hear, and said: M. Bernarde, I am a horse keaper in the
stable at Saint Peter ad Vincula and am he that looks to your mulett. Then
wiste I not which prevailed most in me, grief, anger or shame. Yet for the
less hurt I fled toward my lodging, and the next morning I durst not
show my head abroad. But the laughing at that Meerie Prancke did not endure
the day following only, but also lasts (in a manner) until this day. And
so when they had a while renewed the laughinge at rehersynge this again* M.
Bernarde proceaded. To feine the doing of a matter.
It is also a good and pleasant kind of Meerie Pranckes, from whens in like
manner Iestes are diriued, when one beleaueth yt a man will do a matter which he
will not in deed. As when I was in an Eueninge after supper upon the bridge
of Leo, and goinge together with Caesar Boccadello sportinge one with an other,
we beegan to take houldfast the one of the others arms, as though we would have
wrastled, because then we perceived no man about the bridge. and being in this
manner together, there came two Frenchmen by, which seeing us thus striving,
demanded what the matter meant, and stayed to part us, thinkinge we had bine at
debate in good ernest. Then said I incontinentlye: Help sirs, for this poor
gentilman at certain times of the moon is frantike, and see now how he
strives to cast himself of the bridge into the river. Then did the two renn
and laid hand upon Caesar with me and held him streict. And he (saying
always that I was out of my wit) struggled the more to wind himself out of
their hands, and they greeped him so much the harder. At this the people
assembled to beehoulde our rufflinge together, and every manne rann, and the
more poor Caesar laid about him with his hands and feet (for he beegane now
to enter into coler) the more resort of people there was, and for the great
strength he put, they beleaued verelie that he would have leaped into the
river, and therefore held they him the streicter, so that a great thronge of
people carried him to the ynn above ground, all tourmoiled and without his
cappe, pale for wrath and shame that nothing he spoke could prevail,
partlye because those Frenchmen understood him not, and partly because I also
cariynge him to the ynn did always bewail the poor souls ill luck, that
was so wexed out of his wit. Now (as we have said) of Meerie Pranckes a man
may talk at large, but it suffices to repete that the places whens they are
diriued be the very same which we have said of Iestes. Giornat. viii. Nouel.
iii. Novel. v. Novel. vi. Novel. ix. Giornat ix. Novel. iii. Novel. v.
Pontius a scholar of Pa^^a.
As for examples, we have infinite which we see daily: and among the rest
there are many pleasant in the tales of Boccaccio, as those that Bruno and
Buffalmacco played to their Calandrino, and to M. Simon: and many other of
women, which in very deed are witty and pretty. I remember also I have
known in my days many that have bine meerilie disposed in this manner, and
emonge the rest a Scholar in Padoa borne in Sicilia called Pontius, which
seeinge upon a time a man of the country have a coople of fatt capons,
feininge himself to bye them, was at a point with him for the price, and bed
him ^ome with him to his lodginge, for beeside his price he would give him
somewhat to break his fast withal. And so brought him to a place where was a
styple that stood by himself, alone severed from the Church, that a man
might go round about him, and directlye over against one of the four sides
of the styple was a lane. Here Pontius, when he had first beethought himself
what he had to do, said unto the man of ye country: I have laid these Capons
on a wager with a fellow of mine, who says that this toure compaseth xl.
foot* and I say no, and even as I met with thee I had bought this packthrid to
measure it, therefore before we go to my lodging I will try which of us has
wonn the wager. And in so saiynge he drew the packthrid out of his sleeue, and
put the one end of it into the man of the countries hand, and said: give
here, and so took the Capons: and with the other end he beegane to go about
the bell toure, as though he would have measured it, making first the man of
the country to stand still, and to houlde the packthrid directlye on the
contrary side of the toure to that, that was at the head of ye lane, where
as soon as he came, he drove a nail into the wall, to the which he tied the
packthrid, and leaving it so, went his ways without any more a do down the
lane with the Capons. The man of the Country stood still a good while,
always lookinge when he would have done measuring. At length after he had said
many times, what do you so long? he thought he would see, and found that
Pontius held not the line, but a nail that was driven into the wall, which
only remained for payment of his Capons. Of this sort Pontius played many
Meerie Pranckes. And there have bine also many other pleasant men in this
manner, as Gonella, Meliolo in those days, and now our friar Seraphin and friar
Marian here and many well known to you all. And in very deed this kind is
to be praised in men that make profession of nothing else. But the Meerie
Pranckes that ye Courtier ought to use, must (by mine advise) be somewhat wide
from immoderate jesting. He ought also to take heed that his Meerie Prancke^
turn not to pilferinge, Pilferinge.
as we see many naughtipackes* that wander about the world with diverse shifts
to get money, feining now one matter, now an other. And that they be not to
bitter, and above all that he have respect and reverence, Reverence to women.
as well in this, as in all other things, to women, and especially where the
staininge of their honesty shall consist. Then the L. Gaspar, truly, M.
Bernarde (quoth he) you are to partial to these women. And why will you that
men should have more respect to women then women to men? Set not you as much
by your honesty, as they do by theirs? Think you then that women ought to
nippe men both with words and mockes in every matter without any regard, and
men should stand with a flea in their ear, and thank them for it? M.
Bernarde answered: I say not the contrary, but women in their Iestes and
Meerie Pranckes ought to have the respects to men which we have spoken of.
Yet I say with more liberty man ^hey touch men of small honesty, then men
may them. And that because we our selves have established for a law, that in
us wanton lief is no vice, nor default, nor any sclaunder, and in women it is
so great a reproach and shame, that the that has once an ill name, whether the
report that goith of her be true or false, has lost her credit for ever.
Therefore sins the talkinge of women's honesty is so dangerous a matter to
offend them sore, I say that we ought to touch them in other matters and
refrain from this. For when the Jest or Meerie Pranck ^ippeth to sore, it
goith out of ye bounds which we have already said is fit for a gentilman.
Here M. Bernarde making a little stopp, the L. Octauian Fregoso said smylinge:
My L. Gaspar can make you an answer to this law which you allege that we our
selves have made, Women.
that yt is not perchance so out of reason, as you think. For sins women are
most imperfect creatures and of little or no woorthynesse in respect of men,
it beehoued for that they were not apt to work any virtuous deed of them
selves, that they should have a bridle put upon them with shame and fear of
infamye, that should (in manner) by force bring into them some good condition.
And continency was thought more necessary in them, then any other, (...)
to have assurance of children. So that very force has driven men withal
inventions, policies, and ways possible to make women continent, and (in
manner) granted them in all things beeside to be of small worthiness, and
to do the clean contrary always to that they ought to do. Therefore sins it
is lawful for them to swerve out of the way in all other things without
blame, if we should touch them in those defaultes, wherein (as we have said)
they are to be borne withal, and therefore are not unseemly in them, and
pass full little upon it, we should never move laughter. For you have already
said, that Laughter is provoked with certain things that are disagreeinge.
Then spoke the Duchess: Speak you (my L. Octauian) of women thus, and then
complain that they love you not. The L. Octauian answered: I complain not of
it, but rather I thank them for it, sins in not louinge of me, they bind not
me to love them. Neither to I speak after mine own opinion, but I say yt ye
L. Gaspar might allege these reasons. M. Bernarde said: truly women should
make a good bargayne, if they could make attonementes with such two great
ennemies as you and the L. Gaspar be. I am not their enemy answered the L.
Gaspar, but you are an enemy to men. For in case you will not have women
touched in this honesty of theirs, you ought as well to appoint them a law not
to touch men, in that which is as much shame to us, as incontinencye to
women. And why was it not as meet for Alonso Carillo to make ye answer which
he gave maistres Boadilla of ye hope that he had to save his lief, in that she
would take him to husband as it was for her to say first: All that knew him
thought the king would have hanged him* Boccaccio. Giornat. iii. Novel. vi.
Giornat. vii. Novel. vii.
And why was it not as lawefull for Richard Minutoli to beguile Philippellos
wief, and to trane her to that bayne, as it was for Beatrice to make Egano her
husband arrise out of his bed, and Anichin to beeswadell him with a cudgel,
after she had lain a good space with him? And the other that tied the packthrid
to her great toe, and made her own husband beleaue that he was not himself,
Giorna. vii. Nouel. viii.
sins you say those Meerie Pranckes of women in Boccaccio are so witty and
pretty. Then said M. Bernarde smiling: My lords, for so much as my part has bin
to entreat only of Iestes, I entende not to pass my bounds therein, and I
suppose I have already showed why I judge it not meet to touch women neither
in word nor deed about their honesty, and I have also given them a rule not
to nippe men where it greeueth them. But I say that those Meerie pranckes and
Iestes which you (my L. Gaspar) allege, as that Alonso said unto M. Boadilla,
although it somewhat touch honesty: yet does it not discontent me, because
it is set far inoughe of, and is so privy, that it may be simplye
understood, so, that he might have dissembled the matter, and affirmed that he
spoke it not to that end. He spoke an other (in mine opinion) very unseemly,
which was: When the Queen passed by M. Boadillas house, Alonso saw peincted
with coals all the gate over, such kind of dishonest beasts, as are peincted
al out ynnes in such sundry wise, and cumminge to the Countess of Castagneto
said unto her: See (madam) the heads of the wielde beasts that M. Boadilla
kills every day in huntinge. Mark you this, though it were a witty
metaphor, and borrowed of Hunters* that count it a glory to have many wielde
beasts heads nailed at their gates, yet is it dishonest and shameful
iestinge. Beeside that, it was not in answeringe, for an answer has much
more courtesy in it, because it is thought that a man is provoked to it, and
it must needs be at a sodeine. But to retourn to our matter of the Meerie
Pranckes of women, I say not that they do well to beeguile their husbands: but
I say that some of the deceites which Boccaccio recyteth of women, are pretty
and witty enough, and especially those you have spoken of your self. But in
mine opinion the prancke that Richard Minutoli wrought, does pass the
bounds, and is much more bitterer then ye Beatrice wrought. For Richard
Minutoli took much moore from Philippellos wief, then did Beatrice from Egano
her husband: because Richard with that privy policy enforced her, and made
her to do of herself that she would not have done: And Beatrice deceived her
husband to do of herself that she lusted. Then said the L. Gaspar: for no
other cause can a man excuse Beatrice but for love, which ought to be allowed
as well in men as in women. Then answered M. Bernarde: Truly the passions of
love bring with them a great excuse of every fault, yet judge I (for my part)
that a Gentilman that is in love, ought as well in this point as in all other
things, to be void of dissimulation, and of an upright meaning. Love without
dissimulation.
And if it be true that it is such an abominable profit and trespace to use
tradiment against a man's very enemy: consider you how much more heinous
that offense is against a person whom a man loves. Tradiment against one
beloved.
And I beleaue each honest lover susteyneth such peynes, such watchinges,
hasardeth himself in such dangers, droppeth so many tears, uses so many
means and ways to please the woman whom he loves, not cheeflye to come bye
her body, The true end of lovers desires.
but to winn the fortress of that mind, to break in pieces those most hard
Diamondes, to heat that cold ice, that lie many times in the tender breasts
of these women. And this do I beleaue is the true and sound pleasure, and the
end whereto the intent of a noble courage is bent. And for my part truly (were
I in love) I would like it better to know assuridlye that she whom I loved and
served loved me again with heart, and had bent her mind toward me, without
receiving any other contentation, then to enjoy her and to have my fill of her
against her own will, for in that case I should think my self master of a
dead carcass. Therefore such as compase their desires by the mean of these
Meerie Pranckes, which may perhaps rather be termed Tradimentes then Meerie
Pranckes, do iniurye to other, Unhonest lovers.
and yet receive they not for all that the contentacion which a man should
wish for in love, possessynge the body without the will. The like I say of
certain other that in love practice enchauntmentes. sorceries, and otherwhile
plain force, sometime means to cast them in sleep and such like matters.
Gifts in (...)
And know for a sooth, that gifts also diminishe much the pleasures of love,
because a man may stand in doubt whether he be beloved or no, but that the
woman makes a countenance to love him, to fare the better by him: therefore ye
see that the love of Ladies and great women is esteamed, because it appears
that it can arrise of none other cause, but of perfect and true love, neither
is it to be thought that a great Lady will at any time show to bear good
will to her inferior, unless she love him in very deed. The answered the L
Gaspar: I deny not that the intent, the peynes and dangers of lovers ought
not principally to have their end dyrected to the victory rather of the mind
then of the body of the woman beloved. But I say that these deceytes which
you in men term Tradimentes, and in women Meerie prankes, are a very good
mean to come to this end, because always he that possesses the body of
women, is also master of the mind. And if you beethinke you well, Philippellos
wief after her great lamentatyon for the deceyt wrought her by Richard,
knowinge how much more sauourye the kysses of a lover were then her
husbands, tournynge her rigor into tender affection toward Richard, from
that day forward loved him most deerlye. You may perceive now that his
continual hauntinge, his presents, and his so many other tokens, which had
bine so long a proof of his good will toward her, were not able to compass
that, that his beeyinge with her a small while did. Now see this Meerie
Prancke or Tradiment (how ever you will term it) was a good way to wynn the
fortress of that mind. Then M. Bernarde, you (quoth he) make a surmise, which
is most false, for in case women should always give their mind to him yt
possesses their body, there should be none found that would not love their
husbands more then any person in the world beesyde, where it is seen not to
be so. But John Boccaccio was (as you be) with out cause an enemy to women.
The L. Gaspar answered: I am no enemy of theirs, but (to confess the troth)
few men of woorthynesse there be that generally set any store by women,
although otherwhile, to serve their turn withal, they make wise to the
contrary. Then answered M. Bernarde: You do not only iniurye to women, but
to all men also that reverence them: Notwithstanding (as I have said) I
will not swerve from my first purpose of Meerie Pranckes, and undertake such
an enterprise so hard, as is the defense of women against you, that are a
valiant Champyon. Therefore I will end this my communication, which perhaps
has byne longer then needed, but out of parauenture not so pleasant as you
looked for. And syns I see the Ladies so quiet and bear these injuries at
your hands so pacyentlye as they do, I will hensefurth beleaue that some
part of that which the L. Octauian has spoken is true: Namely That they pass
not to be ill reported of in every other matter, so their honesty be not
touched. Then a great part of the women there, for that the Dutch^sse had
beckened to them so to do: arrose upon their feet, Orpheus was torn in
pieces with women*
and ran all laughyng toward the L. Gaspar, as they would have buffeted him and
done as the wood women did to Orpheus saing continually: Now shall we see
whether we pass to be ill spoken of or no. Thus partlye for laughinge, and
partlye for the risinge of every one from his seat, yt seemed the sleep that
now beegane to enter into the eyes and head of some of them departed, but the
L. Gaspar said: See I pray you where they have not reason on their side, they
will prevail by plain force, and so end the communication, geuinge us leave
to depart with stripes. Then answered yt L. Emilia: No (quod she) it shall not be
so: for when you perceived M. Bernarde was weerie of his long talk, you
beegan to speak so much ill of women, thinkinge you should find none to
gainsaye you. But we will set into ye field a fresher knight that shall fight
with you, because your offense shall not be so long unpunished. So tourninge
her to the L. Julian that hitherto had said little, she said unto him: You are
counted the protector of the honor of women, therefore it is now high time
to show that you come not by this name for nothing, and in case ye have not
bine woorthelye recompensed at any time for this profession hitherto, now
must you think that in puttinge to flight so bitter an ennemy, you shall
bind all women to you much more, and so much, that where they shall do
nothing else but reward you, yet shall the bondage still remain fresh, and
never cease to be recompensed. Then answered the L. Julian: Me think (madam)
you show great honor to your ennemy, and very little to your defender: for
undoubtedly the L. Gaspar has said nothing against women, but it has bine
fullye answered by M. Bernarde. And I beleaue every one of us knows, that it
is meet the Courtier bear very great reverence to ward women, and a
discreet and courtiouse person ought never to touch their honesty neither in
board, nor in good earnest. Therefore to dispute of this so open a truth, were
(in manner) to put a doubt in manifest matters. I think well that the L.
Octauian passed his bounds somewhat in saying that Women are most imperfect
creatures and not apt to work any virtuous deed, and of little or no
worthiness in respect of men. And because many times credit is given to men
of great authority, although they speak not the full truth, and also when they
speak in boorde, the L. Gaspar has suffered himself to be lead by the L.
Octauians words to say that Men of wisdom set no store by them, which is
most false. For I have known few men of worthiness at any time that do not
love and observe women, Men of worthiness observe women.
the virtue and consequentlye the worthiness of whom I deem not a iott
inferior to men's. Yet if we should come to this contention, the cause of women
were like to quail greatly, because these Lords have shaped a Courtier that
is so excellent and of so many divine qualities, that whosoever has ye
understanding to consider him to be such a one as he is, will imagine that ye
deserts of women can not attain to yt point. But in case yt matter should be
equally divided, we have first need of so witty and eloquent a person as is
Count Lewis and Sir Fridericke, to shape a gentilwoman of the Palaice with all
perfections due to a woman, as they have shaped the Courtier with the
perfections beelonging to a man. And then if he that defended their cause were
any thing witty and eloquent, I beleaue (because the truth will be a help
to him) he may plainlye show that women are as full of virtues as men be. The
Lady Emilia answered: Nay, a great deal more, and that it is so you may see*
virtue is the female, and vice is the male. The L. Gaspar then laughed, and
tourning him to M. Nicholas Phrisio, what is your judgment Phrisio (quoth he)
Phrisio answered: I am sorry for the L. Julian that he is so seduced with the
promises and flatteringe words of the L. Emilia to renn into an error to
speak the thing which for his sake I am ashamed of. The L. Emilia answered
smilinge: you will sure be ashamed for your own sake, when you shall see y^ L.
Gaspar after he is convicted, confess his own error and yours to, and
demand that pardon which we will not grant him. Then spoke the Duchess:
Because it is very late, I will we defar the wholl until to morrow, the more
for yt I think it well done we follow the L. Iulians counsel, that before we
come to this disputacion we may have a gentilwoman of the Palaice so facioned
in all perfections, as these Lords have facioned the perfect Courtier. Madam
quoth the L. Emilia then, I pray God it fall not to our lot to give this
enterprice to any confederate with the L. Gaspar, least he facion us for a
gentilwoman of the Court, one that can do naught else but look to the kitchen
and spinn. Then said Phrisio: In deed that is an office fit for herr. Then
the Duchess, I have a good hope in the L. Julian (quoth she) who will (for
the good wit and judgment I know he is of) imagyn the greatest perfection
that may be wished in a woman, and in like manner express it well in words,
and so shall we have somewhat to confound the L. Gaspars false accusations
withal. Madam, answered the L. Julian, I wot not whether your divise be good
or no to committ into my hands an enterprise of so great weight, for (to tell
you the troth) I think not my self able inoughe. Neither am I like the Count
and Sir Fridericke, which with their eloquence have shaped such a Courtier as
never was, nor I beleaue ever shall be. Yet if your pleasure be so that I shall
take this bourden upon me, let it be at the least with those conditions that
the other have had before me: namely, that every man, where he shall think
good, may replye against me, and this shall I reckon not ouerthuartinge but
aid, and perhaps in correctynge mine erroures we shall find the perfection
of a gentilwoman of the Palaice which we seek for. I trust, answered the
Duchess, your talk shall be such, that little may be said against you.
Therefore settle your mind to think upon only this and facion us such a
Gentilwoman that these our adversaries may be ashamed to say, that she is not
equal with the Courtier in virtue: of whom it shall be well done Sir Friderick
speak no more, for he has but so well set him forth, especially sins we
must compare a woman to him. I have (madam) answered Sir Friderick, little or
nothing now left to speak of ye Courtier, and ye I did think upon, M.
Bernardes Iestes have made me forgete. If it be so quoth the Duchess,
assembling together to morrow beetimes, we shall have leiser to accomplish both
the one and the other. And when she had so said, they arrose all upon their
feet, and taking their leave reuerentlye of the Duchess every man withdrue
him to his lodging.

THE THIRD BOOK OF the Courtier of Count Baldessar Castilio unto. M.
Alphonsus Ariosto. Englisshed at the request of the Lady Marquess of
Northampton, in anno 1551.
IT is read that Pithagoras very wittilye and after a suttill manner found out
the measure of Hercules body, in that he knew that the space where every
five years they kept the games or prices of Olympus in Achaia nigh unto Elis
before Jupiter Olympicus Temple, Pisis ad Iouem Olimpicum.
was measured by Hercules himself: and appointed a furlonge of ground there
of six hundredth and five and twenty of his own feet: and the other
furlonges which after his time were cast out in diverse parts of Greece by
his successors, Plin. lib. ii. cap. xxiii. de nature. histor.
were also of six hundredth and five and twenty of their feet, but for all
that somewhat shorter then his. Pythagoras knew furthwith by that proportion
how much Hercules foot was bigger then all the other men's feet, and so the
measure of his foot once known, he gathered ye all Hercules body
proporcionally in greatness exceaded all other men's, so much, as that
furlonge, all other furlonges. You may then (gentle M. Alphonsus) by the very
same reason easlie gather by this least part of all the rest of the body, how
far the Court of Vrbin excelled all the other in Italy. The Court of Vrbin.
For if the sportes and pastymes (that are used to none other end but to
refresh ye werisome minds after earnest labors) far passed all such as are
commonly used in ye other Courts of Italy: What (guess you) were all the
virtuous practices, whereunto all men had their minds bent, and were fully
and wholly addicted. And of this I may be boulde to make my vaunt, nothing
mistrusting but to be credited there in, consideringe I go not about to praise
so ancient antiquities wherein I might, if I were disposed, feine what I
lusted: but of this I speak, I am able to bring forth many men of worthy
credence, for sufficient trial, which as yet are in lief and have themselves
seen and marked well the living and conversation of such as in times past
excelled in that Court. And I reckon my self bound (for that lies in me to
do) to stretch forth my force with all diligence to defend this famous memory
from mortal oblivion, and with my penn to make it live in the minds of our
posterity, whereby perhaps in time to come there shall not want that will
envy this our time. For there is no man that reads of the wonderful
families of times past, but in his mind he conceyueth a certain greater opinion
of them that are written upon, then it appears those books can express
though they have bine written with perfection: Even so do we consider that all
the readers of this our travail (if at the least wise it shall deserve so much
favor, yt it may come to ye sight of noble men and virtuous Ladies) will cast
in their mind and think for a surety, that the Court of Vrbin has bine much
more excellent and better fournished with notable men, then we are able to
express in writing. And in case so much eloquence were in me, as there was
prowess in them, I should need none other testimony to make such give full
credence to my words, as have not seen it.

When therefore the company was assembled in the accustomed place the day
folowinge at the due hour, and set with silence, every man turned his eyes to
Sir Fridericke and to the L. Julian, waytinge when the one of them would
beegine to speak his mind. Wherefore the Duchess, after she had bine still a
while, (...) L. Julian (quoth she) every man's desire is to see this your
Gentilwoman well set furthe, and if you show us her not in such manner, that
all her beawties may be discerned, we will suspect that you are ieolous over
her* The L. Julian answered: Madam, if I reckened her beawtifull, I would show
you her without any other settingfurth,and in such wise as Paris did beehoulde
the three Goddesses. Juno. Minerua. Venus.
But in case these Ladies be not a help to me to trim her (who can do it right
well) I doubt me, that not only ye L. Gaspar and Phrisio, but all ye other
Lords here shall have a just cause to speak ill of her. Therefore sins she is
yet in some part deemed beawtifull, perhaps it shall be better to keep her
close and see what Sir Friderick has yet beehind to speak of the Courtier,
which (no doubt) is much more beawtifull then my woman can be. That I had in
mind, answered Sir Fridericke is not so necessary for the Courtier, but it may
be left out, and no hurt done: yea, it is a contrary matter almost to that
hitherto has bine reasoned of. And what matter is it then, quoth the
Duchess? Sir Fridericke answered, I was pourposed, in what I could, to
declare the causes of these companies and ordres of knights brought up by
great Princis under diverse standards, Order of S. Michael.

Of the Garter.

Of the Golden Flise.


as is that of Saint Michael in the house of France, the order of the Garter
under the title of Saint George in the house of England, the Golden Flice in
the house of Burgony, and how these dignities be given, and in what sort they
that deserve are disgraded from them, how they first came up, who were the
founders of them, and to what end they were ordained, because we see that
these knights in great Courts are always highlye esteamed. I minded also, if
time had suffised me, beside ye diversity of manners used in ye Courts of
christian Princes in feasting and appeeringe in open shows, Great Turk The
Sophy.
to speak somewhat also of the great Turks: but much more particularlye of
the Sophyes king of Persia: for when I understood by merchaunt men a long
time trafficked in that country, the noble men there to be very full of
prowess and well manered and use in their conversation one with an other, and
in women's service, and in all their practisinges much courtesy and great
sobriety, and when time serves, in marciall feats, in sportinges, and
undertaking enterprises much sumptuousnes, great liberality and bravery, I
delited to know what order they take in these things which they set most
store by, wherein their Pompes consist and braueries of garments and armor,
wherein they differ from us, and wherein we agree, what kind of enterteinment
their women use, and with what sober mode they show favor to, who so is in
their love service: but to say the truth, it is no fit time now to enter into
this talk, especially sins there is other to be said, and much more to our
purpose then this. Yes, quod the L. Gaspar, both this and many other things
be more to the purpose, then to facion this gentilwoman of the Palaice,
forsomuche as the very same rules that are given for the Courtier, serve also
for the woman, for as well ought she to have respect to times and places and to
observe (as much as her weakness is able to bear) all the other properties
that have bin so much reasoned upon, as ye Courtier. And therefore in stead of
this, it were not perhaps amiss to teach some particular points that
beelong to ye service about a Princis person, for no doubt the Courtier ought
to know them and to have a grace in doing them. Or else to speak of the way
that he ought to take in ye bodily exercises, how to ride, to handle weapon,
and wrestle, and wherein consists the hardness of these feats. Then spoke ye
Duchess, smiling: Princis are not served about their persons with so
excellent a Courtier as this is. As for the exercises of body and strength and
slightnes of person, we will leave them for M. Peter Mount here to take charge
to teach them when he shall think most meet, for presently the L. Julian
has nothing else to speak of, but of this woman, whom (me think) you now
beegine to have a fear of, and therefore would bring us out of our
purpose. Phrisio answered: certain it is, that now it is needless and out of
purpose to talk of women, especially beeinge yet beehinde somewhat to be
spoken of the Courtier, for ye one matter ought not to be mingled with the
other. You are in a great error, answered the L. Caesar Gonzaga, for like as no
Court, how great ever it be, can have any sightlinesse, or brightness in it,
or mirth without women, nor any Courtier can be gracious, pleasant or hardye,
nor at any time undertake any galant enterprise of Chiualrye unless he be
stirred with the conversation and with the love and contentacion of women, even
so in like case ye Courtiers talk is most imperfect ever more, if the
intercourse of women give them not a part of the grace wherwithall they make
perfect and deck out their playing the Courtier. The L. Octauian laughed and
said: Beehoulde a piece of the bayte that brings men out of their wits.
Then the L. Julian tourning him to the Duchess, Madam (quoth he) sins it is
so your pleasure, I will speak that comes to mind, but with very great
doubt to satisfy. And i wisse a great deal less peine it were for me to
facion a lady yt should deserve to be Queen of ye world, then a perfect
gentilwoman of the Court, for of herr I wot not where to fett any pattern, but
for a Queen I should not need to seek far, and sufficient it were for me
only to imagine the heavenly conditions of a lady whom I know, and through
seeing them, direct all my thoughts to express plainlye with words the
thing that many see with their eyes, and where I could do no more, yet should
I fulfill my duty in naminge her. Then said the Duchess: Pass not your
bounds (my L. Julian) but mind the order taken, and facion the gentilwoman of
the Palaice, that this so worthy a maistresse may have him that shall
woorthelie serve her. The L. Julian proceaded: for a proof therefore (Madam)
that your commandment may drive me to assaye to do, yea the thing I have no
skill in, I shall speak of this excellent woman, as I would have her. And
when I have facioned her after my mind, and can afterward get none other,
Ovid. lib. xiii me^am:
I will take her as mine own, after the example of Pigmalion. And where as the
L. Gaspar has said, that the very same rules that are given for the Courtier*
serve also for the woman, I am of a contrary opinion. For albeit some
qualities are commune and necessary as well for the woman as the man, yet are
there some other more meeter for the woman then for the man, and some again
meet for the man, that she ought in no wise to meddle withal. Wherein the
woman should differ from the (...)
The very same I say of the exercises of the body. But principally in her
facions, manners, words, gestures and conversation (me think) the woman ought
to be much unlike the man. For right as it is seemlye for him to show a
certain manliness full and steadye, so does it well in a woman to have a
tenderness, soft and mild, with a kind of womanly sweetness in every gesture
of herres, that in going, standinge and speakinge what ever she lusts, may
always make her appear a woman without any likeness of man. Adding therefore
this principle to the rules that these Lords have taught the Courtier, I
think well, she may serve her turn with many of them, and be endowed with
very good qualities, as the L. Gaspar says. In what they agr^^.
For many virtues of the mind I reckon be as necessary for a woman, as for a
man* Likewise nobleness of birth, auoidinge Affectation or curiosity, to have
a good grace of nature in all her doings, to be of good condicyons, wyttye,
foreseeyng, not haughty, not envious, not ill tunged, not light, not
contentious, not vntowardlye, to have the knowleage to wynn and keep the good
will of her Lady and of all others, to do well and with a good grace yt
exercises comely for women. Beawtie.
Me think well beawty is more necessary in her then in the Courtier, for (to
say the truth) there is a great lack in the woman that wants beawtie. She
ought also to be more circumspect and to take better heed that she give no
occasion to be ill reported of, and so to beehaue her self, that she be not
only not spotted with any fault, but not so much as with suspicion. Because a
woman has not so many ways to defend her self from sclaunderous reports,
as has a man. But for so much as Count Lewis has very particularly expressed
the principal profession of the Courtier, and wills it to be in Marsiall
feats, me think also beehouffull to vttre (according to my judgment) what
the Gentilwoman^ of y^ Palace ought to be: in which point when I have
throughlye satisfied, Uertues of the mind.
I shall think my self rid of the greatest part of my duty. Leaving therefore
a part the virtues of the mind that ought to be commune to her with the
Courtier, Commune properties.
as wisdom, noblenes of courage, staidenesse, and many mo, and likewise the
conditions that are meet for all women, as to be good and discreet, to have
the understanding to order her husbands gooddes and her house and children
when she is married, and all those parts that beelonge to a good huswief: I say
that for her that lives in Court, me think there beelongeth unto her above
all other things, Sweetness in language.
a certain sweetness in language that may delight, whereby she may gently
entertein all kind of men with talk worth the hearing and honest, and
applied to the time and place, and to the degree of the person she communeth
withal: Accompaniyng with sober and quiet manners and with the honestye that
must always be a stay to all her deeds, Liveliness of wit.
a ready liuelines of wit, whereby she may declare herself far wide from all
dullness: but with such a kind of goodness, that she may be esteamed no less
chaste, A mean.
wise and courteise, then pleasant, feat conceited and sobre: and therefore must
she keep a certain mean very hard, and (in a manner) diriued of contrary
matters, and come just to certain limits, but not pass them. This woman ought
not therefore (to make herself good and honest) be so skemish and make wise to
abhor both the company and the talk (though somewhat of ye wantonnes^) if she
be present, Wanton talk.
to get her thens by and by, for a man may lightlye guess that she feined to
be so coye to hide that in herself, which she doubted others might come to
the knowleage of: and such nice facions are always hateful. Neither ought she
again (to show herself free and pleasant) speak words of dishonesty, To much
familiaritye.
nor use a certain familiaritye without measure and bridle, and facions to
make men beleaue that of her, that perhaps is not* but beeinge present at
such kind of talk, she ought to give the hearing with a little blushing and
shamefastnes. Likewise to eschew one vice yt I have seen reign in many:
namely, To speak and give ear to ill report^s of other women.
to speak and willingly to give ear to such as report ill of other women: for
such as in hearing the dishonest beehauiours of other women disclosed, are
offended at the matter, and make wise not to credit and (in manner) to think it
a wonder that a woman should lead an unclean lief, they make proof y^ sins
this fault seems unto them so foul a matter, they commit it not. But those
yt go always harking out ye loves of others and disclose them so point by
point, and with such joy, it seems that they envy the matter, and that their
desire is to have all men know it, that the like may not be imputed to them for
a trespace, and so they turn it to certain laughters with a kind of gesture,
whereby they make men to suspect at the very same instant that they take great
contentacion at it. And of this arriseth, y^ men although to their seeming they
give diligent ear to it, for ye most part conceive an ill opinion of them and
have them in very small reputation, and (to their weeninge) with these
beehauiours are enticed to attempt them farther. And many times afterward they
renn so far at rouers, that it purchases them worthily an ill name, and in
conclusion are so little regarded, yt men pass not for their company, but
rather abhor them. And contrariwise, Honest women esteamed with all men.
there is no man so shameless and high minded, but bears a great reverence
toward them that be counted good and honest, because that gravity tempered
with knowleage and goodness, is (as it were) a shield against the wanton pride
and beastlines of saucy merchauntes. Wherefore it is seen that one word, a
laughter or a gesture of good will (how little soever it be) of an honest woman,
is more set by of every man, then al ye toys and wanton gestures of them that
so lauishly show small shamefastness. And where they lead not in deed an
unclean lief, yet with those wanton countenaunces, ^abblinge, scornfulnesse,
and such scoffing conditions they make men to think they do. And for so much
as words that are not grounded upon some pithie foundation, are vain and
childishe, the Gentilwoman of the Palaice, beeside her discreation to
understand the condition of him she talks withal, to entertein him
honestlye, must needs have a sight in many things, and a judgment in her
communication to pike out such as be to purpose for the condition of him ^he
talks withal, Beehauiour ^n ^alke.
and be heedefull that she speak not otherwhile where she would not, words
that may offend him. Let her beeware of praising her self vndiscreatly, or
beeinge to tedious that she make him not weerie. Let her not go mingle with
pleasant and laughing talk, matters of gravity: nor yet with grave, Iestes
and feat conceits. Let her not foolishlye take upon her to know that she
knows not, Curiosity.
but soberly seek to be esteamed for that she knows, avoiding (as is said)
Curiosity in all things. In this manner shall she be endowed with good
conditions, and the exercises of the body comlie for a woman shall she do with an
exceading good grace, and her talk shall be plentuous and full of wisdom,
honesty, and pleasantness: and so shall she be not only beloved but reverenced
of all men, and perhaps worthy to be compared to this great Courtier, as well
for ye qualities of the mind as of the body. Wha^ the L. Julian had hitherto
spoken, ^e ^e^de his peace, and settled himself as though he had made an end
of his talk. Then said the L. Gaspar: No doubt (my L. Julian) but you have
decked gaily out this Gentilwoman, and made her of an excellent condition: Yet
me seems that you have gone generallye enough to work, and named in her
certain things so great, that I think in my mind you are ashamed to expound
them, and have rather wished them in her, after ye manner of them that sometime
wish for things impossible and above nature, then taught them. Therefore
would I that you declared unto us a little better, what exercises of the body
are meet for a Gentilwoman of the Palaice, and in what sort she ^ught to
entertein, and what those many things ^e which you say she ought to have a
sight in: and whether wisdom, nobleness of courage, staidness and those
many other virtues that you have spoken of, your meaning is should help her
about the ouerseeinge only of her house, children and houshoulde (the which
nevertheless you will not have her principal profession) or else to entertein,
and to do these exercises of the body with a good grace: and in good fellowship
take heed ye put not these seely virtues to so vile an occupation that they
may be ashamed of it. The L Julian laughed and said: you can not chouse (my L.
Gaspar) but still you must vttre your ill stomach against women. But certes
me thought I had spoken sufficient, and especially before such audience, that
I beleaue none here, but understands concerning the exercises of the body,
that it is not comlye for a woman to practice feats of arms, ridinge,
playinge at tenise, wrestling, and many other things that beelonge to men.
Then said Vnico Aretino: Emonge them of old time the manner was that women
wrastled naked with men, but we have lost this good custom together with many
mo. The L. Caesar Gonzaga replied to this. And in my time I have seen women
play at tenise, practice feats of arms, ride, hunt, and do (in a manner) all
the exercises beeside, that a gentilman can do. The L. Julian answered: Sins I
may facion this woman after my mind, I will not only have her not to
practice these manly exercises so sturdie and ^oisterous, but also even those
that are meet for a woman, I will have her to do them with heedefulnesse and
with the soft mildness that we have said is comely for her. Daunsing.
Sing^^ge. Speculation of music.
And therefore in daunsynge I would not see her use to swift and violent
tricks, nor yet in singinge or playinge upon instruments those hard and
often divisions that declare more counninge then sweetness. Instruments of
(...)
Likewise the instruments of music which she uses (in mine opinion) ought to
be fit for this purpose. Imagine with your self what an unsightly matter it
were to see a woman play upon a tabour or drumm, or blow in a flute or
trompet, or any like instrumente: and this because the boisterousnesse of them
does both cover and take away that sweet mildenes which sets so forth
every deed that a woman does. Therefore when she comes to daunse, or to
show any kind of music, she ought to be brought to it wc suffringe her self
somewhat to be prayed, How she should come to show her feats.
and with a certain bashfulnes, that may declare the noble shamefa^^nes that is
contrary to headiness. She ought also to frame her garments to this intent,
and so to apparaile herself that she appear not fond and light. But for so much
as it is l^full and necessary for women to set more by their beawty then men,
and sundry kinds of beawtie there are, this woman ought to have a judgment
to know what manner garments set her best out, Garments.
and be most fit for the exercises that she enten^eth to undertake at that
instant* and with them to arraye herself. And where she perceyueth in her a
sightlye and cheerful beawtye, she ought to farther it with gestures, Beawtie.
words and apparaile, that all may betoken mirth. In like case an other that
feels herself of a mild and grave disposition, she ought also to accompany
it with facions of the like sort, to increase that that is ye gift of nature.
In like manner where she is somewhat fat^er or leaner then reasonable sise, or
wanner, or browner, to help it with garments, but feiningly as much as she can
possible, and keapinge herself clenlye and handsome, show always that she
bestows no pein nor diligence at all about it. And because the L. Gaspar
does also ask what these many things be she ought to have a sight in, and
how to entertein, and whether the virtues ought to be applied to this
enterteinment, I say that I will have her to understand that these Lords
have wylled the Courtier to know: A judgment in exercises not mee^e for her.
and in those exercises that we have said are not comelye for her, I will at
ye least she have that judgment, that men can have of the things which they
practice not, and this to have knowleage to praise and make of Gentilmen more
and less according to their deserts. And to make a breef rehersall in few
words of that is already said, Qualities for a Gentilwoman.
I will that this woman have a sight in letters, in music, in drawinge or
peinctinge, and skillful in daunsinge, and in diuising sportes and pastimes,
accompaniynge with that discreet sobermode and with the giuinge a good opinion
of herself, the other principles also that have bine taught the Courtier. And
thus in conversation, in laughing, in sporting, in jesting, finally in every
thing she shall be had in very great price, and shall entertein accordingly
both with Iestes and feat conceits meet for her, every person that comes
in her company. And albeit staidnes, noblenes of courage, temperance, strength
of the mind, Uertues.
wisdom and the other virtues a man would think beelonged not to entertein,
yet will I have her endowed with them all, not so much to entertein (although
notwithstanding they may serve thereto also) as to be virtuous: and these
virtues to make her such a one, that she may deserve to be esteamed, and al
her doings framed by them. I wonder then, quod the L* Gaspar smilinge, sins
you give women both letters, and staidness, and nobleness of courage and
temperance, ye will not have them also to bear rule in Cities and to make
laws, and to lead armies, and men to stand spinning in ye kitchen. The L.
Julian answered in like manner smiling: Perhaps to, this were not amiss, the^
he proceaded. Do you not know yt Plato (which in deed was not very friendly to
women) gives them ye ouerseeing of Cities, and all other marciall offices he
appoints to men? Think you not there were many to be found that could as well
skill in ruling Cities and armies, as men can? But I have not appointed them
these offices, because I facion a waiting gentilwoman of ye Court, not a
queen. I se well you would covertly have up again ye sclaunderous report that
the L. Octauian gave women yesterday: nam^ly That they be most imperfect
creatures, and not apt to work any^ virtuous deed, and of very little
woorthiness and of no value in respet of men: But surely both he and you
should be in very great error if ye thought so. Then said the L. Gaspar: I
will not have up again matters already past, but you would feign press me to
speak some word that might offend these Ladies minds, to make them my foes,
as you with flat^ringe them falselye will purchase their good will. But they
are so wise above other, that they love truth better (although it make not so
much with them) then false praises: Neither take they it in ill part for a man
to say, that Men are of a more woorthiness, and they will not let to confess
that you have spoken great wonders, and appointed to ye gentilwoman of the
Palaice certain fond impossible matters, and so many virtues that Socrates and
Cato and all the Philosophers in the world are nothing to her. For to tell
you the plain trothe, I marvel you were not ashamed so much to pass your
bounds, where it ought to have suffised ye to make this gentilwoman of the
Palaice beawtifull, sober, honest, welspoken, and to have the understanding to
entertein without renninge in sclaunder, with daunsinge, music, sportes,
laughing, Iestes, and the other matters that we see daily used in Court: But to
go about to give her the knowleage of all things in the world, and to appoint
her the virtues that so syldome times are seen in men, yea and in them of old
time, it is a matter that can neither be held withal nor scantlye heard. Now
that women are imperfect creatures and consequently of less woorthiness then
men, and not apt to conceive those virtues that they are, I purpose not to
affirm it, because the prowess of these Ladies were enough to make me a liar.
Yet this I say unto you, that most wise men have left in writing, A woman the
default of nature.
that nature, because she is always set and bent to make things most perfect,
if she could, would continuallye bring forth men, and when a woman is borne,
it is a slacknes or default of nature, and contrary to that she would do. As it
is also seen in one borne blind, lame, or with some other impediment, and in
trees many fruits that never ripen: Even so may a woman be said to be a
creature brought forth at a chance and by hap, and that it is so, mark me
the works of the man and the woman, and by them make your pr^of of the
perfection of each of them. Howbeit sins these defaultes of women are the wite
of nature that has so brought them furthe, we ought not for this to hate them,
nor feint in having less respect to them then is meet, but to esteame them
above that they are, me thinks a plain error. The L. Julian looked the L.
Gaspar would have proc^^ded on still, but when he saw now that he held his
peace, he said: Of the imperfectness of women me think you have alleged a
very cold reason, whereunto (albeit may happ it were not now meet to enter
into these subtle points) I answer according to the opinion of him that is
of skill, and according to the truth, that Substance in what ever thing it
be, can not ^eceiue into it more or less: Substanti^ non recip^^ maius aut
minus.
for as no stone can be more perfectlye a stone, then an other: as touching
the beeinge of a stone: nor one block more perfectly a block, then an other:
no more can one man be more perfectlye a man then an other, and consequently
the male kind shall not be more perfect, then the female, as touching his
Formal substance: for both the one and the other is contained under the
Species of Homo, Homo both man and woman.
and that wherein they differ is an Accidental matter and no essential. In
case you will then tell me that the man is more perfect then the woman,
though not as touching the essential, yet in the Accidents, I answer that
these accidents must consist either in the body or in the mind: if in the
body, because the man is more sturdier, nimbler, lighter, and more abler to
endure travail, I say that this is an argument of small perfection: for
emonge men themselves such as abound in these qualities above other, are not
for them the more esteamed: and in war, where the greatest part of peinfull
labors are and of strength, the stoutest are not for all that the most set
bye. If in the mind, I say, what ever things men can v^derstande, the self
same can women understand also* and where it perceth the capacity of ye one,
it may in likewise perce the others. Here after the L. Julian ^ad made a little
stopp, he proce^^e^ smilinge: Do you not know that this principle is held in
Philosophy, Who so is tender of flesh is apt of mind? ^herfore there is no
doubt, but women being tenderer of flesh, are also apter of mind, and of a
more inclined wit to musinges and speculations, then men. Afterward he followed
on. But leauinge this a part, because you said that I should make my proof of
the perfection of each of them by the works, I say unto you, if you consider
the effects of nature, you shall find that she brings women forth as they
be, not at a chance, but fittlye necessary for the end. For albeit she
shapeth them of body not stout and of a mild mind, with many other
qualities ^ontrarye to men's, yet do the conditions of each of them stretch
unto one self end, concerning the self same profit. For even as through that
weak feeblenes women are of a lesser courage, so are they also by the very
same more wary. Therefore moothers nourish up children and fathers instruct
them, and with manlines provide for it abroad, that they with careful
diligence store up in the house, which is no less praise. In case you will then
consider the ancient Histories (albeit men at all times have bine very
sparing in writing the praises of women) and them of latter days, ye shall
find that continually virtue has reigned as well among women as men: Women
have acheued great ^nterprises. Women learned.
and that such there have bine also that have made war and obtained glorious
victories, governed realms with great wisdom and justice, and done what ever
men have done. As touching sciences, do you not remember ye have read of so
many that were well seen in Philosophy? In philosophy.

In poetry. In Rhetoric.


Other, yt have bine most excellent in Poetrye? Other, that have pleaded, and
both accused and defended before Judges most eloquentlye? Of handicraftes,
long it were to rehearse, neither is it needful to make any rehersall thereof.
If then in the essential substance the man is no more perfect then the woman,
nor yet in the Accidents (and of this beeside reason, the experiences are
seen) I wot not wherein this his perfection should consist. And because you
said that Natures intent i^ always to bring forth things most perfect, and
therefore if she could, would always bring forth a man, and that the bringing
a woman forth is rather a default and slackenesse of nature, then her intent, I
answer you that this is full and wholly to be denied, neither can I see why
you may say that nature entendeth not to bring forth women, without whom
mankind can not be preserved, whereof nature herself is more desirous then of
any thing else, because through the means of this fellowship of male and
female she brings forth children, that restore the received benifites in
their childhood to their fathers in their old days, in that they nourishe
them: afterward they renew them, in beegettinge them selves also other
children, of whom they look in their old age to receive it, that being young
they beestowed upon their fathers: whereby nature (as it were) tourning her
about in a circle, fulfilleth an euerlastingnesse, and in this wise gives an
immortality to mortal men. Sins then to this, the woman is as needful as
the man, I can not discern for what cause the one is made by happ more then the
other. Truth it is that Nature entendeth always to bring forth matters most
perfect, and therefore means to bring forth man in his kind, but not more
male then female. Yea were it so that she always brought forth male, then
should it without perauenture be an imperfectness: for like as of the body
and of the soul there arriseth a compounde more nobler then his parts, which
is, man: Even so of the fellowship of male and female there arriseth a
compounde preseruinge mankind, without which the parts were in decay, and
therefore male and female by nature are always together, neither can the one be
without the other: Right so he ought not to be called ye male, that has not a
female (according to the definition of both the one and the other) nor she ye
female that has not a male. male can not b^ without female.
And for so much as one kind alone betokens an imperfection, the divines of
old time referr both the one and the other to God: Wherefore Orpheus said that
Jupiter was both male and female: And it is read in Scripture that God facioned
male and female to his likenes^. And the Poets many times speaking of the
Gods, meddle the kinds together. Then the L. Gaspar, I would not (quoth he)
we should enter into these subtle points, for these women will not
understand us. And albeit I answer you with very good reasons, yet will they
beleaue, or at the least make wise to beleaue that I am in the wrong, and
furthwt will give sentence as they lust. Yet sins we are entered into them, only
this will I say, that (as you know, it is the opinion of most wise men) the
man is likened to the Form, ^ourme. Mattier.
the woman to the Mattier: and therefore as the Form is perfect^r then the
Mattier, yea it gives him his being, so is the man much m^re perfect then the
woman. And I remember that I have heard (when it was) that a great Philosopher
in certain Problemes of his, says: VVhens comes it that naturally the woman
always loves the man, Aristot. ^physic. xviii.
that has bine the first to receive of her, amorous pleasure^? And
contrariwise the man hates the woman that has bine the first to coople in
that wise with him? and addinge thereto the cause, affirms it to be this: For
that in this act the woman receives of the man perfection, and the man of the
woman imperfection: and therefore every man naturallye loves the thing that
makes him perfect, and hates that makes him imperfect. And beeside this a
great argument of ye perfection of the man, and of the imperfection of the
woman, is, that generallye every woman wishes she were a man, by a certain
provocation of nature, that teaches her to wish for her perfection. The L.
Julian answered sodeinlye: The seely poor creatures wish not to be a man to
make them more perfect, but to have liberty, and to be ridd of the rule that
men have of their own authority challenged over them. And the similitude which
you give of the Mattier and Form, is not alike in every point: because the
woman is not made so perfect by the man, as is the Mattier by the Form for
the Mattier receives his beeinge of the Form, and can not stand without it:
yea the more Mattier Fourmes have, the more imperfection they have withal, and
severed from it, are most perfect: but the woman receives not her beeinge of
the man, yea as she is made perfect by the man, so does she also make him
perfect: whereby both the one and the other come together to beegete children:
the which thing they can not do any of them by them selves. The cause then of
the continual love of the woman toward the first that she has bine with, and
of the hatred of the man toward the first woman, I will not affirm to be that
your Philosopher alleges in his Problemes, but I impute it to the surenesse
and stablenesse of the woman, and waueringe of the man, and that not without
natural reason: for sins the male is naturallye hott, by that quality he
takes lightness, stirring and unsteadfastness, and contrariwise the woman
through cold, quietness, steadie waightinesse, and more earnest
imprintinges. Then the L. Emilia tourninge her to the L* Julian, for love of
god (quoth she) come once out of these your Mattiers and Fourmes and males and
females, and speak so that you may be understood: for we have heard and very
well understood the ill that the L. Octauian and the L. Gaspar have spoken of
us: but sins we understand not now in what sort you stand in our defense, m^
think therefore that this is a straiynge from the purpose, and a leauinge of
the yuell imprintinge in every man's mind that these our ennemies have given
of us. Give us not this name answered ye L. Gaspar, for more meter it were for
the L. Julian, which in giuinge women false praises, declares that there are
none true for them. The L. Julian said then: doubt ye not (madam) all shall be
answered to* But I will not rail upon men so without reason, as they have done
upon women. And if perchance there were any one here that meant to penn this
our talk, I would not that in place where these Mattiers and Fourmes were
understood, the arguments and reasons which the L. Gaspar alleges against
you should be seen unanswered to. I wot not, my L. Julian, quoth then the L.
Gaspar, how in this you can deny, that the man is not through his natural
qualities more perfect then the woman, Heat much p^rfect^r t^en cold.
which of complexion is cold and the man hott, and much more nobler and
perfecter is heat then cold, because it is active and forth bringinge: and
(as you know) the element pours down^ here emonge us only heat, and not
cold, which perceth not the works of nature: and therefore because women are
cold of complexion, I think it is the cause of their feinthertednes and
fearfulness. Will you still, answered the L. Julian, enter into subtle
points? you shall perceive your self at every time to come into a greater
pecke of troubles: and that it is so, harken to. I grant you, ye heat in it
self is more perfect then cold, Heat.
but this follows not in meddled matters and compounded, for in case it were
so, the body that were most hot should be most perfect: which is false,
because temperate bodies be most perfect. I do you to weete moreover, Women
cold of complexion.
that ye woman is of complexion cold in co^parason of ye man: which for
overmuch heat is far wide from temper: but as touching herself, she is
temperate, or at ye least nearer to temper then the man, why the woman is more
temperat then the man.
because she has that moisture within her of equal portion with the natural
heat, which in ye man through overmuch drouth does sooner melt and consume
away. She has also such a kind of cold that it resists and comfort the
natural heat, and makes it nearer to temper, and in the man overmuch heat
does soon bring ye natural warmth to the last degree, the which wanting
nourishment, Men so^ner dry then women.
consumes away: and therefore, because men in generation sooner wax dry then
women, it happens oftentimes yt they are of a shorter lief. Wherefore this
perfection may also be given to women, y^ living longer then men, they
accomplish it, The perfection of women about men.
that is the intent of nature more then men. Of the heat that ye element
pours down upon us, we talk not now, because it is diverse in
signification to it which we entreat upon: the which sins it is nourisher of
all things under ye sphere of the moon as well hott as cold, it can not be
contrary to cold. Fearfulness in women.
But the fearfulnes in women although it beetokeneth an imperfection, yet does
it arrise of a praiswoorthie cause, nam^ly the subtilnes and readiness of the
spirits, that convey spedely the shapes to the understanding, and therefore are
they soon out of patience for outward matters. Full well shall you see many
times some men, Heady persons.
yt dread neither death nor any thing else, yet are they not for all that to be
called hardy, because they know not the danger, and go forth like harbraines
where they see ye way open, and cast no more with them selves, and this
proceadeth of a certain grosnes of ye dulled spirits: Courage.
therefore a fond person can not be said to be stoutherted, but very courage in
deed comes of a propre aduisement and determined will so to do, and to
esteame more a man's honesty and duty, then all the perils in the world, and
although he see none other way but death, yet to be of so quiet an heart and
mind that his senses be not to seek nor amassed, but do their duty in
discoursing and beethinkinge, even as though they were most in quiet. Of this
guise and manner we have seen and heardsay many great men to be, likewise many
women, which both in o^de time and presently have showed stoutenes of courage
and brought matters to pass in the world worthy infinite praise, no less
then men have done. Then said Phrisio: these matters beegan, when ye first
woman in offending made others to offend also against god, Eve.
and for inheritance left unto mankind death, afflictions, sorrows, and all
other miseries and calamityes, that be felt now adays in the world. The L.
Julian answered: Sins you will also farther your purpose with entringe into
scripture, do you not know that the same offense was in like manner amended by
a woman? Our Lady.
Which has profited much more then she hindered us, so that the trespace
acquitted with so woorthye a deed, is counted most happy. But I purpose not
now to tell you, how much in dignity all creatures of mankind be inferior to
the virgin our Lady, for meddlinge holy matters with these our fond
reasoninges: Nor rehearse how many women with infinite stedfastnes have
suffered cruel death under Tirannes for the name of Christ: nor them yt with
learning in disputacion have confuted so many Idolatrers. And in case you
will answer me, that this was a miracle and the grace of the holy ghost, I say
unto you that no virtue deserves more praise, then that which is approved by
the testimony of god. Many other also of whom there is no talk, you your
self may look upon, especially in readinge Saint Hierom, which sets out
certain of his time with such wonderful praises, ^ Hierom.
that they might suffice the holiest man yt can be. Imagine then how many there
have bine of whom there is made no mention at all: because ye seely poor
souls are kept close without the pompous pride to seek a name of holiness
among the people, Religious men
that now a days many men have, accursed Hypochrites, which not minding, or
rather setting small store bye, ye doctrine of Christ, that wills a man when
he fasteth, to anoint his face, that he may appear not to fast, and
commands prayer, alms deeds, and other good woorckes, to be done, not in
the markett place, nor Sinagoges, but in secret, So that the left hand know
not of the right, they affirm no treasure in the world to be greater, then to
give a good example, and thus hanging their head aside and fastening their eyes
upon the ground, spreadinge a report about, that they will not once speak to
a woman, nor eat any thing but raw herbs, smokye, with their side garments
all to ragged and torn, they beeguile the simple: but for all that, they
abstain not from falsifiynge wills, sowinge mortal hatred beetweene man and
wief, and otherwhile poison: vsinge sorcery, inchauntmentes and al kind of
ribaldrie, and afterward allege a certain authority of their own head, that
says: Si non cast, tamen caute* and with this ween to heal every
grea^esore, and with good reason to persuade him that is not heedefull that God
forgiueth soon all offenses how heinous ever they be, so they be kept close
and no ill example arriseth of them. Thus with a veil of holiness, and this
mischeuous devise, many times they turn all their thoughts to defile the
chaste mind of some woman, often times to sow variance beetweene brethren, to
govern states, to set up the ^ne and pluck down the other, to chop of
heads, to imprison and banish men, to be ministers of the wickedness, and
(in a manner) the storers and hoorders up of the robberies that many Princes
commit. Other past sh^me delight to seem delicate and smothe, with their croune
minionlye shaven, and well clad, and in their gate lift up their garment to
show their hose sit clean, and the handsomnesse of person in making
courteisie. Other use certain bye looks and gestures even at mass, which
they houlde opinion beecome them well, and make men to beehoulde them:
mischeeuous and wicked men, and clean void not only of all religion but of
all good manner. And when their naughty lief is laid to them, they make a Jest
at it, and give him a mock that tells them of it, and (as it were) count
their vises a praise. Then said the L. Emilia: Such delight you have to speak
ill of Friars, that ye are fallen into this talk without all purpose. But you
commit a great offense to murmur against religious persons* and without any
profit ye burden your conscien^e: for were it not for them, that they pray
unto god for us, we should yet have far greater plages then we have. Then
laughed the L. Julian and said: How ge^sed you so even (Madam) yt I spoke of
Friars, sins I named them not? But forsooth this that I say, is not called
murmuringe, for I speak it plain and openly. And I mean not the good, but
the bad and wicked, of whom I have not yet spoken ye thousandeth part of yt I
know. Speak you not now of Friars, answered the L. Emilia: for I think it
(for my part) a grievous offense to give ear to you, and for hearing you any
more, I will get me hens. I am well pleased, quoth the L. Julian, to speak no
more of this. But to retourn to the praises of women, I say that the L. Gaspar
shall not find me out any notable man, Women not ^nferiour to ^en.
but I will find his wief or sister or daughter of like merit and otherwhile
above him. Beeside that, many have bine occasion of infinite goodness to
their men, and sometime broken them of many erroures. Therefore sins women are
(as we have declared) naturallye as apt for the self same virtues, as men be,
and the proof thereof has bine often seen, I wot not why, in giuinge them
that is possible they may have and sundry times have had and still have, I
ought to be deemed to speak wonders, as the L. Gaspar has objected against
me: Consideringe that there have ever bine in the world and still are, women
as nigh ye woman of the Palaice whom I have facioned, as men nigh the man whom
these Lords have facioned. Then said the L. Gaspar: those reasons that have
experience against them (in my mind) are not good. And ywisse, if I should
happen to ask you what these great women are or have bine, so worthy praise,
as the great men whose wives, sisters, or daughters they have bine, or that
have bine occasion of any goodness, or such as have broken them of their
erroures, I* beeleaue it would combre you shreudlye. Surely, answered the L.
Julian, none other thing could combre me, but the multitude of them: And if
time served me, I would tell you to this purpose the Hystories of Octauia
wief to Marcus Antonius and sister to Augustus. Octauia. Porcia. Cecilia.
Cornelia*
Of Porcia daughter to Cato and wief to Brutus. Of Caia Cecilia wief to
Tarquinius Priscus. Of Cornelia daughter to Scipio, and of infinite other,
which are most known. And not only these of our Country, but also
Barbari^^s, as that Alexandra which was wief to Alexander King of the Jews,
who after the death of her husband, Alexandra* Egesipp. lib. ^. cap. 1^.
seeinge y^ people in an uproar, and already runn to weapon to sl^a the two
children which he had left beehinde him, for a revenge of the cruel and
streict bondage that their father had always kept them in, she so beehaued
herself, that sodeinlye she assuaged that just furye, and in a moment, with
wisdom made those minds favorable to the children, which the father in
many years with infinite injuries had made their most ennemies. Tell us at the
least, answered the L. Emilia, how she did. The L. Julian said: She
perceiving her children in so great a ieopardye, immediatlye caused Alexanders
body to be cast out into the mids of the markett place, afterward calling
unto her the Citizins, she said, yt she knew their minds were set on fire
with most just furye against her husband: She assuaged the furye of the
people*
For the cruel injuries which he wickedlye had done them, deserved it: and
even as when he lived, she did her best always to withdraw him from so wicked
a lief, so now she was ready to make a trial thereof, and to help them to
chastise him even dead, as much as she might, and therefore should take that
body of his and give it to be devoured of Dogs, and rent it in pieces in
the cruellest m^ner they could imagine. But yet she desired them to take pitye
upon the innocent children, that could not only be in no fault, but not so
much as weettynge of their fathers ill doings. Of such force were these
words, that the ragynge furye once conceived in all that peoples minds was
sodainlye assuaged, and turned into so tender an affection, that not only
with one accord they chose those children for their heads and rulers, but
also to the dead corpse they gave a most honorable buryall. Here the L. Julian
made a little pause, Laodice.
afterward he proceaded. Know you not that Mithridates wyef and Systers
showed a far less f^are of death, then Mithridates him self? And
Asdruballes wief, then Asdrubal himself? Know you not that Harmonia daughter to
Hiero the Syracusan, Harmonia.
would have died in ye burninge of her Country? Then Phrisio, where
obstinacye is bent, no doubt (quoth he) but otherwhile ye shall find some women
that will never change purpose, as she that could no longer call her
husband pricklouse, with her hands made him a sign. Ob^ti^acie called
s^edfa^^nesse.
The L. Julian laughed and said: Obstinacy that is bent to a virtuous end,
ought to be called steadfastness, Epicharia.
as in Epicharia a libertine of Room, which made privy to a great
conspiracy against Nero, was of such steadfastness, that beeinge rent with
all the most cruel torments that could be invented, never vttred any of ye
partners: And in ye like peril many noble gentilmen and Senators, fearfullye
accused brethren, friends, and the dearest and best beloved persons to them in
ye world. What say you of this other, Leena bitt in sunder her tunge and
spitt it in the face of Hippias the Tiran. Plin lib, 34. cap. 8.
called Leena? In whose honor the Athenians dedicated before the castle gate
a lioness of metal without a tunge, to beetoken in her the steady virtue of
silence. For she beeinge in like sort made privy to a conspiracye against the
Tirannes, was not aghast at the death of two great men her friends, and for all
she was torn with infinite and most cruel tourmentes, never disclosed any of
the conspiratours. Then said the L. Margare^ Gonzaga: Me seems that ye make
to bre^f rehersall of these virtuous acts done by women. For although these
our ennemies have heard them and read them, yet they make wise not to know
them, and would feign the memory of them were lost. But in case ye will do
us to understand them, we will at the least honor them. Then answered the L.
Julian: With a good will. Now will I tell you of one, that did such a deed as
I beeleaue the L. Gaspar himself will confess that very few men do. And
beegane. In Massilia there was in times past an usage, which is thought came
out of Greece: and that was, that openly there was poison laid up meddled
with Cicuta, Cicuta a bemi^ous her be horrible of savor, one kind whereof is
supposed to be hemlocke.
and it was lefull for him to take it that alleged to the Senate that he ought
to be rid of his lief for some disco^moditie that he felt therein, or else for
some other just cause: to the intent that who so had suffered to much
adversity or tasted over great prosperity, he might not continue in the one,
or change the other. In the presence therefore of Sextus Pompeius. Here Phrisio
not tartyn^e to have the L. Julian p^oceade farther, this, me seems (quoth
he) is the beeginninge of some long tale. Then the L. Julian tourninge him to
the L. Margaret, said: See, Phrisio will not suffer me to speak. I would have
toulde you now of a woman, that after she had showed the Senate that she ought
of right to die, glad and without any fear, took in the presence of Sextus
Pompeius ye poison with such steadfastness of mind and with such wise and
louinge exhortations to hers, that Pompeius and all the rest that beeheld in a
woman such knowleage and stedinesse in the tremblinge passage of death,
remained (not without tears) astonished with great wonder. Then ye L. Gaspar
smiling, and I again remember (quod he) yt I have read an Oration, wherein an
unfortunate husband asks leave of the Senate to die, and alleges that he
has a just cause, for that he can not abide the continual weerisomnes of his
wives chattinge, and had leiffer drink of that poison which you say was laid
up openly for these respects, then of his wives scoldinges. The L. Julian
answered: How many seely poor women should have a just cause to ask leave to
die, for abidinge, I will not say the ill words, but the most yuell deeds of
their husbands? For I know some my self, that in this world suffer the peines
which are sai^ to be in hell. Be there not again, trow you, answered the L.
Gaspar, many husbands that are so tourmented with their wives, that every
hour they wish for death? And what displeasure, quoth the L. Julian, can women
do their husbands, that is so without remedy, as those are which husbands do
their wives? which though not for love, yet for fear are obedient to their
husbands. Sure it is in deed, quoth the L. Gaspar, that the little they do
well otherwhile, comes of fear, for few there are in the world yt secretlye
in their mind hate not their husbands. Nay, clean contrary, answered the L.
Julian: and in case you will remember what you have read, it is to be seen in
all Histories, that always (in a manner) wives love their husbands better then
they their wives. When have you ever seen or read that a husband has showed
such a token of love toward his wief, as did Camma toward her husband? Camma.
I wot not, answered the L. Gaspar, what she was, nor what token she showed.
Nor I, quoth Phrisio. The L. Julian answered: Give ear. And you (my L.
Margaret) look ye bear it well away. This Camma was a most beawtifull young
woman, An example of the true love of a wief toward her husband. Plutarc.
endowed with such modesty and honest conditions, that no less for them,
then for her beawty she was to be wondered at: and above other things with all
her heart she loved her hus^and, who had to name Synattus. It happened that an
other Gentilman of greater authority then Synattus, and (in a manner) head
ruler and Tirann of the City where they dwelled, fell in love with this young
woman: and after he had long attempted by all ways and means to compass
her, and all but lost labor, beethinkinge himself that the love she bore her
husband, was the only cause that withstood his desires, he caused this
Synattus to be slain. Thus instant upon her afterward continuallye, other
fruit could he never get of her, then what he had before. Wherefore this love
daily encreasinge, he was fullye resolved to take her to wief, for all in
degree she was much inferior to him. So suite beeinge made to her friends by
Sinoris (for so was the lover named) they took in hand to persuade her to be
contented with it: Declaring that to agree thereto, was very profitable, and to
refuse it, perilous for her and them all. She after she had a while gainsaied
them, at length made answer that she was contented. Her kinsfolk brought this
tidinges to Sinoris, which passing measure glad, gave order to have this
marriage made out of hand. After they were then both come for this purpose
solemnlye into the Temple of Diana, Camma had caused to be brought to her a
certain sweet drink which she had made, and so before the image of Diana in
the presence of Sinoris she drank the one moitie. Afterward, with her own
hand (for this was the usage in marriages) she gave the remain to ye
bridegroom, which drank it clean up. Camma as soon as she saw her device
take effect, kneeled her down very joyful before the image of Diana, and
said: Oh Goddess, thou that know the bottom of my heart, be a good witness
to me, how hardlye after my dear husband deceased, I have refreined from
killinge my self, and what peines I have sustained to endure the greef to live
in this bitter lief, in which I have felt none other joy or pleasure, but ye
hope of the revenge which I perceive now is come to effect. Therefore with
gladness and contentation I go to find out the sweet company of that soul,
which in lyef and death I have always more loved then mine own self. And
thou Caytif, that weeneddest to have bine my husband, in stead of a marriage
bed, give order to prepare thee a grave, for of thee do I here make a sacrifice
to the shadow of Synattus. Synoris amassed at these words, and already
feelynge the operation of the poison within him that put him to great peine,
proved many remedies, but all prevailed not. And Camma had fortune so
favorable on her side, or what ever else, that before she died, she had
knowleage that Sinoris was dead. When she heard of that, with very great
contentation she laid her upon her bed, with her eyes to heaven, continuallye
calling upon the name of Synattus, and saying. Oh most sweet mate, sins now
I have bestowed for the last tokens upon thy death, both tears and revenge,
and perceive not that I have any thing yet beehinde to do for thee here, I
flee the world and this without thee a cruel lief, which for thy sake only in
times past was dear to me. Come therefore and meet me (oh my Lord) and
embrace as willingly this soul, as she willinglye comes to thee. And
speakinge these words, and with her arms spread, as though she would at
that instant have embraced him, died. Say now Phrisio, what think you by
this? Phrisio answered: Me think you would make these Ladies weep. But let
us set case this was true, I say unto you that we find no more such women in
the world. An other example of fressher years.
The L. Julian said: Yes, that there be, and that it is so, give ear. In my
days there was in Pisa a gentilman whose name was M. Thomas, of what house, I
remember not, Thomaso Lucchese.
for all I heard my father often times tell it, which was his great friend.
This M. Thomas then, passinge upon a day in a little v^ssell from Pisa toward
Sicilia about his affairs, was overtaken with certain foistes of Moors, that
were on the back of him unawares and before the governors of the vessel had
espied them. And for all the men within, defended them selves well, yet because
they were but few and the ennemies many, the vessel with as many as were on
board was taken by the Moors, some hurt, some whole, as fell to their lotte,
and emonge them M. Thomas, which had played the man and slain with his own
hand a brother of one of the Capitaines of those foystes: For which matter the
Capitain full of wrath, as you may conjecture by the loss of his brother,
would have him for his prisoner, and beatinge and buffetinge him daily,
brought him into Barbary, where in great misery he determined to keep him alive
his captive and with much drugetye. All the rest, some one way, some an
other, within a space were at liberty, and returned home, and brought
tidinges to his wief, called M. Argentin and children, M. Argentin.
of the hard lief and great affliction which M. Thomas lived in, and was like
without hope to live in continuallye, unless God wonderfullye helped him. The
which matter when she and they understood for a certeintie, attemptinge
certain other ways for his deliverance, and where he himself was fullye
resolved to end his lief, there happened a careful affection and tender pity
so to quicken the wit and courage of a son of his called Paul, yt he had
respect to no kind of danger, and determined either to die or to deliver his
father. The which matter he brought to pass and with such privy conu^iaunce,
that he was first in Ligurno before it was known in Barbarye that he was
parted thens. Here hens M. Thomas (beeinge arrived in safetye) writ to his
wief, and did her to weete his settinge at liberty, and where he was, and how
the next day he hoped to see her. The honest Gentilwoman filled with so great
and sodeine joy, that she should so shortly as well through the zeal as
prowess of her son, Inordinate affection.
see her husband whom she loved so much, where she once surely beleaued never
to have seen him again, after she had read the letter she lifted her eyes to
heaven and calling upon the name of her husband, fell stark dead to the
ground, and with no remedy done to her, did the departed soul retourn to the
body again. A cruel sight, and inoughe to temper the wills of men and to
withdraw them from couetinge ^o feruentlye superfluous joys. Then said
Phrisio smilinge: What know you whether she died for sorrow or no,
understanding her husband was coming home? The L. Julian answered: Because
ye rest of her lief was nothing agreeable thereto. But I ween rather ye soul
could not tarry the lingering to see him with the eyes of her body, and
therefore forsook it, and drawn out thens with couetinge, fled by and by where
in readinge the letter, her thought was fled. The L. Gaspar said: it may be
that this woman was ouerlouing, because women in every thing cleave always
to the extremity, which is ill. And see, for yt she was ouerlouing ^^e did ill
to herself, to her husband and to her children, in whom she turned into
bitterness the pleasure of that dangerous and desired liberty of his.
Therefore you ought not to allege her for one of the women, that have bine the
cause of so great goodness. The L. Julian answered: I allege her for one of
them that make trial that there are wives which love their husbands. For of
such as have bine occasion of great profittes in the world I could tell you of
an infinite number, and rehearse unto you so ancient, that welnighe a man would
judge them fables. And of such as among men have bine the inuentours of such
kind of matters, Aspasia loved and taught the eloquent Pericles Duke of
Athens. Nichostrata. Hermione. Corinna. Sappho.
that they have deserved to be deemed Goddesses, as, Pallas, Ceres, ye
Sybilles, by whose mouth god has so oftentimes spoken and discovered to the
world matters to come. And such as have taught very great men, as, Aspasia,
and Diotima the which also with sacrifice drove of a plague tenn years that
should have fallen in Athens. I could tell you of Nichostrata mother to
E^ander, which showed the Latins their letters. And of an other woman also
that was maistres to Pindarus Liricus. And of Corinna and Sappho, which were
most excellent in Poetry: but I will not seek matters so far of, I say unto
you that leaving the rest apart, of ye greatness of Room perhaps women were a
no less cause then men. This, quoth the L. Gaspar, were good to understand.
The L. Julian answered: Women the cause of the greatness of Room.
Harken to it then. After Troy was wonn, many Trojans, that in so great a
destruction escaped, fled some one way, some another: of which, one part,
that by many Sea storms were tossed and tumbled, T^b^ri^*
came into Italy in the coo^t where the Te^er enters into the Sea: so landing
to provide for their necessaries, beegane to go a forraginge about the
Country. The women that tarried beehinde in the ships, imagined emonge
themselves a profitable divise, that should make an end of their perilous and
long Sea wandringe, and ^n stead of their lost Country recover them a new.
And after they had laid their heads together, in ye men's absence, they set
fire on the ships, Rom^.
and the first that beegane this work was called Roma. Yet standinge in
fear of the men's displeasure that were retiringe back again, they went to
meet with them, and embracing and kissing in token of good will, some their
husbands, An aun^^^n^ custom emonge the Roman^^
some their ne^t a kinn, they assuaged that first brunt: Afterward they
disclosed to them quietlye the cause of their witty enterprise. Wherefore the
Trojans, on the one side, for need, and one the other for beeinge
courteiouslye received of the inhabitauntes, were very well pleased with that
the women had done, and there dwelled with the Latins in the place where
afterward was Room. And of this arrose the ancient custom emonge the
Romans, that women meetinge their kinsfolk, kissed them. Now ye see what a
help these women were to give the beeginninge to Room. And the Sabine women
were a no less help to the increase of it, Women ^ help to the increase of
Room.
then were the Tro^ane to ye first beeginning: for when Romulus had purchased
him the general hatred of al his neighbors, for the rauine that he made of
their women, he was assailed with war on all sides, the which for that he was
a valiant man, he soon rid his hands of with victory: only the war with
the Sabines excepted, which was very sore, because Titus Tatius king of the
Sabines was very puissant and wise. T. Tatius,
Whereupon after a sore bickeringe beetweene the Romans and Sabines, with very
great loss on both sides, preparynge for a fresh and cruel battle, the
Sabine women clad in black, with their hear scattred and haled, weepinge,
comfortless, without fear of weapons now bent to give the onsett, came into
the mids beetweene their fathers and husbands, beeseachinge them not to file
their hands with the blood of their fatherinlawes and sonninlawes, and in
case it were so that they repined at this aliaunce, they should bend their
weapons against them: for much better it were for them to die, then to live
widows ^r fatherles and brotherlesse, and to remember that their children had
bine begotten of such as had slain their fathers, or they them selves of such
as had slain their husbands. With these pitiful waylinges, many of them
carried in their arms their young babes, of whom some beegane already to leuse
their tunge and seemed to call and sport with their graundfathers, unto whom
the women showinge forth their nephews and weeping, said: Beehoulde your own
blood that in such rage ye seek to shed with your own hands. Of such
force was in this case the affection and wisdom of ye women, that there was
not only concluded beetwene the two Kings ennemies together, an indissoluble
friendship and league, but also (which was a more wonderful matter) the Sabines
came to dwell in Room, and of two peoples was made one, and so did this
accord much increase the strength of Room: thanked be the wise and courageous
women which were so rewarded of Romulus, ^0. c^^iae,
that partinge the people into thirty bands, gave them the names of the
Sabine women. Here the L. Julian pausinge a while, and perceyuinge that the L.
Gaspar spoke not, trow you not (quod he) that these women were occasion of
goodness to their men, and helped to the greatness of Room? The L. Gaspar
answered: No doubt, they were worthy much praise. But in case you would
as well tell the faults of women, Sp. Torpeius daughter corrupted with money by
T. Tatius.
as their well doing, you would not have kept hid, that in this war of T.
Tatius a woman betrayed Room, and taught the ennemies the way to take the
Capitolium, whereby the Romans were welnighe all undone. The L. Julian
answered: You mention me one ill woman, and I tell you of infinite good. And
beeside the before named, I could apply to my purpose a thousand other
examples of the profit cone to Room by women, and tell you why there was once
a Tem^le builded to Venus armata* Venus armata
and an other to Venus calua, Venus calua.
and how the feast of Handmaydens was instituted to Juno, because the
Handmaidens once delivered Room from the guiles of the ennemies. But leauinge
all these things a part, that courageous act for discoueringe the conspiracye
of Catilina, for which Cicero is so praised, had it not cheeflye his
beeginninge of a commune woman, which for this may be said to have bin the
occasion of all the good that Cicero boasts he did the commune weal of Room?
And in case I had sufficient time, Fului^.
I would (may hap) show you also that women have oftentimes corrected men of
many vices: but (I fear me) my talk has already bine ouerlong and
combrous. Therefore sins I have according to my pour fulfilled the charge that
these Ladies have given me, I mean to give place to him that shall speak more
woorthier matters to be heard, then I can. Then the L. Emilia* do you not
deprive (quod she) women of the true praises due unto them. And remember
though the L. Gaspar and perchance the L* Octauian to, hear you with
noisomnesse, yet do we and these other Lords harken to you with pleasure.
Notwithstanding^ the L. Julian wou^^e there have ended, but all the Lords
beegane to ent^eat him to speak^, Wherefore he said laughinge: Least I should
provoke my L. Gaspar to be mine enemy any more then he is, I will but bree^ly
tell you of certain that come into my mind, leauinge many that I could recite
unto you. Afterward he proceaded. When Philipp Demetrius son, was about the
City of Scio, and had l^yed siege to it, he caused to be proclaimed, yt what
ever bondemen would forsake the City and flee to him, he promised them
liberty and their masters wives. The spite of wom^n for this so shameful a
proclimation was such, that they came to the walls with weapon, and fought so
fierslye, Philippus king of Mac^doni^ son to Deme^^^^s.
that in a small time they drove Philipp away with shame and loss, which the
men could not do. T^ese self same women being with their husbands. Fathe^s
and brethren that went into banishment, after they came into Leuconia, did a no
le^se glorious act, then this was. For the Erythreans that were there with
their ^^derate^, made war against these Sciotis, which not able to hould^ out,
came to accord with composition to depart only i^ their doblet and shirt out
of the City. The women hearing of this so shameful a composition, were much
offended, reuilinge them, that leauinge their weapons, they would issue out
like naked men emonge their ennemies. And when they made answer that it was
alreadi^ so condicioned, they willed them to carye their shield and spear, and
leave their clothes, and answer their ennemies that this was their arraye. And
in so doing by their women's counsel, they covered a great part of the shame,
which they could not clean avoid. Likewise when Cirus had discomfitted in a
battle the army of the Persians, The stout heart of women.
as they rann a way, in their fleeinge they met with their women without the
gates, who coming to them, said: Whither flee ye you cowardes? Entende ye
perhaps to hide you in us from whens ye came? These and such like words
the men hearing and perceiving how much in courage they were inferior to
their women, were ashamed of themselves, and retourning back again to their
ennemies fought with them a fresh and gave them the overthrow. When the L.
Julian had hitherto spoken, he s^ayed, and tourning him to the Duchess, said:
Now (Madam) you will license me to houlde my peace. The L. Gaspar answered: It
is time to houlde your peace, when you know not what to say more. The L.
Julian said smiling: You provoke me so, that ye may chance be occupied all
night in hearing the praises of women. And ye shall understand of many
Spartane women that much rejoiced at the glorious death of their children: and
of them that forsook them or slew them with their own hands when they hard
they used dastardlinesse. Again how ye Saguntine women in ye destruction of
their Country, took weapon in hand against Hanniballes soldiers. And how ye
army of the Dutch men vanquished by Marius, their women not obteininge their
suite to live free in Room in service with y^ virgins Vestalles, killed
themselves every one with their young children. And a thousand mo that al
ancient Histories are full of. Then said the L. Gaspar: tushe (my L. Julian)
God woteth how these matters passed, for those times are so far from us, that
many lies may be toulde, and none there is that can reprove them. The L. Julian
said: In case you will measure in every time the worthiness of women with
men's, ye shall find yt they have never bine nor yet presently are any whit
inferior to m^n. For leauinge apart those so ancient, if ye come to the time
wha^ the Goths reigned in Italy, ye shall find that there was a queen among
them Amalasunta yt ruled a long while with marvelous wisdom. Amalasunta.
Theodolinda Theodora.
Afterward Theodolinda queen of ye Longobardes, of singular virtue. Theodora
Empress of Greece. And in Italy among many other was a most singular Lady
the Countess Matilda, Countess^ Matilda.
who prai^es I leave to be toulde of Count Lewis, because she was of his house.
Nay quoth the Count, it is your part, for you know it is not meet that a man
should praise his own. The L. Julian continued on. V^bin. Mantua. Ferra^a.
And how many famous in times past find you of this most noble house of
Montefeltro? How many of the house of Gonzaga, of Este and Pij? In case we
will then speak of ye time present, we shall not need to seek Examples far
fett, for we have them in the house. But I will not serve my purpose with them
whom we see in presence, least ye should seem for courteisie to grant me it,
that in no wise ye can deny me. And to go out of Italy^, remember ye, in
our days we have seen Ann French Queen a very great Lady, Ann french
Queen.
no less in virtue then in State: and if in justice and mildness,
liberalitye and holiness of lief, ye lust to compare her to the Kings Charles
and Lewis (which had bine wyef to both of them) you shall not find her a
iott inferior to them. L. Margaret.
Beehoulde the Lady Margaret daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, which with
great wisdom and justice hitherto has ruled and still does her State. But
omitting all other, tell me (my L. Gaspar) what king or what Prince has there
bine in our days, or yet many years before in Christendom, that deserves
to be compared to Queen Isabel of Spain? ^^^bel Queen of Spain.
The L. Gaspar answered: king Ferdinande her husband. The L. Julian said:
This will I not deny. For sins the Queen thought him a worthy husband for
her and loved and observed him so much, yt can not be said nay, but he deserved
to be compared to her. And I think well the reputacion he got by her was a no
less dowerie then the kingdom of Castilia. Nay, answered the L. Gaspar, I
beleaue rather of many of king Ferdinandes acts Queen Isabel bore the
praise. Praise of her
Then said the L. Julian: In case the people of Spain, the Nobles, private
persons, both men and women, poor and rich, be not al agreed together to lie
in her praise, there has not bine in our time in the world a more clear
example of true goodness, stoutnes of courage, wisdom, religion, honesty,
courteisie, liberality, to be breef, of all virtue, then Queen Isabel. And
where the renoume of that Lady in every place and with all Nations is very
great, they that lived with her and were present at all her doings, do all
affirm this renoume to be spronge of her virtue and deserts. And whosoever will
way her acts, shall soon perceive the truth to be so. For leauinge apart
infinite things that make trial of this, and might be toulde, if it were our
purpose, every man knows yt in the first beginning of her reign, she
found the greatest part of Castilia possessed by great Astates: Yet recovered
she the wholl again, so justly and in such sort that they dispossessed
themselves continued in a great good affection, and were willing to make
surrender of that they had in possession. It is also a most known thing with
what courage and wisdom she always defended her realms from most puissant
ennemies. And likewise to her alone may be given the honor of the glorious
conquest of the kingdom of Granada, which in so long and sharp a war
against stubborn ennemies, that fought ^or their liuelode, for their lief, for
their law, and to their weening in Gods quarrel, declared evermore with
counsel and with her own person so much virtue and prowess, as perhaps in
our time few Princis have had the stomach, not only to follow her steps,
but to envy her. Beeside this, all that knew her, report that there was in
her such a divine manner of government, that a man would have weened that her
will only was almost inoughe to make every man without any more business, to
do yt he ought: so that scase durst a man in his own ^ome and in secret
commit any thing that he suspected (...) would displease her. And of this a
great part was cause the wonderful judgment which she had in knowinge and
thousinge ministers meet for the offices she intended to place them in. And so
well could she ioigne the rigor of justice with the mildness of mercy and
liberality, that there was no good person in her days that could complain
he had bine smallye rewarded, ne any^ ill, to sore punisshed. Wherefore emonge
her people toward her, there sprange a very great reverence diriued of love
and fear, which in all men's minds remains still so settled, that a man
would think they looked she yt should beehoulde them from heaven, and there
above either praise or dyspraise them. And therefore with her name, and with the
ways which she ordained, those Realms are still ruled, in wise that albeit
her lief wants, yet her authority lives, like a whie^e that long swynged
about with violence, keeps ye same course a good while after of it self,
though no man move it any more. Consider you beeside this (my L. Gaspar) that
in our time all the great men of Spain and renowned in what ever thing, have
bine made by Queen Isabel. Ferdinando. Gonsaluo.
And the great Capitain Gonsalue Ferdinande was more setbye for it, then for
all his famous victories and excellent and courageous acts, that in peace and
war have made him so notable and famous, that in case fame be not unkind, she
will for ever spread abroad to ye world his immortal praises, and make proof
that in our age we have had few Kings or great Princis, that by him have not
bine surmounted in noble courage, knowleage and all virtue. To retourn therefore
to Italye, I say unto you that we have not wanted here also most excellent
Ladies. Queens of Naples.
For in Naples we have two Queens, and not long a go in Naples likewise di^d
the other Queen of Hungarye, Queen of Hungary.
as excellent a Lady as you know any, and to be compared well inoughe to the
mighty and glorious king Matthew Coruin her husband. Likewise the Duchess
Isabell of Aragon most worthy sister to king Ferdinande of Naples, Dut.
Isabel of Aragon.
which as gold in the fire, so in the storms of fortune has she showed her
virtue and prowess. If you will come into Lumbardy* Isabel Marq. of Mantua.
you shall mark the Lady Isabell marquess of Mantua, whose most excellent
virtues should receive great wrong in speakinge of them so temperatelye, as
whose will speak of them in this place must be driven to do. I am sorye
moreover that you all knew not the Duchess Beatrice of Millane her sister, yt
you might never again wonder at a womans wit. Dut. Beatrice of millane Dut.
Elionor of Fer^ara.
And y^ Duchess Elionor of Aragon Duchess of Ferrara, and mother to both these
Ladies whom I have named, was such a one, that her most excellent virtues
gave a good trial to all the world, that she was not only a worthy
daughter to a king, but also deserved to be a Queen over a far greater State
then all her ancestors possessed. And to tell you of an other: How many
men know you in the world, would abide the bitter strokes of fortune so
patiently, as Queen Isabell of Naples has done? Which for all the loss of
her kingdom, banishment and death of king Fridericke her husband and two
sons, Queen Isabel of Naples.
and imprisonment of the Duke of Calabria her eldest, yet still shows her
self a Queen: and so bears out the miserable inconveniences of wretched
pou^rtie, that every man may see, though she has changed fortune, yet has
^he not altered condition. I omit the naminge unto you of infinite other great
Ladies, Pisan^^*
and also women of low degree, as many Pisanes that in defense of their
country against Florentines, have declared that noble courage without any
fear of death, that the most invincible courages could do that ever were in
the world: Wherefore certain of them have bine renowned by many noble Poets. I
could tell you of certain most excellent in letters, in music, in
peinctinge, in caruinge, but I will not any more go searching out emonge these
examples, which are most known to you all. It suffices, that if in your
minds ye think upon women whom you your selves know, it shall be no hard
matter for you to understand, that they are not most commonly in prowess or
worthiness inferior to their fathers, brethren and husbands: and that
many* have bine occasion of goodness to men, and many times broken them of
many of their vices. And where presentlye there are not found in the world
these great Queens that go to conquer far Countries, and make great
buildinges, Piramides and Cities, as Thomiris Queen of Scithia, Artemisia,
Zenobia, Semiramis, or Cleopatra, no more are there also men like unto Caesar,
Alexander, Scipio, Lucullus, and the other noble Roman Capitanes. Say not so,
answered then Phrisio laughing, These queens gave themselves to all their
appetites.
for presently there are more found like Cleopatra or Semiramis, then ever
there were. And though they have not so many states, poures and riches, yet
there wa^teth not in them good will to counterfeit them at ye least in giving
themselves to pleasure, and satisfiyng al their lusts as much as they may. The
L. Julian said: You will ever Phrisio pass your bounds. But in case there be
found some Cleopatres, there want not for them infinite Sardanapalles,
Sardanapal^s a king in Assiria monstrous in all kind of lechery.
which is much worse. Make not this comparason quod the L. Gaspar then, and
beleaue not that men are so incontinent, as women be: and where they were so,
yet should it not be worse. For of the incontinencye of women arrise infinite
inconveniences, that do not of men's. And therefore (as it was well said
yesterday) they have wisely ordained that it may be lawful for them to be out
of the way without blame in all other things, that they may apply their
force to keep them selves in this one virtue of chastity, without the which
children were uncertain, and the bond that knitteth all the world together by
blood and by ye love that naturallye each man has to that is borne him,
should be lewsed. Therefore a wanton lief in women is less to be borne withal
then in men, that carry not their children nine months in their body. Then
answered the L. Julian: Doubtless these be pretty arguments that ye make, I
merueile you put them not in writing. But tell me. For what cause is it
ordained that a wanton lief should not be so shameful a matter in men, as in
women? Consideringe if they be by nature more virtuous and of greater prowess,
The wanton lief of m^n make women unchaste.
they may also the easelier keep themselves in this virtue of continency: and
children should be no more nor less certain, for if women were given to wanton
living, so men were continent, and consented not to the wantonness of women,
they emonge them selves and without any other help could not bear children.
Men have calenged a (...).
But if you will tell ye troth, you your self know, that we have of our own
authority claymed a liberty, whereby we will have self same offenses in us
very light and otherwhile worthy praise, and in women not sufficientlye to
be punished, but with a shameful death, or at the least everlasting
sclaunder. Therefore sins this opinion has taken root, me thinks it a meet
matter to punish them in like manner sharply, that with lies bring up a
sclaunder upon women. And I beleaue that every worthy gentilman is bound to
defend always with weapon, where n^ede requires, the truth: and especially
when he knows any woman falslye reported of to be of little honesty. And I,
answered the L. Gaspar smilinge, do not only affirm to be every worthy
gentilmans duty that you say, but also take it for great courtesy and
honesty to cover some offense that by mishappe or overmuch love a woman is
renn into. And thus you may see that I am more on women's side, where reason
bears me out, then you be. I deny not that men have taken a little liberty,
and that because they know by the commune opinion, that to them wanton living
is not so sclaunderous as to women, which through the weakness of their kind,
are much more inclined to appetites, then men: and in case they abstain
otherwhile from satisfiynge their lusts, they do it for shame, not that will
is not most ready in them, and therefore have men laid upon them fear of
sclaunder for a bridle, to keep them (in a manner) whether they will or no in
this virtue, without the which (to say the trothe) they were little to be set
bye: for the world has no profit by women, but for gettinge of children. But
the like is not of men, which govern Cities, armies, and do so many other
waightye matters, The continency of Alexander toward Barius wief and
daughters. Q. Cur^ lib. iii. Ca^thago noua.

The continency of Scipio toward a young Lady betrothed to Allucius a lord
among the C^ltiberians* Xenocrates.


the which (sins you will so have it) I will not dispute, how women could do,
yt suffices they do it not. And when it was meet for men to make trial of
their continency, as well how they passed women in this virtue, as in the
rest, although you grant it not. And about this, will not I rehearse unto you
so many Histories or fables, as you have done, I remit you to the continency
only of two most mighty personages, youthful and upon their victory, which
is wont to make haute men of lowest degree. And the one is, the great Alexander
toward the most beawtiful women of Darius his ennemie and discomfited. The
other, Scipio, unto whom beeinge XXIIII years of age, and having wonn by
force a City in Spain, there was brought a most beawtiful and noble Damisell
taken emonge many other. And when Scipio understood that she was affiansed to
be a Lord of the Country, he did not only abstain from all dishonest act
toward her, but undefiled restored her to her husband and a large gift
withal. I could tell you of Xenocrates, which was so continent, that a most
beawtifull woman lyinge naked by his side and dalying with him and using all
the ways she could (in which matters she was very well practiced) she had
never the pour to make him once show the least sign of wantonness, for all
she bestowed a wholl night about it. And of Pericles that did no more but hear
one praise with ouermuche earnestness the well fauourednesse of a boy,
Pericles reprehended Sophocles for saying O puerum pulchrum.
and he took him up sharplye for it. And of many other most continent of
their own free will, and not for shame or fear of punishment, that compels
the greatest part of women to keep them selves upright in this virtue, which
notwithstanding deserve much praise withal: and whosoever falselye brings up of
them a sclaunderous report of uncleanness of lyuinge, is worthy (as you have
said) very sore punishment. Then spoke the L. Caesar which had held his peace
a good while: Judge you in what sort the L. Gaspar speaks in the dispraise of
women, when these are the matters that he speaks in their praise. But if the
L. Julian will give me leave, that I may in his stead answer him certain few
matters, as touching where (in mine opinion) he has falselye spoken against
women, it shall be good for him and me both. For he shall rest him a while,
and shall afterward the better go forward to speak of some other perfection
of the Gentilwoman of the Palaice, and I shall have a good turn that I have
occasion to execute iointlye with him this duty of a good knight, which is to
defend the truth. Mary I beseech ye, answered the L. Julian: for me think I
have already fulfilled according to my pour, that I ought, and this
communication now is out of the purpose that I went about. The L Caesar then
beegane: I will not now speak of the profit that the world has by women
beeside the bearinge of children, for it is well inoughe declared how
necessary they be, not only to our beeinge, but also to our well beeinge.
But I say (my L Gaspar) that in case they be as you affirm more inclined to
appetites, then men, and notwithstanding abstain more then men (which you
your self grant) they are so much ye more worthy praise, as their kind is
less able to withstand natural appetites. And if you say they do it for
shame, I can not see but for one virtue you give them two. Shame.
For in case shame can do more in them then appetite, and through it refrain
from ill doing, I esteame this shame (which in conclusion is nothing else but
fear of sclaunder) a most sildome virtue and reigninge in very few men.
And if I could without infinite reproach to men, tell how many of them be
drowned in unshamefastness and impudencye (which is the vice contrary to
this virtue) I should infect these devout ears that hear me. And for most
part these kind of injurious persons both to god and nature, are men well
stricken in years, Injurious persons to God and nature.
which profess some preesthoode, some Philosophye, some divinity, and rule
Commonweals with such Catoes gravity in countenance, that it makes an
outward show of all the honestye in the world, and always allege woman
kind to be most incontinent, where they at no time find them selves more
agreeued, then at the want of their natural lustynesse, yt they may satisfy
their abominable desires, which still abide in the mind after nature has
taken them from their body, and therefore many times find out ways, where
force preueyleth not. But I will not tell farther. It fuffyceth for my purpose
ye grant ye women abstain more from unclean living, then men. And sure it
is, that they are not kept short with any other bridle, then what they put upon
them selves. And that it is true, the most part of them that be kept under
with ouerstreict looking to, or beaten of their husbands or fathers, are less
chaste, then they that have some liberty. But generallye a great bridle to
women, is the zeal of true virtue and the desire of good name, which many
that I have known in my days more esteame, Zeal of true virtue and good
report.
then their own lief. And in case you will tell the troth, every one of us
has seen most noble young men, discreet, wise, of prowes and welfauoured
spend, many years in louinge, sparinge for nothing that might entice, tokens,
suites, tears: to be short, whatsoever may be imagined, and all but lost
labor. And if it might not be told me that my conditions never deserved I
should be beloved, I would allege my self for a witness, which more then
once through the unchangeable and ouerstedfaste honesty of a woman was nighe
deaths door. The L. Gaspar answered: marvel you not thereat for women that
are suid to, always refuse to fulfill his request that suith to them, but
those that are not suid to, sue to others. The L. Caesar said: I never knew
them that have bine suid to by women, but many there be that perceiuinge they
have attempted in vain and spent their time fondlye, renn to this noble
revenge, and say that they had plenty of the thing which they did but cast
in their mind. Sclaunderous persons of women's honesties.
And to their weeninge, to report ill and to study for inventions how to
bring up sclaunderous tales of some worthy gentilwoman, is a kind of
Courtiers. But these kind of persons that knauishelye make their vaunt of any
woman of price, be it true or false, deserve very sore correction and
punishment. And if it be otherwhile bestowed upon them, it can not be said
how much they are to be commended that do this office. For in case they tell
lies, what mischief can be greater then to take from a worthy woman with
guile the thing which she more esteameth then her lief? And no other cause,
but ye ought to make her renowned with infinite praises. If again, it be true
they say, what peine can suffice so traiterous a person, that renders such
ingratitude in recompense to a Gentilwoman, which won with his false
flattringes, feigned tears, continual suites, bewaylinges, crafts, deceites,
and periuries has suffered her self to be lead to love ouermuche, afterward
without respect, has given herself vnheedfullie for a pray to so wicked a
spirit? But to answer you beeside to this wonderful continencye of Alexander
and Scipio which you have alleged, I say, that I will not deny but each of
them did a deed worthy much praise. Notwithstanding least ye should say
that in rehersinge to you ancient matters, I toulde you fables, I will allege
a woman of our time of base degree, An example of true continencye.
who notwithstanding showed a far greater continency then any of these two
great astates. I say unto you therefore y^. I knew once a welfauoured and
tender young woman, whose name I tell you not, for giuynge matter to many
leude persons to report ill, which as soon as they understand a woman to be in
love, make an ill descantinge upon it. She therefore beloved of a worthy and
fair condicioned young Gentilman, was bent with heart and mind to love him.
And of this not I alone, unto whom of her own accord she uttered trustfullye
the wholl matter, no otherwise then if I had bine, I will not say a brother,
but an inward sister of herres, but all that beehelde herr in company of the
beloved young m an, were well weettinge of her passion. She thus feruentlye
louinge, as a most loving mind could love, continued two years in such
contynencie, that she never made any token to this young man of the love that
she bore him, but such as she could not hide from him. At no time she would
speak with him, nor receive any letters from him or tokens, where there never
passed day but she was tempted with both the one and the other. And how she
longed for it, that wot I well, for if otherwhile she could privily get
any thing that had bine the young man's, she was so tender over it, that a man would have thought that of it had spronge her lief and all her joy. Yet
would she never in so long a time content him with other, then to beehoulde
him and be seen of him again, and sometime happening to be at open feasts,
dance with him as she did with others. And because there was no great
difference in their degree, she and the young man coueted that so great a love
might have a luckye end, and be man and wief together. All the men and women
in the City desired the same, sauinge her cruel father, which of a weywarde
and strange opinion minded to beestowe her upon an other more welthie. And
this was not by the unlucky maiden otherwise gainstoode, then with most bitter
tears. And after this unfortunate marriage was concluded with great compassion
of the people there, and despair of the poor lovers, yet did not this stroke
of fortune serve to root up so grounded a love in the heart of each other, but
lasted afterward the term of three years, albeit she full wiselye dissembled
it, and sought every way to cut in sunder those desires, which now were
past hope. And in this while she followed on still in her set purpose of
continencye, and perceiuinge she could not honestly have him, whom she
worshipped in ye world, she chose not to have him at all, and continued in her
wont not to accept messages, tokens nor yet his looks. And in this resolved
determination the seely soul vanquished with most cruel affliction, and
wexed through long passion very feint, at the three years end, died. Rather
would she forgoo her contentacions and pleasures so much longed for, finally
her lief, then her honesty. And yet wanted she no means nor ways to fulfill
her desire most secretlye, and without peril either of sclaunder or any other
loss. And for all that, refrained she from the thing of herself that she so
much coueted, and for the which she was so continuallye attempted by the
person whom alone in the world her desire was to please. And to this was she
not driven for fear or any other respect, but only for the zeal of true
virtue. What will you say of an other? An other example of a maiden.
yt for six months almost nightlye lay with a most dear lover of herres,
yet in a gardein full of most sauoury fruits, tempted with her own most
fervent longinge and with the petitions and tears of him that was moore dear
to herr then her own self, refrayned from tastinge of them. And for all she
was wrapped and tied in the streict chain of those beloved arms, yet never
yielded she herself as vanquished, but preserved undefiled the flower of her
honesty. Trow you not (my L. Gaspar) that these be deeds of continency^
alike to Alexanders? Which most feruentlye inamored not with the women of
Darius, but with this renown and greatness, that pricked him forward with
the spurs of glory to abide peines and dangers to make himself immortal,
set at naught not only other things, but his own lief, to get a name above
all men? and do we marvel with such thoughts in his heart that he refrayned
from a thing which he coueted not greatly? for sins he never saw those
women before, it is not possible that he should be in love with them at a
blushe, but rather perhaps abhorred them for Darius his ennemies sake. And in
this case every wanton act of his toward them, had bine an iniurye and not
love. And therefore no great matter if Alexander, which no less with noblenes
of courage then marciall prowess subdued the world, abstained from doing
injury to women. The continency in like case of Scipio is doubtless much to be
commended, Scipio.
yet if ye consider well, not to be compared to these two women's: for he in like
manner also refrayned from a thing that he coueted not, beeinge in his ennemies
country, a fresh Capitain, in the beeginning of a most weighty enterprise,
leaving beehind him in his Country such expecta^ion of himself, and having
beeside to give account to rigorous judges, y^ often times chastised not only
ye great, but ye least offenses of al, and among them he wist well he had
enemies, knowing also if he had otherwise done, because she was a noble da^sel
and espoused to a noble man, he should have purchased him so many enemies and
in such sort, that many would have driven of and perchance have set him clean
beeside his victory. Thus for so many respects and so weighty, he absteined
from a light and hurtful appetite, in showing continency and a freeherted
welmeaning, y^ which (as it is written) got him all the hearts of that people:
and an other army stood him in stead with favor to vanquish men's hertes,
which perhaps by force of arms had bine invincible. Gn. Noeuius Val.
Antiates.
So that this may rather be termed a warlike policy, then pure continency:
Albeit beeside, ye report of this matter is not all of ye purest, for some
writers of authority affirm that this Damsel was enjoyed of Scipio in the
pleasures of love: and of this I tell you ye may depose upon. Phrisio said:
Perhaps ye have found it in the Gospel. I have seen it my self, answered
the L. Caesar, and therefore I have a much more certeintye of this, Alcibiades
was Socrates scholar the welfauouredst young boy in all Athens,
then you or any man else can have that Alcibiades arrose no otherwise from
Socrates bed then children do from their fathers beds: for to say the truth,
a strange place and time was bed and night to view with fired mind the pure
beawty which is said Socrates loved without any dishonest desire, especially
louinge better the beawtie of the mind, then of the body: but in boys, not
in old men, for all they were wiser. And in good sooth a better example could
not have bine pyked out to praise the continency of men, Xenocrates.
then this of Xenocrates, which occupied in his study fastened and bound by his
profession, which is Philo^ophie, that consists in good manners, Lais of
Corinth.
and not in words, old, clean spent of his natural lustiness, nothing able,
no not in making profer to be able, refrayned from a commune haunted woman,
which for the names sake might abhor him. I would sooner have beleaued he had
bine continent, if he had declared any token to have bine come to his right
senses again, and in that case have used continency: or else abstained from
the thing which old men couett more then the battles of Venus, Old men
desirous of wine.
namelye from wine. But to establishe well continency in old age, it is
written that he was full and laden with it. And what can be said to be more
wider from the continency of an old man, then dronkenn^sse? And in case the
shonning of Uenus matters in that slow and cold age deserves so much praise,
how much should it deserve in a tender maiden, as those two I have told you
of? Of which the one most streic^lye bridlinge all her senses, not only
deni^d her eyes their light, but also took from the heart those thoughts,
which alone had bine a most sweet food a long time to keep him in lief.
The other feruentlye in love, beeinge so often times alone in the a^mes of him
whom she loved more a great deal then all the world beeside, fighting^ against
her own self and against him that was more dear to her then her own self,
overcame that fervent desire, that many times has and does overcome so many
wise men. Trow ye not now (my L. Gaspar) that writers may be ashamed to make
mention of Xenocrates in this case, and to reckon him for chaste? where if a
man could come bye the knowleage of it, I would lay a wager that he slept all that night until the next day diner time, like a dead body buried in wine: and
for all the stirringe that woman made, could not once open his eyes, as though
he had bine cast into a dead sleep. Here all the men and women laughed, and the
L. Emilia, surely, my L. Gaspar (quoth she) if you will beethinke your self a
little better, I beleaue you shall find out some other pretty example of
continencye alike unto this. The L. Caesar answered: Is not this other (think
ye Madam) a goodly example of continencye which he has alleged of Pericles? I
muse much that he has not as well called to rehersall the continency and
pretty saying that is written of him that a woman asked to great a sum of for
one night, and he answered her, that He minded not to bye repentance so dear.
Demosthenes answ^^ to Lais of Corinth that asked him xxiiii* li. for one night.
They ceased not laughinge, and the L. Caesar. after he had stayed a while, my
L. Caspar (quoth he) perdon me, if I tell troth. For in conclusion these be the
wonderful continencies that men write of themselves, accusinge women for
incontinent, in whom are dailye seen infinite tokens of continency. And
certe^^e if ye ponder it aright, there is no fortress so impringable, nor so
well fensed that beeinge assaulted with the thousandeth part of the inginnes
and guyles that are practiced to conquer the steadie mind of a woman, would not
yield up at the first assault. How many trained up by great astates and
enriched through them and advanced to great promotion, having in their hands
their fortresses, houldes and Castles, whereupon depended their whole state,
their lief and al their gooddes, without shame or care t^ be named Traiters*
have disloyallye given them to whom they ought not? Trayters.
And would god in our days there were such scarcity of these kind of
persons, that we might not have much more a do to find out some one, that in
this case has done that he ought, then to name such as have failed therein.
See you not so many other that daily wander about to kill men in thickettes,
Thieves.
and rouinge by sea, only to robb men's money? How many Prelates make
marchaundise with the goods of the Church of god? Prelates.
How many Lawiers falsify testaments? Lawyers,
What periuries make they? How many false evidences, only to get money? How
many Phisitiens poison the diseased, Phisitiens.
only for it? How many again for fear of death do most vile matters? And
yet all these so stiff and hard battayles does a tender and delicate young
woman gainstande many times, for sundry there have bine, yt have chose rather
to dye then to lose their honesty: Then said the L. Gaspar: These (my L. Caesar)
be not I beleaue, in the world nowadayes. The L. Caesar answered: And I will
not allege unto you them of old time. But this I say, that many might be
found out, and are daily, that in this case pass not for death. And now it
comes into my mind that when Capua was sacked by the French m^n (which is
not yet so long since, but you may full well bear it in mind) a well
favored young gentylwoman of Capua, beeinge lead out of her house where she had
bine taken by a company of Gascoignes, Examples of the chastity of women.
when she came to the river that renneth by Capua, she feigned to pluck on her
shoe, insomuch that her leader let her go a little, and she straight way
threw herself into the river. Vlturno*
What will you say ^f a poor Country wenche, that not many months ago at
Gazuolo beeside Mantua gone into ye field a lea^inge with a sister of herres,
sore a thirst entered into a house to drink water, where the good man of the
house, that was young, seeinge her meetlye welfauoured and alone, taking her
in his arms, first with fair words, afterward with threatninges attempted
to frame her to do his pleasure, and where she striued still more obstinatelye,
at length with many blows and by force overcame her. She thus tossed and
sobbinge, returned into the field to her sister, and for all the instance that
she made upon herr, would never disclose to herr what oultrage she received
in that house, but still drawinge homewarde, and showinge herself apeaced by
little and little, and to speak without desturbance, she gave her certain
instructions. Afterward when she came to ye Olio, which is the river that
renneth by Gazuolo, Olio*
keapinge her somewhat a louf from her sister, that knew not nor imagined that
she minded to do, sodeinlye cast her self into it. Her Sister sorrowful and
weepinge, followed down by the rivers side as fast as she could, which
carried her a good pace away, and every time the poor soul appeared above
water, her sister threw in to her a cor^e that she had brought with her to
bind ye corn withal. And for all the cord came to her hands more then once
(for she was yet nigh inoughe to the bancke) the steadfast and resolved girl
always refused it and pushed it from her. And thus shonninge all succor that
might save her lief, in a short space died. She was neither stirred by noblenes
of blood, nor by fear of death or sclaunder, but only by the greef of her
lost maidenheade. Now by this you may gather, how many other women do
deeds most woorthye memory, sins (as a man may say) three days a go,
this has made such a trial of her virtue, and is not spoken of, ne yet her
name known. But had not the death followed at that time of the Bishop of Mantua
uncle to our Duchess, the bancke of the Olio in ye place where she cast
herself in, had now bine garnished with a very fair sepulture, for a
memory of so glorious a soul, that deserved so much the more clear renown
after death, as in lief it dwelled in an unnoble body. Here the L. Cesa^ took
respit a while, afterward he se^ forward: In my days also in Room there
happened a like chance, and it was, that a welfauoured and well borne young
Gentilwoman of Room, A chance that happened to a gentilwoman in Room.
beeinge long followed after of one that showed to love her greatly, would never
please him with any thing, no not so much as a look. So that this fellow by
force of money corrupted a waitinge woman of herres, who desirous to please him
to fingre more money, was in hand with her maistresse upon a day, no great
holy day, to go visit Saint Sebastianes Church. One of the vii. Churches of
Room ii. miles with out y^ City.
And giuinge the lover intelligence of the wholl, and instructinge him what he
had to do, lead the young Gentilwoman into one of the dark. Caves under
ground, that whosoever go to Saint Sebastianes are w^nt to visit. And in it was
the young man first closely hid, which perceiuinge himself alone with her
whom he loved somuche, beegane every way to exhort her with as fair language
as he could, to have compassion upon him, and to change her former rigor into
love. But when he saw all his prayers could take none effect, he turned him
to threatninges. And when they prevailed not, he all to beat her. In the end
he was full and wholye bent to have his purpose, if not otherwise, by force,
and therein used the help of the naughtye woman that had brought her thither.
Yet could he never do so much as make her grant to him, but in words and
deeds (although her force was but small) always the seelye young woman
defended herself in what she could possible. So that what for the spite he
conceived, when he saw he could not get his will, and what for fear least
the matter should come to her kinsfolks care and make him punished for it,
this mischeuous person with the aid of the woman that doubted the same,
strangled the unlucky young woman, and there left her, and rennynge his way
provided for himself for beeinge found out again. The waiting woman blinded
with her own offense, wist not to flee, and beeinge taken upon certain
susspitions, confessed the wholl matter, and was therefore punished according
to her deserts. The body of the constante and noble gentilwoman with great
honor was taken out of the cave and carried to burial within Room* with a
garlande of Laurel about her head, accompanied with an infinite number of men
and women: among which was not one yt brought his eyes to his home again
without tears. And thus generallye of all the people was this rare soul no
less be wayled then commended. But to tell you of them yt you your self
know, remember you not y^ ye have heard tell, as the Lady Foelix della Rouere
was on her journey to Saona, Lady Foelix della Rouere.
doubting least certain sails that were descried a far of, had bine Pope
Alexanders vessels that pursuid her, was utterly resolved, if they had made
toward her, and no remedy to escape, to cast herself into the Sea. And this
is not to be thought that she did upon any lightness, for you as well as any
man, do know with what a wit and wisdom the singular beawtie of that Lady
is accompanied. I can no longer keep in silence a word of our Duchess,
Praise of the Du^ches that lead a widows lief with the Duke.
who living XV years in company with her husband, like a widow, has not
only bine steadfast in not vttringe this to any person in the world, but also
when she was persuaded by her own friends to forsake this widowheade, she
chose rather to suffer banishment, poverty, and al other kind of misery, then
to agree to that, which all other men thought great favor and prosperity of
fortune. And as he still proceaded in talkinge of this, the Duchess said:
Speak of somewhat else, and no more ado in this matter, for ye have other
things inoughe to talk of. The L Caesar followed on. Full well I know that you
will not deny me this (my L. Gaspar) nor you Phrisio. No doubtless, answered
Phrisio: but One makes no number. Then said the L. Caesar: Truth it is that
these so great effects and rare virtues are s^ene in few women. Yet are they
also that resist the battles of love, all to be wondered at, and such as
otherwhile be overcome deserve much compassion. For surely the prouocations
of lovers, the crafts that they use, ye snares that they lay in wa^te are
such and so applied, that it is to great a wonder, that a tender girl should
escape them. What day, what hour passes at any time that the young woman
thus laid at is not tempted by her lover with money, The careful diligence of
lovers.
tokens, and al things that he can imaginn may please her? At what time can
she ever look out at a window, but she sees continuallye the earnest lover
pass by? With silence in words, but with a pair of eyes that talk. With a
vexed and feint countenance. With those kindled sighs. Often times with most
abundant tears. When does she at any time issue out at her doors to Church
or any other place, but he is always in ye face of her? And at every tourning
of a lane meets her in ye teeth, with such heavy pas^ion peinted in his eyes
that a man would ween yt even at that instant he were ready to die? I omit his
preciseness in sundry things, inuentio^s, meery conceits, undertaking
enterprises, spor^es, daunses, games, maskeries, iustes, tourneimentes, ye
which things she knows al to be taken in hand for her sake. Again, in y^
night time she can never awake, but she hears music, or at ye least that
unquiet spirit about the walls of her house casting forth sighs and
lamentable voices. If by a hap she talks with one of her waiting women about
her, she (being already corrupted with money) has straight way in a readiness
some pretye token, a letter, a ^ime, or some such matter to present her in ye
lovers behalf: and here entering to purpose, makes her to understand how this
selie soul burns, how he sets little by his own lief, to do her service,
and how he seeks nothing of her but honesty, and that only his desire is to
speak with her. Here then for all hard matters are found out remedies,
counterfeit kayes, laders of ropes, ways to cast into sleep, a trifling
matter is peincted out, examples are alleged of others that do much worse: so
that every matter is made so easy, that she has no more trouble, but to say, I
am content. And in case the poor soul makes resistaunce but a while, they
plye her with such prouocations, and find such means, that with continual
beatynge at, they break in sunder that is a let to her. And many there be
that perceiving they can not prevail with fair words, fall to threatninges,
and say that they will tell their husbands they are, that they be not. Other
bargain bouldlye with the fathers and many times with the husbands which for
money or promotions sake give their own daughters and wives for a prey against
their will. Other seek by inchauntmentes, and witchcraftes to take from them
the liberty that god has granted to souls, wherein are seen wonderful
conclusions. But in a thousand year I could not repeat all the crafts that
men use to frame women to their wills, which be infinite. And beeside them
which every man of himself finds out, there has not also wanted that has
wittily made books, and beestowed great study to teach how in this beehalfe
women are to be deceived. Now judge you how from so many nets these simple
dooues can be safe, tempted with so sweet a bayte. And what great matter is it
then, in case a woman knowinge her self so much beeloued and worshipped many
years together, of a noble and fair condicioned young man, which a thousand
times a day hasardeth his lief to serve her, and never thinks upon other but
to please her with the continual beatinge which the water makes when it
perceth the most hard marble stone, at length is brought to love him? Is this
(think you) so heinous a trespace, that the seelye poor creature taken with
so many enticementes, deserves not, if the woorst should fall, the perdon that
many times murderers, thieves, ^ellones and traiters have? Will you have this
vice so vncomperable great, yt because one woman is found to r^nn into it, all
women kind should be clean despised for it, and generallye counted v^ide of
continencye? Not regardinge that many are found most invincible, that
against the continual flickeringe pr^uocations of love are made of Diamondes,
and stiff in their infinite steadiness, more then the rocks against the
surges of the Sea? Then the L. Gaspar when the L^ Caesar stayed talkinge, beegan
to make him answer, but the L. Octauian smilinge: Tushe for love of god (quoth
he) grant him the victory, for I know ye shall do small good, and me think I
see you shall not only make all the women your ennemies, but also the more
part of the men. The L. Gaspar laughed and said: Nay, the women have rather
great cause to thank me. For had not I contraryed the L. Julian and the L.
Caesar, they should not have come to the knowleage so many praises as they
have given them. Then said the L. Caesar: The praises which my L. Julian and I
have given women, and many mo beeside, were most known, therefore they have
bine but superfluous. Who weteth not that without women no contentation or
delight can be felt in all this lief of ours? ^
which (set them aside) were rude and without all sweetness, and rougher
then the lief of forest wild beasts? Who knows not that women rid our
hearts of al vile and dastardlye imaginations, vexations, miseries, and the
troublesome heaviness that so often times accompanies them? And in case we
will consider ye truth, we shall know moreover as touching ye understanding of
great matters, that they do not stray our wits, The ^oc^a^ions of love.
but rather quicken them, and in war make men past fe^^e and hardy passinge
measure. And certesse it is not possible, that in the heart of man, where once
is entered the flame of love, there should at any time reign cowardlynesse. For
he that lives, always coueteth to make himself as lovely as he can, and
evermore dreadeth that he take no foil, that should make him little set by of
whom he desires to be much set by: and passes not to go a thousand times in
a day to his death, to declare himself woorthye of that love. Therefore whosoever
could gather an army of lovers, that should fight in presence of the ladies
they loved, should subdue the wholl world, on less against it on the
contrary part there were an other army likewise in love. And to abide by, the
houldinge out of Troy X. years against all Greece: Why Troy* withstoode all*
Greece ^ years.
proceaded of nothing else but of certain lovers, which when they intended
to issue out abroad to fight, armed themselves in the presence of their Ladies,
and many times they helped them themselves, and at their settinge forth rounded
them some certain word, that set them on fire and made them more then men.
Afterward in fightinge they wi^^ well y^ they were beeheld from the walls and
Toures by the Ladies, wherefore they deemed every bold enterprise that they
undertook, was commended of them, which was the greatest reward to them that
they could have in the world. Many there be that houlde opinion that the
victory of king Ferdinande and Isabell of Spain, against the king of
Granada was cheeflye occasioned by women, Women the cause of the conquest of
the king^om of Granata.
for the most times when the army of Spain marched to encounter with the
enemies, Queen Isabel set forth al^o with all her Damselles: and there were
many noble gentilmen that were in love, who til they came within sight of the
ennemies, always went communing with their Ladies. Afterward echone taking
his leave of his, in their presence marched on to encountre with the ennemies,
with that fiersenesse of courage, that love and desire to show their Ladies
that they were served with valiant men, gave them. Whereupon it beefell many
times yt a very few gentilme^ of Spain put to flight and slu^ an infinite
number of Moors, thanked be the courteious and beloved women. Therefore I wot
not (my L. Gaspar) what weywarde judgment has lead you to dispraise women.
Women the cause of worthy (...)
Do you not see that of all comelye exercises and which delight the world, the
cause is to be referred to no earthlye thing, but to women? Who learneth to
dance featlye for other, but to please women? Who applies the sweetness of
music for other cause, but for this? Who to w^ite in meeter, at the least in
the mother tung, but to express the affections caused by women? Judge you how
many most noble Poemes we had bine without both in Greek and Latin,
Francesco* Pe^rarea.
had women bine smallye regarded of Poets. But leauinge all other a part, had
it not bine a very great loss, in case M. Francis Petrarca, that writ so
diuinlye his loves in this our tunge, had appli^d his mind only to Latin
matters: as he would have done, had not the love of the Damsel Laura sometime
strayed him from it? I name not unto you the fine wits that are now in the
world, and here present, which dailye bring furthe some noble frut^, and
no^wythstandynge take their ground only of the virtue and bea w^ye of women.
See whether Solomon minding to write mysticallye very high and heavenly
matters, S^lomon
to cover them with a gracious veil, did not feign a fervent Dialogue full of
the affection of a lover with his woman, seeminge to him that he could not
find here beeneth emonge us any likeness more meet and agreeinge with
heavenly matters, then the love toward women: and in that wise and manner
minded to give us a little of the smacke of that diuinitye, which he both for
his understanding and for the grace above others, had knowleage of. Therefore
this needed no disputacyon (my L, Gaspar) or at the least so many words in
the matter. But you in gainsaiynge the truth have hindered the understanding of
a thousand other pretty matters and necessary for the perfection of the
gentilwoman of the Palaice. The L. Gaspar answered: I beleaue there can no more
be said. Yet if you suppose that the L. Julian has not garnished her
throughlye with good conditions, the fault is not in him, but in him that has
so wrought that there are no ^o virtues in the world: ^or all that there be,
he has beestowed upon her. The Duchess said smilinge: Well, you shall see
that the L. Julian will yet find out mo beeside. The L. Julian answered: In
good sooth (Madam) me seems I have sufficientlye spoken. And for my part I am
well pleased with this my woman. And in case these Lords will not have her as
she is, let them leave her to me. Here when all was whilt, Sir Fridericke
said: My L. Julian, to give you occasion to say somewhat else, I will but
ask you a question, Enterteinment.
as touching that you have willed to be the principal profession of the
Gentilwoman of the Palayce. And this it is, that I long to know how she
should beehaue herself in a point that (to my seeming) is most necessary.
For albeit the excellent qualityes which you have given her contain in them
discretion, knowleage, judgment, slight, sobermoode, and so many other
virtues, wherebye of reason she ought to have the understanding to entertein
every manne and in all kind of purpose, yet think I notwithstanding above
any other thing that it is requisite for her to know what beelongeth to
communication of love. To tal^e of love.
For even as every honest Gentilmanne for an instrument to obtain the good
will of women, practyseth those noble exercises, precise facions and good
manners which we have named, even so to this purpose applies he also his
words, and not only when he is stirred thereto by some passion, but often
times also to do honor to the woman he talks withal, seeming to him that
to declare to love her is a witness that she is worthy of it, and that her
beawtie and woorthynesse is such, that it enforces every manne to serve her.
Therefore would I know, how this woman in such a case should beehaue
herself vprightlye, and how to answer him that loves her in deed, and how
him that makes false semblant: and whether she ought to dissemble the
understanding of it, or be answerable, or shonn the matter, and how to handle
herself. Then said the L. Julian: It were first needful to teach her to
know them that make semblant to love, and them that love in deed: Afterward
for beeinge answerable in love or no, I beeleaue she ought not to be guided by
any other man's will, but by her own self. Sir Fridericke said: Teach you her
then what are the most certain and surest tokens to descerne false love from
true, and what trial she shall think sufficient to content herself withal,
to be out of doubt of the love showed her. The L. Julian answered smiling: That
wot not I, because men be nowadayes so craftye, that they make infinite false
semblantes, and sometime weep, when they have in deed a greater lust to
laughe. Therefore they should be sent to the constant I Will under the Arch of
faithful lovers. But least this woman of mine (which is my charge and no man's
else, because she is my creature) should renn into those erroures which I
have seen many other renn into, I would say that she should not be light of
credence that she is beloved: nor be like unto some, that not only make not
wise they understand him not that communeth with them of love, be it never so
far of, but also at the first word accept all the praises that be given
them: or else deny them after such a sort, that it is rather an alluringe for
them to love them they commune withal, then a withdrawinge of themselves.
Therefore the manner of enterteinment in reasoninge of love that I will have my
woman of the Palaice to use, shall be always to shonn beeleauinge that whosoever
talks of love, loves her any whitt the more. And in case the Gentilman be
(as many such there are abroad) malapert, and has small respect to her in
his talk, she shall shape him such an answer, that he shall plainly
understand she is not pleased withal. Again, if he be demure and uses sober
facions and words of love covertly, in such honest manner, as I beeleaue the
Courtier whom these Lords have facioned will do, the woman shall make wise
not to understand him, and shall draw his words to another sense, seekinge
always sobrely with the discretion and wisdom that is already said becomes
her, to stray from that purpose. But in case the communication be such that
she can not feign not to understand it, she shall take the wholl (as it were)
for a meerie divise, and make wise that she knows it is spoken to her rather
to honor her withal, then that it is so in deed, debasinge her deserts and
acknowleginge at the Gentilmans courtesy the praises which he gives her: and
in this sort she shall be counted discreet, and shall be on the surer hand
for beeinge deceived. Thus me seems the Gentilwoman of the Palaice ought to
behave herself in communication of love. Then Sir Friderick, You debate this
matter, my L. Julian (quoth he) as though it were requisite, that all such as
speak with women of love, should tell lies, and seek to deceive them, the
which in case it were so, I would say your lessons were good. But if this
gentilman that enterteineth, loves in very deed, and feels the passion that
so tourmenteth men's hertes sometime, consider you not in what peine, in what
calamity and death ye put him in, when at no time you will that the woman
shall beeleaue him in any thing he says about this purpose? Shall oaths,
tears, and so many other tokens then, have no force at all? Take heed (my L.
Julian) least a man may think that beeside the natural crueltye which
many of these women have in them, you teach them get more. The L. Julian
answered: I have spoken, not of him that loves, but of him that enterteineth
with communication of love, wherein one of the necessariest points is, that
words be never to seek: and true lovers as they have a burninge heart, so
have they a cold tunge, with broken talk and sodeine silence. Therefore (may
happ) it were no false principle to say: He that loves much, speaks little.
Howbeit in this I beleaue there can be given no certain rule, by reason of ye
diversity of men's manners. And I wot not what I should say, but yt ye woman be
good and heedfull, and always bear in mind, that men may with a great deal
less danger declare themselves to love, then women. The L. Gaspar said
laughinge: Why (my L. Julian) will not you that this your so excellent a woman
shall love again, at the least when she knows cer^einlye she is beeloued?
consideringe if the Courtier were not loved again, it is not likelye he would
continue in louinge her: and so should she want many favors, and ^heefly the
homage and reverence, wherwithal lovers obey and (in a manner) woorship the
virtue of the women beloved. In this, answered the L. Julian, I will not
counsel her. But I say pardee to love, as you now understand, I judge it not
meet, but for unmarried women. For wha^ this love can not end in matrimonye,
the woman must needs have always the remorse and pricking that is had of
vn^efull matters, and she puts in hasarde to stain the renown of honesty,
that stands her so much upon. Then answered Sir Fridericke smilinge: Me
think (my L. Julian) this opinion of yours is very sour and crabbed, and I
b^leaue you have learned it of some Friar Preacher, of them that rebuke women
in love with lay men, that their part may be the more. Married women,
And me seems you sort over hard laws to married women, for many there be
that their husbands bear very sore hatred unto without cause, and ^ipp them
at the heart, sometime in louinge other women, otherwhile in woorkinge them all
the displeasures they can imagine. Some are compelled by their fathers to ^ake
old men full of diseases, ^glesome and wey ward that make them lead their
lief in continual misery. And in case it were leful for such to be divorced and
severed from them they be ill coopled withal, perhaps it were not to be
allowed yt they should love any other then their husband. But when either
through ye sterres, their enemies, or through the diversity of complexion, or
any other casualtie it befalls, that in bed, which ought to be the nest of
agreement and love, the cursed fury of hell sows the seed of his venime,
which afterward brings forth disdeigne, susspition and the pricking thorns
of hatred, that tourmenteth those unlucky souls bound cruelly together in ye
fast lincked chain that can not be broken but by death, why will not you have
it lefull for this woman to seek some ^asement for so hard a scourge? and
give unto an other that which her husband not only regards not, but rather
clean abhors? I houlde well, that such as have meet husbands and be
beloved of them, ought not to do them injury: but the other in not louinge him
that loves them do them selves injury. Nay, they do themselves injury in
louinge other beeside their husband, answered the L Julian. Yet sins not
loving is not many times in our will, if this mishap chance to the woman of
the Palaice, that ye hatred of her husband or ye love of an other bends her
to love, I will have her to grant her lover nothing else but ye mind: nor at
any time to make him any certain token of love, neither in word nor gesture,
nor any other way that he may be fully assured of it. Then said M. Robert of
Bari smilinge, I appeal (my L. Julian) from this judgment of youres, and I
beleaue I shall have many fellows. But sins you will teach this currishnesse
(that I may term it so) to married women, will ye also have the unmarried to be
so cruel and discourtious? and not please their lovers at the least in
somewhat? In case my woman of the Palaice, answered the L. Julian, be not
married, myndinge to love, How maide^s should love*
I will have her to love one, whom she may marye, neither will I think it an
offense if she show him some token of love. In which matter I will teach her
one general rule in few words, and that is, That she show him whom she
loves all tokens of love, A general ^ule.
but such as may bring into the lovers mind a hope to obtein of her any
dishonest matter. And to this she must have a great respect, because it is an
error that infinite women renn into, which ordinarilye couett nothing so much
as to be beawtifull: and because to have many lovers they suppose is a
testimonye of their beawtie, they do their best to winn them as many as they
can. Therefore often times they renn at rouers in beehauiours of small modesty,
and leauinge the temperate sobermoode that is so sightlye in them, use certain
wanton countenaunces, with baudie words and gestures full of
unshamefastness, houldinge opinion that men mark them and give care to them
willyngly for it, and with these facions make themselves beloved, which is
false: because the signs and tokens that be made them, spring of an appetite
moved by an opinion of easiness, not of love. Therefore will not I that my
woman of the Palaice with dishonest beehauiours should appear as though she
would offer herself unto whosoever will have her, and allure what she can the eyes
and affection of who so beehouldeth her: but with her deserts and virtuous
conditions, with amiablenesse and grace drive into the mind of whosoever sees her
the very love that is due unto every thing worthy to be beloved: and the
respect that always takes away hope from whosoever minds any dishonest
matter. He then that shall be beloved of such a woman, The love of honest women.
ought of reason to houlde himself contented with every little token, and more
to esteame a look of herres with affection of love, then to be altogether
master of an other. And to such a woman I wot not what to ad more, but that
she be beloved of so excellent a Courtier, as these Lords have facioned, and
she likewise to love him, that both the one and the other may have full and
wholly his perfection. After the L. Julian had thus spoken he held his peace,
when the L. Gaspar laughinge, now (quoth he) you can not complain that the L.
Julian has not facioned this woman of the Palaice most excellent. And if
perdee there be any such to be found, I say yt she deserves well to be
esteamed equal with the Courtier. The L. Emilia answered: I will at all times
be bound to find her, when you find the Courtier. M. Robert said then:
Doubtless it can not be said nay, but the L. Iulians woman which he has
facioned is most perfect. Yet in these her last properties as touching love, me
seems not withstanding that he has made her somewhat over crabbed, and
especially where he will have her in words, gestures and countenance to take
clean away all hope from the lover, and settle him as nigh as she can in
despair. For (as all men know) the desires of man stretch not to such kind
of matters, whereof there is no hope to be had. And although at times some
women there have bine, that perhaps bearing themselves lofty of their
beawtie and worthiness: the first word they have said to them that communed
with them of love has bine, that they should never look to come bye any
thing of them that liked them: yet in countenance, and daliance together they
have afterward bine more favorable to them, so that with their gentle deeds
they have tempred in part their proud words. But if this woman both in
words, deeds and beehauiours take hope quite away, I beeleaue our Courtier,
if he be wise, will never love her, and so shall she have this imperfection, yt
she shall be without a lover. Then the L. Julian, I will not (quoth he) have my
woman of the Palaice to take away the hope of every thing, Honest love.
but of dishonest matters, y^ which, in case the Courtier be so courteious and
discreet, as these Lords have facioned him, he will not only not hope for,
but not once motion. For if beawtie, manners, wit, goodness, knowleage,
sobermoode, and so many other virtuous conditions which we have given the
woman, be the cause of the Courtiers love toward her, the end also of this
love must needs be virtuous: and if nobleness of birth, skilfulnes in
marciall feats, in letters, in music, gentleness, being bath in speech and
in beehauiour endowed with so many graces, be y^ means wherwithall the
Courtier compaseth the woman's love, ye end of that love must needs be of the
same condition that the means are by the which he comes to it. Beeside
that, Sundry kindeso^ beawtye.
as there be in the world sundry kinds of beawtye, so are there also sundry
desires of men: and therefore it is seen that many, perceiuinge a woman of so
grave a beawtie that goinge, standinge, iestinge, dalyinge, and doing what she
lusts, so tempreth al her gestures, that it drives a certain reverence into
whosoever behouldeth her, are aghast and a ferde to serve her: and rather drawn with
hope, love those garishe and enticefull women, so del^cate and tender, that in
their words, gestures and countenance declare a certain passion somewhat
feeble, that promises to be easily brought and turned into love. Some to be
sure from deceytes, love certain other so lauishe both of their eyes, words
and gestures, that they do what ever first comes to mind, with a certain
plainness that bideth not their thoughts. There want not also many other
noble courages, that seeminge to them that virtue consists about hard matters
(for it is over sweet a victory to overcome that seems to an other
impringable) are soon bent to love the beawties of those women, that in their
eyes, words and gestures declare a more churlish gravity then the rest for a
trial yt their prowess can enforce an obstinate mind, and bend also
stubborn wills and rebels against love, to love. Therefore such as have so
great affiance in themselves, because they reckon themselves sure from deceit,
love also willinglye certain women, that with a sharpness of wit, and with
art it seems in their beawtie that they hide a thousand crafts. Or else
some other, that have accompanied with beawty a certain skornefull facion in
few words, little laughing, after a sort as though (in a manner) they smallye
regarded whosoever ever beehouldeth or serves them. Again there are found certain
other, that vouchesafe not to love but women that in their countenance, in
their speech and in all their gestures have about them all hansomnesse, all
fair conditions, all knowleage, and all graces heaped together, like one
flower made of all the excellencies in the world. Therefore in case my woman of
the Palaice have scarsitie of these loves proceadinge of an ill hope, she shall
not for this be without a lover: because she shall not want them yt shall be
provoked through her deserts and through the affiance of ye prowess in
themselves, whereby they shall know themselves worthy to be beloved of her. M.
Robert s^ill spoke against him, but the Duchess to aid him that he was in
the wrong, confirminge the L. Iulians opinion: after that she added: We have
no cause to complain of the L. Julian, for doubtless I think that the woman
of the Palaice whom he has facioned, may be compared to the Courtier, and
that with some advantage: for he has taught her to love which these Lords
have not done their Courtier. Then spoke Vnico Aretino: It is meet to teach
women to love, because I never saw any that could do it, for almost
continuallye all of them accompanye their beawtye with crueltye and unkindness
toward such as serve them most faithfullye, Beawtifull women cruel.
and which for nobleness of birth, honesty and virtue deserved a reward for
their good will: and yet many times give themselves for a prey to most
blockish and cowardly men and very assheades, and which not only love them
not, but abhor the^. Therefore to shon these so foul ouersightes, perhaps it
had bin well done first to have taught them to make a choice of him yt should
deserve to be beloved, and afterward to love him. The which is not necessary
in men, for they know it to well of themselves: and I my self can be a good
witness of it, because love was never taught me, but by the divine beawty and
most divine manners of a Lady, so that it was not in my will not to woorshippe
her: and therefore needed I therein no art nor teacher at all. And I beleaue that
the like happens to as many as love truly. Therefore the Courtier has more
need to be taught to make him beloved then to love. Then said the L Emilia: Do
you now reason of this then, M. Vnico. Vnico answered: Me think reason would
that the good will of women should be gotten in seruinge and pleasinge them.
But it, wherein they reckon themselves served and pleased, I beleaue must be
learned of women themselves, which oftentimes couett such strange matters,
that there is no man yt would imagine them, and otherwhile they themselves wot
not what they should long for: therefore it were good you (Madam) that are a
woman, and of right ought to know what pleases women, should take this peine,
to do the world so great a profit. Then said the L. Emilia: For so much as you
are generallye most acceptable to women, it is a good likelihoode that you
know all the ways how their good will is to be gotten. Therefore is it pardee
meet for you to teach it. Madam, answered Vnico, I can give a lover no
profitabler advise then to procure that you bear no stroke with y^ woman whose
good will he seeks. For the small qualities which yet seemed to the world
sometime to be in me, with as faithful a love as ever was, were not of such
force to make me beloved, as you to make me be hated. Then answered the L.
Emilia: God save me (M. Vnico) for once thinking and much more for workinge
any thing yt should make you be hated. For beeside that I should do that I
ought not, I should be thought of a sclender judgment to attempt a matter
impossible. But sins ye provoke me in this sort to speak of that pleases
women, I will speak of it, and if it displease you, lay the fault in your
self. I judge therefore, that whosoever entendeth to be beloved, ought to love and
to be lovely: How to obtein the good will of women
and these two points are enough to obtein the good will of women. Now to
answer to that which you lay to my charge, I say that every manne knows and
sees that you are most lovely. Mary whether ye love so faithfullye, as you
say ye do, I am very doubtful and perhaps others to. For, your being over
lovely, has bine ye cause yt you have bine beloved of many women: and great
rivers divided into many arms beecome small brooks: so love likewise
scattered into mo then one body has small force. But these your continual
complaints and accusinge of the women whom you have served of unkindness
(which is not likely, consideringe so many deserts of yours) is a certain
kind of discretion, to cloak the favors, contentations and pleasures which
you have received in love, and an assurance for the women that love you and
that have given themselves for a prey to you, that you will not disclose them.
And therefore are they also well pleased, yt you should thus openly show false
loves to others, to cloak their true. Wherefore if haplye those women that you
now make wise to love, are not so light of beleaf, as you would they were, it
happens because this your art in love beeginneth to be discovered, and not
because I make you to be hated. Then said M. Vnico: I entende not to attempt to
confute your words, because me seems it is as well my destiny not to be
beleaued in truth, as it is yours to be beleaued in untruth. Say hardlye M.
Vnico, answered the L. Emilia, that you love not so, as you would have
beleaued ye did. For if you did love, The law of love.
all your desires should be to please the woman beloved, and to will the self
same thing that she wills, for this is the law of love. But your
complaininge somuche of her, beetokeneth some deceit (as I have said) or else
it is a sign that you will that, that she wills not. Nay (quoth M. Vnico)
there is no doubt but I will that, that she wills, which is a sign I love
her: but it greeueth me because she wills not tha^, that I will, which is a
token she loves not me, according to the verse same law that you have
alleged. The L. Emilia answered: He that takes in hand to love, must please
and apply himself full and wholly to the appetites of the wight beloved, and
according to them frame his own: and make his own desires, servants: and
his very soul, like an obedient handmaiden: nor at any time to think upon
other, but to change his, if it were possible, into the beloved wightes, and
reckon this his cheef joy and happiness, for so do they that love truly. My
cheef happiness were iumpe, answered M. Vnico, if one will alone ruled her
soul and mine both. It lies in you to do it, answered the L. Emilia. Then
spoke M. Bernarde interruptinge them: Doubtless, who so loves truly,
directs all his thaughtes, without other men's teachinge, to serve and please
the woman beloved. But because these services of love are not otherwhile well
known, I beleaue that beeside louinge and seruinge, it is necessary also to
make some other show of this love, so manifest, that the woman may not
dissemble to know that she is beloved: yet with such modesty, yt it may not
appear that he bears her little reverence. And therefore you (Madam) that have
beegone to declare how the soul of the lover ought to be an obedient
handmayden to the beloved, teach us withal, I beseech you, this secret matter,
which me think is most needful. The L. Caesar laughed and said: If the lover
be so bashful, that he is ashamed to tell it her, let him write it her. To
this the L. Emilia said: Nay, if he be so discreet, as is meet, before he
makes the woman to understand it, he ought to be out of doubt to offend her.
Then said the L. Gaspar: All women have a delight to be suide to in love,
although they were minded to deny the suite. The L. Julian said, you are
much deceived. For I would not counsel the Cour^er at any time to use this
way, except he were sure not to have a repulse. What should he then do? quoth
the L. Gaspar. The L. Julian answered: How a man should disclose his love to a
woman.
In case you will needs write or speak to her, do it with such sobermoode,
and so warilye, that the words may first attempt the mind, and so
doubtfullye touch her intent and will, that they may leave her a way and a
certain issue to feine the understanding that those words contain love: to
the intent if he find any danger, he may draw back and make wise to have
spoken or written it to an other end, to enjoy these familiar cherishinges
and daliances with assurance, that oftentimes women show to such as should
take them for frendshippe, afterward deny them as soon as they perceive they
are taken for tokens of love. Wherefore such as be to rash and venture so
sau^ilie with certain furies and plunges, oftentimes lose them, and woorthilie:
for it dispeaseth always every honest gentilwoman, to be little regarded of
whosoever without respect seeks for love at her before he has served her.
Therefore (in my mind) the way which ye Courtier ought to take, to make his
love known to ye woman me think should be to declare them in signs and
tokens more then in words. For assuredlye there is otherwhile a greater
affection of love perceived in a sigh, in a respect, in a fear, then in a
thousand words. Afterward, to make the eyes the trustye messangers, that
may carye the ambassades of the heart: because they oftentimes declare with a
more force what passion there is inwardlye, then can the tunge, or letters, or
messages, so that they not only disclose the thaughtes, but also many times
kendle love in the heart of the person beloved. For those lively spirits that
issue out at ye eyes, because they are engendered nigh the heart, entering in like
case into the eyes that they are leueled at, like a shaft to the prick,
naturallye perce to the heart, as to their resting place and there are at
trust with those other spirits: and with the most subtle and fine nature of
blood which they carry with them, infect the blood about the heart, where
they are come to, and warm it: and make it like unto themselves, and apt to
receive the imprintinge of the image which they have carried away with them.
Wherefore by little and little coming and goinge the way through the eyes to
the heart, and bringinge back with them the tunder and strikinge iron of
beawtie and grace, these messangers kendle with the puffinge of desire the fire
that so burns, ^he^pes.
and never cease consuminge, for always they bring some matter of hope to
nourishe it. Therefore it may full well be said, that The eyes are a guide in
love, especially if they have a good grace and sweetness in them, black, of
a clear and sightlye blackenesse, or else gray, meery and laughinge, and so
comely and percinge in beehouldinge, as some, in which a man thinks verily
that the ways that give an issue to the spirits are so deep, that by them he
may see as far as the heart. The eyes therefore lie lurkinge like soldiers in
war lyinge in wait in bushment, and if the form of all the body be
welfauoured and of good proportion, it draws unto it and allureth whosoever
beehouldeth it a far of, until he come nigh: and as soon as he is at hand,
the eyes shoot, and like sorcerers, beewitch, and especially when by a right
line they send their glisteringe beams into ye eyes of the wight beloved at
the time when they do the like, because the spirits meet together, and in
that sweet encounter the one takes the others nature and qualitye: as it is
seen in a sore eye, that beehoulding steadily a sound one, gives him his
disease. Therefore me think our Courtier may in this wise open a great percel
of the love to his woman. Truth it is that in case the eyes be not governed
with art, they discover many times the amorous desires more unto whom a man
would least: for through them (in a manner) visibly shinefurth those burninge
passions, which the lover mindinge to disclose only to the wight beloved,
opens them many times also also unto whom he would most soonest hide them
from. Therefore he that has not lost the bridle of reason, handles himself
heedefullye, and observes the times and places: and when it needs,
refrayneth from so steadfast beehouldinge, for all it be a most sauourie food,
Open love.
because An open love is to hard a matter. Count Lewis answered: Yet
otherwhile to be open it hurts not: because in this case many times men
suppose that those loves tend not to the end which every lover coueteth,
when they see there is little heed taken to hide them, and pass not whether
they be known or no: and therefore with denial^ a man chalengeth him a certain
liberty to talk openly and to stand without susspition with the wight
beloved: Which is not so in them that seek to be secret, because it appears
that they stand in hope of, and are nighe some great reward, which they
would not have other men to know. I have also seen a most fervent love
spring in the heart of a woman toward one, that seemed at the first not to
bear him the least affection in the world, only for that she heard say, that
the opinion of many was, that they loved together. And the cause of this (I
beleaue) was, that so general a judgment seemed a sufficient witness, that
he was worthy of her love. And it seemed (in a manner) that report brought the
ambassade on the lovers beehalfe much more truer and worthier to be beleauen,
then he himself could have done with letters, or words, or any other person
for him: therefore sometime this commune voice not only hurts not, but
far^hereth a man's purpose. The L. Julian answered: Loves that have report for
their messanger, are very perilous to make a man pointed to with a finger. And
therefore who ever entendeth to walk this race warilye, needs must he make
countenance to have a great deal less fire in his stomach, then in deed he
has, and content himself with that, that he thinks a trifle, and dissemble
his desires, (...), afflictions and pleasures, and many times laugh with mouth
when the heart weepeth, and show himself lauishe of that he is most covetous
of* and these things are so hard to be done, that (in a manner) they are
impossible. Therefore if our Courtier would follow my counsel, I would exhort
him to keep his loves secret. Then said M. Bernarde: yo^ must then teach (...)
him, and me think it is much to purpose: for beeside privy signs that some
make otherwhile so closely, that (in a manner) without any gesture, the person
whom they couett, in their countenance and eyes read what they have in the
heart, I have sometime heard between two lovers a long and a large discourse of
love, whereof yet ye standers by could not plainlye understand any particular
point, nor be out of doubt that it was of love, such was the discreation and
heedefulnesse of the talker: for without making any manner show that they
were not willinge to be heard, they rounded priuilye the words only that
were most to purpose, and all the rest they spoke aloude, which might be
applied to diverse meaninges. Then spoke Sir Friderick: to reason thus in
peecemeale of these rules of secretnesse, were a taking of an infinite matter
in hand: therefore would I yt we spoke somewhat rather how the lover should
keep and maintein his Ladies good will, which me think is much more
necessary. The L. Julian answered: I beleaue the means that serve him to
compass it, serve him also to keep it, and all this consists in pleasinge
the woman beloved, To maintein good will.
without offending her at any time. Therefore it were a hard matter to give any
certain rule, because whosoever is not discrete, infinite ways commits
ouersightes, which otherwhile seem matters of nothing, and yet offend they
much the woman's mind. And this happens more then to others, to such as be
mastred with passion: as some that whenso ever they have opportunity to speak
with the woman they love, lament and beewaile so bitterlye, and couett many
times things so impossible, that through this unreasonableness they are
lothed of them. Other, if they be pricked with any ieolosie, stomach the
matter so greeuouslye, that without stopp they burst out in raylinge upon him
they suspect, and otherwhile it is without trespace either of him or yet of the
woman, and will not have her speak with him, nor once turn her eyes on that
side where he is. And with these facions many times, they do not only offend
the woman, but also they are the cause that she bends herself to love him.
Because the fear that a lover declares to have otherwhile least his Lady
forsake him for the other, beetokeneth that he acknowleageth himself inferior
in deserts and prowess to the other, and with this opinion the woman is moved
to love him. And perceyuinge that to put him out of favor he reports all of
him, although it be true, yet she beleaueth it not, and notwythstandinge loves
him the more. Then said the L. Caesar: I confess that I am not so wise that I
could refrain speaking ill of my fellow lover, except you could teach me
some other better way to dispatche him. The L. Julian answered smilinge: It is
said in a Proverb, An Italian proverb.
When a man's enemy is in the water up to the middle, let him reach him
his hand, and help him from danger: but when he is up to the chinn, set his
foot on his head and drown him out of hand. Therefore certain there be that
play so with their fellow lovers, and until they have a sure mean to
dispatche them, go dissembling the matter, and rather show themselves friends
th^n otherwise. Afterward when occasion serves them so fitlye, that they know
they may overthrow them with a sure riddaunce, reportinge all yuell of them,
be it true or false, they do it without sparynge, with art, How a woman's good
will is to be drawn from a man's riuale*
deceit and all ways that they can imagine. But because I would not like that
our Courtier should a^^ any time use any deceyte, I would have him to
withdraw the go^d will of his maistresse from his felowlouer with none other
art, but with louinge, with seruinge and with beeinge virtuous, of prowess,
discreet, sober, in conclusion with deserving more then he, and with beeinge
in every thing heedfull and wise, refrayninge from certain leude folies, into
the which often times many ignorant renn, and by sundry ways. For in times
past I have known some that in writings and speaking to women used evermore
the words of Poliphilus, and ruffled so in their subtle points of
Rhetoric, Men that profess to be to louinge in words.
that the women were out of conceit with their own selves, and reckened
themselves most ignorant, and an hour seemed a thousand year to them, to
end that talk and to be rid of them. Other, bragg and boast to by yonde all
measure. Other speak things many times that redounde to the blame and damage
of themselves, as some that I am wont to laughe at, which make profession to be
lovers, and otherwhile say in the company of women: I never found woman that
ever loved me, The fondnes of some lovers.
and are not weetinge that the hearers by and by judge that it can arrise of
none other cause, but that they deserve neither to be beloved, nor yet so much
as the water they drink, and count them assheades, and would not love them for
all the good in the world: seeming to them that in case they should love them,
they were less worth, then all the rest that have not loved them. Other, to
purchase hatred to some fellow lover of theirs, are so fond that in like manner
in the company of women they say: Such a one is the luckiest man in the
world, for once, he is neither welfauoured, nor sober, nor of prowess, neither
can he do or say more then other men, and yet all women love him* and ren^
after him* and thus vttringe the spite they bear him for this good luck,
although neither in countenance nor deeds he appears louelye, yet make
they them beleaue yt he has some hid matter in him, for the which he
deserves the love of so many women, wherefore the women that hear them talk
of him in this wise, they also upon this beleaf are moved to love him much
more. Then Count Lew^ laughed and said: I assure you our Courtier if he be
discreet, will never use this blockishenes, to get him the good will of
women. The L. Caesar Gonzaga answered: nor yet an other that a Gentilman of
reputation used in my days, who shall be namelesse for the honor of men. The
Duchess answered: tell us at the least what he did. The L. Caesar said: this
manne beeinge beloved of a great Lady, Blockish over sightes*
at her request came priuilye to the town where she lay. And after he had
seen her and communed with her, as long as they thought meet and had time and
leyser thereto, at his leave taking with many bitter tears and sighs in
witness of ye extreme greef he felt for this departinge, he required her to be
always mindful of him. And afterward he added withal, That she would
discharge his ynn, for sins he came thither at her request. he thought me^te yt
he should not stand to ye charges of his being there himself. Then beegan all
the Ladies to ^augh, and said that he was most unworthy of the name of a
Gentilman: and many were ashamed with the self shame that he himself should
woorthilye have felt, if at any time he had gotten so much understanding,
that he might have perceived so shameful an oversight. Then turned the L.
Gaspar to the L. Caesar and said: Better it had bine to have omitted the
rehearsal of this matter for the honor of women, then the naming of him for the
honor of men. For you may well imagine what a judgment that great Lady had in
louinge so unreasonable a creature. And perhaps to, of many that served her,
she chose him for the most discreatest, leauinge beehinde, and showinge ill will
unto them that he was not worthy to wait upon. Count Lewi^ laughed and
said: Who woteth whether he was discreate in other things or no, Love makes
men commit great (...).
and was out of the way only about ynnes? But many times for overmuch love
men committ great folies. And if you will tell the truth, perhaps it has
bine your chance to commit mo then one. The L. Caesar answered smilinge: Of
good fellowship let us not discover our own ouersightes. Yet we must
discover them, answered the L. Gaspar, that we may know how to amend them,
then he proceaded. Now that the Courtier knows how to wynn and keep the good
will of his Lady, and take it from his fellow lover, you (my L. Julian) are
dettour to teach her to keep her loves secret. The L. Julian answered: Me
think I have sufficientlye spoken, therefore get ye now an other to talk of
this secreate matter. Then M. Bernarde and all the rest beegane a fresh to be
in hand with him instantlye, and the L. Julian said: you will tempt me. Ye are
all the sort of you to great Clearkes in love. Yet if ye desire to know
farther, go and read Ovid. And how, quoth M. Bernarde, shall I hope that his
lessons are any thing worth in love, when he counsels and says that it is
very good for a man in the company of his maistresse To feign the dronkarde?
See what a goodly way it is to get good will withal. And he alleges for a
pretty divise to make a woman understand that he is in love with her, beeinge
at a banckett, To diepe his finger in wine and write it upon the table. The L.
Julian said smilinge: In those days it was no fault. And therefore, quoth M.
Bernarde, seeinge so sluttishe a matter was not disalowed of men in those
days, it is to be thought that they had not so cour^lye beehauiours to serve
women in love, as we have. But let us not omit our first purpose to teach
to keep love secret. Then said the L. Julian: In mine advise to keep love
secret, the causes are to be shonned that vttre it, which are many: To keep
love secret.
yet one principal, namelye, To be over s^ciete and to put no person in
trust. Because every lover coueteth to make his passions known to the
beloved, and ^eeinge alone, he is driven to make many mo signs and more
evident, then if he were aided by some louinge and faithful friend. A friend.
For the signs that the lover himself makes, give a far greater susspition,
then those that he makes by them yt go in message between. And for so much as
men naturallye are greedy to understand, as soon as a stranger beeginneth to
suspect the matter, he so applies it, that he comes to ye knowleage of the
truth, and when he once knows it, he passes not for disclosinge it, yea
sometime he has a delight to do it. Which happens not of a friend, who
beeside yt he is a help to him with favor and counsel, does many times
remedy yt ouersightes committed by the blind lover, and always procures
secretnes. and preueteth many matters which he himself can not foresee: beeside
the great comfort yt he feels, when he may vttre his passions and greeffes,
to a hearty friend, and the partening of them likewise increases his
co^tentations. Then said the L Gaspar: there is an other cause that discovers
loves much more then this. What is that, answered the L. Julian. The L. Gaspar
said: Uaine greediness ioigned with the fondenesse and cruelty of women, What
discloseth love.
which (as you your self have said) procure as much as they can to get them
a great number of lovers, and (if it were possible) they would have them al to
burn and make ashes, and after death to retourn to lief, to die again. And
though they love withal, yet rejoice they at the tourment of lovers, because
they suppose yt greef, afflictions and the calling every hour for death, is a
true witness that they are beloved, and that with their beawtie they can make
men miserable and happy, and give them life and death, as pleases them.
Wherefore they feed upon this only food, and are so gredie over it; yt for
wanting it they never thoroughly contet lovers, nor yet put them out of hope,
but to keep them still in afflictions and in desire, they use a certain lofty
sowernesse of threatninges mingled with hope, and would have them to esteame a
word, a countenance or a beck of theirs for a cheef bliss. And to make men
count them chaste and honest as well others as their lovers, they find means
that these sharp and discourtious manners of theirs may be in open sight, for
every man to think yt they will much worse handle ye unworthy, sins they
handle them so, that deserve to be beloved. And under this beleaf thinking
themselves with this craft safe from sclaunder* often times they lie nightlie
with most vile men and whom they scase know. So that to rejoice at the
calamity and continual complaints of some worthy gentilman, and beloved of
them, they bar themselves from those pleasures, which perhaps with some
excuse they might come bye, and are the cause that the poor lover by very
debating of the matter is driven to use ways, by the which ye thing comes
to light, that with all diligence should have line kept most secret. Certain
other there are, which if with deceit they can bring many in beeleaf that
they are beloved of them, nourish emonge them ieolosies with cherishinge and
making of the one in the others presence. And when they see that he also whom
they love best is now assured and out of doubt that he is beloved through the
signs and tokens that be made him, many times with doubtful words and
feigned disdeignes they put him in an uncertainty and nippe him at the very
heart, making wise not to pass for him and to give themselves full and wholye
to the other. Whereupon arrise malice, enimities, and infinite occasions of
strife and vttre confusion. For needs must a man show in that case ye extreme
passion which he fealeth, although it redounde to the blame and sclaunder of
ye woman. Other, not satisfied with this only tourment of ieolosye, after ye
lover has declared all his tokens of love and faithful service, and they
received the same with some sign to be answerable in good will, without
purpose and when it is least looked for, they beegine to beethinke themselves,
and make wise to beleaue that he is slacked, and feininge new suspicions that
they are not beloved, they make a countenance that they will in any wise put
him out of their favor. Wherefore through these inconveniences the poor soul
is constrained of very force to beegine a fresh, and to make her signs, as
though he beegane his service but then, and all the day long pass by and
down through the street, and when the woman goith forth of her doors to
accompanye her to Church and to every place where she goith, and never to
turn his eyes to other place. And here he retourneth to weepinge, to sighs,
to heavy countenance, and when he can talk with her, to swearing, to
blaspheminge, to desperation, and to all rages which unhappy lovers are lead
to by these wielde beasts, that have greater thirst of blood then the very
Tygres. Such sorrowful tokens as these be are to often seen and known, and
many times more of others then of the causer of them, and thus are they in
few days so published, that a stepp can not be made, nor the least sign
that is, but it is noted with a thousand eyes. It happens then, that long
before there be any pleasures of love beetwext them, they are ghessed and
judged of all the world. For when they see yet their lover now nighe deaths
door, clean vanquished with the crueltye and tourmentes they put him to,
determines aduisedlye and in good ernest to draw back, then beegine they to
make sign that they love him heartily, and do him al pleasures and give
themselves to him, least if that fervent desire should feint in him, the fruit
of love should withal be the less acceptable to him, and he ken them the
less thank for doing all things contrarily. And in case this love be
already known abroad, at this same time are al ye effects known in like
manner abroad, that come of it, and so lose they their reputation, and the lover
finds that he has lost time and labor and shortened his life in afflictions
without any fruit or pleasure, because he came by his desires, not when they
should have bine so acceptable to him that they would have made him a most
happy creature, but when he set little or nothing by them. For his heart was
now so mortified with those bitter passions, that he had no more sense to
taste ye delight or contentation offered him. Then said the L. Octtauian
smilinge: you held your peace a while and refrayned from speakinge ill of
women, but now ye have so well hit them home, yt it appeared ye waited a time to
pluck up your strength, like them that retire backward to give a greater
pushe at the encounter. And to say the truth, it is ill done of you, for now
me think ye may have done and be pacified. The L. Emilia laughed, and
tourninge her to the Duchess she said: See Madam, ^ure ennemies begine to
break and to square one with an other. Give me not this name answered the L.
Octauian, for I am not your adversary, but this contention has displeased me,
not because I am sorye to see the victory upon women's side, but because it has
lead the L. Gaspar to revile them more then he ought, and the L. Julian. and
the L. Caesar to praise them perhaps somewhat more then due: beeside that
through the length of the talk we have lost the understanding of many other
pretye matters that are yet beehinde to be said of the Courtier. See, quod the
L. Emilia, whether you be not our adversary, for the talk that is past
greeueth you, and you would not that this so excellent a Gentilwoman of the
Palaice had bine facioned: not for that you have any more to say of the
Courtier (for these lords have spoken already what they know and I beleaue
neither you, ne any man else can ad ought thereto) but for the malice you bear
to the honor of women. It is out of doubt, answered the L. Octauian, beeside
that is already spoken, of the Courtier, I could wish much more in him. But
sins every man is pleased that he shall be as he is, I am well pleased to, and
would not have him altered in any point, sauinge in making him somewhat more
frindlye to women, then the L. Gaspar is, yet not perhaps, so much as some of
these other Lords are. Then spoke the Duchess: In any case we must see
whether your wit be such that it can give the Courtier a greater perfection,
then these Lords have already done: therefore dispose your self to vttre
that you have in your mind, else will we think that you also can not ad unto
him more then has already bine said, but that you minded to diminish the
praises and worthiness of the gentilwoman of the Palaice, seeing ye judge she
is equal with ye Courtier, whom by this mean you would have beleaued might be
much more perfect, then these Lords have facioned him. The L. Octauian
laughed and said: The praises and disprayses given women more then due, have so
filled the ears and mind of the hearers, that they have left no void rowme
for any thing else to stand in: beeside that (in mine opinion) it is very
late. Then said the Duchess: if we tarry till to morrow, we shall have the
more time, and the praises and dispraises, which (you say) are given women on
both sides passinge measure, in ye mean season will be clean out of these
Lords minds, and so shall they be apt to conceive the truth that you will
tell us. When the Duchess had thus spoken, she arrose upon her feet, and
courteisly dismissing them all, withdrew her to her bedchamber, and every
manne got him to his rest.

The fourth book THE FOVRTH BOOK OF the Courtier of Count Baldessar Castilio
unto. M. Alphonsus Ariosto.
THINKINGE TO WRITE OVTE the communication that was had the fourth night after
the other mentioned in the former books, I feel among sundry discourses a
bitter thought that gripeth me in my mind, and makes me to call to
remembrance worldly miseries and our deceitful hopes, and how fortune many
times in the very mids of our race, otherwhile nighe the end disapointeth
our frail and vain pourposes, sometime drowneth them before they can once
come to have a sight of the haven a far of. It causes me therefore to remember
that not long after these reasoninges were had, cruel death bereued our house
of three most rare gentilmen, when in their prosperous age and forwardness of
honor they most flourished, L. Gaspar Pall^uicin.
and of them the first was the Lord Gaspar Pallauicin, who assaulted with a
sharp disease, and more then once brought to the last cast, although his mind
was of such courage yt for a time in spite of death he kept the soul and
body together, yet did he end his natural course long before he came to
his ripe age. A very great loss not in our house only and to his friends and
kinsfolk, but to his Country and to all Lumbardye. Not long after died the
L. Caesar Gonzaga, L. Caesar Gonzaga.
which to all that were acquainted with him left a bitter and sorrowful
remembrance of his death. For sins nature so sildome times brings forth such
kind of men, as she does, meet it seemed that she should not so soon have
bereued us of him. For undoubtedly a man may say that the L. Caesar was taken
from us even at the very time wha^ he beegane to show more then a hope of
himself, and to be esteamed as his excellent qualities deserved. For with many
virtuous acts he already gave a good testimony of his worthiness, and
beeside his nobleness of birth, he excelled also in the ornament of letters,
of marciall prowess, and of every worthy quality. So that for his
goodness, wit, nature, and knowleage, there was nothing so high, that might
not have bine hoped for at his hands. Within a short while after, M. Robert of
Bari.
the death of M. Robert of Bari was also a great heaviness to the wholl house:
for reason seemed to persuade every man to take heuily the death of a young
man of good beehauiour, pleasant and most rare in the beawtie of fisnamye and
in the making of his person, with as lucky and lively towardnes, as a man
could have wished. These men therefore, had they lived, I beleaue would have
come to that pass, that unto whosoever had known them, they would have showed a
manifest proof, how much the Court of Vrbin was worthy to be commended, and
how fournished it was with noble knights, the which (in a manner) all the
rest have done that were brought up in it. For truly there never issued out of
the horse of Troy so many great men and capitaines, The promotinge of certain
mentioned in the booke^.
as there have come men out of this house for virtue very singular and in
great estimation with all men. For as you know Sir Fridericke Fregoso was made
archbishop of Salerno, Count Lewis, Bishop of Baious. The L. Octauian
Fregoso, Duke of Genua, M. Bernarde Bibiena, Cardinal of Santa Maria in
Portico, M. Peter Bembo, Secretarye to Pope Leo. The L. Julian was exalted to
the Dukedom of Nemours and to the great astate he is presentlye in. The Lord
Francescomaria della Rouere General of Room, he was also made Duke of Vrbin:
although a much more praise may be given to the house where he was brought up,
that in it he has proved so rare and excellent a Lord in all virtuous
qualities (as a man may beehoulde) then that he atteined unto the Dukedom of
Vrbin: and no small cause thereof (I think) was the noble company wherein
daily conversation he always heard and saw commendable nourtour. Therefore
(me think) whether it be by hap, or through the favor of the sterres, the
same cause that so long a time has granted unto Vrbin very good governors,
does still continue and brings forth ye like effects. And therefore it is to
be hoped y^ prosperous fortune will still increase these so virtuous doings,
that the happiness of the house and of the State shall not only not diminish,
but rather dailye increase: And thereof we see already many evident tokens,
emonge which (I r^cken) ye cheeffest to be, that the heaven has granted
such a Lady as is the Lady Eleonor Gonzaga the new Duchess. For if ever
there were coopled in one body alone, L. Eleono Gonzaga Dut. of Vrbin.
knowleage, wit, grace, beawtie, sober conversation, gentilnesse and every
other honest quality, in her they are so lincked together, that there is made
thereof a chain, which frames and sets forth every gesture of herres with all these conditions together. Let us therefore proceade in our reasoninges upon
ye Courtier, with hope that after us there shall not want such as shall take
notable and woorthye examples of virtue at the present Court of Vrbin, as we
now do at the former. It was thought therefore (as the L, Gaspar Pallauicin
was wont to rehearse) that the next day after the reasoninges contained in the
last book, the L. Octauian was not much seen: for many deemed that he had
gotten himself out of comapnye to think well upon that he had to say without
trouble. Therefore when the company was assembled at the accustomed hour where
the Duchess was, they made the L, Octauian to be diligently sought for,
which in a good while appeared not, so that many of the Gentilmen and
Damselles of the Court fell to daunsynge and to mind other pastymes,
supposing for that night they should have no more talk of the Courtier. And
now were they all settled about one thing or an other, when the L. Octauian
came in (almost) no more looked for: and beehouldinge the L. Caesar Gonzaga and
the L. Gaspar daunsinge, after he had made his reverence to the Duchess, he
said smilinge: I had well hoped we should have heard the L. Gaspar speak
some ill of women this night to, but sins I see him dau^ce with one, I imagine
he is agreede with all. And I am glad that the controversy, or (to term it
better) the reasoninge of the Courtier is thus ended. Not ended, I warrant you,
answered the Duchess, for I am not such an enemy to men, as you be to
women, and therefore I will not have the Courtier bereued from his due honor and
the fournimentes which you your self promised him yester night. And when she
had thus spoken, she commanded them all after that daunse was ended to place
themselves after the wonted manner, the which was done. And as they stood all
with heedfull expectation, the L. Octauian said: Madam, sins for that I wished
many other good qualities in the Courtier, it follows by promise that I must
entreat upon them, I am well willinge to vttre my mind: not with opinion
that I can speak all that may be said in the matter, but only so much as shall
suffice to root that out of your mind, which yester night was objected to me:
namely, that I spoke it more to withdraw the praises from ye Gentilwoman of
the Palaice, in doing you falselye to beleaue that other excellent qualities
might be added to the Courtier, and with that policy prefarre him before
her, then for that it is so in deed. Therefore to frame my self also to the
hour, which is later then it was wont to be when we beegane our reasoninges at
other times, I will be breef. Thus continuinge in the talk that these Lords
have ministered, which I full and wholye allow and confirm, I say, that of
things which we call good, Things good.
some there be that simply and of themselves are always good, as temperance,
valiant courage, health, and al virtues that bring quietness to men's minds.
Other be good for diverse respects and for the end they be applied unto, as
ye laws, liberality, riches and other like. I think therefore yt ye Courtier
(if he be of ye perfection y^ Count Lewis and Sir Friderick have described him)
may in deed be a good thing and worthy praise, but for all that not
simplye, nor of himself, but for respect of the end whereto he may be applied.
For doubtless if ye Courtier with his nobleness of birth, comlie beehauiour,
pleasantness and practice in so many exercises, should bring forth no other
fruit, but to be such a one for himself, I would not think to come by this
perfect trade of Courtiership, that a man should of reason beestowe so much
study and peynes about it, as who so will compase it must do. But I would say
rather that many of the qualities appointed him, as daunsing, singinge and
sportinge, were lightness and vanity, and in a a man of estimation rather to
be dispraised then commended: because those precise facions, the settinge forth
ones self, meerie talk and such other matters belonginge to enterteinment of
women and love (although perhaps many other be of a contrary opinion) do
many times nothing else but womannish the minds, corrupt youth, and bring
them to a most wanton trade of living: Dastardlinesse.
whereupon afterward ensue these effects, that the name of Italy is brought
into sclaunder, and few there be that have the courage, I will not say to
^eoparde their lief, but to enter once into a danger. And without perauenture
there be infinite other things, that if a man beestow his labor and study
about them, would bring forth much more profit both in peace and war, then
this trade of Courtiershipp of it self alone. But in case the Courtiers doings
be directed to the good end they ought to be and which I mean: me think
then they should not only not be hurtful or vain, The end of a Courtier.
but most profitable and deserve infinite praise. The end therefore of a perfect
Courtier (whereof hitherto nothing has bine spoken) I beleaue is to purchase
him, by the mean of ye qualities which these Lords have given him, in such
wise the good will and favor of the Prince he is in service withal, that he
may break his mind to him, and always enfourme him francklye of the truth
of every matter meet for him to understand, without fear or peril to
displease him. And when ^e knows his mind is bent to commit any thing
unseemly for him, to be bold to stand with him in it, and to take courage
after an honest sort at ye favor which he has gotten him through his good
qualities, to dissuade him from every ill purpose, and to set him in ye way
of virtue. And so shall the Courtier, if he have the goodness in him that
these Lords have given him accompanied with readiness of wit, pleasantness,
wisdom, knowleage in letters and so many other things, understand how to
beehaue himself readilye in all occurrentes to drive into his Princis head
what honor and profit shall ensue to him and to his by justice, liberality,
val^auntnesse of courage, meekness and by the other virtues that beelong to a
good Prince, and contrariwise what sclaunder and damage comes of the vices
contrary to them. And therefore in mine opinion, as music, sportes, pastimes,
and other pleasant facions, The flower of courtlines
are (as a man would say) the flower of Courtlines, even so is the traininge
and the helping forward of the Prince to goodness and the fearinge him from
yuell, the fruit of it. The fruit of it.
And because the praise of weldoinge consists cheeflye in two points, whereof
the one is, Well doing.
in chousinge out an end that our purpose is directed unto, that is good in
deed: the other, the knowleage to find out apt and meet means to bring it
to the appointed good end: sure it is that the mind of him which thinks to
work so, that his Prince shall not be deceived, nor lead with flaterers,
railers and liars, but shall know both the good and the bad and bear love to
the one and hatred to the other, is directed to a very good end. Me think
again, that ye qualities which these Lords have given ye Courtier, may be a
good means to compass it: and that, because emonge many vices that we see
now a days in many of our Princis, the greatest are ignorance and self
leekinge: and the ^oote of these two mischeeues is nothing else but lyinge,
Lies engender ignorance and self le^king.
which vice is worthelie abhorred of God and man, and more hurtful to Princis
then any other, because they have more scarsitye then of any thing else, of
that which they need to hau^ more plentye of, then of any other thing:
namely, of such as should tell them the truth and put them in mind of
goodness: Enemies.
for enemies be not driven of love to do these offices, but they delight rather
to have them live wickedly and never to amend: on the other ^ide, they dare
not rebuke them openly for fear they be punished. As for friends few of them
have free passage to them, Friends
and those few have a respect to reprehende their vices so freelye as they do
private men's: And many times to coorie favor and to purchase good will,
Flattery.
they give themselves to nothing else but to feed them with matters that may
delight, and content their mind, though they be foul and dishonest. So that
of friends they beecome flatterers, and to make a hand by that streict
familiarity, they speak and work always to please, and for the most part
open the way with lies, which in the Princis mind engender ignorance, not of
outward matters on^^e, but also of his own self. And this may be said to be
the greatest and fowlest lie of all other, because the ignorant mind deceives
himself and inwardly makes lies of himself. Of this it comes, Great men.
that great men, beeside that they never understand the truth of any thing,
dronken with the licentious liberty that rule brings with it and with
abundance of delicacies drowned in pleasures, a^ so far out of ye way and their
mind is so corrupted in seeing themselves always obeyed and (as it were)
woorshipped with so much reverence, and praise, without not only any reproof
at all, but also gainsayinge, that through this ignorance they wade to an
extreme self leekinge, so that afterward they admit no counsel nor advise
of others. And because they beleaue that the understanding how to rule is a
most easy matter, and to compass it there needs neither art nor learning,
but only stoutness, they bend their mind and all their thoughts to the
maintenance of that port they keep, thinking it the true happiness to do what
a man lusts. Therefore do some abhor reason and justice, because they ween
it a bridle and a certain mean to bring them in bondage and to minishe in
them the contentation and hearts ease that they have to bear rule, if they
should observe it: and their rule were not perfect nor wholl if they should be
compelled to obey unto duty and honesty, because they have an opinion that
Whoso obeys, is no right Lord in deed. Therefore taking these principles for
a president and suffering them selves to be lead with self leekinge, they w^xe
lofty, and with a statlye countenance, with sharp and cruel conditions, with
pompous garments, gold and iewelles, and with coming (in a mauer) never
abroad to be seen, they think to get estimation and authority among men,
and to be counted (almost) Gods: But they are (in my judgment) like the
Colosses that were made in Room the last year upon the feast day of the place
of Agone, Images of horrible greatness.
which outwardlye declared a likeness of great men and horses of triumph, and
inwardly were full of towe and rags. But the Princis of this sort are so
much worse, as the Colosses by their own waightye pese stand upright of
them selves, and they because they be y^l counterpesed and without line or
level placed upon unequal ground, through their own waightinesse
overthrow them selves, and from one error renn into infinite. Because their
ignorance beeinge annexed with this false opinion that That they can not err,
and that the port they keep comes of their knowleage, leads of them every
way by right or by wrong to lay hand upon possessions bouldly, so they may
come bye them. But in case they would take aduisemente to know and to work
that that they ought, they would as well strive not to reign as they do to
reign, because they should perceive what a naughtye and dangerous matter it
were for Subjects that ought to be goue^ned, to be wyser then the Princis that
should govern. You may see that ignorance in music, in daunsinge, in ridinge
hurts no man, yet he that is no musitien is ashamed and aferde to singe in
the presence of others, or to daunse, he that can not, or he that sits not
well a horse, Ignorance of rules.
to ride: but of the unskillfulness to govern people arrise so many yuelles,
deaths, destructions, mischeeffes and confusions, that it may be called the
deadliest plagu upon ye earth. And yet some princes most ignorant in
government, are not bashful nor ashamed to take upon them to govern I will not
say in the presence of four or half a dosen persons, but in the face of the
world: for their degree is set so on loft, y^ all eyes beehould them, and
therefore not their great vices only, but their least faults of all are
continually noted. As yt is written that Cimon was ill spoken of because he
loved wine, Scipio, sleep, Lucullus, bancketinges. But would God, the Princis
of these our times would coople their vices with so many virtues as did they
of old time: which if they were out of the way in any point, yet refused they
not the exhortations and lessons of such as they deemed meet to correct those
faults: Yea they sought with great instance to frame their lief by the rule of
notable personages: As Epaminondas by Lisias of Pythagoras sect: Agesilaus by
Xenophon: Scipio by Panaetius, and infinite others. But in case a grave
Philosopher should come before enie of our Princes, Princis of old time
were refourmable.
or who ever beeside, that would show them plainly and without enie
circomstance the horrible face of true virtue and teach them good manners and
what the lief of a good Prince ought to be, I am assured they would abhor him
at the first sight, as a most venomous serpent, or else they would make him a
laughinge stock, as a most vile matter. I say therefore that sins nowadayes
Princis are so corrupt through ill vsages, ignorance and false self leekinge,
and that yt is so hard a matter to give them the knowel^age of the truth and
to bend them to virtue, and men with lies and flattery and such naughtye
means seek to coorie favor with them, the Courtier by the mean of those
honest qualities that Count Lewis and Sir Friderick have given him, may soon,
and ought to go about so to purchase him the good will and allure unto him the
mind of his Prince, that he may make him a free and safe passage to commune
with him in every matter with out troublinge him. And if he be such a one as
is said, he shall compase yt with small peine, and so may he always open unto
him the truth of every matter at ease. Beside this by little and little distille
into his mind goodness, and teach him continency, stoutnesse of courage,
justice, temperance, making him to taste what sweetness is ^id under that
little bitterness, which at the first sight appears unto him that
withstandeth vices: which are always hurtful, displeasant and accompanied
with ill report and shame, even as virtues are profitable, pleasant and
praisable, and inflame him to them with the examples of many famous Capitanes,
Images in the honor of men.
and of other notable personages, unto whom they of old time used to make
images of metal and marble, and sometime of gold; and to set them up in
commune haunted places, as well for the honor of them, as for an encouragynge
of others, that with an honest envy they might also endeavor them selves to
reach unto that glory. In this wise may he lead him through the roughe way
of virtue (as it were) deckynge yt about with boowes to shadow yt and
strawinge it over with sightlye flouers, to ease the grief of the peinfull
journey in him that is but of a weak force. And sometime with music, sometime
with arms, and horses, sometime with rymes and meeter, otherwhyle with
communication of love, and with all those ways that these Lords have spoken
of, continuallye keep that mind of his occupied in honest pleasure:
imprintynge notwythstandynge therein always beesyde (as I have said) in
company with these flickeringe prouocations some virtuous condition, and
beeguilinge him with a wholesome craft, as the wary phisitiens do, who many
times when they minister to young and tender children in there sickness, a
medicin of a bitter taste, anoint the cupp about the brimm with some sweet
licour. The Courtier therefore applyinge to such a purpose this veil of
pleasure, in every time, in every place, and in every exercise he shall
attain to his end, and deserve much more praise and recompense, then for
any other good work that he can do in the world because there is no
treasure that does so universally profit, as does a good Prince, nor any
mischeef so universally hurt, as an ill Prince. Therefore is there also in
peine so bitter and cruel that were a sufficient punishment for those naughty
and wicked Courtiers, that make their honest and pleasant manners and their good
qualities a cloak for an ill end, and by mean of them seek to come in favor
with their Princis for to corrupt them and to straye them from the way of
virtue and to lead them to vice. For a man may say, that such as these be, do
infect with deadly poison, not one vessel whereof one man alone drinks, but
the commune fountain that all the people resorteth to. The L. Octauian held
his peace as t^ou^h he would have sai^ no ^ore, but the L Gaspar, I can not
see, my L. Octauian (said he) that this goodness of mind and continincie, and
the other virtues which you will have the Courtier to show his Lord, may be
learned: but I suppose that they are given the men that have them, by nature
and of God. And that it is so, you may see that there is no man so wicked and
o^ so ill conditions in the world, nor so intemperate and unjust, which if he
be asked the question, will confess him self such a one. But every man be he
never so wicked, is glad to be counted just, continent and good* which should
not be so, in case these virtues might be learned, because it is no shame not
to know the thing that a man has not studied, but a rebuke, it is not to have
that which we ought to be endowed withal of nature. Therefore does each man
seek to cover the defaultes of nature, as well in the mind, as also in the
body: the which is to be se^ne in the blind, lame, crooked and other mayned
and deformed creatures. For although these imperfections may be laid to
nature, yet does it grieve each man to have them in him self: because it
seems by the testimony of the self same nature that a man has that default
or blemishe (as it were) for a patent and token of his ill inclination. The
fable that is reported of Epimetheus does also confirm mine opinion, Fable of
Epimetheus.
which was so unskillful in diuidinge the gifts of nature unto men, that he
left them much more needy of every thing, then all other living creatures.
Whereupon Prometheus stole the politic wisdom from Minerua and Vulcan that men
have to get their living withal. Yet had they not for all that, civil
wisdom to gather them selves together into Cities, and the knowleage to live
with ciuility, because it was kept in the Castle of Jupiter by most circumspect
ouerseears, which put Prometheus in such fear, that he durst not approach
nygh them. Whereupon Jupiter taking pitye upon the miserye of men, that could
not felowshipp together for lack of civil virtue, but were torn in pieces by
wielde beasts, he sent Mercury to the earth to carry justice and shame, that
these two things might fournish Cities and gather Citizins together: and
willed that they should be given them, not as other arts were, wherein one
counning man suffices for many ignorant, as phisike, but y^ they should be
imprinted in every man. And ordained a law, that all such as were without
justice and shame, should be banished and put to death, as contagious to the
City. Beehoulde then (my L. Octauian) God has granted these virtues to me^,
and are not to be learned, but be natural. Then y^ L. Octauian some what
smiling, will you then, my L. Gaspar (quod he) have me^ to be so unfortunate
and of so peuish a judgment, yt with policy they have found out an art to tame
ye natures of wield beasts, as bears, wolves, Lio^s, and may with ye same teach
a pretty bird to fle as a man lust, and return back from the wood and from his
natural liberty of his own accord to snares and bondage, and with the same
policy can not, or will not find out arts whereby they may profit
themselves, and with study and diligence make their mind more perfect? This
(in mine opinion) were like as if Phisitiens should study with all diligence
to have the art only to heal fellon^es in fingers and the read gum in young
children, and lay aside the cure of fevers, pleurisy and other sore diseases,
the which how out of reason it were every man may consider. I beleaue therefore
that the moral virtues are not in us all together by nature, because nothing
can at any time be accustomed unto it, that is naturally his contrary: as it
is seen in a stone, the which though it be cast upward ten thousand times,
yet will he never accustom to go up of him selfe^ Uertues may be learned.
Therefore in case virtues were as natural to us, as heaviness to the stone, we
should never accustom our selves to vice. Nor yet are vices natural in this
sort, for then should we never be virtuous: and a great wickedness and folly
it were, to punish men for the faults that came of nature without our
offense: and this error should the laws committ, which appoint not
punishment to the offenders for the trespace that is past, because it can not
be brought to pass that the thing that is done, may not be done, but they
have a respect to the time to come, that who so has offended may offend no
more, or else with ill president give not a cause for others to offend. And
thus yet they are in opinion that virtues may be learned, which is most true,
because we are borne apt to receive them, and in like manner vices: and therefore
there grows a custom in us of both the one and the other through long
use, so that first we practice virtue or vice, A difference beetwene that a man
has by nature and by custom.
after that, we are virtuous or vicious. The contrary is known in the things
that be given us of nature, for first we have the pour to practice them, after
that, we do practice: as it is in the senses, for first we can see, here,
feel, after that, we do see, here and feel: although notwithstanding many
of these doings be also set out more sightlye with teachinge. Whereupon good
Schoolmaist^rs do not only instruct their children in letters, but also in good
nourtour in eatinge, drinkinge, talking, and goinge with certain gestures meet
for the purpose. Therefore even as in the other arts, so also in the virtues
it is behouffull to have a teacher, that with lessons and good exhortations may
stir up and quicken in us those moral virtues, whereof we have the seed
enclosed and buried in the soul, and like the good husband man, till them and
open the way for them, weedinge from about them the briers and darnell of
appetites, which many times so shadow and choke our minds, that they suffer
them not to budd nor to bring forth the happy fruits, which alone ought to be
wished to grow in ye hearts of men. In this sort then is naturally in every
one of us justice and shame, which (you say) Jupiter sent to the earth for all
men. But even as a body without eyes, how sturdie ever he be, if he remove to
any certain place, often times fails: so the root of these virtues that be
potentiallie engendered in our minds, if it be not aided with teaching, does
often come to naught. Because if it should be brought into doing and to his
perfect custom, it is not satisfied (as is said) with nature alone: but has
need of a politic usage and of reason, which may cleanse and scour that
soul, taking away the dymm veil of ignorance, whereof arrise (in a manner) all
ye erroures in men. For in case good and ill were well known and perceived,
every man would always chouse the good and shonn the ill. Therefore may virtue
be said to be (as it were) a wisdom and an understanding to chouse the good:
Virtue.
and vice, a lack of foresight and an ignorance that leads to judge falsely.
Uice.
Because men never chouse ye il with opinion that it is ill, but they are
deceived through a certain likeness of good. Then answered ye L. Gaspar: yet
are there many that know plainly they do ill, and do it notwithstan^ing, and
that because they more esteame the present pleasure which they feel, True
pleasure.

True sorrow.


then ye punishment that they doubt shall fall upon them, as thieves,
murderers and such other. The L. Octauian said: true pleasure is always good,
and true sorrow, evil: therefore these be deceived in taking false pleasure for
true, and true sorrow for false: whereupon many times through false pleasures,
they reun into true displeasures. The art therefore that teaches to discern
this truth from falsehood, may in like case be learned: and the virtue by the
which we chouse this good in deed, True knowleage.
and not that which falsely appears to be, may be called true knowleage, and
more auailable for man's lief, then any other, because it expels ignorance,
of the which (as I have said) spring all euelles. Then M. Peter Bembo, I wot
not, my L. Octauian (quoth he) how the L. Gaspar should grant you, that of
ignorance should spring all euelles, and that there be not many which in
offendinge know for certeintie that they do offend, neither are they any
deal deceived in the true pleasure nor yet in the true sorrow: because it is
sure that such as be incontinent judge with reason and uprightly, and know it,
where unto they are provoked by lust contrary to due, to be ill, and therefore
they make resistance and set reason to match greedy desire, whereupon arriseth
the battle of pleasure and sorrow against judgment. Reason,
Finally reason overcome by greedy desire far the mightier, is clean without
succor, like a ship, that for a time defends herself from the tempestuous
Seastormes, at the end beaten with the to raginge violence of winds, her
gables and tacklinges broken, yeldeth up to be driven at the will of fortune,
without occupiyng helm or any manner help of Pilott for her safeguard. Furthwith
therefore commit they the offenses with a certain doubtful remorse of
conscience and (in a manner) whether they will or no, ye which they would not
do, unless they knew ye thing that they do to be ill, but without striving of
reason would ren wholly headlonge after greedy desire, and then should they not
be incontinent, but intemperate, which is much worse. Therefore is
incontinencie said to be a diminished vice, Incontine^cy.
because it has in it a part of reason, Continency.
and likewise continency an imperfect virtue, because it has in it part of
affection: therefore (me think) that it can not be said that the offenses of
the incontinent come of ignorance, or that they be deceived and offend not,
when they know for a truth that they do offend. The L. Octauian answered:
Certesse ( M. Peter) your argument is good, yet (in my mind) it is more
apparent then true. For although the incontinent offend with that
doubtfulnesse, and reason in their mind strives against greedye desire, and
that that is ill, seems unto them to be ill in deed, yet have they no
perfect knowleage of it, nor understand it so thoroughly as need requires.
Therefore of this, it is rather a feeble opinion in them, then certain
knowleage, whereby they agree to have reason overcome by affection: but if they
had in them true knowleage, there is no doubt, but they would not offend:
because evermore ye thing whereby greedy desire ouercometh reason, is
ignorance neither can true knowleage be ever overcome by affection, Ignorance.
that proceadeth from ye body and not from the mind, and in case it be well
ruled and governed by reason it becomes a virtue: if not it beecommeth a
vice. Reason.
But such force reason has, that she makes the sense always to obey and by
wondrous means and ways perceth least ignorance should possess that, which
she ought to have: so that although ye spirits and the sinews, and the bones
have no reason in them, yet when there springs in us ye motion of mind, that
ye imagination (as it were) pricketh forward and shakes the bridle to the
spirits, all ye members are in a readiness, the feet to renn, ye hands to
take or to d^e that which the mind* thinks upon, and this is also
manifestlye known in many, which unwittingly otherwhile eat some lothesome
and abhorring meat, but so well dressed that to their taste it appears most
delicate: afterward understanding what manner thing it was, it does not only
grieve them and loath them in their mind, but the body also agrees with the
judgment of the mind, that of force they cast that meat up again. The L.
Octauian followed on still in his talk, but the L. Julian interruptinge him. My
L. Octauian (quod he (if I have well understood, you have said that
co^tinencie is an imperfect virtue, because it has in it part of affection:
and me seems that the virtue (where there is in our mind a variance
beetwene reason and greedy desire) which fights and gives the victory to
reason, ought to be reckened more perfect, then that which overcomes having
neither greedy desire nor any affection to withstand it: because (it seems)
that that mind absteyneth not from ill for virtues sake, but refrayenth the
doing it, because he has no will to it. Then the L. Octauian, which (quod he)
would you esteame the valianter Capitain, either he that hasardeth him self in
open ^ight, and notwithstanding vanquisheth his enemies, or he that by his
virtue and knowleage weakeneth them in bringinge them in case not able to
fight, and so without battle or any ieopardie discomfetethe them? He, quoth
the L. Julian, that overcomes with most surety, is out of doubt most to be
praised, so that this assured victory of his proceade not through the
slackenesse of the ennemies The L. Octauian answered: you have judged aright.
And therefore I say unto you, that continencio may be compared to a Capitain
that fights manly, and though his ennemies be strong and well appointed,
yet gives he them the overthrow, Temperance
but for all that not without much a do and danger But temperance free from all
disquietinge, is like the Capitain that without resistance overcomes and
reigns. And having in the mind where she is, not only affuaged, but clean
quenched the fire of gredie desire, even as a good Prince in civil war
dispatcheth the sedicious inward ennemies, and gives the scepter and wholl
rule to reason, so in like case this virtue not enforcing the mind, but
powringe therinto through most quiet ways a vehement persuasion that may
incline him to honesty, makes him quiet and full of rest, in every part
equal and of good proportion: and on every side framed of a certain agreement
with him self, that fills him with such a clear caulmenesse, that he is
never out of patience: and becomes full and wholly most obedient to reason,
and ready to tourn unto her all his motions, and follow her where she ^ust to
lead him, without any resistance, like a tender lamb that renneth, stands
and goith always by the ewes side, and moves only as he sees her do. This
virtue therefore is most perfect, and is cheeflie requisite in Princis, because
of it arrise many other. Then the L. Caesar Gonzaga, I wott not (quoth he) what
virtues requisite for Princis may arrise of this temperance, if it be ^he that
riddeth the mind of affections (as you say) which perhaps were meet for some
Monk or Heremite: but I can not see how it should be requisite for a Prince
that is courageous, fre^harted and of prowess in marciall feats, for
whatsoever is done to him, never to have anger, hatred, good will, disdeigne,
lust, nor any affeccion in him: nor how without this he can get him authority
emonge the people and soldiers The L. Octauian answered: I have not said that
te^perance should throughlye ridd and root out of men's minds, affections:
neither should it be well so to do, because there be yet in affections some
parts good: but that which in affections is corrupt and striving against
honesty, she brings to obey unto reason. Therefore it is not meet, to ridd
the troublesome disquietnesse of the mind, to root up affections clean, for
this were as if to a void drunkenness, there should be an act established,
that no man should drink wine: or because otherwhile in renninge a man takes
a fall, every man should be forbed renning. Mark them that break horses,
they break them not from their renninge and coming on loft, but they will
have them to do it at the time and obedience of the rider. The affections
therefore that be cleansed and tried by temperance are assistant to virtue, as
anger, that helps manliness: hatred against the wicked, helps justice, and
likewise the other virtues are aided by affections, which in case they were
clean taken away, they would leave reason very feeble and feint, so that it
should little prevail, like a shipp master that is without wind in a great
caulme. Marvel ye not then (my L. Caesar) if I have said, that of temperance
arrise many other virtues: for when a mind is in tune with this harmony, by
the mean of reason he easily receives afterward true manliness, which makes
him boulde and safe from all danger, True manliness.
and (in a manner) above wordly passions. Likewise Justice an undefiled virgin,
friend to sobermode and goodness, Justice.
queen of all other virtues, because she teaches to do that, which a man
ought to do, and to shon that a man ought to shonn, and therefore is she most
perfect, because through her the works of the other virtues are brought to
pass, and she is a help to him that has her both for him self and for
others: without the which (as it is commanlye said) Jupiter him self could
not well govern his kingdom. Stoutnesse of courage.
Stoutnesse of courage does also follow after these, and makes them all the
greater, but she can not stand alone, because whosoever has not other virtues can
not be of a stout courage. Of these then wisdom is guide, which consists in
a certain judgment to chouse well. Wisdom.
And in this happy chain are also lincked liberality, sumptuousness, the
desire to save a man's estymation, meekness, pleasantness, courtesy in
talk, and many other which is now no time to speak of. But in case our
Courtier will do as we have said, he shall find them all in his Princis
mind: and daily he shall see spring such beawtifull flowers and fruits, as
all the delicious gardens in the world have not the like: And he shall feel
very great contentacion within him ^elf, when he remembers that he has given
him, The way to govern well.
not the things which foolish persons give, which is, gold, or silver,
plate, garments, and such matters, whereof he that gives them has him self
very great scarsitie, and he that receives them exceading great store: but
that virtue, which perhaps among all the matters yt belong unto man, is the
cheeffest and rarest, that is to say, the manner and way to rule and to reign
in the right kind. Which alone were sufficient to make men happy, and to
bring once again into the world the golden age, which is written to have bine
when Saturnus reigned in the old time. The reign of a good Prince.
Here when the L. Octauian had paused a little as though he would have taken
respite, the L. Gaspar said: Which reckon you (my L. Octauian) the happiest
government and that were most to purpose to bring into the world again that
golden age which you have made mention of, either the reign of so good a
Prince, or the governance of a good Commune weal? The L. Octauian answered: I
would always prefarr the reign of a good Prince, because it is a government
more agreeable to nature, and (if it be lawful to compare small matters with
infinite) more like unto Gods, which one, and alone governs the universal.
But leauinge this, ye see that in whatsoever is broug^te to pass with the
policy of man, as armies, great saylinge vessels, buildings and other like
matters, the wholl is committed to one alone, to dyspose ther^f at his will.
Likewise in our body all the members travail and are occupied as the heart
thinks good. Beeside this it seems meet that people should as well be
governed by one Prince, as many other living creatures be, whom nature
teaches this obedience, as a most soueraign matter. Mark ye whether dear,
cranes and many other fowls, wha^ they take their ^light do not always set a
Prince before, whom they follow and obey. And bees (as it were) with discourse
of reason and with such reverence honor their king, as the most obedientest
people in the world can do. And therefore all this is a very great argument
that the so^eraigntie of a Prince is more according to nature, then a Commonweals. Then M. Peter Bembo, and me think (quoth he) that sins God has given
us liberty for a sovereign gift, Liberty.
it is not reason that it should be taken from us: nor that one man should be
partner of it more then an other, which happens under the rule of princis,
who for the most part keep their people in most streict bondage. But in
Commonweals well in order this liberty is well kept. Beeside that, both in
judgments and in aduisementes it happens oftener that the opinion of one
alone is false, then the opinion of many, because troublous affection either
through anger, or through spite, or through lust, sooner enters into the mind
of one alone then into the multitudes, whi^he (in a manner) like a great
quantity of water, is less subject to corruption, then a small deal. I say
again that the example of the beasts and fowls does not make to purpose, for
both Dear and Cranes and the rest do not always set one and the self
foremost for them to follow and obey, but they still change and vary, giuinge
this prefarment sometime to one, otherwhile to an other, and in this manner it
beecommeth rather the form of a Commune weal, then of a kingdom, and this
may be called a true and equal liberty, when they that sometime command,
obey again an other while. The example likewise of the bees (me think) is not
alike, because that king of theirs is not of their own kind: And therefore
he that will give unto men a w^rthie head in deed, must be feign to find him
of an other kind, and of a more noble nature then man's, if men (of reason)
should obey him, as flocks and heardes of cattle that obey, not a beast
their like, but a sheppharde and a hardman, which is a man and of a more
worthy kind, then theirs. For these respects, I think (my L. Octauian) the
government of a Commune weal is more to be coueted, then of a king. Then the
L. Octauian, against your opinion, M. Peter (quoth he) I will allege but one
reason: which is, that of ways to rule people well, there be only three
kinds. The one a kingdom: The other, Three kinds of ways to rule.
the rule of good men, which they of old time called Optimates, The third,
the governance of the people. And the transgressinge (to term it so) and
contrary vice that every one of these is changed into beeinge apayred and
corrupted, is when the kingdom beecommeth a Tyranny: and when the governance
of good men is changed into the hands of a few great men and not good: and
when the rule of the people is at the disposition of the co^munaltye, which
making a meddlie of the ordres, suffers the governance of the wholl at ye will
of the multitude. Of these three ill gouernmentes (it is sure) the Tyranny is
the woorst of al, as it may be proved by many reasons. It follows then, that
of the three good, the kingdom is the best, because it is contrary to the
woorste, for (as you know) the effects of contrary causes, they be also
contrary among them selves. Now as touching it, that you have spoken of
lybertye, I answer, that true liberty ought not to be said to live as a man
will, but to live according to good laws. And to obey, is no less natural,
profitable and necessary, then to command. And some things are borne and so
appointed and ordained by nature to command, as some other to obeisance.
Truth it is, that there be two kinds of bearinge rule, the one Lordlye and
forsyble, Two kinds of ways to bear swinge.
as masters over slaves, and in this does the soul command the body. The
other more mild and tractable, as good Princis by way of the laws over their
Subjects, and in this reason commands greedy desire. And each of these two
ways is proifitable: because the body is created of nature apt to obey the
soul, and so is desire, reason. There be also many men whose doings be
applied only about the use of the body: and such as these be are so far wide
from the virtuous, as the soul from the body, and yet because they be
reasonable creatures, they be so much partners of reason, as they do no more
but know it, for they possess it not, ne yet have they the use of it. These
therefore be naturallye bondemen, and better it is for them and more profitable
to obey, then to bear swey. Then said the L. Gaspar: In what manner wise be
they then to be commanded that be discreet and virtuous and not by nature
bond? How good men be to be ruled.
The L. Octauian answered: With that tractable commaundment kinglye and civil.
And to such it is well done otherwhile to commit the bearinge of such
offices as be meet for them, that they may likewise bear swey and rule over
others of less wit then they be, yet so that the principal government may
full and wholye depend upon the cheef Prince. And because you have said, that
it is an easier matter to corrupt the mind of one, then of a great sort, I
say, that it is also an easier matter to find one good and wise, A king.
then a great sort. Both good and wise ought a man to suppose a king may be,
of a noble pr^genie, inclined to virtue of his own natural motion, and
through the famous memory of his auncestoures, and brought up in good
conditions. And though he be not of an other kind then man, as you have said
is emonge the bees, yet if he be helped forward with the instructions,
bringinge up, and art of the Courtier, whom these Lords have facioned so wise
and good, he shall be most wise, most continent, most temperate, most
manlye, and most just, full of liberality, majesty, holiness, and mercy:
finallye he shall be most glorious and most deerlye beloved both to God and
manne: through whose grace he shall atteine unto that heroical and noble
virtue, that shall make him pass the b^undes of the nature of man, and shall
rather be called a Demi God, God the defendour of good Princis.
then a man mortal. For God deliteth in and is the defendour not of those
Princis that will follow and counterfeit him in showinge great pour, and make
themselves to be woorshipped of men, but of such as beeside pour, whereby
they are mighty, endeavor themselves to resemble him also in goodness and
wisdom, whereby they may have a will and a knowleage to do well and to be his
ministers, distributinge for the beehouf of man the benifittes and gifts
that they receive of him. Therefore even as in the firmamente the son and the
moon and the other sterres show to the world (as it were) in a glass a
certain likeness of God: A good Prince an Image of God.
So upon the earth a much more liker image of God are those good Princis that
love and woorshippe him, and show unto the people the clear light of his
justice, accompanied with a shadow of the heavenly reason and understanding:
And such as these be does God make partners of his true dealing,
righteousness, justice and goodness, and of those other happy benifittes
which I can not name, that disclose unto the world a much more evident proof
of the Godhead, then does the light of the son, or the continual tourninge
of the firmamente with the sundry course of the sterres. It is God therefore
that has appointed the people under ye custody of Princis, which ought to
have a diligent care over them, that they may make him account of it, as good
stewardes do their Lord, and love them and think their own, all the profit
and loss that happens to them, and principally above all thing provide for
their good astate and welfare. Therefore ought the prince not only to be good,
but also to make others good, like the Carpenters square, that is not only
straight and just it self, but also makes straight and just whatsoever it is
occupied about. And the greatest proof that the Prince is good, The li^^ of
the king a^ law to the ^^^ple.
is when the people are good: because the lief of the Prince is a law and
ringleader of the Citizins, and upon the conditions of him must needs al
others depend: neither is it meet for one that is ignorant, to teach: nor for
him that is out of order, to give order: nor for him that falls, to help up
an other. Therefore if the Prince will execute these offices aright, it is
requisite that he apply all his study and diligence to get knowleage, afterward
to facion within him self and observe vnchangeablye in every thing the law
of reason, not written in papers, or in me^tall, but graven in his own mind,
that it may be to him always not only familier, but inward, and live with
him, as a percell of him: to the intent it may night and day, in every time
and place admonish him and speak to him within his heart, ridding^ him of those
troublous effections that intemperate minds feel, which because on the one
side they be (as it were) cast into a most deep sleep of ignorance, on ye
other overwhelmed with the vnquitnesse which they feel through their weyward
and blind desires, they are stirred with an unquiet rage, as he that sleeps
otherwi^e with strange and horrible visions: heaping then a greater pour upon
their noughtie desire, there is heaped also a greater trouble withal. And wha^
the Prince can do what he will, then is it great ieopardie least he will the
thing that he ought not. Therefore said Bias well, that promotions declare what
men be: for even as vessels while they are empty, Bias saying.
though they have some think in them, it can ill be perceived, but if they be
filled with l^cour, they show by and by on what side the fault is, so corrupt
and il disposed minds syldome discover their vices, Authorities disclose vices.
but when they be filled with authority. For then they are not able to carry
the heavy burdien of pour, but forsake them selves and scatter on every side
greedy desire, pride, wrath, solemness and such tira^nicall fecions as they
have within them. Whereupon without regard they persecute the good and wise, and
promote ye wicked. Tira^nes.
And they can not abide to have frendshippes, assemblies and co^ferences among
Citizins in Cities. But maintein spies, promoters, murderers and cutthrotes to
put men in fear and to make them become feintharted. And they sow debate and
striefe to keep them in division and weak. And of these manners ensue infinite
damages and the vttre undoing of the poor people, and often times cruel
slaughter or at the least continual fear to the Tira^nes them selves. For
good Princis fear not for them selves but for their sakes whom they rule over:
and Tyrannes fear very them whom they rule over. Therefore the more number of
people they rule over and the mightier they are, the more is their fear and
the more ennemies they have. How fearful (think you) and of what an unquiet
mind was Clearus Tira^n of Pontus every time he went into ye market place, or
into the theater, or to any banquet, Clea^^^*
or other haunted place? For (as it is written) he slept shutt into a chest. Or
Aristodemus of Argos? which of his bed had made to him self a prison (or little
better) for in his palaice he had a little room hanginge in the aer, and so
high that he should clime to it with a ladder, and there slept he with a woman
of his, whose mother ouernight took away the ladder, and in the morning set
it to again. Clean contrary to this therefore ought the lief of a good Prince
to be, free and safe and as dear to his subjects as their own: and so
framed, that he may have a part of both the doing and beeholdinge lief,
as much as shall be beehouffull for the benefit of his people. Then the L
Gaspar, And which of the two lives, my L. Octauian (quoth he) do you think
most meet for a Prince? The L. Octauian answered smilinge: ye think perhaps
that I stand in mine own conceit to be the excellent Courtier that ought to
know so many matters, and to apply them to the good end I have spoken of.
But remember your self, that these Lords have facioned him with many
qualityes that be not in me: therefore let us first do our best to find him
out, for I remytt me to him both in this and in all other things that belong to
a good Prince. Then the L. Gaspar, I think (quod he) that if any of the
qualities given the Courtier want in you, it is rather music and daunsinge and
the rest of small account, then such as beelong to the instructing of a Prince
and to this end of Courtlines. The L. Octauian answered: They are not of small
account all of them that help to purchase a man the favor of a Prince, which
is necessary (as we have said) before the Courtier adventure to teach him
virtue, the which (I trow) I have showed you may be learned, and profits
as much as ignorance hurts, whereof spring all vices, and specially that
false leekinge a man has of him self. Therefore (in mine opinion) I have
sufficientlye said, and perhaps more then my promise was. Then the duchess,
we shall be so much the more bound (quoth she) to your gentilnesse, as ye shall
satisfye us more then promise. Therefore stick not to speak your fansye
concerning the L. Gaspars request. And of good fellowship show us beside
whatsoever you would teach your Prince, if he had need of instructions: and
set the case that you have throughlye gotten his favor, so as it may be
lawful for you to tell him francklye what ever comes in your mind The L.
Octauian laughed and said: If I had the favor of some Prince that I know, and
should tell him franckly mine opinion (I doubt me) I should soon lose it:
Beeside that, to teach him, I should need first to learn^ my self.
Notwithstanding sins it is your pleasure that I shall answer the L Gaspar in
this point also, I say, that (in my mind) Princis ought to give them selves
both to the one and the other of the two lives, but yet somewhat more to the
beehouldinge: Vita con^emplati^^.
Because this in them is divided into two parts, whereof the one consists in
knoweynge well and iudgeinge: the other in commaundinge aryght, and in such
wise as it should be done, and reasonable matters and such as they have
authority in, commanding them to him, that of reason ought to obey, and in
time and place accordingely. And of this spoke Duke Friderick, when he said, He
that can command, is always obeyed. And to command is evermore the
principal office of Princis, which notwithstanding ought many times also to
see with their eyes and to be present at the deed doing, and according to
the time and the busenesse otherwhile also be doing them selves, and yet has
all this a part with action or practice. Vita ^^^iua.
But the end of the actyue or doing lief ought to be the beehouldinge, as of
war, peace, and of peynes, rest. How to trade people.
Therefore is it also the office of a good Prince so to trade his people and
with such laws and statutes, that they may live in rest and in peace, without
danger and with increase of wealth, and inioye praisablye this end of their
practices and actions, which ought to be quietn^sse. Because there have bine
often times many Commonweals and Princis, that in war were always most
florishinge and mighty, and immediatlye after they have had peace, fell in
decay and lost their puissance and brightness, like iron unoccupied. And this
came of nothing else, but because they had no good trade of living in peace,
nor the knowleage to inioie the benifit of ease. And it is not a matter lawful
to be always in war without se^kinge at the end t^ come to a peace: Although
some Princis suppose that their drift ought principally to be, to bring in
subjection their borderers, and therefore train up their people in a warlyke
wyldenesse of spoil, and murder, and such matters: they wage them to
exercise it, and call it virtue. Whereupon in the old time it was an usage
emonge the Scyth^s, A custom among the Scythes.
that whosoever had not slain some ennemie of his, could not drink in solemn
banckettes of the gobblet that was carried about to his companions. Great high
square stones smaller and small^r unto the top.
In other places the manner was to rear about ones sepulture so many
Obeliskes, as he that lay there buried had slain o^ his ennemies. And all
these things and many mo, were inu^nted to make men warlike, only to bring
others in subjection, which was a matter (almost) impossible, because it is an
infinite p^ece of work, until all the world be brought under obeisance: and
not very reasonable, according to the law of nature Which will not ^aue,
that in others the thing should please us, which in our selves is a greef to
us, Why Princis should make their people warlike.
Therefore ought Princis to make their people warlyke, not for a greedy desire
to rule, but to defend themselves the better and their own people, from whosoever
would attempt to bring them in bondage, or to do them wrong in any point. Or
else to drive out Tirans, and to govern the people well, that were ill handled.
Or ^lles to bring into bondage them, that of nature were such, that they
deserved to be made bondmen, with intent to govern them well, and to give them
case, rest and peace. The end of the laws.
And to this end also ought to be applied ye laws, and al statutes of
justice, in punishing the ill, not for malice, but because there should be no
ill, and least they should be a hinderaunce to the quiet living of the good:
Because in very deed it is an uncomely matter and worthy blame, that in
war (which of it self is naught) men should show themselves stout and wi^e,
and in peace and rest (which is good) ignoruant, and so blockishe that they
wiste not how to inioye a benifit. Even as therefore in war they ought to
bend their people to the profitabl^ and necessary virtues to come by ye end
(which is, peace) so in peace, to come by the end thereof also (which is,
quietness) they ought to bend them to honest virtues, which be the end of the
profitable. And in this wise shall the subjects be good, and the Prince shall
have many mo to commend and to reward, then to chastise. And the rule both
for the subjects and for the Prince shall be most happy, not Lordly, as the
master over his bondeman, but soft^ and meek, as a good father over his good
child. Then the L. Gaspar, gladly (quoth he) would I understand what manner
virtues these are, that be profitable and necessary in war, and what honest
in peace. The L. Octauian answered: All be good and help the turn, because
they tend to a good end. Yet cheeflye in war is much set by that true
manlines, Manliness.
which makes the mind void from all passions, so that he not only fears
not perilles, but passes not upon them. Likewise steadfastn^sse, and pacyence,
Steadfastnesse.
abidinge with a quiet and untroubled mind all the strokes of fortune. It is
beehouffull likewise in war and at all other times to have all the virtues
that beelonge to honestye, as justice, staidness, sobermoode: but much more
in peace and rest, because often times men in prosspiritie and rest, when
favorable fortune fa^neth upon them, were unrighteous, vntemp^rate, and suffer
themsel^es to be corrupted with pleasures. Therefore such as be in this state
have very great need of these virtues, because rest brings ill condicyons
to soon into men's minds: Whereupon arrose a Proverb in old time, Rest.
that Rest is not to be given to bondme^. And it is thought that the Piramides
of aegipt were made to keep the people occupied, because Unto every manne,
Hugions ^reat ^ones steeple wise*
use to abide peynes is most profitable. There be more over many other
virtues, all helpful, but it suffices for this time to have spoken this
much: for if I could teach my Prince and train him in this manner and so
virtuous a bringinge up (as we have set furthe) in doing it without any
more (I would beeleaue) that I had sufficientlye well compased the end of a
good Courtier. Then the L Gaspar, My L. Octauian (quoth he) because you have
much praised good bringing up, and seemed (in a manner) to beleaue that it is
the cheef cause to make a man virtuous and good, I would know, whether the
Courtiers instructing of his Prince, ought to beegine first of use and (as it
were) daily facio^s, that unawares to him may make him to accustom himself
to weldoinge: or else wh^th^r he ought to beegine it himself in opening unto
him with reason the proprety of good and ill, and in making him to perceive,
before he take the matter in hand, which is the good way and to be fo^owed,
and which the ill, and to be shonned: finally^ whether into that mind of his,
the virtues ought to be driven and grounded with reason and understanding
first, or with custom. The L. Octauian said: you bring me into ouerlonge a
discourse. Yet because you shall not think that I will slack for that I am
not willing to make answer to your requests, I say, that like as the soul
and the body in us are two things, so is the soul divided into two parts:
whereof the one has in it reason, and the other appetite. Reason.
Even as therefore in generation the body go^th before the soul, Appetite.
so does the vnreanable part of the soul go before the reasonable: the which
is plainlye to be descerned in young babes, who (in a manner) immediatlye after
their birthe vttre anger and fervent appetite, but afterward in process of
time reason appears. Therefore first must the body be cherished before the
soul: after that, the appetite before reason: but the cherishinge of the
body for a respect to the soul, and of the appetite for a respect to reason.
For as the virtue of the mind is made perfect with learning, so is the
civil with custom. Therefore ought there to be a ground made first with
custom, which may govern the appetites not yet apt to conceive reason: and
with that good use lead them to goodness: afterward settle them with
understanding, the which although she be last to show her light, yet does
she the more perfectlye make the virtues to be inioyed of whosoever has his mind
well instructed with manners, wherein (in mine opinion) consists the wholl.
The L. Gaspar said: Before ye proceade any farther, I would know how the
body should be cherished: Cherishing of the bo^ye.
because you have said that we must cherishe it before the soul. The L.
Octauian answered smiling: know of these me^ that make much of it and are fair
and round, as for mine (as you see) it is not half well cherished. Yet may
there also be much said in this beehalf: As, the time meet for marriage, that
children be neither to nigh nor to far of from the fathers age: Exercises, and
bringinge up soon after there birth, and in the rest of their lief to make
them handsome, towardlie, and lively. The L. Gaspar answered: The thing that
would best please women to make their children handsome and welfauoured (in my
mind) were the fellowship that Plato will have of them in his Commune weal,
and in that wise. Then the Lady Emilia smilinge, It is not in the covenant
(quod she) that ye should a fresh fall to speak ill of women. I suppose,
answered the L. Gaspar, that I give them a great praise, in sainge that they
should desire to have a custom brought up, which is allowed of so woorthye a
man. The L. Caesar Gonzaga said laughing: Let us see whether among the L.
Octauians lessons (yet I wott not whether he have spoken al or no) this may
take place: and whether it were well done the Prince should establish it for a
law or no The few that I have spoken, answered the L. Octauian, may perhaps
be enough to make a good Prince, as Princes go nowadayes. Although if a man
would go more narrowly to work in the matter, there were much more for him
yet to say. Then said the Duchess: Sins it costeth us nothing but words,
show us of good fellowship that, that would come in your mind to teach your
Prince. The L. Octauian answered: Many other matters I would teach him
(madam) if I knew them my self: and among the rest, that he should pike out a
certain number of Gentilmen emonge his subjects, of the noblest and wisest, A
counsel o^ noble men.
with whom he should debate all matters, and give them authority and free
leave to vttre their mind francklye unto him with out respect: and take such
order with them that they may well perceive, that in every thing he would
know the truth and abhor^ lyinge. And beesid^ this Counsel of the nobility, A
counsel of the commons
I would persuade him to chouse out others among the people of a baser
degree, of whom he should make an honest substanciall Counsel, that should
debate with the Counsel of the nobilitye the affairs of the City beelonginge
to the commune and private astate^ And in this wise should be made, of the
Prince, as of the head, of the nobilite and communes, as of the members, one
body alone knitt together, the governance whereof should cheeflie depend upon
the Prince yet should the rest bear a stroke also in it: and so should this
state have the form and manner of the three good gouernmentes, which is, a
kingdom, men of the best sort, and the people. Afterward I would show him,
that of cares beelonging to a Prince, the cheeffest is of justice: for
maintenance whereof wise and well tried men should be chosen out for officers,
Cares in a Prince.
whose wisdom were very wisdom in deed, accompanied with goodness, for
e^les is it no wisdom, but craft. And where there is a want of this goodness,
always the art and subtle practice of lawyers is nothing else, but the vttre
decay and destruction of the laws and judgments: and the fault of every
offense of theirs is to be laid in him that put them in office. Godly
affections.
I would tell him how that of justice also depends the zeal toward God,
which beelongeth unto all men and especially to Princis, who ought to love him
above all things, and to direct all their doings unto him, as unto the true
end: And (as Xenophon says) to honor and love him always, but much more in
prosspiritie, because they may afterward lefullye with a more confidence call
to him for assistance when they be in any aduersitye: for it is not possible
to govern either himself or others well, without the help of God, who unto the
good sends otherwhile good fortune for his minister, to help them out of
great dangers, sometime aduersitye least they should slumber so much in
prospirity that they might happen to forgete him, or the wisdom of man, which
many times redresseth ill fortune as a good player, the ill chances of the
dice, with counninge play at tables. I would not forgete als^ to put the
Prince in mind to be devout indeed, not superstycious, nor given to the
vanity of nigromancy and prophecies: for in case he have accompanied with the
wisdom of man, a godly zeal and true religion, he shall also have good
luck, and God his defendour, who will always increase his prospiritie both in
peace and war. Beeside, To love his Country and people.
I would declare unto him how he should love his Country and his people,
keapinge them not in tomuch bondage, for being hated of them whereof arrise
sedicions, conspiricies, and a thousand mischeeues beeside: nor yet in to much
liberty, lest he be set at naught, whereof proceadeth the licencious and riotus
living of the people, theft, robberye and murder without any fear of
laws, often times the decay and vttre destruction of cities and kingdoms.
Moreover how he should love them that be nighest to him from one degree to an
other, obseruinge among them all in certain matters a like equality, Equalitye.
as in justice and liberty, Partialitye
and in some matters a reasonable partiality as in being liberal, in
reco^pensing, in ^^stowinge promotions and honors according to the
vnequalnesse of deserts, which ought not always to exceade, but to be
exceaded with recompenses. And yt in thus doing he should not only be beloved,
but (in a manner) worshipped of his subjects, neither should he need to commit
ye gaurde of h^s person to strangers for his own (for ye better safeguard and
profit of them selves) would guarde him with their own person: and each man
would willinglye obey the laws, when they should see him to obey them him
self, and be (as it were) an uncorrupted keaper and minister of them: and so
shall he make all men to conceive such an assured confidence of him, that if
he should happen otherwhile to go biyonde them in any point, every one
would know it were done for a good ^ntent: the self same respect and reverence
they would have to his will, as they have to the laws. And thus should the
Citizens minds be tempered in such sort, that the good would not seek for
more then is requisite, and the badd should not perish: To much wealth.
because many times abundance of wealth is cause of great destruction, as in
poor Italy, which has bine and still is, a prey and booty in the teeth of
strange nations, as well for the ill government, as for the abundaunce of
riches that is in it. Therefore the best way were, ^ow to order his citizins*
to have the greater part of the Citizins, neither very wealthy, nor very
poor: because the ouerwealthy many times w^^e stiff necked and reckl^sse, the
poor, desperate and pikinge. But the mean sort lie not in wa^te for others,
and live with a quiet mind that none lie in wait for them. And where this
mean sort are the greater number, they are withal the mightier. And therefore
neither the poor nor rich can work any conspiracy against the Prince, or
against others, nor move sedicion. Wherefore to avoid this evil, the most
surest way is universally to maintein a mean. I would counsel him therefore to
use these and many other remedies for the purpose, Alteracion of ^^ate.
that in the mind of the subjects there spring not a lo^ging after new
matters and alteracio^ of state, which most co^munly they do, either for gain,
or else for promotio^ yt they hope upon, or for loss, or else for some ^oile
that they be a ferde of. Extortion of the higher powe^s.
And these sturres in their minds be engendered some ^ime of hatred and despite
that makes them desperate for ye wrongs and vnshameful dealing that they
receive through the couetisenesse, pride, and crueltye, or unlawful lust of ye
higher powers: Otherwhile of a contempt and little regard that arises in them
through the negligence and ill handlinge and lack of foresight in Princis.
Lack of wisdom in princis.
And these two faults must be prevented with purchasing him the love of the
people, and authority, which is done in rewardinge and promotinge the good
and in finding wisely a remedy, That the evil were not great.
and sometime with rigor, that the evil and sedicious were not great: the
which thing is easier to be stopped before they come to it, then to pluck
them down again after they are once on loft. And I would say, to restrain
the people from renning into those inconveniences, there is no better way, Il
customs
then to keep them from ill custommes, and specially such as be put in use
and creep in unawares by little and little, because they be secret infections
that corrupt Cities before a man can not only remedy them, but spy them
out. With such means I would counsel the Prince to do his best to preserve
his subjects in quiet astate, and to give them the gooddes of the mind,
Goods of the mind, of the body and of fortune.
and of the body and of fortune: but them of the body and of fortune, that
they may exercise them of the mind, which the greater and plentier they be,
so much the more profitable be they: that happens not in them of the body,
nor of fortune: In case therefore the subjects be good and of woorthynesse
and well bent to the end of happynes, that Prince shall be a very great
Lord: for that is a true and a great government, under the which the
subjects be good, well ruled and well commanded. Then the L. Gaspar, I
suppose (quoth he) that he should be but a small Lord, under whom the
subjects were all good. For in every place there be few good. The L Octauian
answered: In case some certain Circe should iourne into wild beasts all the
French Kings subjects, Not the multitude, but the worthy.
would not you think him a small Lord for all he reigned over so many
thousand beasts? And contrarywyse if only the Cattle that scattre abroad
feadynge about our Mountaignes here, might become wise men, and valiant
Gentilmen, would not you think that heardmenne that should govern them and
have them obedient to them, of heardmen were become great Lords? you may see
then, that not the multitude of Subjects, but the woorthynesse of them makes
Princis great. The Duchess, the L. Emilia, and all the rest gave very
diligent ear to the L. Octauians talk for a good while together, but after h^
had here ma^e a little s^op, as though he h^d made an end of his talk, the L.
Caesar Gonzaga said: Certesse (my L. Octauian) it can not be said, but your
lessons be good and profitable: yet should I beleaue that if ye instructed
your prince with them, ye deserved rather ye name of a good Schoolmaister then
of a good Courtier: and he of a good gouernoure rather then of a good prince.
Yet my meaning is not, but that the care of princis should be to have their
people well ruled with justice and good vsages, notwithstanding it may he
sufficient for them (in my mind) to ^house out good ministers to execute
these kind of matters, but the very office of them is far higher. Therefore
if I thought myself to be the excellent Courtier that these Lords have
facioned, and in my princis favor, without parauenture I would never incline
him to any vicious matter: but to atteine unto the good end (you speak of,
and the which I confirm ought to be the f^ute of the Courtiers travails and
doings) I would endeavor to put into his head a certain greatness, with that
pri^elye sumptuousness, and readynes of courage, and unconquered prowess in
arms, that should make him beloved and reverenced of all men, in such
wise, that for this in especial he should be famous and notable to the
world. I would show him also, that he ought to accompanye with his
greatness a familiar gentle beehauiour, with a soft and ^ouelye kindness,
and good cast to make much of his subjects and strangers discreatlye more
and less according to their deserts, observing always notwithstanding the
majesty meet for his degree, that should not in any point suffer him to
diminish his authority through overmuch abaysinge, nor yet purchase him hatred
through over sour rigorousnesse: that he ought to be full of liberality and
sumptuous, and give unto every manne without stint, for God (as they say) is
the treasurer of freharted princis: make gorgious bankettes, feas^es, games,
people pleasinge shows, keep a great number of fair horses for profit in war,
and for pleasure in peace, Hawks, Hounds, and all other matters that beelong
to the contentation of great Princis and the people. Markq. of mantua.
As in our days we have seen the L. F^ancis Gonzaga marquess of Mantua do,
which in these things seems rather king of all Italy, then Lord over one
City. I would assay also to bring him to make great buildinges, both for his
honor in lief, and to give a memory of him to his posterity, S. Peter's
church.
as did Duke Friderick in this noble Palaice, and now does Pope July in the
Temple of Saint Peter, and the way that goith from the Palaice to his house of
pleasure Beluedere, and many other buildinges, Beluedere.
as also the old ancient Romans did, whereof so many remnantes are to be
seen about Room, Naples, Pozzolo, Baie, Ciuita Vecchia, Porto, and also out
of Italy, and so many other places, which be a great witness of ye prowes of
those divine courages. So did Alexander ye great in like manner, The great
Alexande^
which not satisfied with the fame that he got him worthelie for subduing ye
world with marcial prowess, built Alexandria in aegipt, Bucephalia in India,
and other Cities in other Countries: and intended to bring the mountaigne
Athos into the shape of a man, Plutar.
Athos a hill in thracia of a ^onderfull height.
and in the left hand of him to build a very large City, and in the right a
great boule, into the which should gather all the rivers that rann from it,
and thens should fall down toward the Sea, a purpose in very deed
princelye and meet for the great Alexander. These things (think I) my L.
Octauian, beecome a noble and a right Prince, and shall make him both in peace
and war most triumphant and not put him in the head of such particular and
small matters, and have a respect to take weapon in hand only to conquerr
and vanquishe such as deserve to be conquered, or to profitt his subjects
withal, or to dispossess them that govern not as they ought. For in case the
Romans, Alexander, Hanniball, and ye rest had had these respects they should
never have reached to the top of the glory they did. The L. Octauian
answered then smiliinge: Such as had not these recpectes should have done the
better in case they had hadd them: although if ye consider well, ye shall
find that many had them, and especially those auntientest of old time, as
Theseus, and Hercules. And think not that Procustes, Scyron, Caccus, Diomedes,
Antheus and Gerion were any other then cruel and wicked Tirannes against
whom these noble couraged Demigoddes kept continual and mortal war, and
therefore, for ridding the world of such intolerable monstres (for Tyrannes
ought not to be called by other name) unto Hercules were made Temples, Tira^nes
monstres.
and sacrifices, and godly honors given him, because the benefit to root up
Tirannes is so profitable to the world, that who so does it, deserves a
far greater reward, then whatso ever is meet for a mortal man. And of them
you have named, Do you not think that Alexander did profit with his victories
the vanquished? sins he so traded those barbarous nations which he overcame,
with such good manners, that of wild beasts he made them men? Alexander profited
the vanquished.
He built many beawtifull Cities in Countries ill inhabited, plantinge therein
civil kind of living, and (as it were) coopled Asia and Europe together with
the bond of amity and holy laws, so that the vanquished by him were more
happy then ye rest, because among some he brought in matrimony: among other,
husbandry: among other, religion: emonge other, not to sley, but to make much
of their parents in their old age: among other, ye refraining from bedding
with their mothers, and a thousand other matters, that might be said for a
witness of ye profit which his victories brought to the world. But leaving
aside them of old time, what enterprise were more noble, more glorious, and
more profitable then if Christians would bend their force to conquerr the
infidelles. Would you not think that this war, prosperously acheued, and
being the cause of so many a thousand to be brought from the false sec^ of
Mahumet to the light of the Christian truth, it should be a profit as well to the
vanquished, as to ye subduers? And undoubtedly, as Themistocles in times past,
being banished out of his Country, Xer^e^.
and embraced of the king of Persia, and much made of, and honored with
infinite and most rich gifts, said unto his train: Oh sirs we had bine
undone, had we not bine undone, even so might then ye Turks and the Moors
speak the very same with good cause, for that in their loss should consist
their welfare. This happiness therefore (I hope) we shall come to ye sight of,
King Francis the first.
if god grant so long lief to Monseigneur d' Angoulesme that he may come to
the Crown of France, who shows such a hope of him self, as four nights
ago the L. Julian spoke of. And to the Crown of England yt L^ Henry Prince of
Wales, who presentlye grows under his most noble father, King Henry the
VIII.
in all kind of virtue, like a tender ympe under the shadow of an excellent
tree and laden with fruit, to renew him much more beawtiful and plentuous when
time shall come, for as our Castilio writes from thens, and promises at his
retourn to tell us more at ye full, a man can judge no less, but that nature
was willing in this Prince to show her counning, planting in one body alone so
many excellent virtues, as were sufficient to deck out infinite. Then said M.
Bernard Bibiena: a very great hope of him self promises also the L. Cha^les
Prince of Spain, The Emperor Charles the v.
who not yet fullye tenn years of age, declares now such a wit, and so
certain tokens of goodness, wisdom, mod^sly, noble courage and of every virtue,
that if ye Empire of Christendom (as it is thought) come to his hands, it is
to be reckened upon, that he will darken ye name of many Emperors of old
time, and in renown be compared to ye most famous that ever were in the
world. The L. Octauian proceaded. I beeleaue therefore that God has sent
such and so heavenly Princis upon the earth, and made them one like an other
in youth, in mightines of arms, in s^ate, in handsomnes and disposition of
person, (...) ^m^ng Kings.
that they may also be minded alike in this good purpose: and in case any
manner envy or strife of matching others arrise at any time among them, it
shall be, who shall be the first, and most inclined and most courageous in so
glorious an enterprise. But let us leave this kind of talk, and return unto
our own. Unto you therefore (my L. Caesar) I say, that such things as you would
have the Prince to do, be very great and worthy much praise. But you must
understand that if he be not skillful in that I have said he ought to have a
knowleage in, and have not framed his mind in that wise, and bent it to the
way of virtue, it shall be hard for him to have the knowleage to be noble
couraged, liberal, just, quicke-spirited, wise, or to have any other of those
qualities that beelong unto him: neither would I have him to be such a one for
any other thing, but to have the understanding to put in ure these conditions
(for as they that build, be not all good woorkemen, Libera^itye.
so they that give, be not all liberal) for virtue never hurts any man: and
many there be, that lay hand on other men's gooddes to give, and so are
lavish of an other men's substance. Some give to them they ought not, and leave
in wretchedness and misery such as they be bound to. Other give with a
certain ill will and (as it were) with a dispite, so that it is known they do
it, because they can do none other. Other do not only not keep it secret, but
they call witness of it, and (in a manner) cause their liberalities to be
cried. Other foolishlye at a sodeine emptye the fountain of liberalitye,
Knowleage.
so that afterward they can use it no more. Therefore in this point (as in all
other matters) he must have a knowleage, and govern him self with the wisdom
that is a companion unto all the other virtues which for that they are in the
mild, Virtue in the middle.
be nygh unto the two extremities, that be vices. Wherefore he that has not
knoweleage renneth soon into them. For as it is a hard matter in a circle to
find out the prick in the center, which is the middle, so is it hard to find
out the prick of virtue placed in the middle beetwene two extreme vices, the
one for the overmuch, and the other for the ouerlitle, and unto these we are
inclined sometime to the one, sometime to the other, and this is known by the
pleasure and greef that is felt within us, for through the one we do the
thing that we ought not, and through the other we leave undone that, which we
ought to do: although pleasure be much more dangerous, because our judgment
is soon lead by it to be corrupted. But because the perseverance how far a
man is wide from the center of virtue, is a hard matter, we ought by little and
little to draw^ back of our selves to the contrary part of this extremytye,
which we know we be inclined unto, as they do, that make straight crooked
staves, for by that mean we shall draw nighe unto virtue, which is placed (as
I have said) in that prick of the mean: whereby it comes that by many ways
we be wide, and by one alone we do our office and duty: like as Archers by
one way alone hitte the mark, and by many mysse the prick. Therefore
oftentimes a Prince to be gentle and lowelye, Extremities, vices
does many things contrary to comeliness, and so humbles him self that
he is naught set by. Some other to show a grave majesty with authority
according, beecommeth cruel and intolerable. Some one, to be counted
eloquente, enters into a thowsande strange matters and long processes with
curious words giving ear to him self, so that other men can not for
lothsomenesse hear him. Therefore (my L Caesar) do you not call a small matter
any thing that may better a Prince how small so ever it be. Nor think that I
judge it to be in the reproof of my lessons where you say, A good Prince a
good governor.
that a good Governor were there instructed therewithal, then a good Prince:
for perhaps there can not be a greater praise nor more comlye for a Prince,
then to call him a good Governor. Therefore if it should fall to my lot to
instruct him, he should have a care not only to govern ye matters already
spoken of, but also far lesser, and understand in peecemeale whatsoever
belongs to his people, as much as were possible: and never credit nor trust
any officer so much, as to give him the bridle wholly into his hands, and the
disposinge of the wholl gou^^nment. For no man is most apt to all things.
Mistrustinge.
And much more hurt comes of the light beeleaf of Princis, then of
mistrusting, which otherwhile does not only not hurt, but oftentimes
p^ofiteth exceadingly. Yet in this point a good judgment is very necessary
in a Prince to descern who deserves to be put in trust, and who not. I would
he should have a care to understand the doings and to be an ouerseear of his
officers and ministers. The Prince toward his subjects.
To break and to end controversies emonge his subjects. To take up matters
beetwene them and to knitte them together in alliance by marriage. To provide
so, that the City may be all joined together and agreeinge in amitye, City.
like a private house, well peopled, not poor, quiet, and full of good
artificers. To show favor to merchant men and to help them also with
stokkes. Merchant men Houskeepinge.

Superfluous things.


To be liberal and honorable in houskeepinge toward strangers and religious
persons. To tempre all superfluous matters, because through the offenses
committed in these things, albeit they appear but small, cities many times
fall in decay: therefore it is reason that ye Prince set a stint to ye
ouersumptuous buildinges of private men, bancque^tinges, unmeasurable doweries
of women, their riotous excess, their pomp in iewelles and apparaile, Excess
of women.
which is nothing else but a token of their folly: for (beeside that through
ambicion and malice that one of the^ bears an other, they many times lavish
out there liuelode and husbands substance, otherwhile for some pretye is well
or other matter of fansye) sometime they sell their honesty to him that will
buy it. Then said M. Bernarde Bibiena smilinge: You beegine (my L. Octauian)
to take my L. Gaspars and Phrisios part. Then the L. Octauian answered in like
manner smilyng: The controuersye is ended, and I entende not now to renew it.
Therefore will I speak no more of women, but retourn to my prince: Phrisio
answered: you may now leave him hardely, and be contented to have him such a
one as you have instructed him. Good Princes very scant.
For doubtless it were an easier matter to find out a woman of the qualities the
L. Julian has spoken of, then a prince of the qualities that you would have in
him. Therefore (I fear me) he is like the Commune weal of Plato, and we shall
never see such a one, unless it be perhaps in heaven. The L. Octauian
answered: things possible, though they be hard, yet is it to be hoped that
they may be: therefore may we yet parhappes see him upon the earth in our
time. For although the heavens be so scante in bringinge forth excellent
Princis, that in so many hundredth years we do scantlye see one, yet may this
good luck happen to us. Then said Count Jews: I have a good hope of it. For
beeside the three great ones that we have named, of whom may be hoped it, that
beelongeth to the high degree of a perfect Prince, there be also nowadayes in
Italy certain Princes children, which although they be not like to have such
power, may hap will supplye it with virtue: and he that emenge them all
declares a more towardness and promises of him self a greater hope then
any of the rest (me think) is the L. Friderick Gonzaga, L. Friderick Gonzaga
Duke of Mantua.
son and heyr to the marquess of Mantua, and nephewe to our Duchess here.
For beeside the honest inclination to good nourtour and the discreation that he
declares in these tender years, they that have the bringing up of him,
report such wondrous things as touching his being wittye, desirous of
glory, stouthearted, courteious, freeharted, frindlye to justice, so that of so
good a beeg^nning, there can not be looked for but a very good end. Then
Phrisio, well, no more of this (quod he) we will pray unto God that we may se
this your hope fulfilled. Here the L. Octauia^ tourning him toward the duchess,
after a sort as though he had ended as much as he had to say, You have now
heard, madam (quoth he) what I am able to say of the end of the Courtier,
wherein though I have not satisfied in all points, it shall suffice me yet,
that I have showed, that some other perfection may be given him beside the
matters which these Lords have spoken of, who (I beleaue) have left out both
this and what so ever I am able to say, not because they knew it not better
then I, but because they were loath to take the peynes: therefore will I give
them leave to go forward, if they have any thing else left beehinde to be
said. Then said the Duchess: Beeside that it is late (for within a while it
will be time for us to make an end for this night) me think, we ought not to
mingle any other talk with this, wherein you have gathered together such
sundry and goodlye matters, that concerning the end of Courtlinesse, it may
be said, that you are not only the perfect Courtier whom we seek for, and able
to instruct your Prince well, but also (if fortune be so favorable on your
side) ye may be the good Prince your self, which should not be without
great profit to your Country. Then laughed the L. Octauian and said: Perhaps
(madam) were I in that astate, it would be with me as it is with many others
that can better say well, then do well. Here after a little debatinge of the
matter to an^ fro emonge the company, with cert^in contentions tending to the
commendacion of that that had ^i^e spoken, and agreeinge on all hands not yet
to be b^d time, the L. Julian said smilinge: Madam, I am so very an enemy
to craft and guile, that needs must I speak against the L. Octauian: who for
that he is (as I much doubt him) a secret conspiratour with the L. Gaspar
against women, has ouershott himself in committing of two errors (in mine
opinion) very great: whereof the one is, that meaning to prefer this Courtier
before the Gentilwoman of the Palaice, and to make him to pass those bounds
that she is not able to reach to, he has also preferred him before the
Prince, which is most vnseemlye. The other, that he has given him such an
end, that it is evermore hard and otherwhile impossible for him to comebye
it: and yet when he does come by it, he ought not to have the name of a
Courtier. I can not see: quoth the L. Emilia, how it is hard or impossible
for the Courtier to come bye this his end, nor yet how the L. Octauian has
prefarred him before the Prince. Grant it him not, answered the L, Octauian*
for I have not preferred the Courtier before the Prince. And as touching the
end of Courtlinesse. I dare undertake that I am not ouerseene in any point.
Then answered the L. Julian: You can not say (my L. Octauian) that always the
cause, by the which the effect is such as it is, is no more such as the effect
is. Therefore needs must the Courtier, by whose instruction the prince must be
of such an excellencye, be more excellent then the prince: and in this wise
shall he be also of a more worthiness then the prince himself, which is most
vnsittinge. Then concerning the end o^ C^urtlinesse, that which you have
spoken may follow when there is little beetwene the age of the prince and the
Courtiers: yet very hardlye, for where there is small difference of age, it
is likelye there is also small difference of knowleage. But in case the prince
be old and the Courtier young: it is meet that the old prince know more then
the young Courtier, and where this follows not always, it follows sometime,
and then is the end which you have appointed to the Courtier impossible. In
case again the prince be young and the Courtier aged, much a do shall the
Courtier have to win him the good will of the prince with those qualities
that you have given him. For (to say the truth) feats of ar^es and the other
exercises beelonge unto young men and be not comelye in age: and music,
daunsinge, feastinges, sportinges, and love, be matters to be laughed at in
old men, and (me think) to an instructor of the lief and manners of a
prince, who ought to be a g^aue person and of authority, ripe in years and
experience and (if it were p^ssible, a good Philosopher, a good Capitain and to
have the knowleage almost of every thing, they are most unseemly. Wherefore he
that instructs a Prince (I believe) ought not to be called a Courtier, but
deserves a far greater and a more honorable name. Therefore (my L. Octauian)
perdon me in case I have opened this your craftye conue^ance, which I think my
self bound to do for the honor of my woman, whom you would have to be of
less worthiness then this Courtier of yours, and I will none of that. The L.
Octauian laughed and said: A more praise it were for the Gentilwoman of the
Palaice (my L. Julian) to exalt her so much that she may be equal with the
Courtier, then so much to debase the Courtier that he should be equal with
the Gentilwoman of the Palaice: for it were not unfit for the woman also to
instruct her lady, This end of the Courtier serves also for a Gentil woman
with her Lady.
and with her to draw to the same end of Courtlinesse, which I have said is
meet for the Courtier with his prince. But you seek more to dispraise the
Courtier, then to praise the Gentilwoman of the Palaice, therefore shall it
become me also to take part with the Courtier. Now to make you answer to your
objections, you shall understand that I have not said, that the instruction
of the Courtier ought to be the only cause why the Prince should be such a
one, for in case he be not inclined of nature and apt to be such a one, all
diligence and exhortacion of the Courtier were in vain. As in like manner every
good husband man should labor in vain, yt would take in hand to till and
sow with good grain the barraine sand of the Sea, because this barrainnesse
in that place is natural. But when to the good seed in a fruitful s^^le with
the temperatnesse of aer and rain meet for the season of the year, there is
also applied the diligence of man's husbandinge the ground, always great
abundance of corn is seen to spring plentuouslye: yet for all this, is it
not to be said, that the husband man alon^ is the ^a^^e of it, although
without him all the other things do little or nothing help the purpose.
There be therefore many Princis, that would be good, in case their minds were
well tylled, and of them speak I, not of such as be like the ^arraine
Country, and of nature so far wide from good conditions that no teaching were
able to frame their mind to a right trade. And for so much as (as we have
already said) such custommes and properties be engendered in us, as our doings
are, Virtue in a^tio^e.
and virtue consists in doing and practice, it is not impossible nor any
marvel, y^ the Courtier should train his Prince in many virtues, as
justice, liberality, noble courage, the practisinge whereof he, through his
greatness, may lightlye put in ure and make it custom, which the Courtier
can not do, because he has no means to practice them, and thus the Prince
inclined to virtue by the Courtyer, may beecome more virtuous then the
Courtier: beesyde that, you must conceive that the whettstone which cutteth
not a whitt, does yet make a tool sharp: therefore although the Courtier
instructs his Prince yet (me think) it is not to be said that he is of a
more woorthynes then his Prince. That the en^e of this Courtier is hard and
sometime impossible, and that when the Courtier does come bye it, he ought not
to be named a Courtier, but deserves a greater name, I tell you plainlye, The
end of the Courtier* hard.
that I deny not this hardenesse, because it is no less hard to ^ind out so
excellent a Courtier, then to come by such an end. Yet by reason (me think)
the vnpossiblenes of ye matter lies not in the point that you have alleged.
For in case ye Courtier be so young that he has not understanding in the
thing, which he ought to have a knowleage in, it is not to the purpose to
speak of him, because he is not the Courtier that we entreat upon, neither is
it possible for him that must have a sight in so many things to be very
young. And if it happen moreover the Prince to be so wise and good of him
self, that he needs no exhortations or counsel Aristotel, beeside the
directinge him to that glorious end* that was to make the world only a
general country, and all men, as one people, that should live in amitye and
agreement together, under one government and one law, that (like the son)
should generallye give light to all, he instructed him in the natural sciences
and in the virtues of the mind full and wholly, that he made him most wise,
most manly, most continent, and a true moral Philosopher, not in words
only, but in deeds. For there can not be imagined a more noble Philosophy,
then to bring to a civil trade of living such wild people as were the
inhabitauntes of Bactria and Gaucasus, India and Scithia, and to teach them
matrimony, husbandrye, to honor their fathers, to abstain from robbinge and
killinge and from other noughty conditions, and to build so many most noble
Cities in strange Countries, so that infinite through those laws were brought
from a wild lief to live like men. He rebuked Alexander for beeinge
woorshipped as a god, and therefore died upon the rack. ^. Curt. lib. 8.
And of these things in Alexander the Author was Aristotel in practisinge the
ways of a good Courtier. The which Calisthenes could not do, for all
Aristotel showed him the way of it, who because he was a right philosopher and
so sharp a minister of the bare truth without mynglinge it with Courtlinesse,
he lost his lief and profited not, but rather gave a sclaunder to Alexander.
With the very same way of Courtlinesse Plato framed Dion the Syracusan. But
when he met afterward with Dionysius the Tyrann, like a book all full of
faults and erroures, and rather needful to be clean blotted out, then altered
or corrected, because it was not possible to scrape out of him that blott of
tyranny wherwi^hall he was stained so long together, The Courtier ought not to
^^rue the wicked
he would not practice therein the ways of Courtie^ship, for he thought they
should be all in vain: The which our Courtier ought to do also, if his
chance be to serve a Prince of so ill a nature, that by long custom is
grown in use with vices, as they that have the consumption of the lunges with
their desease. For in this case he ought to forsake his service, least he bear
the blame of his Lords ill practices, or feel the hartgreefe that all goo^
men have which serve the wicked. Here when the L. Octauian had made a stay^,
the L. Gaspar said: I had not thought our Courtier hadd ben^ so worthy a
personage. But sins Aristotel and Plato be his mates, I judge no man ought to
disdeigne this name any more. Yet wett I not whether I may beleaue that
Aristotel and Plato ever daunsed or were musitiens in all their lief time, or
practiced other feats of chiualrye. The L. Octauian answered: Almost it is not
lawful to think that these two divine wits were not skillful in every
thing, and therefore it is to be presupposed that they practiced what ever
beelongeth to Courtlynesse. For where it comes to purpose they so penn the
matter, that the very crafts masters them selves know by their writings that
they understood the whole even to the pith and innermost roots. Wherefore to a
Courtier or instructor of a Prince (how ever ye lust to term him) that
tends to the good end, which we have spoken of, it is not to be said but
that all the good qualities which these Lords have given him do beelonge,
though he were never so grave a Philosopher or holy in his manners: because
they strive not against goodness, discreation, knoweleage and will, in all
age, and in all time and place. Then the L. Gaspar, The Courtier a lover.
I remember (quoth he) that these Lords yesternight reasoninge of the
Courtiers qualities, did allow him to be a lover, and in making rehersall of
as much as hitherto has been spoken, a man may pike out a conclusion, That
the Courtier (which with his worthynesse and credit must incline his Prince to
virtue) must in manner of necessity be aged, for knoweleage comes very
syldome times before years, and specially in matters that be learned with
experyence: I can not see, when he is well drawn in years, how it will
stand well with him to be a lover, considering (as it has bine said the
other night) Love framet h not with old men, and the tricks that in young men
be galauntnesse, courtesy and preciseness so acceptable to women, in them are
mere folies and fondness to be laughed at, and purchase him that uses them
hatred of women and mockes of others. Therefore in case this your Aristotel an
old Courtier were a lover, and practiced the feats that young lovers do (as
some that we have seen in our days) I fear me, he would forgete to teach his
Prince: and parauenture boys would mock him behind his back, and women
would have none other delight in him but to make him a jesting stock. Then said
the L. Octauian: Sins all the other qualities appointed to the Courtier are
meet for him, although he be old, me think we should not then bar him
from this happiness to love. Nay rather, quoth the L. Gaspar, to take this
love from him, is a perfection over and above, and a making him to live
happily out of misery and wretchedness. M. Peter Bembo said: Remember you
not (my L Gaspar) that the L. Octauian declared the other night in his divise
of pastymes, although he be not skillful in love, to know yet that there be
some lovers, which reckon the disdeignes, the angres, the debates and
tourmentes which they receive of their Ladies, sweet? Whereupon he required to
be taught the cause of this sweetness. Therefore in case our Courtier
(though he be old) were kendled with those loves that be ^weete without any
bitter smacke, he should feel no misery nor wretchedness at all. And being
wise, as we set case he is, he should not be deceived in thinkinge to be meet
for him what so ever were meet for young men, but in louinge should perhaps
love after a sort, that might not only not bring him in sclaunder but to
much praise and great happiness, without any lothsomnes at all, the which
very sildome or (in manner) never happens to young men: and so should he
neither lay aside the teachinge of his Prince, nor yet commit any thing that
should deserve the mockinge of boys. Then spoke the Duchess: I am glad ( M.
Peter) that you have not bine much troubled, in our reasoninges this night,
for now we may be the boulder to give you in charge to speak, and to teach
the Courtier this so happy a love, which brings with it neither sclaunder,
nor any inconvenience: for perhaps it shall be one of the necessariest and
profitablest qualities that hitherto has bine given him, therefore speak of
good fellowship as much as you know therein. M. Peter laughed and said: I would
be loath (Madam) where I say that it is lefull for old men to love, it should
be an occasion for these Ladies to think me old: therefore hardely give ye
this enterprise to an other. The Duchess answered: You ought not to refuse to
be counted old in knowleage, though ye be young in years. Therefore say on,
and excuse your self no more. M. Peter said: Surely (madam) if I must
entreat upon this matter, I must first go ask counsel of my Heremite
Lauinello. The L. Emilia said then half in anger: There is never a one in all
the company so disobedient as you be ( M. Peter) therefore should the Duchess
do well to chastise you somewhat for it. M. Peter said smilinge: for love of
God (madam) be not angrye with me, for I will say what ever you will have me.
God to, say on then, answered the L. Emilia. Then M. Peter after a whiles
silence, somewhat settlinge himself as though he should entreat upon a
weighty matter, Old men may love without sclaunder.
said thus: My Lords, to show that old men may love not only without
sclaunder, but otherwhile more happilye then young men, I must be enforced to
make a little discourse to declare what love is, and wherein consists the
happiness that lovers may have. Therefore I beseech ye give the hearing with
heedefulnesse, for I hope to make you understand, that it were not unsitting
for any man here to be a lover, in case he were xv. or xx. years elder then
M. Morello. And here after they had laughed ^ while, M. Peter proceaded. I say
therefore that according as it is defined of the wise menn of old time) Love
is nothing else but a certain couetinge to enjoy beawtie: What love is.
and for so much as couetinge longs for nothing, Knowleage.
but for things known, it is requisite that knowleage go evermore before
coveting, Coveting
which of his own nature wills the good, but of him self is blind, and
knows it not. Therefore has nature so ordained, that to every virtue of
knowleag there is annexed a virtue of longing. And because in our soul there
be three manner ways to know, namelye, by sense, reason, and understanding: of
sense, there arriseth appetite or longinge, Sense.
which is commune to us with brute beasts: Reason.
of reason arriseth election or choice, which is proper to man: of
understanding, by the which man may be partner with Aungelles, Understandinge.
arriseth will. Even as therefore the sense knows not but sensible matters and
that which may be felt, so the appetyte or couetinge only desires the same:
and even as the understanding is bent but to beehoulde things that may be
understood, so is that will only fead with spiritual gooddes. Man of nature
endowed with reason, placed (as it were) in the middle beetwene these two
extremities, may through his choice inclinynge to sense, or reachynge to
understanding, come nigh to the couetinge sometime of the one sometime of the
other part. Beawtie.
In these sorts therefore may beawtie be coueted, the general name whereof may
be applied to al things, either natural or artificial, that are framed in
good proportion, and due tempre, as their nature bears. But speaking of the
beawtie that we mean, which is only it, that appears in bodies, and
especially in the face of mann, and moves this fervent couetinge which we call
Love, we will term it an influence of the heavenly bountifulness, the which
for all it stretches over all things that be created (like the light of the
Son) yet when it finds out a face well proportioned, The face.
and framed with a certain lively agreement of several colors, and
setfurthwith lights and shadows, and with an orderly distaunce and limits of
lines, therinto it distilleth it self and appears most welfauoured, and
decketh out and lyghtneth the subject where it shyneth with a marvelous grace
and glistringe (like the Son beams that strike against beawtifull plate of
fine gold wrought and set with precious iewelles) so that it draws unto it
men's eyes with pleasure, and percing through them imprinteth him self in the
soul, and with an unwonted sweetness all to stirs her and delyteth, and
setting her on fire makes her to couett him. When the soul then is taken
with: coveting to enjoy this beawtie as a good thing, in case she suffer her
self to be guyded with the judgment of sense, she falls into most deep
erroures, and judges the body in which Beawtye is descerned, to be the
principal cause thereof: whereupon to enjoy it, she reckeneth it necessary to
^oigne as inwardlye as she can with that body, which is false: In possessing
the body beawtie is not enioied
and therefore who so thinks in possessynge the body to inioye beawtie, he
is far deceived, and is moved to it, not with true knowleage by the choice of
reason, but with false opinyon by the longinge of sense. Whereupon the pleasure
that follows it, is also false and of necessytye full of erroures. They that
love sensuallye.
And therefore into one of the two vices renn all those lovers that satisfye
their dishonest lusts with the women whom they love: For either as soon as they
be come to the coueted end, they not only feels a fullness and lothesomnesse,
but also conceive a hatred against the wight beloved, as though longinge
repented him of his offense and acknowleaged the deceit wrought him by the
false judgment of sense, that made him beleaue the ill to be good: or else
they continue in the very same coveting and greedynesse, as thought they were
not in deed come to the end, which they sought for. And albeit through the
blind opinion that has made them dronken (to their seeminge) in that instante
they feel a contentation, as the deseased otherwhile, that dream they drink
of some clear spring, yet be they not satisfied, nor leave of so. And because
of possessing coueted goodness there arriseth always quietness and
satisfaction in the possessors mind, in case this were the true and right end
of there couetinge, when they possess it they would be at quietness and
throughlye satisfied, which they be not: but rather deceived through that
likeness, they furthwith retourn again to unbridled couetinge, and with the
very same trouble which they felt at the first, they fall again into the
raginge and most burninge thirst of the thing, that they hope in vain to
possess perfectlye. These kind of lovers therefore love most vnluckely, for
either they never comebye their couetinges, which is a great unluckiness: or
else if they do comebye them, they find they comebye their hurt, and end
their myseryes with other greater miseries, for both in the beginning and
middle of this love, there is never other thing felt, but afflictions,
tourmentes, greeffes, Properties of lovers.
pining, travail, so that to be wann, vexed with continual tears, and
sighs, to live with a discontented mind, to be always dumb, or to lament,
to covet death, in conclusion to be most unlucky are the propreties which (they
say) beelonge to lovers. The cause therefore of this wretchedness in men's
minds, is principally sense, which in youthful age bears most swey,
because the lustiness of the flesh and of the blood, in that season adds
unto him eue^ so much force, as it withdraws from reason: therefore does it
easelye train the soul to follow appetite or longinge, for when she sees her
self drowned in the earthly prison, because she is set in the office to
govern the body, she can not of her self understand plainly at the first the
truth of spiritual behouldinge. Wherefore to compass the understanding of
things, she must go beg the beginning at the senses, and therefore she
beleaueth them, and gives ear to them, and is contented to be lead by them,
especially when they have so much courage, that (in a ma^er) they enforce her
and because they be deceitful they fill her with errors and false opinions.
Whereupon most co^munlye it happens, that young men be wrapped in this sensual
love, which is a very rebel against reason, and therefore they make them selves
unworthy to enjoy the favors and benifites, which love bestows upon his
true subjects, neither in love feel they any other pleasures, then what
beasts without reason do, but much more grievous afflictions. Setting case
therefore this to be so, which is most true, I say, that the contrary chaunseth
to them of a more ripe age. For in case they, when the soul is not now so
much wayed down with the bodyly burdein, and when the natural burning
asswageth and draws to a warmeth, if they be inflamed with beawty, and to it
bend their coveting guided by reasonable choice, they be not deceived, and
possess beawtye perfectly, and therefore through the possessing of it, always
goodness ensues to them: Beawtie
because beauty is good and consequently the true love of it is most good and
holy, and evermore brings forth good fruits in the souls of them, that with
the bridle of reason restrain the ill disposition of sense, the which old men
can much sooner do then young. Yt is not therefore out of reason to say, that
old men may also love without sclaunder and more happily, then young men:
taking notwithstanding this name Old, not for the age at the pittes brincke,
nor when the canelles of the body be so feeble, that ye soul can not through
them work her feats, but when knowleage in us is in his right strength. And I
will not also hide this from you: namely, that I suppose, where sensual love in
every age is naught, yet in young men it deserves excuse, and perhaps in
some case lefull: for although it puts them in afflictions, dau^geres,
traua^les, and ye vnfortunatenes that is said, yet are there many yt to win
them the good will of their Ladies practice virtuous things, which for all
they be not bent to a good end, yet are they good of them selves, and so of
that much bitterness they pike out a little sweetness, and through the
adversities which they sustain, in the end they acknowleage their error. As
I judge therefore those young men that bridle their appetites, and love with
reason, to be godly: so do I houlde excused such as yield to sensual love,
whereunto they be so inclined through the weakness and frailty of man: so
they show therein meekness, courtesy: and prowess, and the other worthy
conditions that these Lords have spoken of, and when those youthful years be
gone and past, leave it of clean, keapinge alouf from this sensual couetinge
as from the lowermost step of the stayers, by the which a man may ascend to
true love. But in case after they draw in years once they reserve still in
their cold heart the fire of appetites, and bring stout reason in subjection
to feeble sense, it can not be said how much they are to be blamed: for like
men without sense they deserve with an everlasting shame to be put in the
number of unreasonable living creatures, because the thoughts and ways of
sensual love be far vnsittinge for ripe age. Here Bembo paused a while as
though he would brethe him, and when all things were whist M. Morello of
Ortona said: And in case there were some old man more fresh and lustye and
of a better complexion then many young men, why would you not have it lefull
for him to love with the love that young men love? The Duchess laughed and
said: if the love of young men be so unlucky, why would you ( M. Morello) that
old men should also love with this unluckiness? But in case you were old (as
these men say you be) you would not thus procure the hurt of old men. M.
Morello answered: The hurt of old men (me seemeeh ( M. Peter Bembo procures,
who will have them to love after a sort, that I for my part understand not:
and (me think) the possessing of this beawtye, which he prayseth so much,
without the body, is a dream. Do you beeleaue M. Morello, quod then Count
Lewis, that beauty is always so good a thing as M. Peter Bembo speaks of?
Not I in good sooth, answered M. Morello: But I remember rather that I have
seen many beautiful women of a most ill inclination, cruel, and spiteful,
and it seems that (in a manner (it happens always so, for beawtie makes
them proud: and pride, cruel. Count Lewis said smilinge: To you perhaps
they seem cruel, because they content you not with it, that you would have.
But cause M. Peter Bembo to teach you in what sort old men ought to covet
beawtye and what to seek at their Ladies hands, and what to content them
selves withal: and in not passinge out of these bounds, ye shall se that they
shall be neither proud nor cruel: and will satisfy you with what you shall
require M. Morello seemed then some what out of patience, and said: I will not
know the thing that touches me not. But cause you to be taught how the young
men ought to covet this beawty, that are not so fresh and lu^^y as old men be.

Here Sir Fridericke to pacify M. Morello and to break their talk, would
not suffer Count Lewis to make answer, but interterrupting him said^ Perhaps
M, Morello is not altogether out of the way in saing that beawty is not always
good, for the beautye of women is many times cause of infinite euilles in the
world, hatred, war, mortality, and destruction, whereof the rasinge of Troy
can be a good witness: And beawtiful women for the most part be either proud
and cruel (as is said) or unchaste, but M. Morello would find no fault with
that. Ther^ be also many wicked men that have the comeliness of a beautiful
countenance, and it seems that nature has so shaped them, because they may be
the redier to deceive, and that this amiable look were like a bait that
covers the hook. Then M. Peter Bembo, beleaue not (quod he) but beauty is
always good. Here Count Lewis b^^^use he would retourn again to his former
purpose interrupted him and said: Sins M. Morello passes not to understand
that, which is so necessary for him, teach it me, and show me how old men
may come bye this happiness of love, for I will not care to be counted old, so
it may profit me. M^ Peter Bembo laughed and said: first will I take ye error
out of these gentilmens mind: and afterward will I satisfy you also. So
beeginning a fresh, my Lords (quoth he) I would not that with spea: king ill
of beawtie, which is a holy thing, any of us as profane and wicked should
purchase him the wrath of God. A notable Poet which lost his sight for writing
against Helena and recanting, had his sight restored him again.
Therefore to give M. Morello and Sir Fridericke warninge, that they lose not
their sight, as Stesichorus did, a peine most meet for who so dispraiseth
beawtie, I say, that beawtie comes of God, and is like a circle, the
goodness whereof is the Center. And therefore, as there can be no circle
without a center, no more can beawty be without goodness. Whereupon does very
sildome an ill soul dwell in a beawtifull body. And therefore is the outward
beawtie a true sign of the inward goodness, and in bodies this comeliness is
imprynted more and less (as it were) for a mark of the soul, whereby she is
outwardlye known: as in trees, in which the beawtye of the buddes gives a
testimony of the goodness of the fruit. And the very same happens in
bodies, as it is seen, that Palmastrers by the visage know many times the
conditions, and otherwhile the thoughts of men. Judgment by the face.
And which is more, in beasts also a man may descerne by the face the
quality of the courage, which in the body declares it self as much as it
can. Judge you how plainlye in the face of a Lion, a horse and an Egle, a man shall descerne anger, fiersenesse and stoutness, in Lambs and Doves
simpleness and very innocency^: the craftye subtiltye in Foxes and Wolves,
and the like (in a manner) in all other living creatures. The soul therefore
for the most part be also yuell and the beawtifull, good. Therefore it may be
said that Beawtie is a face pleasant, Beawtie.
meerie, comelye, and to be desired for goodness and Foulness a face dark,
Foulness.
vglesome, unpleasant and to be shonned for ill. And in case you will consider
all things, ye shall find, that what so ever is good and profitable has also
evermore the comeliness of Beawtie. De Orat. lib. 3
Beh^ulde the state of this great Inginn of the world, which god created for
the health and preservation of every thing that was made. The world.
The heaven.
The heaven round besett with so many h^auenly lights: And in the middle, the
Earth environed with the Elements, The earth.
and vphelde with the ver^e weight of it self: The son, The son.
that compassinge about gives light to the wholl, and in winter season draws
to the lowermost sign, afterward by little and little climeth again to the other
part: The Moon, that of him takes her light, according as she draws nigh,
The moon.
or goith farther from him: And the other five st^rres, The planettes.
that diversely keep the very same course. These things among them selves have
such force by the knitting together of an order so necessarilye framed, that
with altering them any one ^o^t, they should be all l^wsed, and the world
would decay. They have also such beawtie and comeliness, that all the wits
men have, can not imagine a more beawtifull matter. Think now of the shape of
man, which may be called a little world: in whom every percell of his body is
seen to be necessarily framed by art and not by happ, Man.
and then the form all together most beawtifull, Aristo^
so that it were a hard matter to judge, whether the members, S. Ph^si^*
as the eyes, the nose, the mouth, the ears, the arms, the breast and in like
manner ye other parts: give ^yther more profit to the countenance and the rest
of the body, or comeliness. The like may be said of all other living
creatures. Beehoulde the feathers of fowls, the leaves and bows of trees,
which be given them of nature to keep them in their beeinge, Fowls.
and yet have ^hey withal a very great sightlinesse. Leave nature, and come
to art. Trees.
What thing is so necessary in saylynge vessels, as the forepart, the
sides, the maine^ardes, the mast, the sails, Ships.
the stern, owers, ankers, and tacklinges? all these things notwithstanding
are so welfauoured in y^ eye, that unto who so beehouldeth them they seem to
have bine found out as well for pleasure, Buildinges.
as for profit. Pillars and great beams vphoulde high buildinges and Palaices,
and yet are they no less pleasurfull unto the eyes of the beehoulders, then
profitable to the buyldinges. When men beegane first to build, in the middle of
Temples and houses they reared the ridge of the rouffe, The rouffe of houses.
not to make the works to have a better show, but because the water might the
more commodiouslie avoid on both sides: yet unto profit there was furthwith
adioined a fair sightlinesse, so that if under the sky where there falls
neither hail nor rain a mann should build a temple, without a reared ridge,
it is to be thought, that it could have neither a sightly show nor any
beawtie. Beeside other things therefore, it gives a great praise to the world,
in saiynge that it is beawtifull. It is praised, in saiynge, the beawtifull
heaven, beawtifull earth, beawtifull sea, beawtifull rivers, beawtifull
wooddes, trees, gardeines, beawtifull Cities, beawtifull Churches, houses,
armies. In conclusion this comelye and holy beawtie is a wondrous settinge
out of every thing. And it may be said that Good and beawtifull be after a
sort one self thing, especially in the bodies of men: of the beawtie whereof
the nighest cause (I suppose) is the beawtie of the soul: the which as a
partner of the right and heavenly beawtie, makes sightlye and beawtifull what
ever she touches, and most of all, if the body, where she dwells, be not of
so vile a matter, that she can not imprint in it her propertye. Therefore
Beawtie* is the true monument and spoil of the victory of the soul, when she
with heavenly influence bears rule over material and gross nature, and
with her light overcomes the darkeness of the body. It is not then to be
spoken that Beawtie makes women proud or cruel, although it seem so to M.
Morello. Neither yet ought beawtifull women to bear the blame of that hatred,
mortalytie, and destruction, which the unbridled appetites of men are the cause
of. I will not now deny, but it is possible also to find in the world
beawtifull women unchaste, yet not because beawtie inclines them to unchaste
living, for it rather plucketh them from it, and leads them into the way of
virtuous conditions, through the affinity that beawtie has with goodness:
But otherwhile ill bringinge up, the continual prouocations of lovers, tokens,
poverty, hope, deceites, fear, and a thousand other matters overcome the
steadfastnesse, yea of beawtifull and good women: and for these and like causes
may also beawtifull menn beecome wicked. Then said the L. Caesar: In case the L
Gaspar^ saying be true of yesternight, there is no doubt but the fair women
be more chaste then the foul. And what was my saying, quoth the L. Gaspar? The
L. Caesar answered: If I do well bear in mind, your saiynge was, that The
women that are suide to, always refuse to satisfy him that suith to them, but
those that are not suide to, sue to others. There is no doubt but the beautiful
women have always more suyters, and be more instantlye laid at in love, then
the foul. Therefore the beawtifull always deny, and consequentlye be more
chaste, then the foul, which not beeinge suied to, sue unto others. M. Peter
Bembo laughed and said: This argument can not be answered to. Afterward he
proceaded. It chaunseth also oftentimes, that as the other senses, so the sight
is deceived, and judges a face beawtyfull, which in deed is not beawtifull.
And because in the eyes and in the wholl countenance of some women, a man
behouldeth otherwhile a certain lavish wantonness peincted with dishonest
flickeringes, many, whom that manner deliteth because it promises them an
^asines to come by the thing, that they covet, call it beawty: but in deed it is
a cloked unshamefastness, unworthy of so honorable and holy a name, M. Peter
Bembo held his peace, and those Lords (...) were ^arnest upon him to speak
somewhat more of this love and of the way to enjoy beautye aright, and at the
last, Me think (quoth he) I have showed plainly enough, that Old men may love
more happelye then young, which was my drift, therefore it belongs not me to
enter any farther. Count Jews answered: You have better declared the
unluckiness of young men, then the happiness of old menn, whom you have not
as yet taught, what way they must follow in this love of theirs: only you
have said, that they must suffer them selves to be guided by reason, and the
opinion of many is, that it is impossible for love to stand with reason. Bembo
notwithstanding saught to make an end of reasoning, but the Duchess desired
him to say on, and he beegane thus afreshe: Too unlucky were the nature of
man, if our soul (in the which this so fervent couetinge may lightly
arrise) should be driven to nourish it with that only, Sense.
which is commune to her with beasts, and could not tourn it to the other
noble part, Reason.
which is propre to her. Therefore sins it is so your pleasure: I will not
refuse to reason upon this noble matter. And because I know my self unworthy to
talk of the most holy mysteries of love, I beseech him to lead my thought
and my tunge so, that I may show this excelent Courtier how to love contrary
to the wonted manner of the commune ignorant sort. And even as from my childhode
I have dedicated all my wholl lief unto him, so also now that my words may be
answerable to the same intent, and to the praise of him: I say therefore, that
sins the nature of man in youthful age is so much inclined to sense, it may be
granted the Courtier, while he is young, to love sensuallye. But in case
afterward also in his riper years, he chau^se to be set on fire with this
coveting of love, he ought to be good and circumspect, and heedful that he
beeguyle not him self, to be lead willfullye into the wretchedness, that in
young men deserves more to be pitied then blamed: and contrariwise in old
men, more to be blamed then pitied. Therefore when an amiable countenance of a
beautiful woman comes in his sight, that is accompanied with noble conditions
and honest behauiours, so that as one practiced in love, he wotteth well that
his hew has an agreement with herres, as soon as he is a ware that his eyes
snatch that image and carry it to the heart, and that the soul beeginneth to
beehoulde it with pleasure, and feels within her self the influence that
stirs her and by little and little sets her in heat, and that those
liuelye spirits, that twinkle out through the eyes, put continually fresh
nourishment to the fire: he ought in this beginning to seek a speedye remedy
and to raise up reason, and with her, to fense the fortress of his heart, and
to shutt in such wise the passages against sense and appetites, that they may
enter neither with force nor subtle practice. T^us if the flame be quenched,
the ieoperdye is also quenched. But in case it continue or increase, then must
the Courtier determine (when he perceives he is taken) to shonn throughlye all
filthiness of commune love, and so enter into the holy way of love with the
guide of reason, and first consider that the body, where that beawtye shyneth,
is not the fountain from whens beauty springs, but rather because beauty
is bodilesse and (as we have said) an heavenly shyning beam, she loses much
of her honor when she is coopled with that vile subject and full of
corruption, Beawtye severed from the body is most perfect.
because the less she is partner thereof, the more perfect she is, and clean
sundred from it, is most perfect. And as a mann hears not with his mouth,
nor smells with his ears: no more can he also in any manner wise enjoy
beawtye, nor satisfye the desire that she stirrith up in our minds, with
feelynge, but with the sense, unto whom beawtye is the very butt to level at:
namelye, the virtue of seeinge. Let him lay aside therefore the blind
judgment of the sense, and inioye with his eyes the bryghtnesse, the
comeliness, the loving sparkles, laughters, gestures and all the other
pleasant fournitours of beawty: especially with hearing the sweetness of her
voice, the tunablenesse of her words, the melody of her singinge and
playinge on instruments (in case the woman beloved be a musitien) and so shall
he with most d^intie food feed the soul through the means of these two
senses, which have little bodily substance in them, and be the ministers of
reason, without entringe farther toward the body with couetinge unto any
longinge otherwise then honest. Afterward let him obey, please, and honor
with all reverence his woman, and reckon her more dear to him then his own
lief, and prefarr all her commodites and pleasures before his own, and love
no less in her the beauty of the mind, then of the body: Therefore let him
have a care not to suffer her to renn into any error, but with lessons and
good exhortations seek always to frame her to modesty, to temperance, to
true honestye, and so to work that there may never take place in her other
then pure thoughts and far wide from all filthiness of vices. And thus in
sowinge of virtue in the gardein of that mind, he shall also gather the fruits
of most beautiful conditions, and savor them with a marvelous good relise.
And this shall be the right engendringe and imprinting of beawtye in beawtie,
the which some houlde opinion to be the end of love. In this manner shall our
Courtier be most acceptable to his Lady, and she will always show her self
toward him tractable, lowlye and sweet in language, and as willinge to please
him, as to be beloved of him: and the wills of them both shall be most honest
and agreeable, and they consequently shall be most happy. Here M. Morello, The
engendringe (quoth he) of beawtye in beawtye aright, were the engendringe of a
b^awtyfull child in a beautiful woman, and I would think it a more manifest
token a great deal that she loved her lover, if she pleased him with this,
then with the sweetness of language that you speak of. M. Peter Bembo
laughed and said: You must not (M. Morello) pass your bounds. I may tell you,
it is not a small token that a woman loves, when she gives unto her lover her
beawtye, which is so precious a matter: and by the ways that be a passage to
the soul (that is to say, the sight and the hearing) sends the looks of
her eyes, the image of her countenance, and the voice of her words, that
perce into the lovers heart, and give a witness of her love. M. Morello said:
Looks and words may be, and oftentimes are, false witnesses. Therefore whosoever
has not a better pledge of love (in my judgment) he is in an ill assurance.
And surely I looked still that you would have made this woman of yours
somewhat more courteyous and free toward the Courtier, then my L. Julian has
made his: but (me seems) ye be both of the propretie of those judges, that
(to appear wise) give sentence against their own. Bembo said: I am well
pleased to have this woman much more courteyous toward my Courtier not young,
then the L. Iulians is to the young: and that with good reason, because mine
coueteth but honest matters, and therefore may the woman grant him them all
without blame. But my L, Iulians woman that is not so assured of the modestye
of the young man, ought to grant him the honest matters only, and deny him
the dishonest. Therefore more happy is mine, that has granted him whatsoever
he requires, then the other, that has part granted and part denied. And
because you may moreover the better understand, that reasonable love is more
happy then sensual, I say unto you, that self same things in sensual ought
to be denied otherwhile, and in reasonable, granted: because in the one, they
be honest, and in the other dishonest. Therefore ye woman to please her good
lover, beside the granting him merry cou^tenances, familiar and secret talk,
jesting, dalying, hand in hand, may also lawfullye and without blame come to
kissinge: which in sensual love, according to the L. Iulians rules, is not
lefull. For sins a kiss is a knitting together both of body and soul, ^ kiss.
it is to be feared, least the sensual lover will be more inclined to the part
of the body, then of the soul: but the reasonable lover woteth well, that
although the mouth be a percell of the body, yet is it an issue for the
words, that be the enterpreters of the soul, and for the inward breath,
which is also called the soul: and therefore has a delight to ^o^gne his mouth
with the woman's beloved with a kiss: not to stir him to any dishonest desire,
but because he feels that, that bond is the opening of an entrey to the
souls, which drawn with a cou^ting the one of the other, power them selves
by tourn, the one into the others body, and be so mingled together, that each
of them has two souls, and one alone so framed of them both rules (in a
manner) two bodies. Whereupon a kiss may be said to be rather a cooplinge
together of the soul, then of the body, because it has such force in her,
that it draws her unto it, and (as it were) seperateth her from the body.
For this do all chaste lovers couett a kiss, as a cooplinge of souls together.
And therefore Plato the divine lover says, that in kissing, his soul came as
far as his lips to depart out of the body. And because the separatinge of
the soul from the matters of the sense and the through coopling her with
matters of understanding may be beetokened by a kiss, Solomon says in his
heavenly book of Balattes, Oh that he would kiss me with a kiss of his
mouth, to express the desire he had, that his soul might be ravished through
heavenly love to the behouldinge of heavenly beawtie in such manner, that
cooplyng her self inwardly with it, she might forsake the body. They s^oode all
^erkeninge he^dfullie to Bem^os reasonings, and after he had s^aide a while and
saw that none spoke, ^e said: Sins you have made me to beegine to show our
not young Courtier this happy love, I will lead him yet somewhat farther
forwards, because to ston^e ^^yll at this stay were somewhat perilous for
him, consideringe (as we have often times said the soul is most inclyned to
the senses, and for all reason with discourse chouseth well, and knows that
beawtie not to spring of the body, and therefore sets a bridle to the
dishonest desires, yet to beehould it always in that body, does oftentimes
corrupt the right judgment. And where no other inconvenience insueth upon it,
ones absence from the wight beloved carries a great passion with it: because
the influence of that beawtie when it is present, gives a wondrous delight to
the lover, and settinge his heart on fire, quickens and melts certain
virtues in a trance and congeled in the soul, the which nourished with the
heat of love, floow about and go bubbling nigh the heart, and thrust out through
the eyes those spirits, which be most fine vapoures made of the purest and
cleerest part of the blood, which receive the image of beawtie, and deck it
with a thousand sundry fournitures. Whereupon the soul takes a delight, and
with a certain wonder is aghast, and yet enjoys she it, and (as it were)
astonished together with the pleasure, feels the fear and reverence that men
accustomably have toward holy matters, and thinks her self to be in
paradise. The lover therefore that considers only the beawtie in the body,
loses this treasure and happiness, as soon as the woman beloved with her
departure leaves the eyes without their brightness, and consequently the soul,
as a widow without her joy. For sins beawtie is far of, that influence of
love sets not the heart on fire, as it did in presence. Whereupon the pores be
dried up and wythered, and yet does the remembrance of beawty somewhat stir
those virtues of the soul in such wise, that they seek to scattre abroad the
spirits, and they fyndinge the ways closed up, have no issue, and still they
seek to get out, and so with those shootinges enclosed prick the soul, and
tourment her bitterlye, as young chilldren, when in their tender gummes they
beegin to breed teeth. And hens come the tears, sighs, vexations and
tourmentes of lovers: Because the soul is always in affliction and travail
and (in a manner) wexeth wood, until the beloved beawtie comes before her
once again, and then is she immediatlye pacified and takes breath, and
throughlye bent to it, is nouryshed with most deintye food, and by her will,
would never depart from so sweet a sight. To avoid therefore the tourment of
this absence, and to enjoy beawtie without passion, the Courtier by the help
of reason must full and wholly call back again the coveting of the body to
beawtye alone* and (in what he can) beehoulde it in it self simple and pure,
and frame it within in his imagination sundred from all matter, and so make it
frindlye and louinge to his soul, and there enjoy it, and have it with him
day and night, in every time and place, without mystrust ever to lose it:
keapinge always fast in mind, that the body is a most diverse thing from
beawtie, and not only not increases, but diminishes the perfection of it. In
this wise shall our not young Courti^r be out of all bitterness and
wretchedness that young men feel (in a manner) continuallye, as ielousies,
suspicions, disdeignes, angres, desperations and certain rages full of
madness, whereby many times they be lead into so great error, that some do
not only beat the women whom they love: but rid them selves out of their lief.
He shall do no wrong to the husband, father, brethren or kinsfolk of the woman
beloved. He shall not bring her in s^launder. He shall not be in case with
much a do otherwhile to refrain^ his eyes and tunge from discovering his
desires to others. He shall not take thought at departure or in absence,
because he shall ever more carye his precious treasure about with him shut fast
within his heart. And beeside, through the virtue of imagination he shall facion
within himself that beawty m^che more fair, then it is in deed. But among
these commodities the lover shall find an other yet far greater, in case he
will take this love for a stayer (as it were) to clime up to an other far
higher then it^ The which he shall bring to pass, if he will go and consider
with himself, what a stre^^t bond it is to be always in the trouble to
beehoulde the beawtie of one body alone. And therefore to come out of this so
narrow a rowme, he shall gather in his thought by little and little so many
ornaments, that meddlinge all beawties together, he shall make an universal
concept, and bring the multitude of them to the unity of one alone, that is
generally spread over all the nature of man. And thus shall he beehoulde no more
the particular beawtie of one woman, but an universal, that decketh out all
bodies. Whereupon being made dymm with this greater light, he shall not pass
upon the lesser, and burning in a more excellent flame, he shall little esteame
it, that he set great store by at the first. This stayer of love, though it be
very noble and such, as few arrive at it, yet is it not in this sort to be
called perfect, for so much as where the imagination is of force to make
conueiance and has no knowleage, but through those beeginninges that the
senses help her wythall, she is not clean po^rged from gross darkness: and
therefore though she do consider that universal beawtie in sunder and in it
self alone, yet does she not well and cleerlye descerne it, nor without some
doubtfulness, by reason of the agreement that the fansyes have with the body.
Wherefore such as come to this love, are like young Birds almost flushe,
which for all they flytter a little their tender wings, yet dare they not
stray far from the neste, nor commytt them selves to the wind and open
weather. When our Courtier therefore shall be come to this point, although he
may be called a good and happy lover, in respect of them that be drowned in
the miserye of sensual love, yet will I not have him to set his heart at rest,
but bouldlye pr^ceade farther, folowinge the high way after his guide, that
leads him to the point of true happiness. And thus in stead of goinge out
of his wit with thought, as he must do that will consider the bodilye beawty,
he may come into his wit, to behoulde the beawty that is seen with the eyes
of the mind, which then beegin to be sharp and thorough seeinge, when the
eyes of the body lose the flower of their sightlynesse. Therefore the soul rid
of vices, purged with the studyes of true Philosophy, occupied in spiritual,
and exercised in matters of understanding, tourninge her to the beehouldyng of
her own substance, as it were raised out of a most deep sleep, opens the
eyes that all men have, and few occupy, and sees in her self a shining beam
of that light, which is the true image of the aungelike beawtye partened with
her, whereof she also partneth with the body a feeble shadow: Therefore wered
blind about earthlye matters, is made most quick of sight about heavenly.
And otherwhile when the stirringe virtues of the body are withdrawn alone
through earnest behouldinge, either fast bound through sleep, when she is not
hindered by them, she feels a certain preuie smell of the right aungelike
beawtie, and ravished with the shining of that light, beeginneth to be
inflamed, and so greedilye follows after, that (in a manner) she wereth dronken
and beeside her self, for coveting to coople her self with it, having found
(to her wening) the footesteppes of God, in the beehouldinge of whom (as in her
happy end) she seeks to settle her self. And therefore burninge in this most
happy flame, she arryseth to the noblest part of her (which is the
understanding) ^ there no more shadowed with the dark night of earthlye
matters, sees the heavenly beawtye: but yet does she not for all that enjoy
it altogether perfectlye, because she beehouldeth it only in her particular
understanding, which can not conceive the passing great universal beautye:
whereupon not throughlye satisfied with this benifit, love gives unto the soul
a greater happiness. For like as through the particular beawtye of one body he
guydeth her to the universal beawtye of all bodies: Euenso in the last degree
of perfection through particular understanding he guides her to the
universal understanding. Thus the soul kindled in the most holy fire of
true heavenly love, flees to coople her self with the nature of Aungelles,
and not only clean forsakes sense, but has no more need of the discourse
of reason, for being changed into an Angel, she understands all things
that may be understood: and without any veil or cloud, she sees the meine
sea of the pure heavenly beawtye and receives it into her, and enjoys that
sovereign happiness, that can not be comprehended of the senses. Sins
therefore the beawties, which we daily see with these our dimm eyes in bodies
subject to corruption, that nevertheless be nothing else but dreams and
most thin shadows of beauty, seem unto us so well favored and comely, that
oftentimes they kendle in us a most burning fire, and with such delight, that we
reckon no happiness may be compared to it, that we feel otherwhile through
the only look which the beloved countenance of a woman casts at us: what
happy wonder^ what blessed abashement may we reckon that to be, that takes
the souls, which come to have a sight of the heavenly beawty? what sweet
flame? What soote incense may a mann beleaue that to be, which arriseth of
the fountain of the sovereign and right beawtye? Which is the origion of all
other beawtye, which never increases* nor diminishet^, always beawtyfull,
and of it self, as well on the one part as on the other, most simple, only
like it self, and partner of none other, but in such wise beawtifull, that all
other beawtifull things, be beawtifull, because they be partners of the
beawtie of it. Heavenly beawtie.
This is the beawtye inseparable from the high bountye, which with her voice
calls and draws to her all things: and not only to the endowed with
understanding gives understanding, to the reasonable reason, to the sensual
sense and appetite to live, but also partaketh with plants and stones (as a
print of her self) stirring, and the natural provocation of their properties.
So much therefore is this love greater and happier then others, as the cause
that stirs it, is more excellent. And therefore, as commune fire tries
gold and makes it fine, so this most holy fire in souls destroys and
consumes what so ever there is mortal in them, and relieueth and makes
beawtyfull the heavenly part, which at the first by reason of the sense was
dead and buried in them. This is the great fire in the which (the Poets
write) that Hercule^ was burned on the topp of the monntaigne Oeta: A mounteign
between Thessalia and Macedonia where is the sepulcher of Hercules.
and through that consumynge with fire, after his death was holy and
immortal. This is the fyri^ bu^he of Moses: The divided tunges of fire: The
inflamed Chariot of Helias: which doobleth grace and happiness in their souls
that be worthy to see it, when they forsake this earthly baseness and flee up
unto heaven. Let us therefore bend all our force and thoughts of soul to
this most holy light, that shows us the way which leads to heaven: and
after it, putting of the affections we were clad withal at our commnige
down, let us clime up the stayers, which at the lowermost stepp have the
shadow of sensual beawty, to the high mansion place where the heavenly,
amiable and right beawtye dwells, which lies hid in the innermost secrets
of God, least unhallowed eyes should come to the sight of it: and there shall
we find a most happy end for our desires, true rest for our travails,
certain remedy for myseryes, a most healthful medycin for sickness, a most
sure haven in the troublesome storms of the tempestuous sea of this life. What
tunge mortal is there then (O most holy love) that can sufficientlye praise
thy woorthynesse? Thou most beawtifull, most good, most wise, art diriued of
the unity of heavenly beauty, goodness and wisdom, and therein do thou
abide, and unto it through it (as in a circle) tournest about. Thou the most
swee^e bond of the world, a mean beetwext heavenly and earthlye things,
with a bountiful tempre bendest the high virtues to the government of the
lower, and tourninge back the minds of mortal men to their beeginning,
cooplest them with it. Thou with agreement bring the Elements in one,
stirrest nature to bring forth, and that, which arriseth and is borne for the
succession of the lief. Thou bring severed matters into one, to the
imperfect give perfectyon, to the unlike likeness, to enimitye amitye, to
the Earth fruits, to the Sea calmnesse, to the heaven lyuelie light. Thou art
the father of true pleasures, of grace, peace, lowlynesse and good will,
enemy to rude wildenesse and sluggishnesse, to be short, the beginning and
end of all goodness. And forsomuche as thou delitest to dwell in the flower
of beawtyfull bodies and beawtyfull souls, I suppose that thy abiding place
is now here emonge us, and from above otherwhyle showest thy self a little to
the eyes and minds of them that be woorthye to see thee. Therefore vouchesafe
(Lord) to harken to our prayers, power thy self into our hearts, and with
the bryghtnesse of thy most holy fire lyghten our darkness, and like a
trusty guide in this blind mase, show us the right way: refourme the
falsehoode of the senses, and after long wandringe in vanitye give us the
rygh^ and sound joy. Make us to smell those spiritual sauoures that relieve
the virtues of the understanding, and to hear the heavenly harmony so
tunable, that no discord of passion take place any more in v^. Make us
dronken with the bottomless fountain of contentation that always does
delight, and never gives fill, and that gives a smacke of the right bliss
unto who so drinks of the renni^^ and clear water thereof. Pourge with the
shininge beams of thy light our eyes from mysty ignorance, that they may no
more set by mortal beawty, and well perceive that ye things which at ye first
they thought themselves to see, be not in deed, and those that they saw not,
to be in effect. Accept our souls, that be offered unto thee for a sacrifice.
Burn them in the liuely^ flame that wastes al gross filthiness, that after
they be clean sundred from the body, they may be copled with an everlasting
and most sweet bond to the heavenly beawty. And we severed from our selves,
may be changed like right lovers into the beloved, The poets feign to be the
meat and drink of the God^^s.
and after we be drawn from the earth, admitted to the feast of the aungelles,
where fed with immortal ambrosia and nectar, in the end we may dye a most
happy and liuelye death, as in times past died the fathers of old time, whose
souls with most fervent zeal of beehouldinge thou did hale from the body
and coopleddest them with God. When Bembo had hitherto spoken with such
vehemencye, that a man would have thought him (as it were) ravished and
beeside himself, he stood^ still without once moving, houldynge his eyes
toward heaven as astonished, when the Lady Emilia, which together with the rest
gave most diligent ear to this talk, took him by the plaite of his garment
and pluckinge him a little, said: Take heed (M. Peter) that these thoughts
make not your soul also to forsake the body. Madam, answered M. Peter, it
should not be the first miracle that love has wrought in me. Then the
Duchess and all the rest beegan a fresh to be instant upon M. Bembo that he
would procc^de once more in his talk, and every one thought he felt in his
mind (as it were) a certain sparkle of that godly love that pricked him, and
they all coueted to hear farther: but M. Bembo, My Lords (quoth he) I have
spoken what the holy fury of love has (vnsaught for) indicted to me: now that
(it seems) he inspireth me no more, I wot not what to say. And I think
verelie that love will not have his secrets discovered any farther, nor that
the Courtier should pass the degree that his pleasure is I should show him,
and therefore it is not perhaps lefull to speak any more in this matter.
Surely, quoth the Duchess, if the not young Courtier be such a one that he
can follow this way which you have showed him, of right he ought to be
satisfied with so great a happiness, and not to envy the younger. Then the L.
Caesar Gonzaga, the way (quod he) that leads to this happiness is so stiepe (in
my mind) that (I beleaue) it will be much a do to get to it. The L. Gaspar
said: I beleaue it be hard to get up for men, but impossible for women. The
L. Emilia laughed and said: If ye fall so often to offend us, I promise you,
ye shall be no more forgiven. The L. Gaspar answered: It is no offense to you,
in saiynge, that women's souls be not so pourged from passions as men's be, nor
accustomed in behouldinges, as M. Peter has said, is necessary for them to be,
that will taste of the heavenly love. Therefore it is not read that ever woman
has had this grace: but many men have had it, as Plato, Socrates, Plotinus,
and many other: and a number of our holy fathers, as Saint Francis, in whom a
fervent spirit of love imprinted the most holy seal of the five wounds. And
nothing but the virtue of love could hale up Saint Paul the Apostle to the
sight of those secrets, which is not lawful for man to speak of: nor show
Saint Stephan the heavens open. Here answered the L. Julian: In this point men
shall nothing pass women, for Socrates him self does confess that all the
mysteries of love which he knew, were oped unto him by a woman, which was
Diotima. Diotima. And the Angel that with the fire of love imprinted the five
wounds in Saint Francis, has also made some women worthy of the same print
in our age. You must remember moreover that S. Mari Magdalen had many faults
forgeuen her, because she loved much: and perhaps with no less grace then
Saint Paul, was she many times through Aungelyke love haled up to the third
heaven. And many other (as I showed you yesterdaye more at large) that for
love of the name of Chryst^ have not passed upon lief, nor feared tourmentes,
nor any other kind of death how terrible and cruel ever it were. And they
were not (as M. Peter will have his Courtier to be) aged, but soft and tender
maidens, and in the age, when he says that sensual love ought to be borne
withal in men. The L. Gaspar began to prepare himself to speak, but the
Duchess, Of this (quoth she) let M. Peter be judge, and the matter shall
stand to his verdite, whether women be not as meet for heavenly love* as men.
But because the plead beetweene you may happen be to long, it shall not be
amiss to deferr it until to morrow. Nay, to night, quoth the L. Caesar Gonzaga.
And how can it be to night, quoth the Duchess? The L. Caesar answered: Because
it is day already, and showed her the light that beegane to enter in at the
cliftes of the windows, Then every man arrose upon his feet with much
wonder, because they had not thaught that the reasoninges had lasted l^nger
then the accustomed wont, sauinge only that they were beegon much later, and
with their pleasantness had deceived so the Lords minds, that they wist not
of the going away of the hours. And not one of them felt any heaviness of
sleep in his eyes, the which often happens when a man is up after his
accustomed hour to go to bed. When the windows then were opened on the side
of the Palaice that has his prospect toward the high to^ of Mount Catri, they
saw alr^die risen in the East a fair morninge like unto the color of roses,
and all sterres void^d, sauinge only the sweet Gouernesse of the heaven*
Uenus, which keapeth the bounds of the night and the day, from which
appeered to blow a sweet blast, that filling the aer with a bytinge cold,
begane to quicken the tunable notes of the pretty birds, among the hushing
woods of the hills at hand. Whereupon they all, taking their leave with
reverence of the Duchess, departed toward their lodginges without torche, the
light of the day sufficing. And as they were now passing out at the great
chamber door, the L. General turned him to the Duchess, and said: Madam, to
take up the variance beetweene the L. Gaspar and the L. Julian, we will
assemble this night with the judge sooner then we did yesterdaye. The Lady
Emilia answered, upon condition, that in case my L. Gaspar will accuse women,
and give them (as his wont is) some false report, he will also put us in
suretye to stand to trial, for I reckon him a waueringe starter.

The end of Castilios books of the Courtyer.
A letter that the Author writ to the Lady Victoria Columna Marquess of
Pescara, whom he mentions in the Epistle before his book.
MOST HONORABLE AND MY VERY good Lady. I am much behouldinge to M. Thomas
Tuke, because he was the occasion that your Ladishipp has vouchsafed to write
unto me: which is most acceptable to me, and not without cause, consideringe I
have written so many letters and could never receive any answer from you
again, albeit they contained sundry matters. Truth it is indeed, that unmeet
it were your L. should write unto me, unless therewithal you used my service
and commanded me in what I am able to do for you. As touching M, Tuke, I will
do as much for him, as shall lie in me to do, both for your L. sake that may
command me, and for the brotherlye love that I bear him. Where M. Gutteriz
has written unto you that I complained of you, I wonder nothing at it, for
(to say the troth) I vttred my greef a good while sins in a letter that I
wrott unto you your self, as I passed the mountaignes of France to come into
Spain. And he that toulde me the matter that caused it, was my L. Marquess of
Vasto, who showed me a letter of yours, in the which you your self confessed
the stelth of the Courtyer. The which thing I as then took in great good
part, doubting nothing ^ut that it should remain in your hands, and be
well kept until I my self should come to demand it of you. At the last I
was enfourmed by a Gentilman Neapolitan, who continues still here in Spain,
that there were certain Fragmentes of the poor Courtier in Naples, and he saw
them in the hands of sundry men, and he that scattered it thus abroad
reported that he had it of you. It was some greef to me, as a father that sees
his child so ill handled: yet afterward yeeldyng to reason, I knew he
deserved not to have any more store made of him, but (like an vntymelye birth)
to be left in the high way for the benifit of nature. And so undoubtedly was I
determined to do, consideringe if there were any thing in the Book not ill,
men would have the worse opinion of it, when they should see it so out of
order. And no diligence should prevail any more to poolish it and to set it
forth, sins it had lost the thing, which perhaps at the first was only it,
that made it esteamed: that is to weete, the noueltye of the matter. And
knowinge your saiynge to be true, that the cause of my complaint was very
trifling, I resolved with my self, to leave at the least my complaininge,
though I could not my sorowynge. And that which I brake with M. Gutteriz (in
case it be well wayed) was no complaint. In conclusion others, more bent of a
zeal then I was, have enforced me to write him over again, as the shortness
of time has served me, and to send him to Venice to be put in print, and so
have I done. But if your L. should suspect that the good will which I bear
you were any deal feinted for this, your judgment should deceive you, which
(I beleaue) it did never in all your lief before: but rather I reckon my
self more bound to you, because the necessity that drove me to make have so
spedilie to imprint it, has saved me a great piece of labor, where I was once
minded to have added many other matters, which could be but of small moment
as the rest are. And thus shall the reader have the less labor and the Author
less blame. Therefore it is now past time either for you or me to repent or
correct. And thus I take my leave of you.

In Burgos the XXI. ^ of Septembre. 1527.
A breef rehersall of the chief conditions and qualities in a Courtier.
TO be well borne and of a goo^ stock. To be of a mean stature, rather with
the least then ^o high, and well made to his proportion. To be portly and
amiable in countenance unto whosoever beehouldeth him. Not to be womanish in his
sayings or doings. Not to praise himself vnshamefully and out of reason. Not
to crake and boast of his acts and good qualities. To shon Affectatio^ or
curiosity above al thing in all things. To do his feats with a slight, as
though they were rather naturally in him, then learned with study: and use a
Reckelesness to cover art, without minding greatly what he has in hand, to a
man's seeminge. Not to carry about tales and triflinge newis. Not to ^e
ouerseene in speaking words otherwhile that may offend where he meant it not.
Not to be stubborn, wilful nor full of contention: nor to contrary and
ouertwhart men after a spiteful sort. Not to be a babbler, brauler or chatter,
nor lavish of his tunge. Not to be given to vanity and lightness, nor to have
a fantastical head. No liar. No fond flatterer. To be well spoken and fair
languaged. To be wise and well seen in discourses upon states. To have a
judgment to frame himself to the manners of the Countr^y where ever he comes.
To be able to allege good, and probable reasons upon every matter. To be seen
in tunges, and specially in Italian French and Spanis^ To direct all things to
a good end. To procure where ever he goes ye men may first conceive good
opinion of him before he comes there. To fellowship him self for the most
part with men of the best sort and of most estimation, and with his equalies,
so he be also beloved of his inferiors. To play for his pastime at Dice and
Cards, not wholye for meneis sake, nor fume and chafe in his loss. To be
meanly seen in the play at Chestes, and not ouer-counninge. To be pleasantly
disposed in commune matters and in good company. To speak and write the
language that is most in ure emonge the commune people, without inuenting new
words, in^^horn terms or strange phrases, and such as be grown out of use
by long time. To be handesome and clenly in his apparaile. To make his
garments after the facion of the most, and those to be black, or of some
darkish and sad color, not garish. To get him an especial and hartye friend
to company withal. Not to be ill tunged, especially against his betters. Not
to use any fond sauciness or presumption. To be no envious or malicious
person^ To be an honest, a fair condicioned man, and of an upright conscience.
To have the virtues of the mind, as justice, manliness, wisdom, temperance,
staidenesse, noble courage, sobermoode etc. To be more then indifferentlye well
seen in learning, in the Latin and greek tunges. Not to be rash, nor
persuade himself to know the thing that he knows not. To confess his
ignorance, when he sees time and place thereto, in such qualities as he
knows him self to have no manner skill in. To be brought to show his feats
and qualities at the desire and request of others, and not rashlye press to it
of himself. To speak always of matters likely, least he be counted a liar in
reporting of wonders and strange miracles. To have the feate of drawing and
peincting. To dance well without over nimble footinges or to busy tricks. To
singe well upon the book. To play upon the Lute, and singe to it with the
ditty. To play upon the Uyole, and all other instruments with freates. To
delight and refresh the hearers minds in being pleasant, feat conceited, and a
meerie talker, applied to time and place. Not to use sluttish and Ruffianlike
pranckes with any man. Not to beecome a iester or scoffer to put any man out
of countenance. To consider whom he does taunt and where: for he ought not to
mock poor seely souls, nor men of authority, nor commune ribaldes and
persons given to mischeef, which deserve punishment. To be skillful in all kind
of marciall feats both on horsbacke and a foot, and well practiced in them:
which is his cheef profession, though his understanding be the less in all
other things. To play well at fense upon all kind of weapons. To be nimble
and quick at the play at tenise. To hunt and hawk. To ride and manege well his
horse. To be a good horsman for every saddle.
Sildome in open sight of the people but priu^^ye with himself alone, or
emonge his friends and familiers. To swim well. To leap well. To renn well.
To vaute well. To wrestle well. To cast the stone well. To cast the bar well.
These things in open sight to delight the commune people withal. To renn well
at tilt, and at ring. To tourney. To fight at Barriers. To keep a passage or
streict. To play at Iogo di Can. To renn at Bull. To fling a Spear or Dart.
Not to renn, wrestle, leap, nor cast the stone or bar with men of the
Country, except he be sure to get the victory. To set out himself in feats
of chivalry in open shows well provided of horse and harne^s, well trapped,
and armed, so that he may show himself nymeble on horsbacke. Never to be of
the last that appear in the listes at iustes, or in any open shows. To have
in triumphs comely armor, bases, scarfes, trappinges, liueries, and such
other things of sightly and meerie colors, and rich to beehoulde, with
witty poesies and pleasant diuises, to allure unto him chefflie the eyes of
the people. To disguise himself in maskerie either on horsbacke or a foot, and
to take the shape upon him that shall be contrary to the feate that he minds
to work. To undertake his bold feats and courageous enterprises in war, out
of company and in the sight of the most noble personages in the camp, and (if
it be possible) before his Princis eyes. Not to hasarde himself in forraginge
and spoiling or in enterprises of great danger and small estimation, though he
be sure to gain by it. Not to wait upon or serve a wicked and naughtye
person. Not to seek to come up by any naughty or subtle practice. Not to
committ any mischeuous or wicked fact at the will and commandment of his Lord
or Prince. Not to follow his own fancy, or alter the express words in any
point of his commission from his Prince or Lord, unless he be assured that
the profit will be more, in case it have good success, then the damage, if it
succeade ill. To use evermore toward his Prince or L. the respect that
beecommeth the servant toward his master. To endeavor himself to love, please
and obey his Prince in honestye. Not to couett to press into the Chamber or
other secret part where his Prince is withdrawn at any time. Never to be sad,
melanchonie or sole^n before his Prince. Sildome or never to sue to his Lord
for any thing for himself. His suite to be honest and reasonable when he suyth
for others. To reason of pleasant and meerie matters when he is withdrawn
with him into private and secret places always doing him to understand the
truth without dissimulation or flattery. Not to love promotions so, that a man
should think he could not live without them, nor vnshamefastlye to beg any
office. To refuse them after such a comelye sort, that the Prince offrynge him
them, may have a cause to offer them with a more instance. Not to press to
his Prince where ever he be, to hold him with a vain tale, that others should
think him in favor with him. To consider well what it is that he does or
speaks, where, in presence of whom, what time, why, his age, his profession,
the end, and the means.
THE FINAL END OF A COVRTIER, WHERETO AL HIS good conditions and honest
qualities tend, is to beecome An Instructor and Teacher of his Prince or
Lord, inclininge him to virtuous practices: And to be francke and free with
him, after he is once in favor in matters touching his honor and estimation,
always puttinge him in mind to follow virtue and to flee vice, opening unto
him the commoditiess of the one and inconveniences of the other: And to shut
his ears against flatterers, which are the first beeginninge of self leekinge
and all ignorance.

His conversation with women to be always gentle, sober, meek, lowly,
modest, serviceable, comely, merry, not bitinge or sclaundering with iestes,
nippes, frumpes, or railinges, the honesty of any.

His love toward women, not to be sensual or fleshly, but honest and godly,
and more ruled with reason, then appetyte: and to love better the beawtye of
the mind, then of the body.

Not to withdraw his maistresse good will from his felowlouer with reuilinge
or railinge at him, but with virtuous deeds, and honest conditions, and with
deserving more then he, at her hands for honest affections sake.

Of the chief conditions and qualityes in a vvaytyng gentylvvoman.
TO be well born and of a good house. To flee affectation or curiosity. To
have a good grace in all her doings. To be of good condicio^s and well brought
up. To be witty and foreseing, not heady and of a renning wit. Not to be
haughty, envious, yltunged, light, contentious nor vntowardlye. To win and
keep her in her Ladies favor and all others. To do the exercises meet for
women, comlye and with a good grace. To take heed that she give none accasion
to be ill reported of. To commit no vice, nor yet to be had in suspision of
any vice. To have the virtues of the mind, as wisdom, justice, nobleness of
courage, temperance, strength of the mind, continency, sobermoode. etc. To be
good and discreet. To have the understanding being married, how fordre her
husbands substance, her house and children, and to play the good huswyef. To
have a sweetness in language and a good vttrance to entertein all kind of
men with communication worth the hearing, honest, applied to time and place
and to the degree and disposition of the person which is her principal
profession. To accompany sober and quiet manners and honesty with a lively
quickness of wit. To be esteamed no less chaste, wise and courteious, then
pleasant, feat conceited and sober. Not to make wise to abhor company and
talk, though somewhat of the wantonnest, to arrise and forsake them for it. To
give the hearing of such kind of talk with blushing and bashfulnesse. Not to
speak words of dishonestye and baudrye to show her self pleasant, free and
a good fellow. Not to use over much familyaritie without measure and bridle.
Not willingly to give ^are to such as report ill of other women. To be
heedefull in her talk that she offend not where she meant it not. To beeware of
praysinge her self vndiscreatlye, and of being to tedious and noisome in her
talk. Not to mingle with grave and sad matters, meerie iestes and laughinge
matters: nor with mirth, matters of gravity To be circumspect that she offend
no man in her jesting and tauntynge, to appear thereby of a ready wit. Not to
make wise to know the thing that she knows not, but with soberness get her
estimation with that she knows. Not to come on loft nor use to swift measures
in her daunsinge. Not to use in singinge or playinge upon instruments to much
division and busy points, that declare more cunning then sweetness. To come
to dance, or to show her music with suffringe her self to be first prayed
somewhat and drawn to it. To apparaile her self so, that she seem not fond
and fantastical. To set out her beawtye and disposition of person with meet
garments that shall best beecome her, but as feininglye as she can, making
semblant to bestow no labor about it, nor yet to mind it. To have an
understanding in all things belonginge to the Courtier, that she may give
her judgment to commend and to make of gentilmen according to their
worthiness and deserts. To be learned. To be seen in the most necessary
languages. To draw and peinct. To daunse. To devise sportes and pastimes. Not
to be light of creditt that she is beloved, though a man commune familierlye
with her of love. To shape him that is ouersaucie with her, or that has small
respect in his talk, such an answer, that he may well understand she is
offended with him. To take the loving communication of a sober Gentylman in an
other signifycatyon, seeking to straye from that purpose. To acknoweleage the
praises which he gives her at the Gentylmans courtesye, in case she can not
dissemble the understanding of them: debasynge her own deserts. To be
heedefull and remember that men may with less ieopardy show to be in love,
then women. To give her lover nothing but her mind, when either the hatred of
her husband, or the love that he bears to others inclines her to love. To
love one that she may marye with all, beeinge a maiden and mindinge to love. To
show such a one all signs and tokens of love, saving such as may put him
in any dyshonest hope. To use a somewhat more famylyar conversation with men
well grown in years, then with young men. To make her self beloved for her
deserts, amiablenesse, and good grace, not with any uncomely or dishonest
behavior, or flickeringe enticement with wanton looks, but with virtue and
honest conditions.
The final end whereto the Courtier applies all his good conditions,
properties, feats and qualities, serves also for a waiting Gentilwoman to
grow in favor with her Lady, and by that means so to instruct her and train
her to virtue, that she may both refrain from vice and from committing any
dishonest matter, and also abhor flatterers, and give her self to understand
the full troth in every thing, without entering into self leeking and ignorance,
either of other outward things, or yet of her own self.

A Letter of sir I. Cheeks.
To his loving frind Master Thoma^ Hoby.
FOr your opinion of my good will unto you as you wr^it, you can not be
deceived: for submitting you^ doings to mi iudgemen^* I thank you: for taking
this pain of your translation, you worthily deser^ great thanks of all
sorts. I have taken sum pain ^^ your request cheflie in your preface, not in
the reading of it for that was pleasant unto me boath for the roundnes of your
saienges and welspeakinges of the saam, but in changing certain words which
might very well be let aloan, but that I am very curious in mi friends
matters, not to determi^n, but to debaat what is best. Whearin, I seek not the
bestnes happily by truth, but by mijn own fancy, and show of goodness.

I am of this opinion that our own tung should be written clean and pure,
unmixed and vnmangeled with borowing of other tunges* wherein if we take not heed
by tijm, ever borowing and never payeng, she shall be fain to keep her house as
bankrupt. For then does our tung naturally and praisablie utter her meaning,
when she bouroweth no conterfeitness of other tunges to attire her self
withal, but uses plainly her own, with such shift, as nature, craft,
experiens and following of other excellent does lead her unto, and if she want
at an^ tijm ^as being vnperfight she must) yet let her borow with such
bashfulnes, that it may appeer, that if e^t^er the ^o^ld of our own tung could
serve us to falcion a word of our own, or if the old denisoned words could
content and ease this need, we would not boldly venture of unknown words This
I say not for reproof of you, who have scarslie and necessarily used whear
occasion serves a strange word so, as it seems to grow out of the matter and
not to be sought for: but for mijn own defens, w^o might be counted
ouerstraight a deemer of things, if I gave not this accomp^ ^o you, mi friend
and wijs, of mi marring this your handiwork. But I am called aw^i, I prai you
pardon mi shortness, the rest of mi saienges should be but p^^ise and
exhortacion in this your doings, which at (...) I should do better.

From my house in Woodstreete the 16* of July, 1557. Yours assured Joan Cheek.

Imprinted at London, by Wyllyam Seres, dwelling at the west end of Poules, at
the Sign of the hedghog.


