A brief Catechism so necessary and easy to be learned even of the simple
sort, that whosoever can not or will not attain to the same, is not to be
counted a good Christian, much less to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord.

It stands of three parts.

1. The first shows how miserable all men are of them selves. 2. The
second, how happy they are that rightly believe in Christ. 3. The third,
what duties they owe unto God, for his great merye to wards them in Christ
Jesus.
1576.

AT LONDON. Printed by Hugh Singleton.

1. PETER. 3.15.16. Sanctifye the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you.

And that with meekness and reacrence, having a good conscience, that when
they speak evil of you as of evil dooers, they may be ashamed which blame
your good conversation in Christ.

THE FIRST PART.
Question. ARt thou not a subject and a servant unto the Almyghtie God, and
Lord of Heaven and Earth?

Answer. I acknowledge and yield my self for ever to be his subject and
servant. Exodus 20.2. Ios. 24.15.24. Romans 12.16.


Question. Has God given forth any laws, whereby his subjects should be
well ruled and governed?

Aunsvvere.

The holy scriptures are Gods statures and laws, Hebru. 1.12. Luke 16.29.31
Dent. 4.13.
wherein he declares his will and pleasure, the general sum and effect
whereof is breefely set forth unto us in the ten Commandments.

Question. Rehearse the ten Commandments.

Answer.

i. GOD spoke all these words and said, Exodus 20.3.
I am the Lord thy GOD, thou shall have none other gods but me.

ii. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneth, or in the waters
under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I the
Lord am a ielious God, and will vifite the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

iii. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy GOD in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him giltles, that takes his name in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord the GOD, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou nor thy
son, thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maydseruant, thy cattle, nor the
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh
day, and hallowed it.

v. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy GOD gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultery.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass,
nor any thing that is his.

Question. Are you able to keep all these laws?

Aunsvvere

Every man daily breaks them in thought, Psalm. 19.12. Ecclesi. 7.22. 1.
John. 1.8.
word, and deed.

Question. What is the danger of breaking any of these laws and
commandments of Almighty GOD.

Aunsvvere,

The just wages and punishment of breaking the least of Gods holy laws, Math.
5.19.22.
yea if it were but once in all my life, Romans 6 23.
and in thought only: Ga^at. 3.10.
is the loss of Gods favor, the purchasing of his heavy displeasure: James.
2.10.
which brings everlasting death both of soul and body.

THE SECOND PART.
Question. How shall you escape this great danger, and fearful punishment of
your sins. Will not your good deeds serve to make some amends to GOD for
your il deeds, and so deliver you from this punishment.

Aunsvvere. My good deeds will not help to save me from this punishment, nor
any thing else, Ephe. 2.9. Acts. 4.1^. Gala. 2.21.
but only the deeds of Jesus Christ has delivered me.

Question. How has Jesus Christ saved and delivered you from this great
punishment of your sins.

Aunsvvere. Jesus Christ has delivered me from the punishment of my sin, 1.
Tim. 3.1^. Cala. 3.13. Esai. 53.5.
because he being both GOD and Man, Col. 1.19.20.
has suffered all the punishment which my sins deserved, 1. Pet. 2.24.
and has fulfilled the law of God perfectly for me, Rom 4.25.
and thereby has restored me for ever to the love and favor of God.

Question. Are all then saved by this suffering and death of Christ.

Aunsvvere. Only they are saved by Christ, John. 3.16.3.
who believe that he has done all things touching salvation, not only for
other, Gal. 2.20. Ioh. 1.20.22.
but also even for them selves, the effect of which faith is contained in the
Creed.

Question. Rehearse the Creed.

Aunsvvere. I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth.
John. 14 1.
And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived by the
holy Ghost, horn of the Virgin Marie. Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried, he descended into Hell. The third day he rose
again from the dead. He assended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God the Father Almighty. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the
dead. I believe in the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The Communion of
Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life
everlasting Amen.

Question. By what means have we such a true faith.

Aunsvvere. Math. 16.17. Ephesi 6.23. 2. Cor. 4.13. Mark. 9.24.


It is the gift of GOD.

Question. How does God work this faith in us.

Aunsvvere By the preaching of the word of God. Romans 1.12.17. Romans 10.4.17.
James. 1.21.


Question. Is this faith fully framed, and made strong in us at the first, or
in one hour.

Aunsvvere. Faith is increased by little and little, 1. Cor. 11.17. Galat.
4.19. Ephesi. 4.11.12.13. 1. Thessa. 5.19.20.
and made strong in us by the diligent hearing of the word of God, and by the
use of his Sacraments.

Question. How many Sacraments are there.

Aunsvvere. There are two Sacraments, Baptism, Romans 4.11. 1. Cor. 10.2.3.
Math. 21.25. Matthew. 28.19. Matthew. 26.2.6 Acts. 2.26.
and the Supper of the Lord.

Question. What benifite have you by Baptism, and to what end serves it.

Aunsvvere. By Baptism the holy Ghost assures me, Acts 22.16.
that as my body is sprinkled with water, so my soul, 1. Pet. 3.21.
by the bloodshedding of Christ, is sprinkled and washed from all the guilte
and punishment of my sins, Coloss. 2.12.
and also herby I profess my self to dye with Christ, as concerning sin,
Romans 6.4.
and live in him as concerning righteousness.

Question. To what end serves the Supper of the Lord.

Aunsvvere. In the Supper of the Lord, Luke. 22.19.20. 1. Pet. 10.16.
I am by the spirit of GOD assured, that as the bread broken, and the wine
poured out be delivered unto me, 1. Cor. 11.23.34
even so was the body of Christ broken, and his blood shed, as a full
recompense to God for my sins.

THE THIRD PART.
Question. For as much then as God of his infinite love, has given his own
son, to ransom us from the power of sin, death, and hell, to advance us
to the honor of his Children, and heirs of his kingdom: seeing it pleases
him to give us faith, and daily to nourish and increase it in us more and
more: by his word and Sacraments, by the which faith we lay hold upon
Christ, and make him with all his merits and treasures our own: so that now
not only alour sins are removed from us, but also his righteousness,
holiness, and perfection, is accounted ours before GOD: Do you not think that
we are very depely bound unto him.

Aunsvvers.

Yes verily. I am so much bound to God, Psalm. 8.5. Psalm. 116.12 Romans 12.1.
that al my life ought to be a continual thankfulness to his Majesty, for his
great mercy.

Quuestion.

Is then this doctrine which shows us that we are saved by Jesus Christ
only, and not by our own works, any occasion of wicked life, as the Papists
slander it.

Aunsvvere. This doctrine is no occasion of wicked life, Romans 12.1. 1. John.
2.1. Romans 6.1. Titus. 2.11.12.
but the greatest reason to persuade men to be diligent and zealous in good
works.

Question. Are there no other good deeds required of Christians, but giving of
alms, visiting the sick, buylding of schools, and houses for the poor.

Aunsvvere. Math. 6.2. 1. Cor. 13.3.
As these are good deeds, and such as highly please God, being done in such
manner as the word of God does teach us: Exo. 20.3.4. Math. 22.36.
So are there many other much more excellent then these: as the pure
worshipping of God both with the soul and body: Job. 13.15.
trusting and dependidg of his good providence both in prosperity and
adversity: Luke 10.42.
hearing of his holy word: These. 5.11.14. Hebre. 3.13. Colos. 3.16. Jacob.
5.20.
exhortations and admonitions one to an other, especially to such as we have
special charge over: 1. These. 5.16. Psalm. 50.14.15.
praising God for all his mercies, and continual benifites powered upon us: and
last of all, Judges. 20. Ephe. 6.18. Psalm. 50.15. Acts. 4.24.
faithful prayers for all such things as we stand in need of.

Question. To whom ough we to make our prayers.

Aunsvvere. We must pray to our loving and Almighty GOD alone, and to none but
him.

Question. What things ought we to pray for.

Aunsvvere. We must pray, Acts. 4.29. Ephe. 6.18.19.
not only for all things needful for our selves and the church of GOD, but
especially for those things which appertain to the setting forth of the
glory of God, even as we are taught in the Lords prayer.

Question. Rehearse the Lords prayer.

Aunsvere. Our father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name. Math. 6.9.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in Earth, as it i^ in Heaven. Give us this
day our daly bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation But deliver us from
evil Amen.

Question. How may we be assured that God will hear us, seeing we are sinners.

Aunsvvere. Because we offer up our prayers, John. 16.29. 1. John. 2.1. 1. Pet.
2.5.
not in our own name, nor in the name of any creature but of the son of God
our Savior, who is always in the presence of God, to entreat his majesty
for us, his poor Servants.

FINIS.


