. A SHORT Catechism, or plain instruction, containing the su^me of Christian
learning, set fourth by the Kings majesty's authority, for all
Scholemaisters to teach.

To this Catechism are adjoined the Articles agreed upon by the Bishops and
other learned and godly men, (...) the last conuocatio^ at London, in the year
of our Lord, (...). D. L I I. for to root out the discord of (...) opinions,
and stablish the ^me^t of true religion: Likewise published by the Kings
majesty's authority. 1553.

(...) Imprinted at London by Ih^ Day with the kings most gracious license
(...) privilege: Forbidding all other to print the same Catechism.

An Iniunction given by the king our sovereign Lord his most excellent majesty
to all scholemasters and teachers of youth, within all his Graces realm and
dominions, for auctorising and establyshyng the use of this Cathechisme.
Edward the Sixte, by the grace of God king of England, France and Ireland:
defe^doure of the faith: and of the church of England and also of Ireland in
earth the Supreme head: to all Scholemasters and teachers of youth.

When there was presented unto us, to be perused, a short and plain order of
Catechism written by a certain godly and learned man: we committed the
debatinge, and diligente examination thereof, to certain Bishops, and other
learned men, whose judgment we have in great estimation. And because it seemed
agreeable with the scriptures, and the ordynaunces of our Realm, we thought
it good, not only, for that agreement to put it forth abroad to Print: but
also, for the plainness and shortness, to appoint it out for all Scholemasters to
teach. That the yet unskillful and young age, having the foundations laid,
both of religion and good letters, may learn godliness together with wisdom:
and have a rule for the rest of their life, what judgment they ought to have
of god: to who^ all our life is applied: and how they may please God, wherein
we ought, with all the doings and duties of our life, to travail.

We will therefore and co^mau^d, both all and each of you, as ye tender our
favor, and as ye mind to avoid the just punishmente of transgressing our
aucthoriti, that ye truly and diligently teach this Catechism in your
schools, immediately after the other brief Catechism which we have already
setforth: that young age, yet tender and wauerynge, being by authority of good
lesso^s and instructions of true religion stablyshed, may have a great
furtherance to the right worshipping of God: and good helps to live in
alpointes according to duty. Wherewyth being furnyshed, by better using dew
godlynes toward God the author of all things: obedyence toward their King,
the sheepeherde of the people: Loving affection to the common weal, the
general mother of all: they may seem not borne for them selves: but be
profitable and dewtyfull, toward God, their King, and their country.

Given at Grenewyche the. xx. of May the. vii. year of our Reign.
The Copy of the Kings Majesty's letters Patentes for the Printynge of this
and the little Cathechisme.
EDWARD the ^irte by the grace of God King of England. France and Ireland,
Defendour of the faith, and of the church of England and also o^ Ire land in
earth the supreme hedde.

TO all manner of Printers, Bokesellers; and other our Officers, Ministers and
Subjects gretyng.

We do you to understand, that of our grace especial, we have granted and
given Privilege and license, and by these presents do grant, and give
privilege and license to our well-beloved subject John Day, of our City of
London Printer, unto his factours and assigns, to Print, or cause to be
printed, as well this Cathechisme i English, which we have caused to be
setfourth for the better instruction of ^outh, to be taught in English
Schools, as also an A. B. C. with the B^ife Cathechisme, already printed, Any
other privilege to the contrary in any wise not withstanding.

AND furthermore our pleasure is that the same John Day, his factonres and
assygnes, shall and may have the only pryntynge from time to time of the same
Cathechismes in recompense of his industry pains and charges to be sustained
in that behalf. Straightly forbidding by these presents al and singulec, our
subjects, as well priuters as bokesellers, as al other parsos within our Realms
and dominions whatsoever they be, to prynt, or cause to be printed* within any
our fair^ dominions, these Cathechismes aforesa^d or any of them, but only the
said John Day* and his assigns, neither to bie any other sorts of impressions
then such as shall be printed by the said John Day and his assigns, upon pain
of our high displesure, and that every offe^der therein shall forteit to our
use* xls* for every such cathechisme, so prin ted, or bought, co^trari to the
true meaning of this our present license and privilege, over and besides al
such cathechismes to be forfaited to whom soever shall sustein the charges and
sue the said forfai ture in our behalf.

Willing therefore and co^ma^ding al our officers and ministers as they tender
our favor and will avoid our dysplesure and indignacio^ for the contrary, that
they and every of the^ (if need shall require) do aid and assist the foresaid
John Day, his factours and assigns, in due exercising and execucio^ of this
our present license and privilege with the ffect according to the true
meaning of the same. I^ witness whereof we caused these our letters to be made
patents. Witness oureselfe at Westemynstre the, xxv, day of March the, vi^,
year of our ^aygue,

The Table.
A
Absent. Chris^e gouerueth his church absent. fol. 24. b. How Christ is
absent, and present in the world. fol. 25. a*
Adam. The names of Adam and ^ue. fol. 16, a.
Aduoutrie. Aduoutrie. fol. 7. a.
Ascension. Christ's ascension. fol. 20. b, fol. 26. a. Out profit by Christ's
ascension. fol. 30. a. Causes of Christ's ascens^on. fol. 30. b.

B
Baptism. The ministratio^ of bap tisme. 48. b. The meaning of baptism. fol,
50. a.
Bread. The bread. fol. 50. a. Our day^y bread. fo. 59. a. Wvhat br^ad
means. fol. 19. a. Daily bread or supernatural. 60. a. Wvh^ we ask our
bread to be daily. fol 60. a.
Brother. The name of brethren. fol. 66. a.

C
Ceremonies of the law. Ceremonies. fol. 12, a.
Charity. Charity. fol. 66, ^ Degrees of Charity, fol. 67. b.
Children. Children to be taught^ true religion. fol. 2. a,
Church. The church. fol, 41. b. Christ governs his Church absent, fol, 24.
b. The holy Church, fol. 37. a, Wvho be of Christ's church. fol, 38, a,
Marks of the Church. fol. 42. b. Wvhy the Church is called universal. fo.
45. a.
Christ. Christ's doings for our behofe. fol. 32. b. Christ an example of
life unto us. 33. b. Honor of Christ. 34. b Christ's benefits to us. fol. 66.
a.
Communion. Communion of Saints. fol. 45. a. b.
Contention. The harms of contention. fol. 62.
Covenant. Gods covenants, fo, 19, b Our covenant with god: as we forgive. etc.
fo. 61. ^
Couetise. Couetise of an others. ^ol. ^. b.
Creed. The Creed. fol. 4. a. ^ol. 13. b. Wvhy the Creed is called a symbol.
fol. 4. b.

D
Death. Christ's death. f^. 20. b
Dome. The day of dome. 36. b.
Epiousion. Epiousion. fol. 60. a.

E
Eve. The names of Adam and Eve. fol. 16. a.
Example. Christ an example of life unto us. fol. 33. b.

F
Faith. Iustificacio^ by faith. 40, ^ Trem faith and works vnseparat^. fol. 41.
a. Faith the mouth of the soul. fo. 5^. b. Faith in prayer. fo. 64. b.
Father. Wvhy we call God father. fol. 15. a. Wvhat we gather of (our father.)
fol, 54. b
Feed. ^ow we feed upon Christ's body and blud. fol. 51. a.
Forgiveness. Forgiveness of trespasses. passes. fol. 60. b. Charitable
forgiueness^ one to an other ceasseth brawles. fol. 61. b.

G
God. Wvhat God is. fol. 3. b. One God. fol. 5. a. Cakynge the name of God.
fol. 5. a. God is each where. fo. 56. a God always present to help us. fol. 56.
^. Knowledge, desire, fear and love of God. fo. 65. b
Gadlessnesse. Gadlessnesse. fol. 66. a.
Godly. The bliss of the G^ly. fol. 68. b.
Good. Good not evil to be r^ dred for evil. fol. 62. ^.
Gospel. The law and the Gospel. fol. 4. ^.

H
Hallowe. ^ow Gods name is to be hallowed. fol. 57. ^.
Heaven. Wvhat is meant by (which ^t in heaven) fol. 55. a.
Holly Ghost. The holy Ghost. 4^. ^. Why the holy Ghost is called holy. fol. 4.
b. (...) rests the holy Ghostes sanctificacio^. fol. 44. a*
Honor. Honor of Christ. 34. b
Hipocrisy. Superstition and hypocrisy. fol. ^6, a,

I
Ignorance. Ignorance brought in by corruption of nature. fol. 10. a,
Image. Images. fol. 5. a. The image that man was made after, fol, 16, a, Gods
image def^ed in man. fol, 10, b,
Iu^ificationr Causes of our justification, 39. a, I^stification by faith, fol.
^0, a,

K
Keye. Keys to by^de and loose. fol. 43. a.
Kingdom* Christ's kingdom not yet perfect. fol, ^7, b, Christ's kingdom. fo,
58, a Why this is added: fo thine is the kingdom, f, 63, b

L
Law. The Law and the Gospel, fol, 4, a, Laws of the first table, fol, 4, b,
Laws of the second table, fol. 5, b, The sum of the law by Christ. fol* 9,
b, Why the law was written in tables. fol, 10, b, None ^ade ryghteous by the
law, fol, 11* b, Why the law was given to one people* fo. 12, b The moral
law commune to all, fol, 1^, b,
(...)* Honest frame of life fol. 65, a,

M
Man. The making of man, f, 15. ^ The image that man was made after, fol, 16,
a, Man's fall, fol, 17. a,
Measure. Measure an other by thy self, fol, 67, a,
Mouth* Faith the mouth of the soul, fol. 1, b,
Murder* Murder. fol, 6, b,

N
Nature The law of nature* fol, 10, a, 67, a,

O
Original syn. Original syn, fol, 18, b

P
Parents. Honor of parents, fo, 6, b
Passion. Christ's passion, fo, 20, b
Prayer. Prayer, fol, 52, b, The Lords prayer. f, 53, a ^ ^herher we may use
any other prayer but the pate^ noste^, 53, b, Nothing in the Lords prayer
hand to understand, fol, 54, b, Faith in prayer, fol, 64, b What to be asked in
praer, fol, 64, b,
Preacher Office of Preachers, fol, 52, a,
Presence* Christ's bodylye presence, fol, 27, b,
Present* How Christ is absent and present in the world. fol, 25 a, God always
present to help us, fol, 56, b,
Professyon. All Christian* should know their profession. fol, 1, a,

Q
Question* Teaching by questions fol. 1, a.

R
Redemp^ion, The means of redemption, fol. 9, a,
Religion* Children to be taught true religion, fol, 2, a. Christian religion,
fo, 2, ^ Parts of Christian religion. fo, 3 a,
Resurrectyo^* Christ's resurrection, 20, ^ The resurrection of Christ
necessary, fol* 22, b, The resurrection, fo, 36, ^
Reward The reward of the godly and ungodly, fol, 9, a,
Righteous None made ryghteous by the law, fol, 11, b,

S
Sabbat. The sabbat. fol. 5. a. 46. ^*
Sacrament* ^vhat Sacraments are. fol. 48. a.
Sanctificatyon ^vherin re^eth the holly Ghostes sanctificacion. fol. 44. a.
Scripture The scriptures preserved from the beginning. fol. 4. a.
Sede The sede of the (...) fol. ^0. a.
Serpente The Serpents head* fol, 19, b,
Service Parts of Gods t^ewe inward service, fol. 46, a, Outward service of
god, fol, 47. b,
Sin^e Sins forgiven by Christ's death only, fol, 12, a,
Son Christ compared to the son, fol, 28, a,
Spirit, The spirit sent down, fol, 22, a,
Superstition Superstition and hipocrisye, fol, 66, a.
S^pper, The use of the Lords Supper, fol, 49, b, The meaning of the Lords
Supper, fo, 50,
Symbol* ^hy the Creed is cal^ed a Symbol, fol, 4, b,

T
Table Laws of the first ta^le, fol. 4, b, Laws of the second^ ^able, fol,
v, b, ^vhy the law was written in tables, fol, 10, b,
T^utation ^entation, fol, ^2, b,
Theft. Theft, fol, 7, b,

V
Vice, Vices to be rooted dut^ that virtues may be planted in their place, fo,
69, ^
Universal Why the chirch is called universal. fol, 45. a.

W
Weakness. Our weakness, fol, 62, ^
Will. Gods will to be done, fol, 58, b.
Wine, The wine, fol, 51, a,
Witness False witness, fol, 8, ^
Work* True faith and work ^ v^separate, 41, a,
World* The making and preservation of the world, fol, 14, b, The end of the
world, fol, 35,

The end of the Table.
THE CATHECHISME.
IT is the deutie Al Christians should know their profession*
of them al, who^ Christ has redeemed by his death, that they not only be
servants to obey, but also Children to in herite: so to know, which is the
true trade of life, and that God lyketh, that they may be able to answer to
every demand of Religion, and to render account of their faith and
profession.

And this is the playnest Teaching by questyons*
way of teachinge: which not only in Philosophye Socrates, but also in our
Religion Apolina^ius, has used: that both by certain questyons, as it were
by poynctinge, the ignoraunte might be instructed: and the skilful put iu
remembrance, that they forgette not what they have learned. Wether fore
having regard to the profit, which we ought to seek in teaching of youth:
and also to shortness, that in our^ hole Scholyng, there should be nothing,
either over flowyng or wantyng: have co^ueied the whole so^me into a dialogue,
that the matter it self, might be the plainer to perceive, and we the less
stra^ in other matters beside the (...)* Thus the^ begins y^ Master to
appose his scoler.

Master. Since I know (dear Chyl^re^ to be taught true relygion.
(...).) that it is a great part of my deutie, not only to se that thou be
instructed in ^d letters: but also earne^y and diligently to examine what sort
of Religion, thou (...), in this thy tender (...): I thought it b^st to (...)
thee by certain questi^, to the intent I may perfectly know, whether thou
have well or il travailed therein. Now therefore te^ me (my son) what Religion
that is which thou professest.


Scholar. That, good Master I profess, which is the (...) ligion of the Lord
(...): Christian re ligion.
which in the. xi. of the Acts is called the christian (...).


Master. Do^st tho^ then (...) fesse thy self to be a (...) of Christian
godliness* (...) religion, and a (...) our Lord Christ*


Scholar. That forsothe (...) I coufesse, and play^ (...) boldly pro^ yea,
(...) accom^t ^the who^ (...) al my (...), as in the the which is both of
(...) ^uour, then that the ^nesse of my wit may ^tayne (...) it* and also
more approaching to God des majesty, than that I, by any (...) of v^eraunce,
may easily express it.


Master* Tell me then (dear s^n) as exactly as thou can, in what points
thou think that the si^nne of Christian Religion stands.


Scholar. In two poin^tes, Parts of Christian re ligion.
that is to say: true faith in God, and assured persuasio^ mnce^ed of all those
things, which are contained in the holy Scriptures: and in charity, which
belongs both to God and to our neigh boure.


Master. That faith which is (...) by hearing and readyng of the word, (...)
does it teach the concerning God?


Scholar. This does it principally What god is.
teach: that there is one certain nature, one substance, one ghost and
heavenly mind, or rather an everlasting spirit, without beginning or endyng,
which we call God: whom all the peoples of the world ought to worship, with
souerayn honor, and the highest kind of reverence. Moreover out of the holy
words of GOD, which by the prophets and the beloved of almyghtye God, are in
the holy ^okes published, to the eternal glory The (...) and the gos pell.
of his name. I learn the law and the thretnynges thereof: then the promyses
and the gospel of god These thin The scriptures preserved from the beginning.
ges first written by Moses and other men of God, have been preserved hole and
uncorrupted, even to our age: and sythens that, the chief articles of our
faith, have been gathered into a short abrydgement, which is commonly called the
Creed, or Symbol The cre^e
of the Apostles.


Master. Why is this abridgmente of the faith termed with y^ name of a
symbol* Scho. A symbol is as much to say, as a sygnt, mark, pr^uye called a
^mbole.
token, or watch word, whereby the souldioures of one camp are known from
their enemies. For this reason the abridgement of the faith, whereby the
Christians are known from them that be no Christians, is rightly named a
Symbol.


Master. First tell me so^what what thou thynkest of the law: and then
afterward of the Creed or Symbol.


Scholar. I shall do (good Master) with a good will as you command me. The
^awes of the first table.
Lord God has charged us by Moses, that we have none other God at all, but
him: that is to say, that we take him alone, for our one only God, our maker,
and One God
savior. That we reverence not, nor worship any portraiture or any image
what Images,
soever whether it be painted, carved, graven, or by any mean fashyoned how
soever it be. That we take Takyug the name of God.
not the name of our Lord God in vain: that is either in a matter of no
wayght or of no truth* Last of al this ought we to hold steadfastly The Sabbat.
and with devout conscye^ce: that we keep holyly and religiously the Sabbat
day: which was appointed (...) from the other, for rest, and service of God.


Master. Uerye well. Now haste thou rehearsed unto me the laws of the first
table: wherein is, in a sum, contained the knowledge, and true seruyee of
God. Go forward and tell me, which be the duties of charity, and our love
toward men.


Scholar. Do you ask me (master) what I think o^ the other part of the
law, which is commonly called ^awes of the second table.
the second table?


Master. Thou say new, my son, that is it in deed that I would feign hear
of.


Scholar. I will in few w^des dispatche it, as my simple wit will serve me.
Moses has knitte it up in a sh^rte sum: that is, that with all loving
affection, we honor and reverence our father and mother. That we^ k^ll no
man. That we commit no aduoutrie. That we steal nothing. That we ^are false
wytnes against (...). Last of all that we co^ nothing, that is our ^yghboures.


Master. How is that commandment, of the honoringe father and mother, (...)
be understood?


Scholar. Honor of father Honor of Parents.
and mother co^teineth love, fear, and reverence: yea (...) it further
stands in obeyinge, succouring, defe^ding, and nourishing the^, if need
require. It byndeth us also most h^ly, and with (...) natural affection, to
(...) the magistrate: to reverence the Mi^ysters of the church, our
^cholemasters, with all our elders, and betters.


Master. What is (...) Murder.
in that commaundement^ do not kill.


Scho. That we hate, (...), (...) revile no man. (...) i^ (...) us, that we
(...) t^en our f^es: do good to them that hate us: and (...) we pray for all
prospe^ and good hap to our very mortal ennemies.


Master. The (...) not commiting aduoutry, what think tho^ (...)


(...). Forsothe this com^ ^duoutry.
conteyneth many things For it forbid^ not only to talk (...) man's wy^e, or
any other woman vnthastly: bu^ also to touch her, yea, or to cast an eye at
her wa^ton^e: o^ with lustful look to behold her: or by any (...)* nest
mean to w^oe her* (...) there our selves, or any other in our behalf: finally
hear in is debarred al kind of (...) thy, and strayeng lust*


Mast. What thynkest thou of the commandment* not to steal?


Scholar. I shall show (...) ^heft.
briefly as I have done the rest* if it please you to (...) me* It commands
(...) beguyle no (...)* to (...) no unlawful wares: (...) ^e no man his
wealth: and to think nothing profitable, that either is not just* or (...)
^reth from right and honesty: Breifely, rather wyllynglye leese that is thine
own, than thou wrongfullye take that is another, and turn it to thine own
commodity.


Master. How may that commandment be kept, False wit nesse.
of bearing no false witness?


Scholar. If we neither our selves speak any false or vain lie: nor allow
it in other, either by speech or silence, or by our present company. But we
ought, always to maintain truth, as place and time serves.


Master. Now remains the last commandment, of (...) coveting any thing that
is our neighbors: what means that?


Scholar. This law does Couetise of another.
generally forbid al sorts (...) evil lusts: and commands us to bridle
and restrain al greedye insatiable desire of our will, which holds not it
self within the bonds of right and reason: and it wylleth that each man be
content with his estate. But who so ever coueteth more then right* with the
loss (...) his neighbor, and wrong to an other: he breaks and utterly
loses the bond of charity, and fellowship among men, Yea and upon The
reward of y^ godly and ungodly.
him (unless he amend) the Lord God, the most stern revenger of the breaking
his law, shall execute most grievous punyshmente. On the other side, he that
lives according to the rule of these laws, shall find both praise and
bliss: and God also his mercyful and bou^tyfull good Lord.


Master. Thou haste shortly set out the. x. commandments: Now then tell
me, how all these things, that thou haste particularlye declared, Christ has
in few words contained, settyng^ forth unto us in a su^me, the whole pyth of
the law.


Scholar. Will you that I knit up in a brief abrydgement, all that belongs
both to God and to men?


Master. ^ea.


Scho. Christ says thus: The su^me of the law by Christ.
Thou shall love the Lord, thy God, with al thy heart: with all thy soul: with
all thy mind: and with all thy strength. This is the greatest commandment in
the law. The other is like un* to this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Up* on these two commandments hang the whole law* and the Prophets.


Master. I will now that thou tell me further, what law is that which thou
speak of: that which we call the law of nature? or The law of nature.
some other besides?


Scholar. I remember master that I learned that of you long ago: that it was
ingraffed by God in the nature of man, while nature was yet sound and
uncorrupted. But after the e^tra^^ Ignorance brought i^ by corrup^ion of nature.
of sin, although the wise were somewhat after a sort ^ot utterly ignorant of
that ^yght of nature: yet was it ^y that time so hid from the greatest part
of me^, that they sca^t perceived any shadow thereof.


Master. What is the cause, that god willed it to be written out in tables: and
that i^ should be priuatli appointed to one people alone?


Scholar. I will show you* Why the law was written in tables.
By oryginal synn^ and euel custom, the image of God in man, was so, at the
beginning darkened: and the judgment of nature, so corrupted: that man him
self does no^ snfficiently understand, wha^ difference is between ho^ stye and
dyshonestye, rygh^ and wrong. The bountyfull God thearefore minding to renew
that image in us: first wrought this by y^ law written in tables, that we
might know our selves, and therein, as it were in a glass, behold the fylthe
and spots of our soul, and stubborn hardness of a corrupted heart: that by
this mean yet, acknowledgynge our sin: and perceiving the weakness of our
flesh: and the wrath of God fear^ely bent against us for sin: we might
the ^ore fervently long for our ^ior Christ Jesus: which ^y his death and
precious ^prynklynge of his blood, has cleansed and washed away our sins:
pacified the wrath of the almyghtye father: by the holy breathe of his Spirit
creates new hearts in us: and renews our minds after the image and
likeness of their Creator, in true ryghteousnes, and holiness. Which thing
neither the justice of the law, nor any sacrifices of Moses were able to
perform. And None made righteous by y^ ^awe.
that no man is made ryghteous by the law, it is evident: not only thereby,
that the ryghteous lives by faith: but also hereby that no mortal man is able
to fulfill all that the law of both the tables commands. For we have
hindrau^ces that strive against the law: as the weakness of the flesh:
froward appetite, and lust naturally Ceremonies of the law.
engendered. As for sacrifice, cleansynges, washinges, and other ceremonies of
the law: they were but shadoes, lykenesses, images and figures of the true and
everlasting sacrifice of Jesus Christ, done upon the cross. By the benefit
whereof alone all the sins of all beleuers, even from the beginning Sins
for given by Christ's death only
of the world* ar ^ardoned, by the only mercy of God, and by no desert of
ours,


Master. I hear not yet, why almighty Gods will was to declare his secret
pleasure to one people alone, whi che was the Israelites.


Scholar. Forsooth that had Why the law was given to one people
I almost forgotten, I suppose it was not don for this intent, as though the
law of the. x. commauudements did not belong generally to ail men: for as much
as the Lord our God is not only The moral law commune to all the God of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles: but rather this was meant
thearby that the true Messiah, which is our Christ, might be known at his
coming into the world: who must needs have been borne of that nation, and
none other, for true perfourmannce of the promise. For the which cause, Gods
pleasure was to appoint out for himself one certain people, holy, so^dred
from the rest, and as it were peculiarly his own. That, by this mean his
divine word might be continually kept holy, pure, and uncorrupted.


Master. Hitherto thou have well satisfied me, dear son. Now let us come to
the Christian confession, which I will that thou plainly rehearse unto me.


Scholar. It shall be done. I The creed.
believe in God, the father al mighty: maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ, his only son, our Lord: which was conceived by the holy Ghost: borne
of the virgin Mary: Suffered under Po^ce Pilate: was crucified: dead: and
buried. He went down to hell: the third day he rose again from the dead.
He went up to heaven: sytteth on the right hand of God the father almighty:
from thence shall he come, to judge the quycke and the dead. I believe in y^
holy ghost. I believe the holy universal church: the communion of saints: the
forgeuenes of sins: the rysynge again of the flesh: and the life
everlasting.


Master. All these (my son) thou have rehearsed generallye and shortelye.
Therefore thou shall do well, to set out largelye, all that thou have spoken
particularlye: that I may plainly perceive what thy belefe is concerning each of
them. And first I would hear of the knowledge of god, afterward of the right
serving of him.


Scholar. I will with a good The ma^uge and preservation of the world.
will obey your pleasure (dear Master) as far as my simple wit will suffer me.
Above all things we must steadfastly believe and hold: that God almyghtye, the
father, in the beginning, and of nothing, made and fashyoned this whole frame
of the world, and al things what soever are contained therein: and that they all
are made by the power of his word, that is of Jesus Christ the son of God.
Which thing is sufficientlye approved by witness of scriptures. Moreover that,
when he had thus shapen all creatures, he ruled, governed and saved them by his
bounty and liberal hand: has ministered, and yet also ministers most
largelye all that is needful, for mayntenaunce and preserving of our life:
that we should so use them, as behooves myndeful and godly children.


Master. Why do thou call God father:


Scholar. For two causes, the Why we call God fa there.
one, for that he made us all at the beginning, and gave life unto us all: the
other is more weyghtye, for that by his holy spirit and by faith he has
begotten us again: making us his children: gyuing us his kingdom and the
enheritaunce of lyf^ everlasting, with Jesus Christ his own, true, and
natural son.


Master. Seeing then God has created all other things to serve man: and made
man to obey, honor, and gloryfye him: What can thou say more of the
beginning and making of man?


Scholar. Even that which Moses wrote: that God shaped The making of man
the first man of claye: and put into him soul and life: the^, that he cast
Adam in a dead sleep, and brought forth a woman, whom he drew out of his
side, to make her a companion with him of al his life and wealth. And therefore
was man called Adam, because he took The names of Adam and (...)
his beginning of the earth: and the woman called Eve. because she was
appointed to be the mother of al liui^g.


Mast. What image is that, after the likeness whereof, thou say that man
was made?


Scholar. That is most absolute The image that man was made after.
righteousness and perfect holiness: which most nearely belongs to the ^ry
nature of God: and mos^ clearly appeared in Christ our new Ada^. Of the which
in us, thear scante are to be seen any sparcles.


Master. What* are there sc^ to be seen?


Scholar. It is true forsooth: Gods image defa ced in man.
for they do not now so shi^, as they did in the beginning, before man's fall:
for as much as man by the darkness of sins, and mist of errors, has
corrupted the bryghtnesse of this image. In such sort has God i^ his wrath
wreaked him upon the synful man.


Master. But I pray the tell me, wherefore came it thus to pass*


Scholar. I will show you. When the Lord God had made the frame of this
world, he him self planted a garden, full of delight and pleasure, in a
certain place, Eastward, and called it Eden. Wherein beside other passing
fair trees, not far from the mids of the garden was thear one specially
called, the tree of life, and another called y^ tree of knowledge of good and
evil. Herein the Lord of his singular love placed man: and committed unto him
the garden to dress, and look unto: geuynge him liberty to eat of the
fruits of all the trees of paradyse, except the fruit of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. The fruit of this tree if ever he tasted, he
should without fail die for it. But Eve, deceived by the deuell
counterfetynge the shape of a serpent, gathered of the forbidden fruit: which
was for the fayrenes to the eye to be desired: for the sweetness in taste to
be reached at: and pleasant for the knowledge of good and evil* and she eat
thearof, and gave unto her housba^ to eat of the same. For which doing, they
both immediately dyed, that is to say: were not, only subject to the death of
the body, but also lost the life of the soul, which is righteousness. And
forthwith the image of God was defaced in the^: and the most beautiful
proportion of righteousness, holiness* truth and knowledge of God, was
confounded and in a manner utterly blotted out. Thear remained the earthly
image, joined with unrighteousness, guyle, fleshly mind, and deep ignorance
of godli and heavenly things. Hereof grew the weakness of our flesh^* hereof
came this corruption, and disorder of lusts and affections: hereof came that
pestilence: hereof came that seed and nurishme^t of sins wherwyth mankind is
infected, and it is called sin Origynall sin.
original. Moreover thereby nature was so corrupted, and overthrown, that
unless the goodness, and mercy of almighty God had helped us by the medicine
of grace, eue^ as in bodi we are thrust down into al wretchedness^ of death: so
must it needs have been, that al me^ of all sorts should be thrown into
everlasting punishment, and fire unquenchable.


Master. Oh the unthankfulness of men! But what hope had our first parents,
and from thence fourth the rest; whearby they wear releue^*


Scholar. When the Lord The means of (...) tion.
God had both with words and deeds chastised Adam and Eve (for he thrust them
both out of the garden with a most grievous reproach) he then cursed the
serpent, threatnynge him, that the time should one day come, when the seed of
the ^oma^ should break his head. After ward the Lord God stablyshed that same
glorious and most bountiful promise: first with a covenant made Gods (...).
between him and Abraham, by circumcision, and in Isaac his son: then again
by Moses: last of all by the oracles of ye noble prophets.


Master. What means the serpents head: and that seed that God speaks of*


Scholar. In the serpe^ts head The Serpents head
lies all his venim^, ^d the whole pyth of his life and force. Thearfore do I
take the serpents head to betok^ the whole power, and king dome, or more truli
the tira^nie of the old serpent the deuel. The sede (as saint* Paul The seed
of the woman*
does plainly teach) is* Jesus Christ the son of God, very God and very man:
co^ceaned of the holy Ghost: engendered of the womb and substau^^e of Marie, the
blessed pure and undefiled maid: and was so borne and ^ostred by her as other
babes de, sauinge that he was most far from all infection of sin.


Master. All these founda^ions that thou have laid ar most ^rew. Now
thearfore let us: go forward to those his doings, whearin lie^ our salua^ion
and conquest against that old serpent.


Scholar. It shall be done, good Master. After that Christ Jesus had
delivered incharge to his Apostles that most joyful, and in all points
heavenly doctrine, the gospel, which in greek is called Euangelion, in
Englysh good tidinges: and had as by sealyng stablished the same with tokens,
and miracles Christ's (...), death* refurreccion and ascension.
innumerable, when of all his life was full: at length was he sore s^urged:
mocked with pottyng, sco^nyng, and spyttynge in his face: last of all his
hands and ^ete bored through with nails: and he fastened to a cross. Then he
truly dyed: and was truly buried: that by his most sweet sacrifice, he
might pacifye his fathers wrath against mankind: and subdue him by his death,
who had ye authority of death, which was the deuel: forasmuch not only the
lyuinge, but also the dead, wear they in hell, or elsse whear, they all felt
the power and force of this death: to whom lieng in prison (as Peter says)
Christ preached, though dead in body, yet relyued in Spirit. The third day
after, he vprose a gain, a live in body also: and with many notable profes,
the space of.xl. days, he abode among his disciples, eating and drynkyng with
the^. In whose syghte he was conveyed away in a cloud, up into heaven, or
rather above al heavens: where he now sits at the right hand of God the
father: being made Lord of all things, be they in heaven, or in earth: king
of all kings: our everlasting and only he Bisshoppe: our only attournye:
only mediator, onely^ peace maker between God The spirit sent down.
and men. Now sithe^s that, he is entered into his glorious majesty: by
sendynge down his holy spirit unto us (as he promised) he lighteneth our dark
blyndnesse: moves, rules, teaches, cleanses, comforts, and reioyseth our
minds: and so will he still continually do, till the end of the world.


Master. Well, I se thou have touched the chief Articles of our religion, and
have set out, as in a short abrydgement, the Creed, that thou did
rehearse. Now therefore I will demand the questions of certain points.


Scholar. Do as shall please you Master: for ye may more perfectlye instruct
me, in those things that I do not thoroughly understand: and put me in
remembrance of that I have forgotten: and printe in my mind deeper, such
things, as have not taken steadfast hold thearin.


Master. Tell me the. ^f by his death we get pardon of our sins: was not
that enough, but that he must also rise again from the dead*


Scho. It was not enough, The resurrection of Christ necessary.
if ye have a respect, either to him, or to us. For unless he had risen
again, he should not be taken, for the son of God. For which cause also,
while he hong upon the cross, they that saw him vpbrayded him and said: he
has saved other, but can not save him self. Let him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe him. But now vprisyng from the dead to everlasting
continuance of life, he has showed a mutche greater power of his godheade,
then if by coming down from the cross he had fled from the terrible pains
of death. For to dye is common to all men: but to louse the bonds of death, and
by his own power to rise again, that properlye belongs to Jesus Christ the
only begotten son of God, the only author of life. Moreover it was
necessary, that he should rise again with glory, that the sayengs of David
and other prophets of God might be fulfilled, which told before: that neither
his body should se corruption: nor his soul be left in hell. As for us, we
neither had been justified, nor had had any hope left to rise again, had not
he risen, again, as Paul does in diverse places plainly show. For if he had
remained in the prison of death, in grave: and been holden in corruption, as al
men beside: how could we have hoped for saf ty by him which saved not himself?
It was mete therefore, and needful, for the part that he had in hand: and for
the chief stay of our sauegarde: that Christ should first deliver himself
from death, and afterward assure us of safetye by his vprisyng again.


Master. Thou have touched (my son) the chief cause of Christ's risinge
agay^* Now would I feign heart thy mind of his going up into heaven. What
answer think thou is to be made to them, that say: it had be^ better for
him, to tarry hear with us, presentlye to rule and govern us? For, beside
other diverse causes, it is ^lye, that the love of the people toward their
prince, specially being good and gracious, should grow the grea ter by his
present company.


Scholar. All these things Christ gouernith his Church ab ^ent.
which he should do present, that is to say, if he were in company among us,
he does the^ absent, He rules, maintayneth, strengthens, defe^deth, rebukes,
punysheth, corrects: and performs all such things as do become such a
prince, or rather God himself. Al those things (I say) performs he, which
belong either to our need or profit: honor or commodity. Beside this, Christ
God Christ is absent and present in the worrd*
is not so all together absent from the world, as mani do suppose. For albeit
the substance of his body be taken up from us: yet is his Godheade
perpetuallye present with us: although not subject to the sight of our eyes.
For things that be not b^dylye, can not be perceived by any bodyly mean. Who
ever saw his own soul^ No man. Yet what is thea^ more present? or what to
(...) man nearer, than his own soul. Spiritual things (...) not to be seen,
but with the eye of the spirit. The arfe^ he that in earth will see the
Godhead of Christ: let him open the eyes, not of his body, but of his mind,
but of his faith: and he shall set him present, whom eye has not seen: he
shall see him present, and in the mids of them, whearsoeuer be two or three
gathered together in his name: he shall see him present with us, even unto the
end of the* world, What said* I^ shall he see Christ present* Yea, he shall
both se and feel him dwelling within himself: in such sort as he does his
own proper soul. For he dwells and ^ydeth in the mind and heart of him
which fasteneth all his trust in him.


Master. Uery well, but our Christ's (...) cension.
confession is that he is ascended by into heaven. Tell me thearfore how that
is to be understood.


Scholar. So use we commo^lye to say of him, that has attained to any hye
degree or dignity: that he is ascended up, or advanced in to some hye room:
some hye place or state: because he^ has changed his forme^ case, and is
become of more honor, tha^ the rest. In sut^ case is Christ gone up, as h^
before came down. He came down from hiest honor to deepest dishonor, even
the dishonor and vile state of a servant, and of the cross* And likewise
afterward he went up, from the depest dyshonoure, to the highest honor, even
that same honor, which he had before, his going up into heaven, yea, above all
heavens, to the very roial throne of god, must needs be evident by most just
reason, that his glory and majesty might in comparison agreably answer to the
proportion of his baseness and reprochefull estate. This does Paul teach us,
in his writing to the Philippians: he became obedient eue^ unto death: yea,
the very death of the cross. Whearfore God bath both advanced him to the
highest state of honor: and also given him a name above al names: that at y^
name of Jesus eueri kne should bow, of al things in heaven, earth and hell. But
although he be already gone up into heaven: nevertheless by his nature of
godhead, and by his spirit, he shall always be present in his church: eue^ to
the end of the world. Yet this proves not that he is present among us in his
body. For his Godhead has one propertye: his ma^head another. His ma^head
Christ's bo dily presence
was create: his godhed uncreate. His ma^head is in so^^ one place of heaven:
his godhed is in such sort each where, that it fills both heaven * earth. But
to make this poi^t plainer, by a similitude or comparing of like to like. There
is nothing that does Christ compared to y^ son.
trulier, like a shadow, expres Christ, the^ the son: for it is a fit image
of the light and brightness of Christ. The so^ does always keep the heaven: yet
do we sai that it is prese^e also in y^* world: for without light thear is
nothing present, that is to say, nothing to be seen of any man: for the son
with his light fulfilleth al things. So Christ is lyfted up above all heavens,
that he may be present with all, and fully furnyshe all things as S. Paul does
say. But as touching the bodylye present of Christ hear in earth (if it
be lawful to place in comparison, great things with small) Christ's body is
present to our faith: as the son, wh^ it is seen, is present to the ey^* the
body whereof, although it do not bodylye touch the eye, nor be presently with
(...) together hear in earth, yet is it present to the sight, notwithstanding,
so large a distaunce of space between. So Christ's body which at his glorious
going up was conveyed from us: which has left the world, and is gone unto his
father: is a great way absent from our mouth, even then when we receive with
our mouth, the holy sacrament of his body and blood. Yet is our faith in
heaven: and beholds that son of righteousness: and is presently together
with him in heaven, in such sort as the syghte is in heaven with the body of
the son: or in earth the son with the sight. And as the son is present
to all things by his light: so is Christ also in his godhead. Yet neither can
from the body the light of the son be sondred: nor from his immortal body
the godhead of Christ. We must thearfore so say, that Christ's body is in
some one place of heaven, and his godhead euerywhear: that we neither of his
godhead make a body: nor of his body a God.


Master. I see (my son) th^n art not ignorant, after what sort Christ is
rightly said, to be from us in body, and with us in spirit. But thy^ one thing
would I know of thee: why Christ our lord is thus conveyed away from the
syghte of our eyes: and what profit we take by his going up to heaven.


Scholar. The chief cause the^ Our profit by Christ's ascenci^.
of was, to pluck out of us that false opinion, which sometime deceived the
Apostles theymselues: that Christ should in earth visibly reign, as other
kings, and rufflyng princes of the world. This error he minded, to have
utterly suppressed in us: and that we should thyncke his kingdom to consyst in
hyer things. Which thing he thearfore thought fytter, because it was more
for our comoditie and profitte: that some such kingdom should be set v^,
Causes of Christ's as c^tion.
as the foundacions thearof should rest upon our faith. Whearfore it was
necessary that he should be conveyed away from us, past perceiving of all
bodily sense: that by this mean our faith might be styrred up and exercised
to consider his government and providence, whom no sight of bodylye eyes can
behold. And forasmutch as he is not king of some one country alone: but of
heaven and earth: of quick and dead: it was most convenient that his kingdom
should be otherwise governed then our senses may a^teine unto. For else he
should have been constrained, some time to be carried up to heaven: sometime to
be driven down to the earth: to remove sometime in to one country, sometime
into another: and like an earthly prince to be carried hither and thither, by
diverse change of chaunsable affairs. For he could not be prese^tli with all
at once, unless his body wear so turned in to Godheade, that he might be in
all or in many places together: as Eutyches, and certain like heretykes held
opinion. If it so wear that he might be each whear present with all, at one
very instaunt time: then wear he not man, but a ghost* neither should he
have* had a true body, but a fantastical: whearof should have spronge
forth with a thowsa^d errors: all which he has dispatched by carienge his
body up whole to heaven. In the mean season he* remaining invisible,
governs his kingdom and commen weal, that is his church* with soueraign
wisdom and power. It is for men to rule their commonweals, by a certain
civil policy of men: but for Christ and God, by a heaven lie godlyke* order.
But all that I have hitherto said conteyneth but a small parcel of the
profytte, that we take by the caryenge up of Christ's body into heaven. For
there ar many mo things, that hear might be rehearsed, whearof large store of
fruit is to be gathered. But specially this may not be left unspoken: that the
be nefits are such, and so great* which come unto us by the death, risynge
again, and goinge up of Christ: as no tongue either of men or angeles is able
to expres. And that you may know my mind hearein: I will rehearse certain
of the chief: whearunto as it wear two principal points, the rest may be
applied. I say therefore: that both by these and other doings of Christ, two
commodities do grow unto us: the one, that all the things that ever he has
don* for our profyt and behofe he Christ do ing^s for (...) behofe
has done the^: so that they be as well our own, if we will cleave thearunto
with steadfast and lively faith, as if we had done them our selves. He was
nailed to the cross: we wear also nailed with him: and in him our sins
punished* He dyed: and was buried: we likewise with our sins are dead, and
buried: and that in such sort that all remembrance of our sins is utterly
taken out of mind. He is risen again: and we are also risen again with him:
that is, are so made partakers of his rysyng again and life, that from
hensforth death has no more rule over us. For y^ same spirit is in us that
raised up Jesus from the dead. Finallye, as he is gone up into heavenly
glory: so are we lifted up with him. Albeit that these things do not now
appear: yet then shall they all be brought to light, when Christ the light^
of the world, shall show him self in his glory, in whom all our bliss is
laid up in store, Moreover by his going up are granted us the gifts of the
holy ghost: as Paul does sufficiently witness. Ephe. iiii. The other
Christian ex ample of life unto us.
commodity, which we take by the doings of Christ, is: that Christ is set
for an example unto us, to frame our lives thereaster. If Christ has been
dead: if he has been buried for sin? he was so but ones. If he be risen
again: if he be gone up to heaven: he is but ones risen: but ones gone up.
From hensforth he dies no more, but lf neth with God: and reygneth in
everlasting continuau^ce of glory. So if we be dead: if we be buried to sin:
How shall we hear after live in the same? If we be risen again with Christ:
if by sted fast hope we live now in heaven with him: heavenly and godly
things, not earthly and frail, we ought to set our care upon. And even as
hearetofore, we have borne the image of y^ earthli man: so from henseforward
let us bear the image of the heavenly. As the Lord Christ never ceased to do
us good, by bestowing upon us his holy spirit: by garnyshinge his church
with so many notable gifts: and by perpetual praying to his father for us:
Like reason ought to move us to ayd^ our neighbor with all our endeavor:
to maintain as much as in us lies, the bond of charity. And to honor Christ
our Lord and Donor of Christ.
savior: not with wythed tradicions and cold devises of men, but with
heavenly honor and spiritual in deed, most fyt for us that give it, and him
that shall receive it, even as he has honored and does honor his father.
For he that honors him honoreth also the father, of which he him self is a
substantial witness.


May. The end of the world ho^ scripture calls the full fyllynge and
parformaunce of the kingdom and mystery of Christ, and the renewing of all
things: For (says ^he Apostle Peter in his se^o^d Epistle the third
chapter.) We look for a new heaven: and a new earth, according to the promise
of God: whearin dwells righteousness. And it seems reason that corruption,
unsteadfast change, and sin, whereunto the whole world is subject, should at
length have an end. Now by what way, and what fasshio^ circumstaunces these
things shall come to pass* I would feign hear the tell.


Scholar. I will tell you as The end of ^ world
well as I can, according to the witness of the same, Apostle. The heavens
shall pass away like a storm* ^ elements shall melt away: the earth, and
all the works therein* shall be consumed with fire: as though he should say:
as gould is wont to be fined: so shall the whole world be purified with fire,
and be brought to his full perfection. The lesser world, which is man,
following the same, shall likewise be delivered from corruption and change.
And so for man this greater world (which for his sake was first created) shall
at length be renewed: and be clad with another hew, much more pleasant and
beutifull.


Master. What then remains?


Scholar. The last and general The ^ay of dome.
dome. For Christ shall come: at whoes voice all the dead shall rise again*
perfect and sound both in bodi and soul. The whole world shall behold him,
sittynge in the Royal throne of his Majesty: and after the examination of
every man's The resur rection.
conscience, the last sentence shall be pronounced. Then the children of God
shall be in perfect possessyon of that kingdom of fredome from death and of
euerlastig life: which was prepared for them, before the foundacyons of the
world were laid. And they shall reygne with Christ for ever. But the ungodly
that believed not, shall be thrown from thense into everlasting fire,
appointed for the devil and his angels.


Master. Thou haste said enough The holly Church.
of the again rising of the dead. Now remains, that thou speak of the holy
church: whearof I would very feign hear thy opinion.


Scholar. I will rehearse that in few words shortly: which the holy
scryptures set out at large and plentifulli* Afroe that the Lord God had made
the heaven and earth: he determined to have for himself a most beautiful
kingdom and holy common wealth. The Apostles and the ancient fathers that
wrote in Greek, called it Ecclesia, in english, a congregation or assemble:
into the which he has admytted an infinite number of me^: that should all be
subject to one king as their souereign and only one head: him we call Christ,
whythe is as mutch to say as anointed* For the hye bishops, and kings among
the Jews, (who in figure betokened Christ, whom the Lord anointed with his
holy spirit,) wear wont by Gods appointment at their consecration, to have
materyall oil poured on them. To the Who be of Christ's churthe.
furnishyng of this common weal belong all they, as many as do truly fear,
honor and call upon God, whole ly applyeng their mind to holy and godly living:
and all those that putting all their hope and trust in him, do assuredlye
look for the bliss of euerlastig life. But as many as ar in this faith
steadfast* wear forechosen, predestinate, and appointed out to euerlastig life,
before the world was made. Witness hereof they have within in their hearts the
spirit of Christ, the author, earnest and vnfailable pledge of their faith.
Which faith only is able to perceive the mysteries of God: only brings peace
unto the heart: only takes hold on the righteousness, that is in Christ Jesus


Master. Does then the spirit alone, and faith (sleep we never so soundlye,
or stand we never so recklesse and slothful) so work all things for us, as
without any help of our own to carye us idle up to heaven?


Scholar. I use (master) as you have taught me, to make a dyfference between
the cause and the effects* Causes of our justification.
The first, principal and most perfect cause of our iustifyenge and
salvation, is the goodness and love of God: whereby he chose us for his, before
he made the world. After that, god grau^teth us to be called by the preachi^g
of ye Gospel of Jesus Christ, when the spirit of the Lord is poured in to us:
by whose guyding and governance we be led to settle our trust in God: and
hope forth per formaunce of all his promises. With this choice is joined, as
companion, the mortifyeng of the old man, that is of our affection and lust.
From the same spirit also tometh our sanctification: the love of God, and of
our neighbor: justice: and vpryghtnesse of life: finally, to say all in sum,
whatsoever is in us* or may be done of us, pure, honest, true and good, that
altogether spryngeth out of this most pleasaunt^ root, from this most
plentyfull fountain, the goodness, love, ^hoyse and unchangeable purpose of
god. He is the cause, the rest are the fr^tes and effects. ^et ar also the
goodness, choice and spirit of God, and Christ himself, causes conjoined and
coupled ethe with other: which may be reckened among the principal causes of
our salvation. As often Justification by faith.
thearfore as we use to say, that we are made ryghteous and saved by only
faith: it is meante theareby: that faith, or rather trust alone, does lay hand
upon, understand and perceive, our righteousmakyng to be given (...) of God
freely: that is to say* by no deserts of our own* but by the free gra^e of
the almighti father* Moreover says does engender in us the love of our
neighbor* and such works as god is pleased with all. For if it (...) a
lively and true faith, quik^ ned by the holy ghost, she is the mother of all
good saying and doing. By thy^ short tale is it evident, whence, and by what
means we attain to be made righteous For not by the worthynesse of our
deseruinges, were we either heartofore chosen, or long ago saved: but by the
only mercy of god, and pure grace of Christ our Lord: whearby we wear in him
made to those good works, that God has appointed for us to walk in. And
although Irewe faith and works vnseparate*
good works can not deserve to make us righ teous before god: yet do they so
cleave unto faith: that neither can faith be found without the^, nor good
works be any whear without faith.


Master. I like very well this short declaration of faith and works: for
Paul plainly teaches the same. But can thou yet further depaint me out that
congregation, which thou call a kingdom or common weal of Christianes: and
so set it out before mine eyes, that it may severally and plainly be known
asonder from each other fellowshyppe of men?


Scholar. I will prove how well I can do it, your pleasure is (master) as I
take it, that I point ye out some certain congregation, that may be seen.


Master. That it is in deed: and so it shall be good for y^ to do.


Scholar. That congregation The church.
is nothing elsse but a certain multitude of men: which, where soever they
be, profess the pure and vprighte learning of Christ, and that in such sort,
as it is faithfully set fourth in the holy testament, by the Evangelists and
Apostles: which in all points, are governed and ru led by the laws and
statutes of their king and hye Bishop Christ, in the bond of charity:
which use his ho lie misteryes, that are commonly called sacraments, with
such pureness and simplicity (as touching their nature and substance) as
the Apostles of Christ used and left behind in writing. The marckes therefore
of Marks of the church
this church are: first, pure preaching of the gospel: the^ brotherly love,
out of which as members of al one body, springs good will of each to other:
thirdlye vprighte and uncorrupted use of the Lords sacraments, according to
the ordinance of the Gospel: last of all brotherlye correction, and
excommunication, or banishynge those out of the church, that will not amend
their lives. This marcke the holy fathers termed discipline. This is that
same church, that is grounded upon the assured rock Jesus Christ and upon
trust in him. This is that same church, which Paul calls the pillar, and
upholding stay of truth. To Keys to bind and loose.
this church belong the keys, whearwyth heaven is locked and unlocked: for
that is done by the ministration of the word: whereunto properly appertains
the power to bind and louse: to hold for gylty, and forgive sins. So that
whosoever believes the Gospel preached in this church, he shall be saved: but
whosoever believes not, he shall be dampened.


Master. Now would I fain hear thy belief of the holy ghost.


Scholar. I confess, him to be The holly Ghost.
the third person of the holy trinity: Andsith be is equal with the father and
the son, and of the very same nature, that he ought egally to be worshipped
with the^ both.


Mast. Whi is he called holy?


Scholar Not only for his Why the holy ghost is called holy.
own holiness: but for that by him are made holy the chosen of God, and
members of Christ. And thearfore have the scriptures termed him the spirit of
sanctification or making holy.


Master. Wherein consysteth this sanctification?


Scholar. First, we be new Whearin rests the holy gost^ sanctifica tion.
gotten by his inward motion. And therefore, said Christ: we must be new borne
of water, and of the spirit. The^ by his inspiration are we adopted, and as it
were by choice made the children of God. For which cause he is not causeless
called the spirit of adoption. By his light are we lightened, to understand
Gods misteryes. By his judgment are sins pardoned and retained. By his power
is the flesh with her lusts kept down and tamed. By his pleasure, ar the
manifold gifts dealt among the holy. Finallye by his means shall our mortal
bodies be relyued. Therefore in the author of so great gifts, we do not without
a cause believe: honor, and call upon him*


Master. Well, thou have now said sufficiently of the holly ghost. But this
would I hear of thee: why it immediatelye follows, that we believe the holy
universal church and the communion of Saints.


Scholar. These two things I have alwai thought to be most fitly coupled
together, Because the felowshyppes and incorporacions of other Communion of
Saints.
men, proceed and be governed by other means and policies: but the church
which is an assemble of men called to everlasting salvation, is both
gathered together, and governed by the holy ghost of whom we eue^ now made
mention. Which thing, since it can not be perceived by bodily sense or light of
nature, is by right and for good rea son, hear reckened among things that
are known by Why the church is called universal.
belief. And thearfore this calling together of the faith full is called
universal, because it is bond to no one special place. For God thorowout al
costs of y^ world, has them that worship him. Which though they Communion
of saints.
be far scattered a sonder, by diverse distance of countries, and dominions:
yet ar they members most nearlye joined of that same bodi, whereof Christ is
the head: and have one spirit, faith, sacraments, prayers, forgiveness of
sins, and heavenly bliss, common among them all: and be so knyt with the
bo^d of love, that they e^deuour themselves in nothing more, than each to help
other, and to build together in Christ.


Master. Seeing thou haste already spoken of the knowledge of god, and his
members: I would also hear* what is the true service of God,


Scholar. First we must consider, Pa^tes of godstrew inward ser uice.
that the right and true knowledge of God, is the principal and only fundatio^
of Gods service. The same knowledge, fear does foster and maintain, which in
scriptures is called the beginning of wisedo^e. Faith and hope are the proppes
and stays, whearupo^ lean all the rest that I have rehearsed. Furthermore,
charity which we call love, is like an everlasting bond, by the straight knot
whereof al other virtues be bound in one together, and their force increased.
These be the inward parts of Gods service, that is to say, which consyst in
the mind.


Master. What have thou to say of the Sabbat, or the ho ly dai: which eue^ now
thou made mention of, among the laws of the first table?


Scholar. Sabbat is as much The Sabbat.
to sai, as rest, It was apoin ted for only honor and service of God: and it
is a figure of that reast and quiet nes, which they have that believe in
Christ. For our trust in Christ does set our minds at liberty, from all
slauishe fear of the law, sin, death and hell: assuring us in the mean
season, that by him we please God, and that he has made us his children and
heiers of his kingdom: whereby thear grows in our hearts peace and true
quietness of mind: which is a certain foretaste of y^ most blessed quiet,
which we shall have in his kingdom. As for those things that are used to be
done on the sabbothe day, as Ceremonies, and exercises in the service of God,
they are tokens and witnesses of this assured trust. And mete it is, that
faithful Christians, on such days as are appointed out for holy things,
should lay aside unholy your kes: and give them selves earnestly to religion and
ser uynge of God.


Master. What be the parts of that outward serving God? which thou saydest
even now, did stand in certain bodily exercises: which are also tokens of the
inward seruinge him.


Scholar. First, to teach, and Outward service of God.
hear the learning of the gospel: the^ the pure and natural use of the
ceremonies and sacraments: last of all prayer made unto God by Christ, and in
the name of Christ, which without fail obteineth the holly ghost, the most
assured author of all true serving God, and vpryght religion.


Master. Tell me what thou call sacraments?


Scholar. They are certain What sacraments are.
customeable reverent doings and Ceremonies ordained by Christ: that by them
he might put us in remembrance of his benefits: and we might declare our
profession, that we be of the number of the^, which are partakers of the same
benefits, and which fasten all their affiaunce in him: that we are not
ashamed of the name of Christ, or to be termed Christ's Scholars.


Master. Tell me (my son) how these two sacraments be ministered: baptism:
and that which Paul calls the supper of the Lord.


Scholar. Him that believes The ministracion of baptysme.
in Christ: professes the Articles of the Christian religion: and myndeth to
be baptized (I speak now of the^ that be growe^ to ripe years of discretion:
since for the yo^g babes, their parents or the churches profession suffices)
the minister dyppeth in, or washes with pure and clean water only, in the
name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost: and the^
commends him by prayer to God, in to whose church he is now openly as it
wear enrowled, that it may please God to grant him his grace, whearhy* he may
answer in belefe and life agreablye to his profession.


Master. What is the use of the Lords supper?


Scholar. Eue^ the very same, The use of the Lords supper.
that was ordained by the Lord himself Jesus Christ* Which (as S. Paul says)
y^ same night, that he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had given
thanks, brake it: and said, This is my body, which is broken for you: Do this
in the remembrau^nce of me. In like manner, when supper was ended, he gave the^
the cup, saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood* Do this, as
often as ye shall drinck thearof, in the remembrance of me. This was the manner
and order of the Lords supper: which we ought to hold and keep: that the
remembrance of so great a benefit, the passion and death of Christ, be
always kept in mind: that, after that the world is ended, he may come, and
make us to fit with him at his own board.


Master. What does baptism represe^t and set before oureyes?


Scholar. That we are by the The meaning of baptism.
spirit of Christ newborn, and cleansed from syn: that we be members and
parts of his church, received into the communion of saints. For water
signifies the spi rite. Baptisiue is also a figure of our burial in Christ and
that we shall be raised up again with him, in a new life, as I have before
declared in Christ's resurrection.


Master. What declares and betokens the supper unto us: which we solemnly
use in the remembrance of the Lord* The meaning of y^ Lords sup per.



Scho. The Supper (as I have showed a little before) is a certain thankful
remembrance, of the death of Christ: for as much as the bread represents
his bodi, The bread
betrayed to be crucified for us: The wine stands in The wine
stead and place of his blood, plentuouslye shed for us. And even as by
bread and wine, our natural bodies, are sustained and nourished: so by the
body, that is y^ flesh and blood of Christ, the soul is fed through faith,
and quickened to the heavenly and godly life.


Master. How come these things to pass?


Scholar. These things How we feed upon Christ's body and blood.
come to pass by a certain secreate mean, and liuelye working of the spirit:
when we believe that Christ has, ones for all, given up his body and blood
for us, to make a sacrifice, and most pleasant offering to his heavenly
father: and also when we confess and acknowledge him our only savior, hie
Bishop, mediatoure, and redemer: to whom is dew all honor and glory.


Master. All this thou do Faith the mouth of the soul.
well understand. For me thinks thy meaning is: that faith is the mouth of
the soul: whearby we receive this very heavenly meat, full both of
salvation and immortalitye, dealt among us, by the means of the holy ghost.
Now, sithe we have entreated of the sacraments, pass forward to the other
parts of Gods service.


Scholar. I will do your commandment. Thear remain two things, belongyng to
the perfection of Gods service. First our Lord Jesus Christ's will was, that
there Office of Preachers
should be teachers and Evangelists, that is to say preachers of the
gospel: to this intent, that his voice might continually be hard sound in his
church. He that coueteth (as all ought to covet) to bear the name of a
Christian, may have no doubt, that he ought with most earnest affection,
and fervent desire, endeavor himself, to hear and soke into his mind, the
word of the Lord: not like the words of any man, but like (as it is in deed)
the word of almigh tie god. Seco^darily, because all that is good, and that
ought of a Christian to be desired, comes unto us from God, and is by him
granted: Prayer.
thearefore of him, we ought to require al things: and by thankesgeuinge
acknowledge them all received of him. Which thing he so well likes, that he
estemeth it instead of a passing pleasauut sacrifice: as it is most evident by
the witness of the prophets and Apostles.


Master. Have thou any certain and appointed manner of prayeng?


Scho. Yea forsooth: even the The lords prayer.
very same, that our Lord taught his disciples, and in them all other
Christians. Who, being on a time required to teach them some sort of prayer,
taught them this. When ye pray, quod he, say: Our father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive the^ that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptacio^: But
deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom power and glory for ever. Ame^


May. How think thou^ is it lawful for us, to use any other words of
prayer? Whether we may use any other prayer but the pa ter noster.



Scho. Although in this short abridgement are suffiently contained all things
that every Christian ought to pray for: yet has not Christ in this prayer
tied us up so short, as that it we are not lawful for us to use other words
and manner of prayer. But he has set out in this prayer certain principal
points, whearvnto all our prayers should he referred. But let each man ask of
God as his present need requires. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name
(says Christ) he shall give it you.


Master. For as much as there is in all this prayer nothing doubtful or beside
the purpose: I would hear thy mind of it.


Scholar. I do well perceive what y^ words do signify.


Master. Think thou then that there is in it nothing ^arcke, nothing
hid, nothing hard to understand?


Scholar. Nothing at al. For Nothing in y^ lardes prayer hard to un derstande.
neither was it Christ's pleasure, that there should be any thing in it dareke
or far from our capacity, specially sith it belongs egally to all, and is
as necessary for the lewd as the learned.


Mast. Therefore declare un to me, in few words, each part by it self.


Scholar. When I say our What we gather of our father
father which art in heaven: this do I think with my self: that it can not
be but that he must hear me, and be pleased with my prayers For I am his Son
(although unprofitable and disobedient) and he on the other side is my most
bountyfull father, most ready to take pity and pardon me.


May. Why doste thousaye, What is meant by, which are in heaven.
he is in heaven? is he in so^^ o^e certain and lymited place in heaven* what
me^* neth that which he says of him self: I fill both heaven and earth:
again, the heaven is my seat and the earth my footestoole.


Scholar. Hereof have I spoken, some what before: where unto I will join this
that follows. First of all, as often as we do say (which art in heaven) it is
as much to sai, as heavenly and divine. For we ought to thyncke much hier of
our heavenly father tha^ of our earthly. He is also said to be in heaven for
this cause: that in that hye and heavenly place the n^ ble and wonderful works
of God, do the more clearly and gloriously show them selves: and he is now
declared to be in everlasting and full felicity: whereas we abide, yet banyshed
in earth full wretchedlye. Moreover as the heaven by unmeasurable widnesse of
compass, conteyneth all places, the earth, and the sea: and no place is
thear, that may be hid from the large reatch of heaven, since it is at every
instant of time, to every thing present: So hearby may we understand, that god
is likewise present to each thing God is each wheat
in each place. He sees, hears and governs al things: he being him self a
spirit, and most far from al earthlye and mortal state. Witness whereof
Hieremy the Prophet. Am not I (says the Lord) a God near unto you? and am
not I a God far of? shall any man be able to shroude him self in such a
corner, that I can not espy him? This is a pithye sentence, to drive fear
into us, that we offend not that Lord of so large a dominion: whereby also we
God always present to help us.
are persuaded assuredly to believe, that God will hear whenever we shall
stand in need. For he is at al times and in all places present, This
foundation then laid: and so sweet and plesaunte entrance prepared: there
follows the first part of the Lords prayer: wherein we require, that not
only we, but also all other who soever, may in holiness, honor, reverence,
and worship his name.


Master. How is that to be done?


Scholar. I shall show you, How gods name is to be hal lowed.
then we do that, when leaving all those that have the name of gods, be they in
hea uen or in earth, or worshipped in temples, in diverse shapes and images,
we acknowledge him alone our father: Prai to the true god, and Jesus Christ
his only son, whom he has sent: and by pure unfeigned prayer call upon him
alone, with vprightnes of life and innocencye.


Master. Thou have said berye well proceed.


Scholar. In the second part Christ's kingdom not yet per fect.
we require that his kyngedome come. For we see not yet all things in
subjection to Christ: we see not the stone he wed offro^ the mountain
without work of man, which all to brosed and brought to naught y^ image
which Daniell, desc^iueth, that the only rock Christ may obtayn and
possess the dominion of the hole world, granted him of his father. Antichrist
is not yet slain. For this cause do we long for, and pray that it may at
length come to pass and be fulfilled, that Christ may reign with his
saints, according to Gods promises: that he may live and be Lord in the
world, according Christ's kingdom.
to the decrees of the holy Gospel: not after the traditions and laws of me^
nor pleasure of worldly tyrauntes.


Master. God grant his kingdom may come: and that spedilye.


Scholar. Moreover sith it is the chyldrens duty to frame their life too their
fathers will: and not the fathers, to bow to the childrens pleasure: Gods will
to be done
forasmuch as our will is ^ommonly by tickling of affeccions, and stirringe of
lusts, drawn to do those things, that God is displesed with: it is reason,
that we hang whollye upon the b^k of our heavenly father, and wholly submit
our selves to his heauenli gouermne^t. Wherefore, for this cause, we mortal
me^ do pray, that we may in like case be obedient to his commau^deme^t, as are
the son and Moan and other sterres in heaven which both by ordinarye
courses, and by lightninge the earth with vncessaun^e beams, execute the
Lords will continuallye: Or that we, as the a^gels and other spirits* divine,
in all points obey him: which bestow al their travail diligently, to
accomplish his godly commandments. Next after that he teaches us, to ask
of our heavenly father, our bread: whereby he means Our daily bread.
not meat only, but also all things else needful for maynetenaunce, and
preseruinge of life: that we may What bread mea neth.
learn, that God alone is authoure of al things: which makes the fruytes of
the earth both to grow and increase to plentye. Wherefore it is meet that
we c^ll upon him alone in prayer: which (as David says) ^ love feeds and
maynteyneth all things.


Master. Some suppose this place to mean, that bread, that Christ makes
men^on of, in the.vi. of Ihon. That is, of the true knoweledge and taste of
Christ, that was borne and dyed for us: wherwyth the faithful soul is fed.
The reason whereupon they gather this is the greek word epiousion Epiousio^.
whereby they understand supernatural, ghostly, heavenly Daily bread or
supernatural.
and divine. This mea nynge I refuse not: for both these expositions may fitlye
agree with this place: but whi calls he it daily bred, which is also
signified by this word epiousion.


Scholar. We ask daily bread, Why we ask our bread to be daily.
that might be always present and accompanye us contynuallye: to slake and
satisfye our thyrstye desire, and vnsaciat stomach: least otherwise, we should
be, as Christ says, careful for to morrow: because the morrow shall care for
it self.

For it shall come not without his own disco^moditie and care, Wherefore it is
not reason, that one day should increase the evil of another.

It shall be sufficient for us, daily to ask, that our most bountiful father
is ready daily to give. Now follows the fifthe request: wherein we beseech
the father to forgive us our trespasses and de^auts, that we have committed.
This request, Forgyuenes of trespasses.
doutles is very necessary: sith there is no man living, free from sin.
Here therefore must we cast away all trust of our selves. Hear must we pluck
down our courage. Here must we prai our most merciful father, for the love
of Jesus Christ his most dear and obedyent son, to pardon, forgive and
utterly blot out of his book, our innumerable offenses. Hear ought we in the
Our covenant with god, as we forgive. etc
mean season, to be myndfull of the couenauute we make with God: That it may
please God so to forgive us our trespaces, as we our selves forgive them that
trespass against us. Therefore it is necessary, that we forgive and pardone
all men, all their offenses, of what sort or condition so ever they be. If we
forgive men there faults, our heavenly father shall forgive us ours.


Master. Were these things Charitable forgiveness one to and there cease bram
les.
(my son) thus used: thear should not, at this day, thus violentlye reign,
so many brawles, so many contentions, so many and so heinous disagreme^ts,
eninities and hatreds of one man to another. But now whereas each man, so
stands in his own conceit, that he wy^ not les^ an ynche of his right,
neither in honor or wealth, it chances often that they lease both their
wealth, The harms of co^tencion.
their honor; and their life it self wythal. Yea they put from them selves,
and turn away the favor of God, and everlasting glory. But thou (my son)
must not be ignorante of Christ's commau^deme^t: nor of that which Paul
techeth, that thou Good not evil to be re^dred for evil.
suffer not thy self to be overcome of evil, that is suffer not thy self fo
to be seduced by any other man's offense, as to repay euel for euel, but rather
overcome evil with good. I mean by doing hi good, yt has done the evil: by
using hun fre^dly, y^ has showed him self thy most cru ^ll foe. Now go forward
to the sixthe request.


Scholar. I will, with a good Our weak nesse.
will, as you command me. Forasmuchas we be feeble, weak, subject to a
thousand periles, a M. te^ptatio^s, easy to be overcome, ready to yield to every
light occasyon, either to men fraughte with malice, or to our own ^ste and
appetit, or finally (...) crafti malicious serpent (...) deuel: Therefore we
beseech our father, that he bring Temptation.
us into no such hard (...) and peril: nor leave us in the very plunge of
danger, but if it come to that point, that he rather take us away from the
present myschief, and engynes of the deuell, the authoure and principal cause
of all evil, then suffer us to run headlong into destruction. Now have you
good Master, in few words, all that you have taught me, unless paradue^
ture, somewhat be ouerslipped in the rehearsal.


Master. Because thine is the kingdom power and glory for ever. Amen. Why was
it Christ's pleasure to knytte up our prayer, with this clause in the end,


Scholar. Partly that we should Whi this is added: for thine is y^ kingdom. etc.
declare our assured trust, to obtain al things, that we before have required.
For there is nothing which, if it be asked with faith, he is not able or not
willing to give, who rules and governs all things, who is able to do all
things, who is garnyshed with endless glory.

These things when we rehearse, of God our father, there remains no cause
to dout, or suspect, that we shall receive, denial. Partlye by so saying, we
teach our selves, how mete it is, to make our suit to God, sith beside him,
none glistreth with so shining glory, none has dominion so large, or force so
great, to be able to stay him from giving that he has appointed according to
his pleasure, or to take away that he has already given us. And there is no
evil of ours so great that may not be put away by his exceadynge great
power, glory and wisdom.


Master. I like well (my son) this thy short declaration: and I see nothing
left out, that ought to have been spoken.


Scholar. But yet this one thing will I add thereto Faith in prayer.
The chief and Princypall thing, required in prayer, is that without al
douting we stedfastli beliue, that god our father will grant what we do
ask: so y^ it be neither unprofitable for us to receive, nor unfit for him to
give. For he that is not, assured but doutful, let him What to be asked in
prayer.
not think (as James. says) to get any thing at the hands of God.


Master. I se now (my dear son) how diligently and hedefullye thou have
applied thy mind, to those things that I have taught y^ how godly and
vpryghte a judgment thou haste of gods true service: and of the duites of
neighbors one to another. This remains ^onest frame of life.
that from hensforth thou so frame thy life, that this hea uenly and godli
knowledge decai not in the, nor lie soulelesse and dead, as it were in a tomb
of the flesh. But rather see that thou whollye give thy self continually and
earnestly to these godly studies. So shall thou live, not only in this
present life, but also in the life to come* which is much better and
blesseder, than this life present. For Godliness (as Paul says) has a
promise, not in this life only, but in the other. It is convenient therefore,
that we earnestlye follow godliness, which plainly opens the way to heaven,
Knoledge desire fear and love of God.
if we will seek to attain thereunto. And the principal poi^t of godliness is (as
thou have declared even now very well) to know God only: to covet him only as
the chief felicity: to fear him as our Lord: to love and reverence him as our
father: with his son our sauyoure Jesus Christ. This is he y^ has be
gotten and regenerat us. Christian benefits to us.
This is he which at the beginning, gave us life and soul: which
mainteineth: which blesses us with life of everlasting co^tinua^ce. To
Godlessnesse.
this godliness is directlye contrary godlessnesse. As for supersticion and
hipocrisye Superstition and hip^ crisie.
they counterfeit in deed, and resemble it, where as nevertheless they are most
far different from all true godliness: and therefore we ought to avoid
them, as a pestylence, as the venime, and most contagious enemies of our soul
and salvation. The next point of godliness, is to love Charity.
each man, as our brother, For if God did at the beginning create us al: if he
does feed and govern us: finally if he be the cause and author of our dwelling
in this wide frame of the world: the The name of brethren.
name of brother must needs most fitly agree with us: and with so much
streyghter bond, shall we be bound together, as we approach nearer to Christ,
which is our brother, y^ first begotten and eldest: who^ he y^ knows not, he
y^ has no hold of, is vnrightous in deed, and has no place among the people
of God. For Christ is the root and foundation of al right and justice: and he
has poured into our hearts certain natural lesso^s, as: Do that (says he)
to another, that The law of nature.
thou would have done un to thy self. Beware therefore, thou do nothing, to
any man, that thou thy self would not willinglye suffer. Measure all ways
another by thine own mind, and as thou select in thy self. If it grieve
Measure another (...) thy self.
the to suffer iniurye: if thou think it wrong that another man does to the:
judge likewise the same in the per son of thy neighbor that thou fealest in
thy self: and thou shalt perceive, that y^ do no less wrongfullye in
hurtyng another, tha^ other do in hurti^g the. Hear if we would stedfastlye
fasten our foot: heareunto if we would earnestlye trauaill: we should attain to
y^ very hiest top of innocencye. For the first degree thereof is to offend
^oma^: The next to help as much Degrees of chariti.
as in us lies, al me^: at least to will and wish well to al. The third (which
is acou^ted the chief and perfectest) is to do good even to our enemies y^
wrong us. Let us therefore know our selves: pluck out the faults that are in
us, and Uices to be rooted out y^ virtues may be planted in their place.
in their place pla^t virtues: like unto the husbandemen that first use to
shrubbe and root out y^ thorns, bra^bles and wedes, out of their ley land
and unlooked to: and then each where therein scatter and throw in to the wo^^e of
the earth good and frutfull seeds, to bring forth good fruit in their dew
season. Likewise let us do. For first let us labor to rote out froward and
corrupt lusts: and afterward plant holy and fit condicio^s for Christian
hearts. Which, if they be watered, and fatted with the dew of gods word, and
nourished with warmth of the holy ghost, they shall bring forth dout less
the most plentiful fruit of immortalitye and blessed The bliss of the god lie.
life: which God has by Christ prepared* for his chosen, before the
foundacyons of the world were laid. To whom* be all honor and glory. Ame^.


The end of the Catechism.
Articles agreed upon in the Conuocacion, and published by the Kings Majesty.
Of faith in the holy Trinity.
THeare is but one living, and true God: and he is everlasting: with out body,
parts, or passions: of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness: the maker, and
preserver of all things, both visible, and invisible. And in unity of this
Godheade there be three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity: the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost.

That the word, or Son of God, was made very man.
THe Son, which is the word of the father, took man's nature in the womb of
the blessed virgin Mary: of her Substance: so that two hole, and perfect
natures, that is to say, the godhode, and manhood were ioygned together into
one person, never to be divided: whereof is one Christ very God, and very man:
who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his father to
us, and to be a Sacrifice for all sin of man, both original, and actual.

Of the goinge down of Christ into Hell.
AS Christ died, and was buried for us: so also it is to be believed, that he
went down into Hell. For the body lay in the Sepulcher, until the
resurruction: but his Ghost departing from him, was with the Ghostes that were
in prison, or in Hell: and did preach to the same: as the place of S. Peter
does testify.

The Resurrection of Christ.
CHrist did truly rise again from death: and took again his body: with
^teshe, bones, and all things apperteyning to the perfection of m^ns nature:
where with he ascended into heaven, and there sits, until he retourn to
judge me^ at the last day.

The doctrine of holy scrip ture is sufficient to Salvation.
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: So that what
soever is neither read therein, nor may be proved thereby, although it be
sometime received of the faithful, as Godly, and profitable for an order, and
comeliness: Yet no man ought to be const^eigned to believe it as an article
of faith, or repute it requisite to the necessity of Salvation.

The old Testament is not to be refused.
THe old Testament is not to be put away, as though it we^ contrary to the
new: but to be kept still. For both in the old, and new Testamentes,
everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ: who is the only mediator
between God, and man, being both God, and manne. Wherefore they are not to be
heard, which feign, that the old fathers did look only for (...) promises.

The three Credes.
THe three Credes, Nicene creed Anathasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received: for they may be
proved by most certain warrauntes of holy Scripture.

Of original, or birthe sin.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, as the Pelagianes do
vainly talk, which also the Anabaptists do now a days renew: but it is the
fault, and corrupcio^ of the nature of every man, that naturallye is engendered
of the of spring of Adam: whereby manne is very far gone from his former
righteousness, which he had at his creation: and is of his own nature given
to evil: so that the f^eshe desires always contrary to the sp^ rit: and
therefore in every person, born into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and
damnacion: And this infection of nature does remain, yea in them that are
baptized: whereby the lust of the flesh called in greek (...) (which some do
expoune, the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of
the flesh) is not subject to the law of God. And although there is no co^
demnation for them that believe, and are baptized: yet the Apostle does
confess, that concupisce^ce, and lust has of it self the nature of sin.

Of Free will.
VUe have no power to do good works, pleasant, and acceptable to God, without
the Grace of God by Christ, preventing us, that we may have a good will: and
working in us when we have that will.

*Of Grace.
THe Grace of Christ, or the holy Ghost by him given does take away the
stony heart, and gives an heart of flesh. And although, those that have no
will to good things, he makes them to will: and those that would evil
things, he makes them not to will the same: Yet nevertheless he e^forceth
not the will. And therefore no man when he sins, can excuse himself, as not
worthy to be blamed or condemned, by alleging that he sinned unwillingly, or
by compulsion.

Of the Justification of man.
Justification by only faith in Jesus Christ, in that sense, as it is
declared in the homelye of Justification, is a most certain, and wholesome
doctrine for Christian men.

Works before Justification.
VUorks done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit,
are not plesau^t to God: forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ:
neither do they make men mete to receive Grace, or (as the Scholeaucthours
say) deserve Grace of congruitie: but because they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not, but they have the nature
of sin.

Works of Supererogation.
VOluntary works besides, over, and above Gods commandments: which they
call works of Supererogation: cannot be taught without arrogance, and iniquity.
For by them men do declare, that they do not only render to God, as much
as they are bound to do: but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden
duty is required: whereas Christ says plainly: when you have done all
that are commanded, you say: we be unprofitable servants.

No man is without sin, but Christ alone.
CHrist, in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things,
sin only except, from which he was clearly void both in his flesh, and in
his spirit. He came to be the lamb with out spotte: who by Sacrifice of
himself, made once for ever, should take away the sins of y^ world: and sin
(as Saint Ihon says) was not in him. But the rest, yea, although we be
baptized, and borne again in Christ: yet we offend in many things: and if
we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Of sin against the holy Ghost.
Every deadly sin, willingly committed after Baptism, is not Sin against
the holy ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the place for penitents, is not to
be denied, to such as fall into sin, after Baptysme. After we have
received the holy ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin:
and by the grace of God we may rise again, and amend our lives. And therefore
they are to be condemned, which say: they can no more Sin, as long as they
live hear: or deny the place for penitents, to such as truly repent, and
amend their lives.

Blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
BLasphemye against the holy Ghost is, when a man of malice and stubbournes of
mind* does rail upon the truth of Gods word, manifestly perceived: and
being enemy thereunto persecuteth y^ same. And because such be guiltye of
gods curse, they entangle the^ selves with a most grievous, and heinous
crime: whereupon this kind of sin is called and affirmed of the Lord,
unpardonable.

Of predestination, and Election.
PRedestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantlye decreed, by his own
judgment, secreate to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom
he has chosen out of mankind: and to bring them to everlasting salvation by
Christ, as vessels made to honor. Whereupon, such as have so excellent a
benefit of God given unto them, be called, according to gods purpose, by his
spi rite workyng in due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be
justified freli: they be made sons by adoption: they be made like the image
of Gods only begotten son, Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good
works: and at length, by Gods mercy, they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the Godly consideratyon of Predestination, and our election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable confort, to godly parsons, and such
as feel in them selves the woorkynge of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthlye members, and drawyng up their mind to
high, and heavenly things: as well because it does greatly establyshe and
confyrme their faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ: as
because it does ferue^tly kindle their love toward god: So for curyous, and
carnal persons, lacking the spirit of Christ to have continuallye before
their eyes the sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous down
fall: whereby the Devil may thrust them either into despe racion, or into a
rechlesnesse of most unclean living, no less perilous then desperacyon.

Furthermore, although the decrees of predestynation are unknown unto us: yet
we must receive Gods promyses, in such wise as they be generallye
settefourthe to us in holy scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is
to be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us, in the word of God.

We must trust to obtain eternal Salvation, only by the name of Christ.
THey also are to be had accur sed, and abhorred, that presume to say, that
every man shall be saved by the Law, or sect which he professes, so that he be
dilligent to frame hislife according to that law, and the light of nature. For
holy Scripture does set out unto us, only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby
men must be saved.

All men are bound to keep the Moral commandments of the Law.
THe law, which was given of god by Moses, although it bind not christian
men, as concerning the ceremonies, and Rites of the same: Neither is it
required, that the civil Precepts and ordres of it, should of necessity be
received in any common we ale: yet no man (be he never so perfect a
christian) is exempte and loose from the Obedience of those commandments,
which are called Moral. Wherefore they are not to be hark ned unto, who affirm
that holy Scripture is given only to the weak: and doo^ boaste them selfs
continually of the spirit, of whom (they say) they have learned such things as
they teach, although the same be most euidentlye repugnante to the holy
Scripture.

Of the Church.
THe visible Church of Christ, is a congregatyon of faythefull men: in the
which the Pure word of god is preached: and the sacraments be duelye
minystred, according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of
necessitye are requisite to the same.

As the church of Jerusalem, of Alexandria, and of Antioch has erred: So also
the Church of rome has erred, not only in their living, but also in matters of
their faith.

Of the authority of the Church.
IT is not lawful for the church, to ordeine any thing, that is contrary to
Gods word written. Neither may it so expoune one place of scripture, that it
be repugnante to an other. Wherefore although the church be a witness and a
keeper of holy writ: yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the
same: so besides the same, ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed,
for necessity of Salvation.

Of the authority of general Counsels.
General counsels may not be gathered together, without the
commandment, and will of Princes: and when they be gathered (for as much as
they be an assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the spirit*
and word of God) they may err* and sometime have erred: not only in worldly
matters* but also in things pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by
them, as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength, nor auctoritye,
unless it may be declared, that they be taken out of holy scripture.

Of Purgatory.
THe Doctrine of Schole aucthoures concerning purgatory, Pardones, Worshipping
and adorocion as well of Images as of relics, and also invocation of Saints,
is a fond thing, vainly feigned, and grounded upon no warraunte of scripture,
but rather repugnante to the word of God.

No man may minister in the Congregation, except he be called.
IT is not lawful for any man, to take upon him the office of Public
preachinge, or mynystringe the Sacraments* in the congregation, before he be
lawefullye called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called, and sent, which be chosen, and called to this work by
men, who have public authority given unto them in the congregation, to
call, and send ministers into the Lords vineyarde.

Men must speak in the Congregation in such tongue, as the people
understands.
IT is most semely, and most agreeable to the word of God, that in the
congregatyon nothing be openly readde, or spoken in a tongue unknown to y^
people. The which thing saint Paul did forbid, except so^e were present that
should declare y^ same

Of the Sacraments.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ has knytte together a company of new people, with
Sacraments most few in nombre, most easy to be kept, most excellent in
signification: as is baptism, and the Lords Supper.

THe Sacraments were not ordained of Christ, to be gased upon, or to be
carried about: but that we should rightly use the^. And in such only, as
worthelye receive y^ same, they have a wholesome effect, and operacion: and yet
not that of the work wrought, as some me speak. Which word, as it is strange,
and unknown to holy Scripture: so it engenders no Godly, but a very
supersticious sense. But they that receive the Sacraments unworthily,
purchase to them selves Damnacion, as Sayncte Paul says.

Sacraments ordained by the Word of God, be not only ^. Badges, and tokens
of christian men's profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and
effectual signs of grace, and Gods good will toward us: by the which he
does work inuisibly in us: and does not only quycken, but also strengthen,
and confirm our faith in him.

The wickedness of the Ministers does not take away the effectual operation
of gods ordynaunces.
ALthough in y^ visible church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief aucthority in the ministration of the word and
sacraments: Yet forasmuch as the^ do not the same in their own name, but do
Minister by Christ's commission, and authority: we may use their ministry
both in hearing the word of God, and in the receiving the sacraments, Nether
is the effect of gods ordiuaunces taken away, by their wickedness: nor the
grace of gods gifts diminished from such, as by faith, and rightlye receive
the Sacraments mynystred unto them: which be effectual, because of Christ's
institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil men.
Nevertheless it appertains to the Disciplyne of the Church, that enqui^ie be
made of such: and that they be accused by those yt have knowledge of their
offenses: and fynallye being found guilty by just iudgmente, be deposed.

Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, ^.
whereby Christian men are discerned from other y^ be not chri^aned: but it is
also a sign and seal of our new birth: whereby, as by an instrument, they that
receive Baptism ryghtlye, are grafted into the church: y^ promyses of
forgiveness of sin, and our Adopcyon to be the sons of God, are visibly
signed and sealed: faith is confyrmed: and grace increasced, by virtue of
prayer un to god. The custom of the church to Christen young children, is to be
commended, and in any wise to be retained in the Church.

Of the Lords Supper.
THe Supper of y^ Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among them selves, one to an other: but rather it is a sacrament of
our redemption, by Christ's death. Insomuche that, to such as rightlye,
worthelye, and with faith receive the same, the bread which we break, is a
communyon of the bodi of Christ. Like wise the Cup of blessinge, is a
Communion of the blood of Christ.

TRansubstantiatyon, or the change of the substance of bread* and wine, into
the substance of Christ's body, and blood, can not be proved by holy writ:
but is repugnaunte to the plain words of scripture, and has given occasion
to many superstycions.

FOr as much as the truth (...) man's nature requires, that the body of
one, and the self same manne, can not be at one time in diverse places, but
must needs be in so^e one certain place: therefore the body of Christ ca^ not
be present at one* time in many, and diverse places. And because (as holy
Scripture does teach) Christ was taken up into heaven and there shall
continue unto the end of the world: a faithful man ought not, either to
bele^e, or open^ye to confess the real and bodylye presence (as they term
it) of Christ's f^esh, and blo^d* in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

THe Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not commanded, by Christ's ordinance,
^o be kept, carried about, lyfted up, nor worshipped.

Of the perfect oblation of Christ made upon the cross.
THe offringe of Christ, made once for ever, is the perfect redemption, the
pacif^ynge of gods displeasure and satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world, both origynall and actual: and there is none other satisfaction
for sin, but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of masses, in the which, it
was commonly said, that the Pr^est did offer Christ for the quick* and the
dead, to have remission of pain or syn, were forged fables, and daungerouse
deceiptes.

The state of syngle life is commanded to no man by the word of God.
Bishops, priests, and Deacons are not commanded to vow the state of
syngle life without marriage: nether by gods law are they compelled to ab^ein
from matrimonye.

Excommunicate persons are to be avoided.
THat person, which by open denunciacion of the church, is rightly cut of
from the v^ti of the Church, and exco^municat^, ought to be taken of the
whole multitude of the faithful, as an Heathen, and publicane: until he be
openly reconciled bipenance and received into y^ church by a judge that has
authorytye thereto.

Traditions of the church.
IT is not necessary that traditions and ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like. For at all times they have been diverse: and may be changed,
according to the diversity of countries, and me^nes manners: so that nothing
be ordained against gods word.

Whosoever through his ^uate judgment wyllingly and purposedly* does openly
break the tradicions and ceremonies of the church, which be not repugnant to
the word of god, and be ordained, and approved ^y common a^cthority: ought to
^e rebuked openly (that other may fere to do the like) as one that offends
against the common order of the church, and hurts tha^ctority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the we^ brethren.

Homelies.
THe Home lies of late given, and set out by the Kings aucthority, be godly
and wholesome: co^teining doctrine to be received of al men: and therefore are to
be red to the people diligently, distinctly* and plainly*

Of the book of Prayers, and Ceremonies of the Church of England.
THe book, which of very late time was given to the church of England by the
kings authority, and the Parliament, containing the manner and form of
praying, and ministering the sacraments in the church of England, likewise also
the book of ordringe Ministers of the church, setforth by y^ foresaid
authority: are godly, and in no point repugnant to the wholesome doctrine of the
Gospel, but agreeable there unto, furthering and beutyfieng y^ same not a
little: and therefore of all faithful members of the church of England, and
chiefly of the ministers of the word, they ought to be recei ued, and allowed
with all readynes of mind, and thanks giving and to be commended to the
people of God.

Of civil Magistrates.
THe king of England is Supreme head in earth, next un der Christ, of the
church of England, and Ireland.

THe Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction, in th^s realin of England.

THe civil magistrate is ordained, and allowed of god: where fore we must obey
him, not on ly for fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake.

THe civil laws may punyshe christen men, with death, for heinous, and
grievous offenses.

IT is lawful for Christians, at the commandment of the ma gistrate, to were
weapons, and to serve in lawful wars.

Christian men's gooddes are not commune.
THe riches and gooddes of Christians are not commune, as touching the right
title, and possession of the same (as certain Anabapti^es do fasly boast) not
withstanding every man ought of such things, as he possesses, li berally to
give alms to the pore, according to his hability.

Christian men may take an Oath.
AS we confess that vain, and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and his apostle James: so we judge that Christian
religion does not prohibit, but that ^ man may swear, when the Magistrate
requires, in a cause of faith, and charity: so it be done (according to the
Prophets teaching) in justice, judgment and truth.

The resurrection of the dead is not yet brought to pass.
THe resurrection of the dead is not as yet brought to pass: as though it only
belonged to the soul, which by the grace of Christ is raised from the death of
sin: but it is to be looked for at the last day. For then (as Scripture (...)
most manifestly testify) to all that be dead their own bodies ste she, and
bone shall be restored: that the whole man may (according to his works) have
other reward, orpu nishment, as he has lived vertuoufly or wickedly.

The souls of them that depart this life do neither die with (...) the
bodies, nor sleep idly.
THey which say, that the souls of such as depart hence, do sleep, being
without al sense feling, or perceiving, until the day of iudgmente* or affirm
that the souls dye with the bodies, and at the last day shall be raised up with
the same: do utterly dissente from the right belefe, declared to us in holy
Scripture.

Heritikes called Millenarii.
THey that go about to renew the fable of heretics called Millenarii, be
repugnaunt to holy scripture, and cast the^ selves headlong into a Iewishe
dotage.

Al men shall not be saved at the length.
THey also are worthy of comdemnation, who endeuout at this time to restore the
dangerous opinion, that al men, be theineues so ungodly, shall at length be
saved, when they have suffered pains for their sins, a certain time
appointed b^ Gods justice.

The end of the Articles.
A general Confession to be said in the Morning.
AL mighty and most merciful father, we have erred and strayed from thy ways,
like lost sheep. We have followed to mutche the devises, and desires, of our
own hearts. We have offended, against thy holy la^es. We have left undone
those things which we ought to have done: ^ we have done those things which
we ought not to have done: and there is no health in us: but thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us, miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O God, which confess
their faults. Restore thou them that be ^tent, according to thy prompses,
declared unto mankind, in Christ Ieso our Lord. And grant, O most merciful
father, for his sake, that we may here (...) li^e a godly, righteous, and sober
life, to the glory of thy holy name.

Amen.
A prayer to be said in the Morning.
OMercifull Lord God, he^uenlye father, I render most high lauds, praise and
thanks unto the, that thou have preserved me both this night, and all the time
and days of my life hitherto, under thy protection: and have suffered (...) to
live until this present hour. And I beseech the heartily, that thou will
vouchesafe to receive me this day, and the residue of my whole life from hence
forth, into thy tu^ion* rulyng and gouernyng (...) with thy holy spirit: that
all manner of darkness of misbeliefe, infidelity, and of carnal lu^ and
affections, may be utterly chased and driven out of my heart: and that I may
be justified and saved both body and soul through ^ right and a perfect faith:
and so walk in the light of thy most godly truth, to thy glory and praise,
and to the profyt and furtheraunce of my neighbor, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior.

Amen.
A Praiet to be said of Children before they study their lesson at schole.
OBlessed Lord, which art the welspring of al wisdom and knowledge, sithe^s
it has pleased the of thy mercy to provide for me such means to be instructed
in my tender age, as whereby I may have knowledge to use my self honestlye, and
to behave my self godly, to lead the whole course of my life in thy holy
service: let it be thy pleasure also to illumynate my dark wit and blind
understanding, so that it may be able to receive accordyngly, the learning
that shall be uttered: refreshe thou my memory, yea imprinte thou it in my
remembrance, that I may keep it assuredlye: dispose thou my heart also
((...)) and frame my will, that ^mape apply my mind to recei^e it, with such
affec^ion and feruente desire, as it beho^eth: to to this end, that the most
happy occasyon which thou offerest unto me, do not pea^ish through my
vnth^kfulnes: and that these things may come to pass, let it stand with thy
gracoius pleasure to power out thy holy spirit into my heart, thy spirit I say
of understanding; of truth, judgment, wisdom ^ knowledge: whe^eby I may become
apt to learn, and my scholemaster not lose his pain in teachyug me: and what
study soever I apply my mind unto, I may reduce ^ bring it to the right end
(that is) to glorif^ the in our sauiou^ Christ, to who^e with the and the holy
ghost be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.
ALmightye God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite: have mercy
upon the whole congrega^yon, and so rule the heart of thy chose^ servant
Edward the sixth, ou^ king and gouernoure, that he (knowing whose myny^er he
is) may above al things seek thy honor and glory: and y^ we his subjects
(duly considering whose authority he has) may faythfullye, serve, honor, and
humbly obey him, in the, and for the, according (...) thy blessed word and
(...): Through Jesus Christ our Lord, wh^ (...) the, and the holy ghost lives
and (...) ever one God, world without (...).

Amen
A Prayer to be said at night going to bed.
OMercifull Lord God heavenly (...) there, whether we sleep or wake, live
ordye, we are always thine. When fore I beseech the hartelye, that thou wy^
^ouchsafe to take care and charge of me, and not to suffer me to pe^ysh in the
worc^es of darckenes, but to kindle the light of thy ^ountenaunce in my
heart, that the godly knowledge may daily increase in me, through a right
and pure faith, and that I may always be ^ounde to walcke and live after thy
will and pleasure, through ^sus Christ ou^e Lord and Sanio^re.

Amen.
Lord into thy hands I commend my spryte, thou haste Redeemed me Lord God of
truth.
IMPRYNted at (...) ^y (...) Day dwelling over Alber^ gate beneth Say^ct
Marty^s.

These Cathechismes are to be ^olde at h^ (...)* b^ (...) Coun^uit in Che^syde
at the sign of the (...). (?)



Cum p^iuilegio adimpri m^ndum solu^.


