A brief Catechism so necessary and easy to be learned even of the simple
sort, that whosoever can not, or will not attain to the same, is not to be
counted a good Christian, much less to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord.

It stands of three parts.

1. The first shows how miserable all men are of them selves. 2. The second,
how happy they are that rightly believe in Christ. 3. The third, what duetyes
they owe unto God for his great mercy toward them in Christ Jesus.
Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creed lane, at the sign
of the gylden Tun, and are there to be sold. 1582.

1. Peter. 3.15.16. Sanctifye the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you.

And that with meekness and reverence, having a good conscience, that when
they speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may be ashamed which blame your
good conversation in Christ.


The first part.
Question. ARt not thou a servant unto the almighty God, and Lord of heaven
and earth?

Answer. I acknowledge myself for ever to be his servant. Exodus 20.2. Ios.
24.15.24. Romans 11.36


Question. Has God given forth any Laws, whereby servant, should be well
ruled and governed?

Answer. The holy Scriptures are Gods laws, wherein he declares his will and
pleasure, Hebru. 11.2 Luke 19.26 31. Deuteronomy. 4.13
the general some and effect whereof is breefely set forth unto us in the
ten Commandments.

Question. Rehearse the ten Commandments.

Answer. The first Table.
i. God spoke all these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have
none other Gods but me. Exodus 20.3.
ii Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of
any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in ye waters
under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor woorship them, for I the
Lord am a ielous God, and visit ye sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them yt hate me, and show mercy unto
thousand in the^ yt love me, and keep my commandments. iii. Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him
guiltles, that takes his name in vain. iiii. Remember that thou keep holy
the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to
do: but the seventh day is the Saboth of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do
no manner of work, thou nor thy son, thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy
maid servant, thy catel nor the stranger that is within thy gates: for in
six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the sea and all that in them is,
and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and
hollowed it.
The second Table.
v. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee. vi. Thou shall do no murder. vii. Thou
shall not commit adultery. viii. Thou shall not steal. ix. Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor. x. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor
his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.


Question. Art thou able to keep all these laws.

Answer. Every man is guiltye of the breach hereof, not only in respect of
their original or birthe sin, Psa. 19.12. Eccle. 7.22 1. John. 1.8
but also otherwise in thought word and deed.

Question. What is the danger of breaking any of these laws of almighty
God.

Answer. The just punishment of breaking any of God his laws, mat. 5.19.22 Romans
6.23. Gala. 3.10. Iam. 2.10.
yea if it were but once in all my life, it is loss of Gods favor, the
purchasing of his heavy displeasure which brings everlasting death, both of
soul and body.

The second part.
Question. How shall you escape this great danger, and fearful punishment of
your sins. Will not your good deeds serve to make some ame^ds and so deliver
you from this punishment.

Answer. My good deeds will not help to save me from this punishment, Ephess.
2.9. Acts. 4.12. Galat. 2.21.
nor any thing else, but only Jesus Christ has deliuerd me.

Question. How has Jesus Christ saved and delivered you from this great
punishment of your sins?

Answer. Jesus Christ has delivered me from ye punishment of my sin, 1. Tim.
3.10 Galat. 3.13 Esai. 53.5. Lol. 1.19.20 1. Pet. 2.24. Romans 4.25. Ioh. 3.16.18
Galat. 2.20.
because he being both God and man, has suffered all the punishment which my
sins deserved, and has fulfiled the law of God perfectly for me, and thereby
has restored me for ever to the love and favor of God.

Question. Are all then saved by this suffering and death of Christ?

Answer. Only they are saved by Christ, Ioh. 20.28.
who believe yt he has done all things touching salvation, not only for other
but also eue^ for them selves, the effect of which faith is contained in the
Creed. Romans 8.12.


Question. Mat. 1.21 Dan. 9.24.25.
Rehearse the Creed.

Answer. I Believe Ioh. 14.1. Heb. 11.3. Math. 5.45
in God the Father almighty Act. 4.27. Heh. 1.9. Act. 10.38.
maker of heaven and earth. And in 2.b Jesus c Christ his Io. 1.14.18.
only son our Ma. 28.18. 1. Pe. 1.18.19.
Lord. Which was conceived mat. 1.8.20.
by the holy ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffered Luke 23.24.33.46.
under Ponce Pilate, Mat. 27.46. Mat. 26.37 Lu. 22.44.
was crucified, dead and buried, Mat. 20.8 9. 1. Cor. 15.4 12.
he descended into hell the third day he rose again from the dead. He Act.
1.9.
ascended into heaven, and Act. 7.55.56. Lol. 3.1.
sits at the right hand of God the father Almighty. From thence 2. Lor.
3.10.
shall he come to judge both the quick and the dead. I believe in mat. 28.19
Act. 5.3, 4. 1. Pet. 1.2.
the holy ghost. The 1. Tim. 3.15. 1. Lor. 14.33 Mat. 28.18 19.
holy Catholic church. The communion 1. Lor. 12.12.
of Saints. The To. 3.24.25.
forgiveness of sins. The 1. Lor. 15.53.45. Job. 19.25.26.
resurrection of the body. And the s life everlasting Amen.

Question. By what means have we such a true faith?

Answer. It is the gift of God.

Question. How does God work this faith in us?

Answer. By the preaching of the word of God.

Question. Is this faithfully framed and made strong in us at the first, or
in one hour? 2. Lor. 1.3. Luke 16.23.


Answer. Faith is increased by little and little, 1. Cor. 11.17 Gala. 4.19.
Ephe. 4.11 12.13. 1. Thessa. 5.19.20.
and made strong in us by the dilligent hearing of the word of God, and by
the use of his sacraments.

Question. How many Sacraments be there?

Answer. There be two Sacraments, Romans 4.11. 1. Co. 10.2.3 Mat. 21.25 Mat.
28.19 Mat 26.2.6 Acts. 2.26.
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Question. What benefit have you by Baptism, and to what end serves it?

Answer. By Baptism the holy Ghost assures me that as my body is sprinkled
with water, Act. 22.16.
so my soul, 2. Pet. 3.21
by the bloudshedding of Christ, Colo. 2.12.
is sprinkled and washed from all the guilt and punishment of my sin, and also
heerby I profess my self to die with Christ, Romans 6.4.
as concerning sin, and live in him as concerning righteousness.

Question. To what end serves the supper of the lord?

Answer. In the supper of the Lord, Luke 22.19.22.24. 1. Pet. 10.16 1. Cor.
11.23
I am by the spirit of God assured, that as the bread broken, and the wine
powered out be delivered unto me, even so was the body of Christ broken, and
his blood shed, as a full recompense to God for my sins.

The third part.
Question. For as much then as God of his infinite love, has given his own
son to ransom us from the power of sin, death and hell, to advance us to
the honor of his children, and heirs of his kingdom: seeing it pleases him
to give us faith, and daily to nourish and increase it in us more and more, by
his word and sacraments: by the which faith we lay hold upon Christ, and make
him with all his merits and treasures our own: so that now not only all our
sins are removed from us, but also his righteousness, holiness, and
perfection, is accounted ours before God: Do you not think that we are very
deeply bound unto him?

Answer. Yes verily, I am so much bound to god, Psalm. 8.5. Psalm. 116.12 Romans
12.1.
yt al my life ought to be a continual tha^kfulnes to his Majesty, for his
great mercy.

Question. Is then this doctrine which shows us that we are saved by Jesus
Christ only, and not by our own works, any occasion of wicked life, as
the Papists slander it?

Answer. This doctrine is no occasion of wicked life but the greatest reso^ to
persuade me^ to be diligent and zealous in good works. Ios. 24.14.18. Psa.
130.4. Romans 12.1. 1. John. 2.1 Romans 6.1. Titus. 2.11.12.


Question. Are there no other good deeds required of christians, but giving
alms, visiting the sick, building of schools, and houses for the poor? An,
Mat. 6.2. 1. Cor. 13.3.
As these are good deeds, and such as highly please God, being don in such
manner as the word of God does teach us yt is, with a true faith in Christ and
pure love toward our Brethren, Ex. 20.3.4 Mat. 22.36.
So are there many other much more excellent then these, as the pure
worshipping of God both with soul and body: Job. 13.36
trusting and depending of his good providence both in prosperity and
adversity: Luke. 10.42.
hering of his holy word: These. 5.11.14. Heb. 3.13. Clos. 3.16. Jacob. 5.20.
exhortations and admonitions one to another, especially to such as we have
special charge over: 1. These. 5.16. Psalm. 50.14 15.
praising God for all his mercies and continual benefits poured upon us: and
last of all, Judge. 20 Ephess. 6 10
faithful prayers for all such things as we stand in need of.

Question. To whom ought we to make our prayers?

An. We must pray to our loving and almighty God alone, Psalm. 50.15 Acts. 4.24.
and to none but him.

Qu. What things ought we to pray for?

Answer. We must pray, not only for all things needful for our selves and
the Church of God, Acts. 4.29. Ephesians. 6.18.19
but especially for those things which appertain to the setting forth of the
glory of God, even as we are taught in the Lords prayer.

Qu. Rehearse the Lords prayer.

Answer. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Math. 6.9.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be don in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from
evil. For thine is the kingdom the power and the glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Qu. How may we be assured that God will hear us, seeing we are sinners?

Answer. Because we offer up our prayers, Ioh. 16.23 1. John. 2.1 1. Pet. 2.5.
not in our own name, nor in the name of any creature, but of the son of God
our Savior, who is always in the presence of God, to entreat his Majesty
for us, his poor servant.

Certain necessary instructions meet to be taught the younger sort, before
they come to be partakers of the holy Communion.
Qu. What do you come to receive?

An. I come to receive the Lords supper.

Qu. What is the Lords Supper?

An. The Lords supper is a sacrament ordained of the Lord Jesus Christ, to show
forth in most lively and evident manner, his painful suffering of death for
us, by the outward signs of bread and wine.

Qu. Wherefore come thou to receive the Lords Supper?

An. I come to receiu it for these 4. causes 1. First, to show my obedience to
my Lord Jesus Christ, who has so commanded me. 2. Secondly, that my inward
man might be nourished and strengthened by that heavenly food of Christ's body
and blood received by faith, as my body is nourished by corruptible bread and
wine. 3. Thirdly, to make open profession of my faith in Christ, and love
tovvard my neighbors. 4. Lastly, that by the reverend ministration and
joyful showing forth of this holy mystery, my mind, and all the parts of my
soul, might effectually be stirred up through the inward woorking of the holy
spirit to a more earnest love of my God and unfeigned thankfulness to his
Majesty, freely given me in his son Jesus Christ.


Qu. After what sort ought you to come to this holy mystery of the lords
supper?

An. Three things are chiefly required of those that come to this heavenly
banquet of the Lords supper.

The one is a sorrowful feeling and a hearty lothing of all my sin, that is
to say of all that I have conceived in my heart uttered with my tongue, or
committed by outward deeds contrary to the word of God.

The second is a true faith in Christ, which brings with it a comfortable
and joyful feeling of the infinite mercy and everlasting love of God toward
me in Christ.

The last is a careful earnest and constant endeavor to please God in all things
according to the rule of his word, and so to behave my self before him all
the days of my life as I may best profit others, and most set forth his
glory in that calling wherein he has placed me.

FINIS.
A form of prayer to be used in Christian famelies.
WE thank thee (O Lord God and most merciful father) for all thy loving
kindness and unspeakable goodness so aboun dantly declared tovvard us, in
preserving us this day past and all our life hitherto, in turning away from
us innu merable plagues which we most justly have deserved, in giving unto
us all ma^er of blessings and co^forts pertaining unto this life, and the life
to come, and namely we praise and thank thy majesty for creating us
according to thine one image, for saving us from our sins and thy wrath by
the merits of thy son Jesus Christ, for calling us unto the knowledge of
this thy infinite love tovvard us, by the preaching of thy word and work of
thy spirit, for ayding and comforting us so fatherlye at all times, in all
places, and against all our enemies which have sought by all means to turn
us from the earnest love of thy Gospel and obedience of thy commaundeme^ts. We
confess (O Lord) from the bottom of our hearts, that we are utterly unworthy
of the least of these thy mercies, that there is nothing to be found in us, to
move thy majesty thus bou^tifully to deal with us, yea that our ma nifold
sins and corruptions of our nature yet remaining in us, have deserud the
contrary. To thee therefore (O father) we render al thanks, al praise and
glory, for these thy benefits bestovved upon us and the rest of our brethren.
And vvc most humbly beseech thee, to pardon al our coldness, unthankfulness with
all the rest of our sins, and to strike our stony hearts yet more deeply with
the force of thy spirit and edg of thy word faithfully preached that we may
more earnestly repent for our former iniquities, loathing and abhoring all sin
in our selves and others, because it is so foul and odious in thine eyes. And
we also most humbly crave at thy hands, more and more to root out of our hearts
our own natural corruptions of infidelity, self love, pride, envy, vain
glory, maliciousnes and all hipocrisy, and to renew in us daily all thy graces
and fruits of thy spirit, in that thou in thy wisdom see to be needful for
us, for the better setting forrh of thy glory, and more fruitful service to
our brethren, in those callings wherein thou haste placed every one of us. Let
thy fear (O dear father) be always so clearly before our eyes, and the most
comfortable feeling of thy abundant love toward us in Christ, so strongly
prevail in our hearts, that we never presume to offend thy majesty by wilful
breaking of thy laws, but be found always cherful, dilligent and zealous in
all good woorks which thou have enioined, and commended unto us in thy holy
word, Let us not (O Lord) be like the rude and ignorant multitude, who because
they have not known thy word, nor effectually tasted of thy love in heavenly
things, are carried with the rage of their own carnal lusts and worldly
desires, to al filthiness of Idolatry, uncleanness of life, covetous,
deceiptfull, and unrighteous dealing for their own gain: But as thou in mercy
have called us from our selves and out of this vain world to serve thy
Majesty, to be called and to be indeed thy children, heirs of an immortal
inheritance, temples of thy spirit and lively members, of thy son our
savior: so grant that our co^uersatio^, behavior, and whole life may answer
to this high calling and glory of our profession, a bounding in all spiritual
knowledge, in feruency of true zeal in detestation of all sin, in carefulnes
to please thee in all things, joy of the spirit, in peace of conscience, in
all Charitable just and kind dealing toward all men for thy sake. And because
all our labors in our callings are in vain, without thy marvelous blessing,
voutchsafe to be always present with us, not only shevving us by the light
of thy word what we should do, but also blessing and prospering us by the
power of thy shield in all that we take in hand, in such sort as soome
worthy fruit may rise thereof to the comfort of our own conscience, the
benefit of our brethren, and the praise of thy holy name through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Give us thy wisdom from above, whereby we may use the things of
this world, as though we used them not, travailing faithfully in our calling,
but yet depending of thy providence, looking for all good success at thy
hands, referring all to thy glory, continually, waiting for the coming of
our Lord and savior Christ Jesus in whose name we pray not only for our
selves. etc.

printer's device of Hugh Singleton HS
GOD IS MY HELPER


