The lif of saint katheryne
portrait of St. Catherine of Alexandria
HEre begins the right excellent and full glorious life and passion of the
right blyssed virgyn and martyr saint Katheryne.
The first chaptre.
THis blyssed virgyn saint katheryn was by the dyscent of the line and of the
noble kyn read of the Emperor of Rome / as it shall be declared more plainly
here after / by a noble cronycle which most blyssed life and conuersacyon was
written of the sole^pne doctor Athanasius that knew her birth her kynred her
holy life and conuersacyon. And this same Athanasius was done of her masters
in her tender age / and by the grace of the holy ghost she was converted to the
faith. And after that she was converted / she converted the same athanasi us
by holy and marvelous works that our lord wrought in her. and after by his
wysdom he was made bishop of Alisandre / and was a glorious pyler of holy
church / by the grace of our lord god and her holy meritis / as we do find
by credible chronicles For in the time of the emperor Dioclesian and maximian /
so great and cruel tyranny was showed in the world and not only of christian but
also of paynymes that in yt time many a realm that was sub get to tome put a
way the yok of there seruage and ope^^y rebelled aienst them perour among which
the realm of Ermony was one of the most that myghtely withstode the tribute
that longed to the emperor of rome wherefore there was chosen to apeas that
rebellyon a lord of great dygnyte of the counseyle of high co^stancius which
was before al other manly in arms / and therewith right discrete and fulle of
virtues. The which lord than when he came in to Ermony stau^ched so by his
virtue and man lie governance that rebellyon / that he deserved the love of
all his enemies / so ferfurthe / that the king and all his people desired
that he should wedde the daughter and the heir of the land and wha^ne this
was done within a while after the king of Ermonie dyed / and constancius was
crowned king of that land the which within a while after had a son by the
queen the which was clepid costus And sone after that died the queen for who^
was made great lamentacion of her people. After whose death co^stancius the
king turned again to Rome for to se the emperoures welfare / and for to se
and know how his lordeshyppes were governed in tho parties. and in the mean
time came tidings to the emperor of Rome how that great brytayne that now is
called England rebellyd against the emperor of Rome. wherefore it was seen
among the counsel / that it was to require con stancius the king of Ermonie to
take on him for to redress that rebellyon. the which request he godlly
granted and drew him toward tho perties and in hi^ coming he ruled him so
by his virtue and prudence wherefore we be in derkenes and till the light of
grace come we may not se the clear way. and when him list to come he shall
void away the derk clothes of ignorance. and she we him clearly to me which I
so ferue^tly desire and love. And if so be that him list not that I find him
/ yet reason commands me to keep hole that is unhurt. wherefore I beseech you
humbly my lady my mother that ye ne noone other never meue moore of this matter
For I by hyghte you plainly that for to dye therefore I shall never have other
but oonly him that I have dyscryuyd / to whom I shall truly keep all the pure
love of my heart. And with this she rose up / and her mother and all the lords
from the parliament. And with great sorrow / and lame^tacien they took there
leave and went on their way. and thanne they young lady went home unto her
paleys whose heart was so set on fire with this husbonde yt she had discryued
that she could no thing think n^ do but all her mind and her intencyon was
only on him / wherfoore she stodyed and mused contynually how she might find
him but it would not be as yet / forsooth she had no means thereto. Not
wythstandinge he was full nere her heart. for he it was that had kynled her
heart with a bre^nynge fyres love that should never be quenched by no peynene
tribulacion which was well seen in her glorio^^ passion herafter.

Ere I leave this young queen as for a time syttyng in her palyce co^tynually
thinking and imagining how she might find this new spouse with many a tere
of elongacyon and many a sore syghe / for her blind ignorance and now I
shall turn as our lord will give me grace to she we how our lord by his
special my racle clepyd her to baptyme / in a synguler manner that never was
herd of before ne since and after how ^^e wedded her visibly i^ a glorious
manner / shewi^ge her sovereign tokens of love / that never was shewid to none
exthly creature save only to our lady his blessed mother. Beside Alysander a
certain space of miles there dwelte an holy fader in deserte that hight Adrian
the which had served our holy fader almighty god the space of. xxx. year in
great penance. And on a day as he walked by foore his celle in meditacion /
there came against him the most reverent lady that any erthly creature might
behold. and when the heremyte bihelde her most excellent estate / and high
beauty above kind he was so sore astoned and dredefull that he fyl dow ne as
deed. Thanne this blessed lady seeing his great dread / cleped him goodly by
his name and said brother Adryan dread ye not for I am not come to you but for
your great worship honor and profit with that she took him by the hand myldly
and comforted him and said to him in this wise. Adrian ye must go on a message
to the cite of Alisaundre for me and into the palys of the young Queen and
there, ye must say to her that that lady gretethe her well whose son she chase
to her lord and husbonde syttinge in her parliament with her mother and all her
lords about her where she had a great contluyte and battle in kepinge of
her virgynyte / and tell her that the same lord that she did chese there is my
son that am a clean virgyn and he desires her beautye and he loves her
chastity among all virgyns in earth / and bid her without tariynge that she
come with you alone into this place and she shall be new clothed and than she
shall see him / and have him to her everlasting spouse. The heremyte heringe
all this / answered thus. O blessed Lady how should I do this message. for
nouther I know the cite ne the wey and what am I though I knew it for to do
such a message unto the queen Her meny woll not suffer me to come unto her
presence: and she woll not believe me of my message. but put me in duraunce as
though I were a fay. toure. Adryan said this blessed Lady dread ye not for
that that my son has begone in her must nedis be performed: for were ye well
she is a special chosyn vessel of grace before all other women wherefore tarry
not ne dread not. For both ye shall know the cite and also the wey into her
Paleys for there shall no creature take heed to you.

And when ye come into her paleys take good head which doors open against you
/ and enter in boldly till that ye come unto this fair young que ne whom ye
shall find alone in her stodye stody inge full sore in her wittis of that that
woll not be wherefore my son has compassyon on her labor and for her good
will she shall be specially fed with his grace that was never none like to her /
out ache mine own person that am his own mother. where fore Adryan hye you fast
and bring me my dear daughter that I love with all mine heart. And when Adryan
had received his message / he laid him down flat before his sovereign lady
saying in this wise. All worship and Joy be to my lord god your blessed son.
and your blessed will be fulfilled and I woll go at your commandment.

The vii. chapter.
And anon adrian rose him up and hied him fast to the cite of alisa^der and
passed the desert and so forth till he came to the cite / and so he went
forth to the paleys as he had learned so did he / and entered in at the doors the
which opened ageynste him / and so he yode from chamber to chaumber till yt he
came to the secret stody where as no creature used to come but she her self
alone / and when that he entered in at the door he saw where sat the fairest
creature and the most goodly yt any creature might behold / and she sat so
sad in her stody that she herd him not unto the time that he kneled him


