THE ORIGINAL OF POPISH IDOLATRY, OR The Birth of Heresies.

Published under the name of CAVSABON, And called-in the same year, upon
misinformation.

But now upon better Consideration Reprinted with ALOWANCE.

Being a True and Exact Description of such Sacred Signs, Sacrifices and
Sacraments as have been instituted and ordained of GOD since ADAM.

With a new source and Anatomy of the Mass, first gathered out of sundry
Greek and Latin Authors, as also out of diverse learned FATHERS.

Published by S. O.

Printed in the Year of our Savior 1630.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader: this treatise came to my hand, and I have perused it, and I
saw it to be but a relation out of other ancient Histories, how superstition
was brought into the Church, which made me to wonder, that any, who is not a
lover of popery, should suppress it, by reason it does only show what others
have written, who lyved in those ages wherein they were brought into the
Church, I have therefore got this treatise to be examined and viewed by sundry
others, who are not inferior for gifts and learned arts to any who had a
hand in suppressing this book, and all of them do agree with me that those
things which are related in it are to be found in the writtings of those
Authors quoted in it, therefore I take it that those which suppressed it, if
they be not Papists in their hearts, yet they hold with the Papists, that
ignorance is the mother of devotion, which is expressly against the Law of God.
And the Scriptures hold ignorance to be no better then Paganism, therefore
the Apostle does tell us, that God shall come to judgment in flaming fire
rendering vengeance to all which know not God, 2. These. 1.8. Therefore those
which contemn this means of knowing God, much more they which suppress the
knowledge of God, or his truth, their end shall be woeful and accursed.

Our adversaries the Papists do vanut much of antiquity unto such as are not
acquainted in ancient Histories, saying that their religion is the true
religion of Christ, which has been in all ages since the Apostles: but this
short treatise does manifest otherwise; if we search the Scriptures and ancient
Histories we may find that all their boasting is mere delusion, which does
vanish away, and their Religion shall be found to be no other, then the
Scriptures have foretold, to wit, that Antichrist should arise in the Church
of God, and corrupt all the holy ordinances of God, and set up his traditions,
and command them to be observed above all the ordinances of God. 2. These.
2.3.4. Apoc. 12.11.12. 1. Tim. 4. And although they have suppressed the
testimonies of the faithful witnesses of the truth, which we produce against
them, yet we do find sufficient testimonies out of their own writers, that
their religion was not received in many Churches till a thousand years after
our Lords ascension, and since brought to the height by Jnnocentius the third
and Honorius.

Then by their own Authors confession, God did stir up many thousands of
witnesses to his truth which we profess against their superstitions: and in
all ages since, the Lords truth has not wanted some which did witness it,
even to the death, by giving their lives for it.

And now this hundredth years the Lord has given us in our land many excellent
truths to be maintained by laws, to be professed and embraced which many
thousands have comfortably embraced, and are departed this life in Christ and
rest with him. And now for our great sins the Lord does begin to take it
away from our land, as he has done in other countries which have had it, and
we see he has sent them the sword with famine and great miseries, and he has
shaken his rod against us, to see if we will learn before it be too late, and
forsake all our great and heinous iniquities. Christ told the Jews that those
eighteen, on who^ the tower of Siloam fell, were examples to them, that except
they did repent, they should all perish; so except we reform our great and
crying transgressions we shall be ruinated and made an astonishment to all the
world: and although we are not the first who have drunk of this cup of Gods
wrath, yet we shall not receive the least part, although the Lord have reserved
the Dregs of his cup for the beast and his false teachers.

We may see the Angel of the Lord is executing of his wrath here, and all the
world is in an uproare round about us. The whole frame of nature is out of
order, yet we do not lament as we should, therefore it does prognosticate his
plagues shall fall seven times heavier upon us. The gospel of Jesus Christ is
departing from us, who can love his King and Country, and not lament and mourn
and fear least his fiere wrath should consume us all in this troublesome,
cruel, desperate and bloody age in which we live, now that wars and
rumoures of wars are sounding in every man's ears, and Gods enemies make
Havocke of his Churches and Servants, and the Roman Antichrist does prevayle,
and Gods people at this day be grievously persecuted and murdered, yea some
consumed and devoured. Alas it will be too late to bring water to quench the
fire, when the house is burnt to ashes. This short treatise is to manifest the
original of the superstitions crept into the Churches, how most of them came
from the old heathenish Romans, except their Transubstantiation, which is a
grosser kind of Idolatry, the^ ever was invented by any Pagane.

Christian Reader, if you do observe this treatise, you may have wherewith to
stop the mouths of the Papists, and behold whence their idolatrous Mass is
derived.

I have in the end added some thing of my own collecting, most out of their
own Authors, to show the truth, how long it is since their idol of their
Breaden God came first into the Church. S. O.

THE AVTHORS EPISTLE TO THE READER.
MOst Christian Reader.
Considering the Controversies and bloody hatred grown betwixt those (who
profess themselves Christians) about religion, for they aspiring to retain
these vain superstitions proceeding from their predecessors: and many also not
contented, do invent new Sects, Schisms and Heresies: Others (least in number)
divinely inspired, and of God elected, desire to extirpate the Darkness of
Ignorance, thereby to cause resplendently to shine, the Light, and claritie of
Truth: But it seems, that the most dangerous Poison that Satan uses to
entoxicate men with the Venym of sedition, and cruel contention and hatred,
derives chiefly from the Mass, disguised with some good meaning, masked and
covered (peradventure) with a good intention. And although that many heretofore
have by sundry faithful descriptions endeavored to discover to the world the
deceitfulnes, error, and blindness thereof, yet could they not prevail, nor
give light to their duskish and heavy sight.

Therefore now, without any passion, I have faithfully extracted, and lively
drawn out, from the Volumes of ELASOPOLITANS COMMENTARIES: (It is a large and
faithful description; whereof the second Volume treates of the Constitutions
of great Pontiss, Sovereign Priests, and Sacrificers, as have been ordained
since the beginning of the World, and their true Number, Power, Riches, and
Authority; (all for thy only benefit) this sincere Summary of the Sacrifice,
called the Mass.

In this Treatise (though little in appearance) are designed and set down all
such Sacred Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments ordained of GOD from time to
time: As also the Corruptions that have grown successively in the Church of
GOD: whereby I do evidently show the Birth of all Heresies and Jdolatries, and
especially the true Original of the Mass; for the which the world is in great
strifes, bloody Contentions, cruel Divisions, Hatred, and lamentable Civil
Wars: for some do Invectivate and Inveigh against it, alleging that it is
newly divised and invented; others defend it by prescription, and long
possession; and thus by such like altercations the Christian Church is sore
afflicted with the yoke and Terror of Sedition. But if thou art a Christian
(beloved Reader) of what Sect soever, Papist, or Evangelical; I pray thee
heartily, for thine own good, to have patience to read this Work; for by it
thou may evidently know, and plainly discover the very truth of whatsoever
thou stand in doubt of, what Sacrifices, Sacraments, and Sacred Signs have
been instituted of GOD since ADAM; what is the Mass and Original thereof;
who were her Founders, Augmenters, and Inventers; and to the end thou may
firmly believe with assurance, all the Contents herein mentioned, have
recourse to those Authors out of whose Books and works I have drawn end
derived it: their Names and Books are quoted in the Margent. So aiming at GODS
glory and thy own Benefit, I rest with my prayers to GOD, to inspire thee with
his Holy Spirit, by the intercession of our only Savior, Redeemer, and
Mediator Jesus Christ.

AMEN,

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE COURTEOUS READER, wishes all Saving health in Jesus
Christ.
WIse Politicians (favorable Reader) in their Jnstitutions, and Government of
Commonwealths, do hold for an infallible maxim, that to reform Corruptions
and abuses in States, better course cannot be taken, then often to reduce
things to their primitive Original; Because Laws at first enacted with good
and profitable intention, in the Revolution of few years, by men's instability
and inconstancy of mind, or the peculiar interest of Avarice by Injustice,
are abrogated and neglected.

The Venetians being a people at this day celebrous, and famous for their
Government, have a supreme Magistracy, which they call A Syndicate, that
once in a few years, survey all the Offices and Dignities in their
Commonwealth, the Duke himself not there excepted, to look in the abuses, and
prevent their deep root and plantation; that so all things may continue and
stand entire, according to the rules and precepts of their first Constitutions
and ordinances.

Also a Garden-plot, though never so curiously drawn or distinguished into
borders, and set with all manner of odoriferous flowers, and wholesome herbs,
yet every shower of rain brings forth new weeds, the which if they be not
carefully, and daily supplanted, will soon overgrow the good plants, and bring
the same to a wild and savage plot of ground. And though the inevitable
depravation and corruption of man's nature carry so strong a hand in things
transitory and mutable, yet one would think they should be more stable and
provident in those courses tending to eternal salvation, and souls
reprobation, in observing those Laws and Co^mandments, uttered by GOD
himself, and commanded to all Posteries for a square Rule, whereby to measure
our faith and actions.

Notwithstanding men are more prone to Declination and Corruption, in that from
the very beginning, and first institution of the Law Mosaicall, till the
present times, that for many ages have received the clear and manifest Truth,
and doctrine Evangelical; Heresies have ever crept in and carried too powerful
a hand, as Verity it self, like gold in the bowels and entralls of the earth,
is encombred with a wonderful deal of oar and dross, which is not like to
be s^parated till the last sire of trial, which shall prove every man's work,
and cast out the dross to be trampled and trodden under foot; Wherefore
(Christian Reader) for the better satisfaction and general good of all Gods
Church, I have labored to translate this curious and admirable Master piece,
most worthy and necessary to be observed and read: for thou may, as in a
Mirror, clearly see and discover the Birth and the Original of this foul
Monster Heresy, in the Church, even from the first ages before the written
Law, as also during the force and efficacy of the Mosaicall Sacrifices, and
now in these later times more pertinent under the Law and precepts of Christ's
holy Gospel, wherein are deduced the Authors and Founders of the Roman Mass.

And what conformity it holds with the Ethnicke-Rites and ceremonies, and how
far a digression it has made from the doctrine, life, and practice
Apostolical, and the ages of the Primitive Church, wherein the Author ever
has abandoned all passion and partiality, and in full proofs, cited none but
either approved and authentike Authors, as the ancient Doctors and Writers of
the Church, that lived before the present Inundations of superstitions
Traditions.

Bring them to the Text of Gods Word, compare them with the example of the
Prophets and Apostles, observe the customs of the Primitive churches, and
thus, by reducing the^ to their beginnings it will be easy to judge whether
they stand still in that unspotted integrity, or have not adulterously
profaned the sincere worship of GOD, with many, and mere humane inventions.

If thou do but vouchsafe the diligent and careful reading hereof, I make
no doubt but it will yield great comfort to thy Conscience, and confirmation to
thy Faith, as that which will clearly delucidate many hidden passages, that
have not hitherto been revealed: and if it may take this happy effect, I shall
think my pains sufficiently requited and recompensed in all things, aiming at
Gods glory, and not mine own. And thus I rest.

ABR. DARCIE.

THE ORIGINAL OF POPISH IDOLATRIES: etc. Published under the name of Casaubon,
Anno Domini 1624.
Called in (the same year) upon misinformation: But now (upon better
consideration) reprinted with allowance.
Together with the Original and true Anatomy of the Mass: As also the
corruptions and abuses of all these holy things from the beginning.
CHAP. I. Of Sacred Signs.
IN the time preordained of God by his inscrutable and incomprehensible
Wisdom, (when he had created man to his true Image and likeness, the better
to move and incite him to fear and obedience, as also to make him partaker of
his blessings, he gave him sme exercise of virtue whereby he might acknowledge
him his Almighty God, and omnipotent Creator) were ordained many Signs,
Sacrifices, and Sacraments: First, to our first Father Adam, to whom with his
Successors, corporal men, God allotted corporal signs, to approve the better
of their obedience: to wit, trees planted in the midst of the Orchard, and
earthly Paradise: which although they were not of any other quality then the
other plants, yet notwithstanding being dedicated and consecrated of God for
Sacraments, or Sacred Signs, their quality was then for to serve as Seals
for the Testimony and approbation of his divine will and pleasure, which was
effected by the infinite goodness and bounty of God, to make appear and
known, that the Association, Confederation and alliance contracted with man
his Creature, was ordained from time to time, yea from the beginning of all
times: Thus, I say, were exterior and Corporal Signs, which man could see
and contemplate with his Corporal Eyes, constituted to serve for an assurance,
pledge, and hostage of the Divine Covenant.

These Trees and substantial Fruits ordained for our first and common Father,
were committed and given unto him to keep, without wasting either, or eating
of the one, upon pain of eternal death. Wherefore we must in faith believe,
that they were not vain Signs and Sacraments, or as a mere simple Picture:
but whereas life or death depended on them, they comprehended both the signs
and thing signified; wherein consisted the knowledge and wisdom to fear God,
Prove. 7.2.3
and obey him. And therefore they were called the Fruits of the knowledge of
good and ill, and the Trees of life; For in the careful keeping of these
sacred fruits, and obeying God, there was promised eternal life: whereas on
the contrary, by abusing the Sacraments, and opposing the will of God, there
was intimated to us by exterior signs, that eternal death and damnation was
purchased.

For other exercises required of man toward God, Sacrifices before the written
Law.
concerning the reverence, honor and adoration of him, many and diverse
Sacrifices were celebrated, even before the Law, written by Moses. And though
God Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, needs not any humane works, or to
be nourished with the blood of beasts, or with terrestrial fruits, Psalm. 50.
yet he had always a desire to draw man unto him, in an external obedience
and fear, by Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments: so as the Sacrifice of
Lambs, offered by Abel, were agreeable and pleasing to God. Noah in like
manner, after the inundation of waters past, in sign of his recognition and
obedience toward God, erected an Altar, Genes. 4. Hebr. 11. Genesis 6.7.5.
immolated and offered sacrifices of unspotted sheep and birds, whereof he
made a real Holocaust, acceptable to the Lord. By which examples we may easily
discern, that Sacrifices took not their beginning in Moses time, but that
Innocent and Just Lamb was prefigured in Abels Sacrifice, as a type of Jesus
Christ, slain and offered from the beginning of the world. Apoc. 13.


After the rigor and justice of the deluge was appeased, The Rainbow.
that happened for a punishment of Tyrants offenses on earth, in sign of a
reconciliation, and Covenant renewed, our God ordained the sign of the
Rainbow, for a pledge and assurance of his Divine mercy. This sign and
celestial Bow, Genes. 9.
though it formerly appeared in thick clouds, being a notice of rain to
ensue, notwithstanding it was not as yet constituted nor appointed to serve man
for a sign or Sacrament, until the time that it was by God ordained for an
assurance of the Covenant contracted with the good Father Noah, and his
successors.

After this, with the faithful Patriarch Abraham, Circumcision in the year of
the world 2048.
there was another confederation and alliance contracted by the wisdom of
God, who, for a pledge and assurance to him and his posterity, constituted the
external sign of Circumcision, to serve him for a Sacrament, and a perpetual
notice of Gods holy will and pleasure: and so he was enjoined to circumcise the
male infants within the eighth day of their nativitie, upon pain of being
rejected from the number of those people whom God had adopted. Genesis 17.


Then followed to his posterity afterward, called the people of Israel, the
sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb, which was ordained by the shedding of blood,
to preserve them from the appointed slaughter in Egypt: Exodus 12.
As also the flesh thereof was appointed to be eaten, and celebrated
festivally every year, on the day called The Pascha, or Easter; for a sign
and commemoration of their Deliverance from Pharaohs servitude: and to the
participation of the flesh of this Paschall Lamb, was annexed the unleavened
bread for seven days, on pain of Death. Exodus 22.


Other sacred signs were sent by God to his Elect people, to win them
continually to his fear and obedience: as the sign of the Cloud, The Cloud.
The Pillar of fire. Exodus 13.
to conduct the people by day; and the flaming and fiery Pillar, for their
guide and direction by night; and all to deliver them out of the hands of the
Tyrant Pharaoh.

Then followed the sign of the division of the Arabicke Red Sea, The division
of the Arabic red sea, in the year of the world, 2403.
over which the elect people of God passed. By all which admirable signs, it
pleased God to institute Sacraments having an analogy to the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, instituted afterward by the elementall sign of water, which is the
washing of Regeneration, and the renovation of the Holy Ghost.

Now during the time that this elect people of God were detained in the Arabian
Deserts, 1. Cor. 10. Titus 3.
and barren Wilderness, they had provision of heavenly bread, wherewith they
were nourished for forty years, which was also an holy Sacrament, instituted
by the power and will of God, Heavenly Manna. Exodus 16. 1. Cor. 10.
and held in so high an admiration, that each one amongst the people said,
Man-hu, what a wonderful thing is this? They saw celestial Manna exhibited to
them without travel, a Figure of the Bread of Life, which came down from
Heaven, giving life to all the faithful.

Another wonderful sign there was ordained by God, of the Rock gushing out
with clear water in Mount Horeb, John 6.
to quench the peoples thirst, who were very dry, and almost stifled with heat.

This was a sign and figure of the true Rock Jesus Christ, out of whom came
blood and water, to quench perpetually the thirst of sinners, and refresh our
souls.

CHAP. II. Of Sacrifices.
BEsides these signs and Sacraments abovementioned, Diverse sacrifices
ordained by God, in the year of the world 2455 Holocausts.
which were only by God ordained: there was also a Law enacted and published
for sacrificers by Moses, as Signs, Figures, and Shadows of that absolute
Sacrifice, consummated by Jesus Christ; so that Sacrifices were either public,
or private; general, or particular. Some were Holocausts, being Sacrifices
that were wholly consumed with fire: Others consisted of beasts slain and
immolated to eat, there were earthly and ayerie Creatures. Amongst those
terrestrial, Division of sacrifices, extracted out of Exedus, Leviticus, and
Numbers. Beasts appointed for sacrifice.
were the most obedient and obsequious beasts; as the Ox and the Calfe, the
He, and She Goat: and so likewise amongst Foul, the most mild and gentle; as
the Pidgeon, and Turtle.

Of Sacrifices again, some were public, and others private or particular:
those public were either quotidian or every seventh day, either at New Moons,
or in times of Fasting: but they were chiefly celebrated at three festival
times of the year which were: First, the days of unleavened bread, Days
appointed for sacrifices.
when the Paschall Lamb was offered, and eaten. Secondly, the time of Harvest,
and the first Fruits. And thirdly, at the Feast of Vines, and Olives, toward
the end of the year. Exodus 23.
They were commanded to immolate every day two Lambs; one in the morning,
another in the evening, after the Altar was first perfumed, with Incense and
Odours.


Some of the Sacrifices also were ordained, See the books of Philo the Jew, and
of Josephus.
for corporal things, which were celebrated with shedding of blood, other
sacrifices were without blood for things incorporate. Sacrifices named
Holocausts concerned only the honor of God, because the whole oblation was
consumed in the fire. For which Holocausts, the Male, and not the Female was
received as an oblation, Holocaust: Philo the Jew in his Treatise of Beasts,
appointed for sacrifice. Joseph. lib. 3 c. 20. De Antiq. Iudaic. Lev. 9.2.3.4.
Sacrifice for health.
that is to say, the Ox, the Lamb, or Goat of a year old.

In the sacrifice for Health, it was a matter indifferent, whether the oblation
were Male or Female: but of the victime offered, three parts were reserved for
the Priest, which was the fat, the two Rumnions, and the Kidney, or Fillet of
the Kidneys.

There was another difference between the Sacrifice for Health, and that
celebrated for sin: for in the one, they were enjoined to eat up all the
oblation in two days; and in the other for sin, the Priest was commanded to
eat it up in one day: and by this means some Sacrifices were termed
Holocausts: Sacrifices for sin. Sacrifices for sin out of ignorance.
Sacrifices for the high Priests, sin, for the Princes, for the Magistrate,
and for particular men. Lev. 3.4.5.6. Sacrifice for a polluted man. Sacrifice
for a delivered woman. Lev. 12. Sacrifice for the Leprous. Levit. 14. Sacrifice
for menstruall pollution.
some were ordained for health, other some for sins.

Sacrifices for sin were diverse, both in respect of the persons, and of the
oblations.

For he that offended out of ignorance, his expiation was celebrated with a
female Sheep or Goat: but the expiation for voluntary and wilful sin, was
with a Male sheep.

The High Priests sin was expiated by the sacrifice of an immolated Calfe:
that of the Prince with an He Goat, or Bull: that of a Magistrate, with an He
Goat; and the sin of a particular man, with a female oblation.

The Sacrifice for expiation of offenses toward God, was with a Ram.

The Sacrifice of a man polluted, was also with a female Sheep or Goat: and
for a woman's expiation after childbed, was a Lamb of a year old, a young
Pidgeon, and a Turtle.

For the clensing of the Leprous, were appointed two living Fowls, pure and
clean, Cedar-wood, and Hysop, two whole Lambs, and a female sheep of a year
old, with Meal and Oil.

Another Sacrifice was celebrated for a man or woman polluted, by shedding his
Seed, or her menstruall blood; with two Turtles, and two young Pigeons.

If the great Oblations failed, they had recourse to Doves, Pigeons, or
Turtles, or for Holocausts: others, maintenance.

In all Sacrifices there was pure Flower, without Leaven, Leaven and Honey
forbidden in all sacrifices. Sacrifice for a woman suspected of Adultery.
Numb. 5. Sacrifice of Nazareans. Numb 6. Philo the Jew in his Treatise above
named.
Incense, and Oil: and nothing was permitted to be offered upon the Altar,
with Leaven or Honey.

Notwithstanding in the Sacrifice constituted for the Purification of a woman
suspected of Adultery, there was neither Incense, nor Oil, as in other
Sacrifices; but it was offered with water, mingled with the dust, or ashes,
gathered up from the floor of the Temple.

There was also another Sacrifice, celebrated for those that had made some
great Vow, called Nazareans, when the time of their Devotion was expired,
wherein they were appointed to offer three Victimes, a Lamb of a year old, a
Sheep, and a Ram: the one, that is, the Lamb, to serve for a Holocaust: the
other, of a female Sheep, for Salvation, and the third oblation for Health.
Furthermore, his hairs that made the oblation, were to be cast into the fire,
to be burned together with the Holocaust.

I was willing particularly to discourse of the diversity of Sacrifices, that
hereby I might make known the great goodness, and bounty of our God: who in
the Law of sacrifices, published by Moses, meant to curb and reyne in the rude
people of Israel, as it were with a Bridle, who could not forget the Egypt an
Idolatries, wherein they had been nourished and bred, for about four hundred
years, under the tyranny of the Pharaohs. Exodus 12.
But what rigorous Laws soever enacted: what Ceremonies or Sacrifices soever
he did ordain them: this people ever made a relapse into their Idolatry,
abusing the Law of God, and corrupting the holy Sacraments, and sacrifices, as
hereafter shall be expressed. But if any man desire to know more at large, the
multitude and variety of sacrifices: let him read the books of Philo the
Jew; and of Josephus in his Antiquities of the Jews, according as Moses has
expressly written in the books of Leviticus, and Numbers.

There was another sign and Sacrament instituted of God, Arc of Covenant,
Exodus 25.26.27.28.
by the Arc of Covenant, described in Exodus, being a sacred sign, and
dedicated to receive celestial divine Oracles, to the end to induce the people
to a remembrance, fear, and obedience of God. To accompany and honor the Arc
of Covenant, many other external signs were constituted by God, as the
ornaments and consecrations of the Priests; especially that ornament called the
Ephod: Ephod.
both which and the Sacrifices, the Israelites abused and profaned with their
Idolatries.

Another sacred sign there was, Water of Purificatio^ consecrated. Numb. 15.
of cleansing water, or Water of expiation, instituted by God, for Moses and
Aaron the High Priest. This cleansing or purifying Water was consecrated, with
ashes taken up by an unpolluted man, of the oblation offered in the Holocaust,
that is to say, of the whole Red Cow, without spot, not having ever bin exposed
to labor.

The Fire; for the burnt-offering was ordained to be of Cedar-wood, Exodus 38.
Hysop, and of Purple-Crymosme. Polluted men were sprinkled over with this
Water, for an expiation and purgation of their corporal blemishes.

At the entry of the Tabernacle, or Temple, there was a kind of Laver like a
Font of Brass, forged at first of seeing Glasses, of the Israelitish Women. In
this Laver or Holywater Font, was put this Water of Purification, wherewith the
Priests besprinkled themselves, before they celebrated their sacrifices, to the
end they might be purified, and obtain grace and remission of sins.

After the death of the High Priest Aaron, the Israelitish people, ungrateful
toward God, for the benefit he sent them, murmuring when they were weary of
the heavenly Manna, which he gave them bountifully for their sustentation,
they were punished with the stingings of venomous Serpents. Brazen Serpent.
Numb. 27.
But God being merciful, gave them a sacred sign, to be preserved and
restored to health, that is to say, the sign of the Brazen Serpent erected up
on high, which was a Figure of Jesus Christ crucified. John 3.7.


This in brief is the greatest part of the Signs, Sacrifices, and Sacraments,
instituted by God, in the first Church of the Israelites, being figures of the
true and perfect sacrifice, accomplished and immolated by Jesus Christ, the
true Messiah, the Eternal Priest, who sits at the right hand of God his Father.

CHAP. III. Of Corruptions.
NOw we must succinctly produce how Man by his own fault falling into
oblivion and disobedience against God his Creator, Corruption began first in
Adam.
abused herein divine favor and grace, and corrupted the sacred signs,
sacrifices and Sacraments, by him ordained and instituted. For else what
persuaded our first Father and his Wife Eve to hide themselves, when they heard
and were set in the way of God, but that they had abused his sacred signs, and
violated the Law of those Fruits prohibited and forbidden them?

This holy sign which our first Parents so alienated and abused, was the
original of other Vices and corruptions hereafter described, whereinto men are
fallen, having a relish of the corrupt mass in Adam.

Omitting the particular corruptions of signs, sacrifices, Corruption of the
sacrifices by Aaron. Exodus 32. Deuteronomy. 9.
and Sacraments, before the Law written by Moses, we will begin in setting
down briefly, the most notable errors committed by the greatest sacrificers,
Kings and Priests, with others, that had the government and charge of the
people. When Moses remained in Mount Sinai, to receive the Commandments from
God, his brother Aaron the High Priest caused a golden Calfe to be framed, of
the earings delivered unto him by the people of Israel, he built an Altar,
offered Incense, and celebrated sacrifice, causing the common people to adore
this Image. Was not this an abusing of the sacrifices ordained by God, and a
corrupting of their true use, procuring the same to be ado^'d, which before was
it self offered, and immolated, according as the custom was?

His sons also, Corruption of sacrifices by Nadab and Abihu. Levit. 10. Numb.
11.
Nadab, and Abihu, were they not consumed with fire, because they adulterated
the true use of sacrifices, and took unconsecrated wood, by corrupting the
instituted Law?

The people of Israel ungrateful for the benefit received, in being delivered
from Pharaohs captivity; did they not murmr against the holy Sacrament of
celestial Manna, when they contemned and despised this Bread of Life, crying
out for flesh to eat? Achan the son of Charms, did not he violate the Law
of sacred signs, when he committed sacrilege, by detaining the spoils of
Jericho, which were vowed and consecrated for sacrifices to God? Josh. 7.


If any man more curious, Observe this.
desires to see the abuses and corruptions continued by the same people, let
him read the Histories of the Judges of Israel, and he shall perceive, Iud.
6.3.6.8.9.
that in all ages men have never been content with the true adoration
instituted by God; but in stead of external signs constituted by God, to
draw the people to his fear, and obedience, they have forged and brought-in
their own inventions: and in stead of reverencing the Altars, Iud. 10.
and the Arc of Covenant, in the name of the only one God, which were
external sacred signs, the Israelites misled by the Idolatries of their
neighbors, Judge.
the Syrians, Sidonians, Moabites, Ammonites, and Palestines, erected Altars to
strange gods, to Baal and Astaroth.

Jephta Judge, Inhumane sacrifice of Iephta. Judge. 11.
and Conductor of the Israelites, did not he corrupt the Law of sacrifices,
when he offered up his own daughter, excusing himself by a Vow he made, which
was not so enjoined him by God?

The sacred sign ordained for the High Priest, and Sacrificer, in celebrating
of sacrifice, Judge. 8.
called the Ephod, serving for an external ornament, was it-not abused by
Gideon, Captain of Israel, when of the spoils of the Madianites, and their
earerings, he forged an Ephod of gold, by means whereof, the people fell to
great Idolatry?

How long was this external sign of the Ephod abused, Idolatry by the golden
Ephod.
when an Image was thereof erected in Siloe, by the Mother of Michas? so that
Priests were expressly instituted to sacrifice thereunto, and an Altar
edified; and thus was the true use of holy sacrifices corrupted, While the
Temple continued in Siloe, into what depraved, and adulterate Rites did the
Priests and sacrificers fall, who were appointed, and ordained for the
celebration and Ministry of holy sacrifices, and Sacraments, when by long
custom, they usurped this privilege over the people, that when the sacrifice
was solemnized, and the flesh of the oblations was a boiling, their son or
servant having a trident or iron hook in his hand, he had the liberty to rake
out of the pot or Cauldron, whatsoeuet he could bring up with his hook?
Moreover, 1. Sam. 2.
with more extreme Leviticall Tyranny, this servant of the Priests had the
privilege, to demand of the Celebrater some flesh to roast for the Priest, or
else he might violently take whatsoever he listed.

Were not these wonderful abuses, and detestable corruptions practiced by the
sacrificers and High Priests, under the pretext and color of sacrifice? What
grosser corruption can be mentioned, then that of the children of Eli the High
Priest, named Ophni, and Phinees; who, Ophni and Phinees corrupters of
sacrifices. 1. Sam. 2.
under the color of devotion, committed infamous Whoredoms, with the women
that watched near to the holy Oraculous sign, instituted by God. For which
sin, they were lamentably slain, and the Arc of Covenant violently taken
away by the Philistims, who erected it in the Temple of their Idol Dagon. 1.
Sam. 4.
But God not permitting this sacred sign to be thus profaned, he caused the
Image of Dagon to fall down, 1. Sam. 5.6.
and sent grievous punishments upon the Philistims, so as they were constrained
to re-deliver up again the Arc of Gods Covenant.

This sacred sign was so precious and estimable, Arc of sacred Covenant.
that being but abused and profaned by the Bethsamites, that were not of the
Order of the Levites, fifty thousand of the common people, and seventy of the
most apparent and remarkable amongst them, were by divine revenge cut off by
sudden death.

This example may make them tremble, Against the corruption of sacred signs.
that presume to profane the signs and Sacraments instituted by God, Vzza
also, for abusing the same sacred sign, though it were with a good intention,
to ease the Arc of the Covenant, that leaned too much of one side, was he not
punished with death? For other prophanations committed by the Israelites, there
are examples of Osias punished with Leprosy; 2 Samuel 6. O^as.
for adulterating the sacrifices, and assuming the Ministry of incensing,
allotted only to the Priests.

Saul the first elected King of the Israelites, 2. Chron. 26 Saul.
was put to the Sword, and his Kingdom succeeded to another, as was foretold
him by Samuel, in that he profaned the sacrifices, and permitted his subjects
to commit the like abuses. 1. Sam. 13. Joseph. lib. 7 cap 4. de Antiq Iudae.
His successors to the Kingdoms of the Jews, and Israelites, did they not
persever in their abuses and corruptions of the sacrifices and Sacraments
ordained by God, when they celebrated sacrifices to the gods, 1. Kings 11.
Astaroth the god of the Sidonians; Chamos, of the Moabites; and Melcom, or
Moloch of the Ammonites: building Temples and Oratories for them, offering
incense, and solemnizing sacrifices to them?

Jeroboam King of the Israelites, Jeroboam. 1. Kings 12.
did not only erect a golden Calfe, as the high Priest Aaron formerly did; but
he set up two golden Cowes in the two Temples of Bethel, and of Dan: he
instituted strange Priests, corrupted the Law of God, and caused sacrifices to
be celebrated after the manner and form of Aarons.

This Idolatry and corruption of sacrifices was continued by the Israelites
for more then four hundred years, 1. Kings 14.
during the reigns of their Kings, who had taught them to adulterate the true
manner and form of sacrifices, in particular Chapels and Oratories, edified
on the tops of hills, and consecrated in shadie forests, violating the law of
sacrifices ordained for the holy Temple, in the sacred City of God: for
particular examples of abuses committed against the true use of sacrifices, we
read an history of Maacha, 2. Kings 16.
the mother of King Asa, who caused an Image to be erected to god Pan: she
consecrated and dedicated unto him a shaddie Forest, and celebrated to him
sacrifices.

Achab another King of the Israelites erected an Altar, Achab. 1 Kings 16.
and procured sacrifices to be solemnized to god Mars, otherwise called Baal;
to whom he dedicated an umbragious Grove, Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 10.
to please herein his wicked wife Jezabel. He also built another Temple and
Altar to the god of the Tyrians, ordained sacrificing Priest, and instituted
about 40. false prophets. His son and successor Ochosias, Ochosias.
inst^ucted by his father in corrupting the true use of the sacrifices, caused
men not only to immolate to Baal, who signified Mars, but persevering still in
far greater corrupt ons, he built another Temple to the god of the
Acaronites, 2. Kings 1. Joseph. lib. 9. cap. 1.
called by Josephus, Myos; and by the Grecians Priapus, to which god he
offered sacrifice.

And to be sho^t, what more abominable corruption can be imagin^d, then the
invention of Purgatory fire, Purgatory fire. 2. Kings 16.
which the Israelites abused, causing their children to pass through the
midst of the fire, in Tophet, a valley belonging to the sons of Ennon,
sacrificing to god Moloch?

This corruption of sacrifice, In the book Alcoran. Asoar. 29. li. 46. and
Asoar. 5. Ignem gehounae, non nisi numero dierum praeterminato. Animas sentire
docet Alc^van liber, and ad diem Veritatis omnis. accedere ^perum suorum
mercedem accepturos A^oar. 5. The cause of corruption in Sacraments. Ap^^. 1.^.
though it had been practiced since Moses time, notwithstanding the idol of
Moloch, in the valley of Ennon, was not demolished till the reign of good King
Josias, more then nine hundred years after Moses. Nevertheless, this abuse
has been continued by the Arabians and Africans, even to this present day; for
the Alcaronists and Mahumetans are of this belief, that the souls of the dead
shall pass through fire, to be purged and purified of their offenses. By this
brief collection we may clearly discern, how from the beginning of the
world man has fallen by his own defect into this gulf of the error and
corruption of sacred signs, sacrifices, and Sacraments instituted for him, by
God. But the most capital abuses, from whence the original of all Idolatry
derives, have proceeded from this, in that carnal and fleshly men have bin
always more addicted to visible signs, and external ceremonies, then to
things signified and intimated in Sacraments; for in stead of circumcising
their hearts, and casting off the old skin of sin, to be regenerated, and
purified by the blood of the heavenly oblation offered up before all ages, they
have taken and understood the circumcision carnally, for nothing but the
corporal foreskin circumcised. Dent. 10.50
For did they follow the interpretation of God hereof by Moses, which was to
circumcise the prepuce of their hearts? Did the people of Israel give credit to
the good Prophet Ieremias, who admonished them of the spiritual Circumcision,
and to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, Ierem. 4.
in casting off the old skin of their corrupt nature? The like has happened in
sacrifices and sacred signs instituted by God, for signs of that sacrifice
consummated in the sacred person of Jesus Christ: for carnal man had reference
to the corporal blood of the terrestrial beasts, whereas man should have
raised up his spirit to heaven, to have apprehended what was prefigured and
signified, by the Immolation and Oblation of beasts. And therefore divine
Justice is denounced by the Prophets; Esar 7.
What need have I, says the Lord God, of your sacrifices? I am angry with the
oblation of your sheep; I take no more delight in the blood of Oxen, nor of
Lambs, and sacrificed goats. Why labor you to erect Altars to me? I Will none
of your vain Offerings and Oblations, I abhor your Incenses; I cannot endure
your New Moons, your Sabbaths, your assemblies, nor your feasts: all this is
but vanity. I have conceived an hatred against your Feasts of New Moons, O you
Israelites, and your solemn celebrations. I am weary with having endured so
much: Psalm. 41.
you are ready to address unto me your prayers, but I will no more hear you,
for the abuses you have committed, by your hands full of blood: I will accept
of no Bull hereafter, from the house of Israel, because sacrifices are not
pleasing to me. Esaias 65.
I take as much delight in the sacrifice of an immolated Ox, as in the murder
of a man slain: and in the Oblation of Incense, Ierem. 6.
as the adoration of an Idol: Wherefore then, says God, take you so much
pains to hunt after Incense from Saba, and for odours out of a far Country
to me, to celebrate sacrifices that are not pleasing to me?

Who incited you, O Israelies, to erect Images to the god Moloch, and to the
star of Remphan, during the time you were in the deserts, A^^^ 5.
where I fed you with heavenly Manna? Your Feasts are odious to me, your
Holocausts, Oblations, and Sacrifices for safety I will reject; your Offerings
displease me. By what means therefore must we present our selves before God?
Must it be by oblations of Heifers of a year old? Does God take pleasure in
the great number of sheep sacrificed to him, or in the abundance of
consecrated oils? Shall I offer unto him, says the Prophet, the first born
for remission of sins?

Our good God herein clearly expresses what he would have us to follow; which
is equity, to love mercy, Psalm. 51.
and to humble themselves before him with a contrite heart: Obedience is better
then sacrifice, or the fat of sacrificed sheep. What moved God to refuse the
Sacraments and Sacrifices by himself ordained, but only the abuses and
corruptions the Israelites had committed, understanding too carnally, the
signs and ceremonies therein concurring to draw them only to true fear and
obedience? For, instead of comprehending what was figured in the signs and
corporal sacrifices, they relied on the flesh of immolated beasts: whereas
they should have circumcized the prepuce of their hearts, they depended merely
in carnal circumcision, and in the mean while strayed from the true adoration
of God, in repairing to the Creatures, as to the Stars, and the Queen of
Heaven, and to other strange gods, offering Incense to them, building of
Temples, instituting of Priests, Chaplains, and Sacrificers, making Oblations,
and celebrating sacrifices to them.

And then further, to heap up all corruptions, they offered sacrifice with the
blood of Innocents, offering, and causing them to pass through the Purgatory
fire, in the valley of Tophet. For the abuses also committed in the holy
Sacrifices, sacred signs, and Oblations constituted for God, it was said to
the people of Israel by Prophets, 4 Esdras 7,
that God would have no more of their Feasts, of their New Moons, nor of their
celebrated sacrifices, by bloody and idolatrous people.

CHAP. IV. Corruptions punished.
AFter that the inscrutable Wisdom of God knew the obstinacy and infidelity
of the Israelitish people, which persevered still in committing Idolatry, by
corrupting the sacred signs, sacraments, and sacrifices; and in stead of
acknowledging Gods infinite goodness, that had freed them from the tyranny of
Pharaoh, and fed them in the Desert; who had brought them into a promised
fertile Land, and had so many times assisted them in the wars, against their
neighbors, the Canaanites, Moabites, Madianites, Philistines, Ammonites,
Syrians, Sydomans, and other envious people, and enemies: This rude and
ungrateful people continued still in their Idolatry, instructed by their
Priests, sacrificers, Princes, and Kings, without returning to the true
adoration of one only God: For this cause, after great mercies showed, and
long expectation of a Just and rigorous Judge, who by all courses of correction
was desirous to reduce his people by divine particular inflictions; which was,
by excited wars, by captivities, and servitudes, by divisions of the Kingdom,
distributed between Roboam and Jeroboam, successors to Solomon. who fell to
extreme Idolatry, by intestine and civil wars, growing between the same
people, divided in themselves, and by other usual scourges, to chastize those
whom God meant to favor, for the reducing of them under his fear and
obedience. At last, this people being too much obdurate, and inveterated in
their Idolatries, were brought into miserable servitude under the Tyranny of
the unbeleeving Assyrians, 4. Kings 15.24.
the Idolatrous Babylonians, and their Kingdoms wholly extirpated.

But some pretty while after, when the same people by the special mercy of
God, were delivered out of the hands of these infidel Tyrants, restored to
their liberty, and Country of promise, they again fell from God more then
before, under the government of their sacrificers and high Priests, which
confounded the Spiritual and Temporal together, so far as to invest
themselves with the Royal Scepter, and Diadem.

Then came in the Heresies of the Pharisees, the Sadducees, Joseph. lib. 13
cap. 16. de Aut. Iud.
the Esseans, Galileans, Masbutheans, Hermerobaptists, and Samaritanes,
corrupted through the diversity of strange Nations, having subdued, and
inhabited the Country of Samaria next to Judea.

For the Babylonians worshipped Succobenoth for their god The Cutheans of
Persia had for their god, Joseph. lib. de Antiq. Iud.
Nergal, or Nergel. The Hamathensians called upon their god Asima. The Ananoys
worshipped Nebahaze, and Thartace. The Sepharvamensians held for their gods,
Adramelech, and Anamelech; to which gods they sacrificed their children,
causing them to pass through the fire.

Wherefore, when all kind of Idolatry was thus spread among the Israelites, when
the sacrifices were absolutely corrupted, the sacrificers became mercenary,
avaricious, tyrants and Idolatrous. The people made tributary to the Tyrants of
Rome, the Country of Judea reduced to a Province, Joseph. lib 15 cap. 3.
next to that of Syria, under the subjection and power of the Romans; as also
the Order and Law of electing high Priests adulterated, and their dignity quite
bastardized, Joseph. lib. 8 cap. 8.
so as without any respect made of the race Leviticall; the sacrificers were
constituted by the Consuls, and Deputies of Rome at their pleasure, Entros. 1.
cap. 12.
and whereas before they were permanent during life, they now became Annual.

When the Royal Scepter was alienated from the Progeny of Judea, their
Kingdom wholly subverted, Genesis 49.
as before was prophesied: the incomprehensible power of God was revealed by
his Son, begotten before all ages, who humbled himself to take upon him
humane flesh, in the womb of the Virgin, to redeem his people, and to restore
them to grace and favor with God.

CHAP. V. The Ceremonial Law accomplished by Jesus Christ.
NOw, Comparison between Adam and Jesus Christ.
as in Adam, through his prevarication and sin, and in abusing the sacred
signs committed to his guard and custody, as the whole mass of humane flesh
was tainted with the leaven of sin; so by the second Adam Jesus Christ, we
were again by grace purged from all our offenses. To our first and general
Father Adam, was given the sacred sign for an exercise of obedience, and other
sacred signs to his successors, Sacrifices, and Sacraments instituted by God,
the Tree of Life, the Fruits of the knowledge of Good and Ill; the Rainbowe;
Circumcision; the unspotted Lamb; the unleavened bread; the Cloud; the Pillar
of Fire; the Red sea divided; Heavenly Manna; Water out of the Rock; the
Oblations and Holocausts of beasts for sacrifice; the Arc of Covenant; the
Brazen Serpent; the Temple edified in the holy City: All which sacred signs,
sacrifices and Sacraments, were figures of that which was accomplished in Jesus
Christ.

For first he was the true Tree of Life, Jesus Christ the Tree of Life. Apoc.
2. Romans 12.
planted in the midst of the Paradise of God, in and by whom, we that were
bastard slips, have been engraffed, to obtain eternal life: He committed to
our keeping his holy Gospel commanding us to preserve it entirely, without
adulterating or corrupting the same, without adding or dimishing therefrom,
upon pain of eternal death.

He was as the Rainbow, The Rainbow.
extended all over the Air, to assure us of the League and Covenant contracted
between God and us, that we should no more be drowned in the deluge of sin:
He was circumcised, that the Law in him might be accomplished, that so the
prepuce of our hearts might be circumcised, and to make us cast off our old
corrupted skin in Adam. Circumcision. Galat 4. The flaming Bush.


He was like the flaming Bush, incarnate in the womb of the Virgin, conceived
by the Holy Ghost, without the seed of Man; the sacred Virgin, like the Bush,
remaining notwithstanding entire, and not consumed.

He was sacrificed, like the just and Innocent Lamb, Pascall Lamb. John 1.
Heb. 13.
and his Blood shed, to preserve us from the Tyranny of Satan, and to open unto
us a passage, whereby we may enter into the Land of Promise, the Heavenly
Kingdom.

He is that true unleavened Bread which came down from Heaven, incorrupt and
unspotted; The bread of Life. 1. Cor 5.
of whom we must cate for our spiritual nourishment; that we may celebrate the
Feast of that miraculous passage from Pharach, in the Land of true Liberty.

He was the Cloud, the fiery Pillar, the divided Red Sea, The cloud, the
Pillar of Fire, the Red Sea. 1. Cor. 10. Ioh. 19. Heavenly Manna. The flowing
Rock, Living Water. 1. Cor. 10. Sacrifice. Heb. 1.8.9.10. Heb. 9. Arc of
Covenant.
which conducted and delivered us out of the hands of our enemies; out of whose
opened Side, came Water and Blood for our Salvation.

He was the heavenly Manna, sent from Heaven, to feed us for ever; and the true
Rock, out of which issued Water, to quench their thirst for ever, which
believe in him.

It was He, that only offered up the saving Sacrifice for the expiation of our
sins; both Priest and Sacrifice, both the Offerer, and the Oblation;
remaining an Eternal High Priest, at the Right Hand of God, his Father; being
entered into the Holy and Heavenly Sanctuary, not built with men's hands, but by
the Hand of God.

He was the true Arc of Alliance and Covenant, by which God revealed and
manifested his Oracles; and in him he did reside, to accomplish his divine and
incomprehensible Mysteries.

He was like to the Brazen Serpent, fastened to the Cross, Brazen Serpent.
Ioh. 3. Temple of God. Ioh. 2.
to give health unto the sick, which return to him, and contemplate on him by
Faith.

He was the true Temple of God, wherein the Holy Ghost dwells, one God in
Trinity; in, and by whom God is only adored.

He was the true and sacred Oblation, Holocaust, and water Purgatory.
of whom the real water purgatory was made, for the purgatio^ of every
blemish. Himself, with his own Ashes, that is, with his immolated Body,
besprinkled and wet with water issuing out of his Side, all People and Nations
that believe in Him. John. 15.


CHAP. VI. Of Sacraments ordained by Jesus Christ himself.
THe Law Ceremonial being by this means accomplished, not in Figures, but
really executed, by the Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
our Savior, our Mediator, our Eternal Priest and Propitiator; the infinite
goodness of God was yet further revealed, by the new Covenant, new Alliance,
and new coming of the Son of God, Incarnate: For, Heb. 9.
by his New Testament, ratified and confirmed in the death of the Testator, He
has constituted us as heirs and coheires to God, in his heavenly Kingdom.

For assurance of this celestial succession, Romans 8.
purchased for us by grace, after the Consummation of the Law Ceremonial, and
the same abolished (as we have formerly declared) through that perfect
Sacrifice of the Priest Eternal; there were left unto us two sacred signs or
Sacraments, wherein God bestowed greater favor, and more special grace, then
he had done before his Incarnation: St. Augustine. lib 3 de doct. Christ. cap. 9
For he has freed us from the servile Law of Circumcision, from the
difference of meats, and diverse sacrifices ordained in the first Church of the
Israelites: And by easing us of this weighty burden, He further conferred
upon us a greater comfort; in constituting, for a memorial and remembrance of
our regeneration and eternal life, two holy Sacraments, under two sacred
signs; which are, the water of Baptism, and the Bread and Wine in the
Communion of his Body.

Now, that his Grace might be extended to all Nations, Sacraments of the New
Testament.
God thought good to make choice of the most familiar and ordinary signs and
Symboles: For Circumcision was a special mark for Abraham and his Posterity;
to which Circumcision, Distributio^ of the Sacraments to all Converts. Herod.
lib. 2,
other Nations were not accustomed; though Hereditus, a Grecian borne, in an
History he wrote of the Egyptian manners, specifies their manner and custom
of being circumcised, but especially the Priests: and we may easily
conjecture, that he had heard of the time when the Jews dwelt in Egypt which
was about 400. years, and observed Circumcision.

Moreover, Circumcision was appointed only for the Males, and not for Females:
there was a limited time appointed for Circumcision; which was, within ^ight
days after the Nativity; and the cutting of the foreskin, was with grief and
pain.

But the Grace of God, by his Incarnation and plenary Sacrifice, Genesis 17.
having abolished the rigor of the Law Ceremonial, as well for difference of
meats, as of days; He left unto us by his New Testament, and new Alliance,
the sacred sign of Water, common to all, both Male and Female, without any
distinction of days; and the Infant, by the Sacrament of Baptism, feeling no
pain, as it did by the Circumcision of the fore-skinne.

This sign of Water, intimating unto us the purgation and expiation of our
sins, through the Blood of Jesus Christ, was common, not only among the
Jews, who used ordinarily, Water purgatory, and of expiation; but the
Gentiles also, and all other Nations, Numb. 19.
were accustomed to a Lotion and purgation of cleansing, and purgatory Water,
as we may perceive in reading Ancient Histories. Wherefore, to the end that
Gods Grace in Jesus Christ, might generally be spread over all the Earth; to
all Nations, Regions, and Provinces; both to the circumcised and uncircumcised;
to the Jews, and to the Gentiles; God made election of the most common sign
of Water, the more freely to expose himself unto Man, and to win him to His
feate and obedience.

By which Sign, he has instituted his holy Sacrament of Baptism, for an
assured note and mark of our regeneration and purification, which is really
conferred by the power of the Holy Ghost: In which Sacrament, God does warrant
us so ingrafted and incorporate in Jesus Christ, to be made and renewed the
members of his Church, ^at. 3. Gal. 3.
and to receiveus, as clothed anew, and reincorporated by and through him.

The like reasons may be produced, for the other holy Sacrament instituted by
God in his New Testament, which is that of Bread and Wine: Which Signs,
Symboles, and external Elements, all Nations were accustomed to use, in their
Sacrifices, Oblations, and Ceremonies belonging to their Religions; both
Circumcised and uncircumcised, both Jews and Gentiles: As also, the two
specificall Refections for the nourishment and sustentation of men, are
comprehended under these signs of Bread and Wine.

Our good God therefore, for these reasons, desiring to draw all Nations to
himself; to nourish, and minister unto them most necessary provisions, He
instituted the Communion of the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
under the symboles, sacred signs, and Sacraments of Bread and Wine: And look
how we are assured by the outward mark and Character of Water in Baptism, to
be regenerate and incorporated into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
represented in this Sacrament of consecrated Water, by the power of the Holy
Ghost; so are we nourished by the Communion of his Body and Blood truly
presented to us, by the consecrated Bread and Wine, for our spiritual food,
living and eternal, by the virtue and power of the Holy Ghost: Wherein God
has showed us this special favor, to discharge us of all bloody sacrifices,
ordained in the first Church of the Israelites, who were charged with sundry
and diverse sacrifices, celebrated with the blood of many carthly beasts shed,
according to the diversity of sins and offenses, and of persons that had
offended.

All which Sacrifices were consummated and abolished, by shedding of the blood
of that just and Innocent Lamb, Jesus Christ; who, by his perfect sacrifice,
has absolutely abolished all other Sacrifices, reserving to himself, the
dignity of High and eternal Priest, placed at the right hand of God the Father.

But so much he has favored us, that in stead of abolished sacrifices, he
has instituted two holy Sacraments heretofore mentioned, for an infallible
assurance of our Regeneration, Purgation, Adoption, and of our nourishment and
eternal life, bestowed upon us by the Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VII. Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of Baptism.
AS the Israelites being too gross and carnal, relied too much on external
signs, having corrupted the true use of Sacrifices, and Sacraments appointed
for them by God; so such like abuses, yea, far greater corruptions have
happened in the two holy Sacraments, left unto us by the New Testament of Jesus
Christ. Corruptions of the holy Sacraments.
For in the Sacrament of Baptism, which succeeded in the place of
Circumcision, man conceived of a foul and wicked mass, could not be
contented with the holy Institution from God, but quickly depraved and defiled
the use of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, by Conjurations, Exorcismes,
mixtures of Salt and Oil, Sacrament of Baptism corruted.
wax Candles, Extreme Unctions, Breathings, Babies, or Puppets, with a
thousand Cruzadoes in the forehead, in the eyes, on the back, on the stomach,
on the shoulders, and at the mouth, and all to drive away Devils.

For the Messalian Heretics, Theed. in the book of the tables of Heretics.
Authors of Exorcismes of Cruzadoes, affirmed, that every borne Infant, was
borne with his peculiar Damon, or Devil, which cannot be driven away, but by
Conjutations and Exorcisines.

By this means the holy Sacrament of Baptism came to be corrupted, Ca sine,
and ca postquam d^ concrat. distinct. 4.
even to the adding and annexing of Syriacke word, of Drivell, and Purgatory
Spittle.

What greater corruption can be imagined, then such abominable inventions; as
if the blood of Christ Jesus were not sufficent for our Regeneration and
purgation; Epheta. Per. Sa^yr. 2.
and that God of himself were not powerful enough to engraft and regenerate
us, by the sacred sign of Water, representing the Blood of Jesus Christ,
Ga^at. 3. Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 15.
but that there must be exorcised Spit^l^, and D^ivell, Oil, Salt,
Puppet-Images, Creames, Torches, Waxe-Candles, Milk, or Honic, invented and
devised by other Heretics?

Some also there be more subtle Magicians, Plthagorcans, instructed in the
Messalian Heresy, have added to all this, the pronouncing of the Devils name
twenty times, to exorcise and conjure him, as he that associates the ^^ale
Infant when he comes to be baptized; and thirty times they utter^t, it the
baptizing of a Daughter. Was there ever so d^testable (...) reptio^ in the
Sacrament of Circumcision?

Wherefore, O you Messalians, have you foysted in Oils, into the holy
Sacrament of Baptism; immating herein the Heresy of Marcus, and Marcusus, who
commanded that Infants to be baptized, Epiphan. lib. 1. tom 3. ^^cres. 38.
should been a^^o^^ted? The sacred sign of Water, instituted by the hand of
God, was it not sufficient to signify the precious blood of Jesus Christ, for
our regeneration and purification, without intruding of Fattes, Oils, spittle,
and other mixtures invented by the corrupters of Sacraments?

The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, wherewith we are clothed an^w by the
sacred Water of Baptism, was it not powerful enough, and efficacious, to
preserve us from all tempests, without borrowing of your Exorcismes and
Unctions?

And yet, for a further corruption and abuse, Women were permitted to baptize,
conformable to the error of the Marcionists, Quintilians, Cataphrigians,
Montanists, Pepuzians, Epiphan. lib. 1. tom. 3. haeres. 42. and lib. 2. tom. 1.
haeres. 49.
Priscilians, and Artotirites. Were Women ever admitted by the Law of God to
minister the holy Sacraments, or sacrifices instituted in the first Church of
the Israelites? or in the New Testament of Jesus Christ?

In the History of Moses it is reported, Exodus 4.
that his wife Sephora excited with feminine fury, took the stone or knife
wherewith she circumcised her son: But it is not written, that she, or any
other like her, were ever permitted to administer the holy Sacraments.

Out of these corruptions in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, many Heresies were
raised by the Catabaptists, Anabaptists, Antipedobaptists, with other
Heretics, and Schismatikes, who were not satisfied with Gods pure and sincere
Institution, but regarded more exterior signs, then that which in them was
spiritually represented.

Whosoever desires to understand more particularly, the abuses and corruptions,
invented and devised in diverse ages, out of the variable humors of men, let
them read our Ecclesiastical Commentaries. We must now at this present
descend to the corruptions in the other holy Sacrament of the Supper, and
Communion of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Corruption of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
We may evidently discern by this succinct discourse, how weak and mutable
man is, ever abusing and aliemating the graces of God. For as the people of
Israel, from the beginning of the Law and Institution to them recommended,
corrupted the true use of sacrifices, sacred signs, and Sacraments ordained of
God, so has it fallen out to the Law of God by Jesus Christ, having consituted
a form of communicating his Body and Blood, under the symboles and sacred
signs of Bread and Wine: which holy Sacrament began to be alienated,
Sacrament of the Supper corrupted. 1. Cor. 11.
even in the very times of the Apostles, by the Corinthians; against whom Saint
Paul wrote Epistles, to reduce them to the sincere and true observation of this
holy Sacrament.

Wherefore, let no man hereafter think it strange, if the Apostles successors
have from time to time adulterated the true Use and Rite of this holy
Sacrament; and the further off they were in the present age of their living,
from the time of the Apostles of Jesus Christ, the more easily they fell into
corruptions; yea, such as were most abominable; having converted the sincere
Use of this Sacrament, into a Gulf and Precipice of all Idolatry.

First of all, Hist. Eccl.
what an alteration happened in the Church, next and immediately succeeding the
Apostles, touching a controversy of days, when this holy Sacrament was to be
celebrated.

Sabatius the Heretic instituted the celebration of the Passover, Hist.
tripart. lib. 9. ca. 37. and lib. 11. cap. 5. Enseb. lib. 5. cap. 24.
with unleavened bread, after the manner of the Jews.

Some of his sect ordained, that this holy Sacrament should be solemnized the
fourteenth day of Month, as the Jews did. Policrates, Hist. tripart. lib 9.
cap. 38 and 39.
Bishop of the Ephesians, was said to be of this sect; Philip Hiropolitan,
Policarpus, Truscas, Melitus, and Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem; Victor Bishop
of Rome, Eleutherius his predecessor, and Theophilus Bishop of Palestina were
of a contrary opinion. This difference continued for more then three hundred
years after the Apostles time.

Others celebrated the Passover after the Aequinoctiall season, when the sun
entered into the sign of Aries: and others observed the Month Xanthicke,
called by the Romans, April. Some affirmed for example the Quartodecumans,
how they were informed by S. John, to celebrate it in the fourteenth day of the
Month.

The Romans vaunted that they were taught by S. Peter and S. Paul, whereof
notwithstanding no manifest proof appeared. The Phrygian Montanists condemn
the Quartodecumans, which observed the fourteenth day of the Month; and that
they ought herein to be governed by the course of the sun, and so to begin
it at the springs Aequinoctiall: And for this reason they celebrated it the
eight of the Ides of April, which was the fourteenth of the said Month,
though it fell upon a Sunday.

And there was not a contention only touching the administration of this holy
Sacrament, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
on the several days assigned for celebrating thereof: but there was likewise
a notable devision among the Christians, about the Ceremonies invented, whereby
worthily to receive the same. For some, as in particular, the Romans, observed
the Fast, or Even, three weeks before the day it self of Easter. The
Illyrians, and all Greece, as likewise the Alexandrians, instituted a
Quadragesima, to fast for six weeks. Some others ordained a seven weeks
abstinence, with an Intermission from five to five days.

Then was another Jewish Ceremony restored, Hist. Tripar. cap. 38.
the more to corrupt the holy Sacrament of the Supper, through difference and
distinction of meats. For some prohibited during the Feast, the eating either
of Fish, or Flesh: Others forbade the use of Flesh only, permitting me^ to
eat Fish, or Foul; which they said, according to Moses, did participate of
the substance of the Water. Some in like manner ordained, that men should only
eat bread and water: Others fasted till noone, without any distinction of
meats. And to resolve briefly: there was in the beginning, an infinite number
of Corruptions and Customs, in the Communion of the holy Sacrament of the
Supper, by means of the Ceremonies renewed, about difference of days and
meated, abrogated by the Grace and Law of Jesus Christ.

But was there any holy Apostle of God, Col. 2. Galat. 4. Heb. 7.
that ever left in writing any Law or Commandment, for distinction of days
and meats, in celebrating the holy Supper of Jesus Christ? Their intention was
not to institute a Religion of Feasts, a distinction of days and meats: Their
Doctrine only aimed to instruct men how to live well; and that only God was
to be adored and worshipped.

Wherefore, we must necessarily hereupon infer, that the Ceremony and
Festivity of the Pascha, or Easter, proceeded from a custom; for none of the
Apostles left any thing thereof in writing.

To qualify such Dissentions and Corruptions, many Councels were assembled;
Hist Tripar. lib. 9. cap. 38
one, at Sangaria in Bithinia; by which, to avoid all contentions, every man
was permitted to celebrate the Passover, when he would. Another Council was
held in Cesarea, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.
by Theophilus, Bishop in that place, and by Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem.
Another Council there was in Achaia. And another Council was convented at
Rome, by Victor, Bishop of the same place.

After these petty corruptions, there succeeded greater from time to time,
according to the humors and affections of the Bishops of Rome. In the year of
Christ, 114. Platina Sa^ells.
Alexander, 1. of that name, being raised to the superintendencie of the Roman
Church; one of the first successors to the Apostles of Jesus Christ, and one of
the first corruptors also of the holy Sacrament of the Supper; invented the
mingling of water with Wine, before the Communion: wherein, he went about to
reform the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, which instituted the Communion of his
Body and Blood, under the two kinds of Bread and Wine; but Alexander added
thereunto a third kind, which was water.

He also renewed the Jewish ceremony of unleavened bread, wherewith to
celebrate the Passover, as the Jews did, following herein the opinion of the
Ebionites, who taught, that the Ceremonial Law of Moses was necessary for
falvation: as also, Symmachus the Heretic in Palestine, taught the like.

If Jesus Christ was circumcised to fulfill the Law of Moses, Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 27. and lib. 8. cap. 14
must it therefore be requisite to use Circumcision? As also, if it were His
pleasure, for acco^plishing the Law of Ceremonies, to use on days appointed
unleavened Bread, must we needs therefore return to the rigor of this
Ceremony, abrogated by the complete sacrifice of Jesus Christ? In what place
of Scripture did Alexander learn to mingle water with Wine? and to restrain
Christians to unleavened Bread; as also his other invention, of driving away
Devils with salt water exorcized?

As for the Purgatory Water by him ordained, we will hereafter derive the
original thereof from Numa Pompilius, that great Magician, and Roman
Idolater. Cel lib. 39. cap. 21.
But touching the mixture of wather with Wine, he might peradventure be
instructed by the ancient Idolaters; who, (...) celebrating their sacrifices,
were wont, in a Chalice, to consecrate Water with Bread: especially upon the
Festivals dedicated to the Sun, which the Persians worshipped, called by
them, Mythros. And in the Feast of the Nephalies, they also used Water for
sacrifice.

With this comparison, Justin in Apolo. 2.
Iustine Martyr relates the custom observed amongst Idolaters, and by
Christians, in the consecration of Bread, Wine, and Water: by the one, which is
to say by the Idolaters, in the name of their Idols; and by Christians, in the
Name of their True God.

And yet this first corruption in the administration of the holy Sacrament, by
the mixture of water with Wine, persevered not without contradiction: Inno.
lib. 4. cap. ^^de officio Dissal.
For the Greeks were of a contrary opinion; and that it was not requisite to
brew water with Wine, neither would they herein follow the Alexandrian
corruptions.

Amarcanus was of the same opinion as Alexander; affirming, that the mixture of
water with Wine was necessary. Scotus the subtle Sophister, absolutely denied,
that it was necessary to mingle the water with the Wine: because, says he, it
cannot then be changed, nor transubstantiated into Blond, except the same were
first changed into Wine.

Some others, more ingenious, labored to interpret this Institution of
Alexander, by alleging, that the wine was co^verted into blood: but as for
the water, it was transubstantiated into the water that came out of Christ's
side.

This first corruption of Alexanders, gave occasion of many other succeeding
abuses: For some other more profound Impostors devised to mingle with the wine,
blood, that was taken from young Infants, wherewith to besmeare the bread of the
holy Supper of Jesus Christ as the Cataphtigians, August lib. d. H^cret. ca. 26
and 64.
who brought in a kind of transubstantiation of wine into blood, really and
corporally.

Some others added cheese thereunto, Epiphan. lib. 2. tom. 5. haevet. 49.
called Artotirites; which is to say, Cheese-bread-mongers. Certain also
abusing this holy Sacrament, in stead of wine, put in water, under pretext of
the greater abstinence. Others had an Institution of steeping bread in the
wine, the which custom the Messalians also retained in their Missal sacrifices.

For another detestable corruption of this Sacrament, some Popes of Rome
forbade their Messalian sacrificers, not to administer to Christian people,
whom they call Laymen, the Body of Jesus Christ in both kinds, but only
under the sacred sign of Bread, and not of Wine; which they reserved for their
Messalian sacrificing Priests.

Is not this corruption directly against the holy Gospel, and Institution of
the Supper of Jesus Christ, ordained and commanded, that all faithful men
should eat his body, and drink of his blood? When he took the Cup, did he
not use these proper words? Drink all this Wine, in memorial of my Blood
shed? Used he any other words for the eating of his Body in the symbol of
Bread, then he did of his Blood, under the sign of Wine? Matthew. 26. Marc. 14.
Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
For if we compare the sacred sign, ordained by God in the Church of the
Israelites, being a Figure of the Communion of the body of Jesus Christ, which
was the true Paschal Lamb, whose flesh was ordained to be eaten without
exception of persons, so they were circumcised: was there ever any difference
in the eating of the Paschall Lamb, and the celebration of the Passcover among
the Jews; between the Levites being of the race of sacrificing Priests, and
others of the common people?

To bring in another odious corruption, the Messalians instituted in their
Missal-Idolatries, to sacrifice and offer the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
reiterating by this means the sacrifice fully consummated by Jesus Christ,
which cannot be reiterated, because it was, not according to the form of
Aaron, but of Melchizedec, the Eternal Sacrifizer and Priest, 1. Cor. 11.
without leaving any successor. As also when the Apostle admonished the
Corinthians to celebrate sacredly the Supper of Jesus Christ, were they
commanded to sacrifice? No; but to eat, and communicate together of the Body,
and to drink of the blood of Jesus Christ.

The beginning of the Supper, was not to kill or immolate, or to sacrifice any
beast, or oblation to God; but only to eat and drink at his holy banquet,
prepared for us by Jesus Christ, the Eternal sacrifice, and sacrificer; who
reserved only for himself this Eternal Priesthood; yet nevertheless, he
left unto us a sacred Institution of a banquet, set before us in the Bread and
Wine, which represent his Body and Blood.

After these abovenamed corruptions, Satan; a diligent Babylonian Architect,
employed all his power and means, to raise an inexpugnable Fort of Idolatry; to
the end that he might wholly demolish and subvert the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, when he undertook to suborne the Mass, in stead of the holy
Sacrament of the Supper, as we will briefly produce, and so clearly, that the
most hard-hearted Pharaohs inveterated in their ancient Idolatries, shall by
the truth of Histories acknowledge their errors, and abominable Heresies.

CHAP. IX. The ancient Religion of the Roman Empire.
BEfore my deciphering of this labyrinth of Error, The Roman Emperors and
their Priests
wherein the Messalians did so loose themselves, I think it very requisite
succinctly to lay open the ancient Religion of the Romans, during the reign
of the Occidentall Empire: and of the Emperors usurping both the Temporal
scepter, and the dignity of high Priests, superintendents over the Roman
Church and Religion.

All of them, as well as my self, will confess, that the ancient Roman
Religion was either wholly, or for the greatest part instituted by Numa
Pompilius, the second King of the Romans, about seven hundred years before
the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Titivill. lib. 1. deca. 1.
Then were your high Priests invested, which afterward were reduced to a
certain number, even to four: then the number was augmented to eight: and
afterward by Silla to fifteen.

In the College of Priests, Ecuestell. lib. de Magist. Romans
there was one Pontifex Maximus, who was chosen by the other inferior Priests,
of their Order and dignity; even as the petty Priest purple-Cardinals make
the election of their great Roman Pope, out of their place, order, and
dignity.

This Pompilian Relig on was so religiously observed by the Romans from father
to son, as it was never possible to irradicate, or supplant it: but it
continues even to this day, as every one shall manifestly discern by this
succinct Narration.

To confirm this point, no man can be ignorant, if ever he read the Roman
Histories; but that, before the Incarnation of Christ, there was not so much as
one King, Confull, Dictator, or Roman Emperor, instructed in the Law of God,
but all were Idolaters and Infidels, observing the Religion of that Magician,
Numa Pompvius. For since the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, for the space of
three hundred years, or thereabouts, there was not likewise any Emperor,
Eusebius. in his books of the Eccl. H^st. Anno Dom 34 and 68. Anno Dom 34 and 68.
Anno Dom 94.112 and 183 167.202.238.254.257.276.292.
or Roman Consul, that changed his Rel^gio^, to en brace the Law of Jesus
Christ: but, on the contrary, they strayn'd all their might and power, to put
in practice what cruclties soever against the Church of Jesus Christ; which may
be justified by the Ecclesiastical Histories: wherein are explained, about
eleven several great persequutions, under the Roman Pontifes; which were,
Claudius Tiber. Nero, Claud. Domitian. Nero, Flau. Domitian. Traian. Elia.
Adrian. Antonine the Philosopher, Septimius Severus. Iul. Maximin Mar: Quint.
Traian. Decius, Licinus, Valerianus, Valerius Aurelianus, and Dioclesian. All
which Emperors governed both the Empire, and the superintendents over the
Roman Religion for three hundred years after the Incarnation of Jesus Christ;
and in their Coins, Sepulchers, Monuments, Titles, and Letters Patents, they
retained the style of great Pontifes, and high Priests: as is most diligently
collected in a book of the Antiquities of Rome, wherein are specified the
Medails, Coins, and Monuments of the ancient Roman Emperors, Pontifex Ma
ximus. In a book entitled, A discourse of the ancient Religion of the
Romans, by William de Chove Bailey of Dolphsnois.
all which were enstil'd Pontifes, under these Titles: Iul. Caesar. Pont. Max.
Tiber. Nero Pont. Max. Vesp. Caesar Pont. Max. Marc Aurel. Antonine Aug. Pont.
Max. Heliogabalus high Priest. Aug. Adrianus Jmp. Pontif. Max. Tit. Caes. Pont.
Max. Commod. Imp. Pontif. Max. Galerius Maximianus Pont. Max. Flavianus
Constantinus, Aug. Pontif. Max. being therefore in this manner Emperors, and
Roman Pontifes, they never would permit any other head above themselves, in
the Church and religion of Rome, which in all ages was an enemy to Jesus
Christ. For when the Apostles preached Christ to be the high and Sovereign
Priest, the Eternal and Great sacrificer, without successor, after the order
of Melchizedee, the Roman Tyrants took occasion, or at least their
Lieutenants, to condemn Jesus Christ, for fear of impayring the authority of
the Caesar's high Roman Pontifes.

With what fury for the space of three hundred years, Catalogue of the
Caesar's, at the end of Nicephorus History. Anno Dom. 410.
were they excited against Christians, and the Religion of Jesus Christ, to
maintain their ancient Pompilian Religion? What answer was given to the
Emperor Theodosius, by the Senate and Senators of Rome, when they were moved
to change their Religion, and embrace that of Jesus Christ? They showed how
they had bin in possession of their Pompilian Religion for more then a thousand
years, and that the alteration of Religion, was the ruin of Commonwealths.
For these reasons persisting in their old Roman Religion, they forbear to
receive the Law of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. X. How the Bishops of Rome began their Corruptions.
BY these Histories we may easily resolve, that during four hundred years and
more, In the Canons collected by Clement Bishop of Rome, 21.22.62. and 95. Anno
Dom. 93.
the Bishops of Rome, who termed themselves Christians, could never draw the
Senate nor Senators of Rome, to entertain the holy Gospel. As also they could
hardly convert the Roman Idolaters from their old and inveterate Idolatries.
For the Bishops of Rome were too busy in restoring the Jewish and heathen
Ceremonies, about difference of meats, touching ordinances, not to fast on
Sundays or Thursdayes; to invent Table clothes, Vailes, Alexander the first,
Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord 110.
Vessels of gold and silver, on Hangings, Tapistries, and other ornaments of
the Altar, worn out with old age, and to be burned, and the ashes to be laid
up in Fonts. Some also were mightily busied to renew the Jewish Ceremonies of
unleavened bread, having their minds greatly turmoyled to corrupt the true use
of the holy Sacraments instituted by God, by the mingling of water with wine,
and seasoning water with salt, Sixtus Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord
127. Sylvester Bishop of Rome. Higinus Bishop of Rome, in the year 140. Fabian
Bishop of Rome, in the year 240.
to make it purgatory, and exorciz'd for the repelling of devils. Othersome in
like manner took great pains to ordain Ephods of fine linuen, wherein to wrap
the sacred Host: also to constitute Aubes, and other vestiments for the Priests
in their sacrifices, of white, and no died colors. Some had their brains
troubled to devise Feasts of dedication, and Consecration with Exorcismes, to
drive away devils with salt: and othersome to invent Oils and Unctions,
wherewith to corrupt the holy Sacrament of Baptism.

Then afterward during the time of these tyrant Emperors, and great Pontifes,
the Bishops of Rome, desiring to perpetuate their names, they wore out their
brains in building of Temples, not to the honor of God, but to the names of
men, Pius Bishop of Rome, in the year 144. Zephc ^in: Bishop of Rome, in the
year 200
and women, Saints by them cannonized, at their own pleasure.

Others were occupted in ordaining and decreeing, that the consecrated Bread or
Wine falling to the ground, should be licked up by the Priests, and the rest
remaining to be burnd in the fire: and the ashes to be reserved in a Reliquarie.

Some look out for Chalices, that they should be of Glass, Calixtus Bishop of
Rome, in the year, 280.
and not of Wood.

Others instituted solemn ceremonies for the four several seasons of the
year, to bring Christians by this means under the servitude or distinction of
days.

Others were studiously employed in ordaining the oblatio^, Eutiches Bishop of
Rome, in the year 262; Red roabes of Cardinals.
and consecration of Beans: to solemnize Funerals with Purple habites, after
the form of a Vestment called Trabea, which Idolaters used in their Triumphs
celebrated to the honor of their Gods. The like purple Ornament is in use at
this day amongst the Cardinals.

Others were occupied in devising confirmation for little Infants, and to
consecrate the Cream for Bishops only, also to honor extraordinarily the
Bishop of Hostia, by whose hands the Bishop of Rome is to be consecrated,
Sylvester Bishop of Rome, in the year 314.
with a kind of Mantle called Pallium: and to invent a number of other
unnecessary Ceremonies, yea such as were opposite to the Evangelical liberty,
given unto us by Jesus Christ.

How was it possible therefore, for the first Bishops of Rome to draw the
Princes and Roman Senators, to the Law of the Gospel, for three or four
hundred years after the Incarnation of Christ, when they labored so much to
corrupt the use of the holy Sacraments, to restore the Jewish ceremonies, and
the Idolatries of the ancient Heathen Romans?

They may here object one Philip, which some vaunt, was co^verted to holy
Baptism, whose depraved manners gave occasion to the most authentic
Historiographers, Cronic. of John Bapeista Ignatius.
to esteem him unworthy of the name of a Christian; Whereunto they add
Constantine the Great, that assembled the Counsel of Nice, but his residence
was in Greece, called the Empire of the East, and yet he would never embrace
the character of Baptism, to be regenerate by the blood of Christ, till he was
threescore and five years old, Hist. tripart. lib 3. cap. 12
when he was Baptized by an Arian Bishop of Nicomedia, named Eusebius: When the
same Constantine was at the point of death. Wherefore Silvester Bishop of Rome
need not vaunt of converting this Emperor to the Faith. For the same Silvester
likewise would not be present in the assembly of the Counsel held at Nice, in
the year of Jesus Christ 327. Howsoever the matter stands, we must ever have
recourse to the truth of Histories, wherein is recited the answer which the
Senate, and Senators of Rome made to the Emperor Theodosius more then
threescore years after the death of the said Constantine the great: to wit,
that they would not receive the Law of Jesus Christ, but rather observe their
ancient Pompilian Law, to avoid the ruin of their Commonwealth through a
change, and alteration of Religion: Wherefore it must needs be inferred, that
the Law of GOD was not received nor approved at Rome, by the Senate and
Senatots.

Now we must come to the subsequent times. Paul. Aenul. lib. 1. In the year
412. In the year 434. Bloa. lib 2. Decad. 2.
After the decease of Theodosius, the Roman Western Empire began so much to
decline, that in a short space, it was clean extirpated by the Vandales and
Alands, who were the first that sacked Rome, in part burned it, and carried
away the Emperor Theodosius own daughter, whom they married to Atolphus King
of the Goths. Not long after succeeded the Hunnes, and then Attila King of the
Goths, which usurped Jtalie. About this time the Occidentall Roman Empire was
stripped of all Germany, Dacia, Sarmatia, and all other tributarie Provinces even
to Danubius. Spain also, Aquitane, Gascoyne, Burgundy, and all the Gauls
revolted from the Roman Tyranny.

Then came the Astrogothes with their Kings, Procop lib. 3. Of the wars of the
Vua^dales in the year 486. In they are 550.554.
Valamir, and Theodomir, Theodoric, with other Barbarians and Infidels, as I
kewise the Visigothes, all usurpers successively in Jtalie.

After this reigned Totilas, who entered, sacked and burnt Rome, and all Sicilia.
At last the Lombardes came to reign, conducted by their King Alboim, who
usurped over all Italy.

These barbarous, Idolatrous, Paul. Aemil. lib. 1. in the year 568.
and Infidel Nations were as Gods scourges, ordained to punish the Roman
defections committed by them, who had received the knowledge of the holy
Gospel: and yet ran astray from the true adoration and worship of God,
violated and corrupted the holy Sacraments by their humane invent ons and
fictions: in like manner to punish the obstinacy, and infidelity of the
Emperors and Senators of Rome, who first by their Officers, and Lieuetenants
Deputies, had caused Jesus Christ, and his holy Apostles to be crucified:
daily persecuted the Christians, and ever opposed the Law Evangelical, to
maintain their Pompilian Religion.

We may therefore resolve, and conclude, that for the space of four hundred
years, the Roman Church of Emperors and Senators were always opposites and
enemics to the Law of Jesus Christ.

Afterward when the Western Empire was extinguished for three hundred years
or thereabouts, that Rome, and all Italy was ruled and governed by Kings,
Princes and Dukes, that were Infidels, and Idolaters, which was by the
Wandales, by the Goths, by the Hunnes, Ostrogothes, Visigothes, and Lumbard,
for the space of seven hundred years or thereabouts after the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ there was no Emperors, Kings nor Princes at Rome, that would
embrace the Law of Jesus Christ. The which I desired briefly to produce, to the
end the Reader might not think it strange, though I here set down how the
sacrifice of the Mass took original, from the ancient Ethnicke Religion,
Instituted by Numa, more then seven hundred years before the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ: and that since also the same sacrifice has been continued by
the Roman Idolaters, hardened and inveterated in their Pompilian Religion,
which they would never abandon nor give over.

CHAP. XI. The first greatness of Popes; proving Antichrists, and bringing in
the sacrifice of the Mass.
NOw, to the end nothing might be concealed out of the Roman histories, to
obscure the clearenesse and sunshine of truth, during the Tyranny and
usurpation of the above mentioned Nations, In the year, 572. Platin Blond.
volaterad. Paul. Aemil. lib. 10. Blond lib. 10
there was erected in Italy a petty Exarcate at Ravenna, which stood for an
hundred eighty three years, till it was suppressed by a Pope, who was invested
in the same, and encroacht upon Sant Peter's Chair, by a Donation or Dismission
wrought by Pepyn in the year 758. in requital of the Tyranny used by
Zacharias, a Greek Roman Pope, who deprived the true heirs of the Crown of
France, which were Chilperic, or Childeric, whom he shut up in a Monastery,
to confer the Kingdom upon the said Pepyn, Blond. lib. 1. Decad. 2. Paul.
Enul. lib. 2.
son to Charles Martell the Bastard. This Donation of Pepyns bestowed on the
great Roman Pontife, was the first Original of the exaltatio^ and eminency
of the Roman Popes, who to this day remain the Exarcate of Ravenna, since
about eight hundred years, with many Towns along the coast of the Adriatic,
assigned over to them by Pepyn, against the express prohibitions of
Constantine, then reigning Emperor of the East in Greece.

While this petty Exarcate continued at Ravenna a time before Pepyns Donation,
The first apparent Antichrist. In the year 588.
the Bishop of the place seeing that there were no more Emperors at Rome,
tyrannized and governed by barbarous and miscreant Nations, began to lift up
his horns, so as he would be preferred before the Bishop of Rome, and style
himself head of the Church, both he and his successors Bishops of Ravenna,
while the Exarcate lasted. This was the first petty Antichrist that assumed a
Tyranny in the Church, Sabellic.
pursuing the terrestrial Tyranny of his Exarcate.

After him rose another great Antichrist in Constantinople, In the veare 600.
Blond lib. 1. Greg lib. 4. of epist. cha. 29.
named John, Bishop of the place: who perceiving the Occidentall Empire of Rome
clean extinguished, and that of Constantinople risen to a great height, he
grew also affected to the worldly Tyranny, and conformable thereunto erected
one Spiritual in the Church of Jesus Christ. By a Council held for the
purpose, he denounced himself to be oecumenicall Bishop, which signifies
general, and head of all the Church. But presently after, the great Roman
Pontifes took so good a course herein, that by treason the Emperor Mauricius
was cruelly slain in Constantinople, In the year 604. Plarin. Sabellic.
himself, his wife, and family, by that wicked Phocas: who, for recompense of
this abominable Murder committed, by the notice and intelligence of their
Church of Rome, always contrary to Jesus Christ, caused Boniface the third of
that name, In the year 612,
to be declared head, and General of the Church of God, usurping the Authority
of the great and eternal Sacrificing high Priest, the only Spouse, and head
of his Church Jesus Christ. Who could better resemble Antichrist then he that
assumes a Tyranny in the Church of God, a Poligamie in the Church, the Spouse
of Jesus Christ: ascribing to himself that power, Matthew. 26.
which Jesus Christ reserved for himself, to reside perpetually with his
Church, by the power and virtue of the holy Ghost, for the conduct and
government of the same.

May not he rightly be termed Antichrist, that labors directly to oppose the
holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 23. Luc. 11. Marc. 2,
who forbad his Apostles, when he sent the^ to Preach the Word, that they
should not co^stitute a Monarchy in the Church, as the Princes, Kings, and
Tyrants of the earth are wont to do? That none of them should presume to be
called head, or greater then the rest; but that they should all be humbled as
brethren: being assured that they had one only Head, and one heavenly Father,
who would dwell and continue with them for ever, to conduct and inspire them in
his holy will?

Is not he truly an Antichrist, that will term himself to be Jesus Christ's
successor to the chief Pontificacie, and to the sovereignty of Priesthood by
him administered, which dignity he reserved only to himself, he remaining
eternal and high Priest for ever; Who left no successor in his dignity, as
Aaron and his successors did, to the dignity of the Jews high Priesthood; but
according to the order of Melchisedeck, King, and high Priest, without any
successor in his dignity.

Wherefore O you Roman Antichrists, why have you assumed the dignity of high
Priests, as Heads and Sovereigns of the Church of God, and usurp the
authority of Jesus Christ, causing your selves to be entitled, most happy, and
most reverend Fathers, and Popes, having founded a College of petty purple
Pontifes, to elect a great Pontife or high Priest: but to the end to renew the
ancient Ethnic Roman Religion of Numa Pompilius, the first founder and
erecter of your Pontifical dignities.

About the same that this cruel murderer Phocas set up Antichrist in the
Roman Church, The cause of Mahomets original.
Mahomet rose up in the Church of Arabia, instructed by Sergius a Monk, about
the year 620. For this Apostaticall Heritick perceiving the whole Law of God
to be corrupted by humane traditions, and the holy Gospel contemned: also the
Sects, and diverse heresies, planted as well by the Jewish Pharisees, Esseans,
Saduces, Masbuthians, Galileans, Hemerobaptists, and Samaritanes: as also by
Christians, the Symoniackes, Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, Menandrians, and
Ebionites, the Valentinians, Cerdonians, Marcionists, Montanists,
Cataphrigians, Tatians, Eucratites, Severians, Artemonists, Look the
Ecclesiastical History.
Porphirians, Helchesaites, Novatians, Sabellians, Chiliasts, Paulianists,
Manechees, Antomousiastes, Arrians, Eunomians, Macedonians,
Eunomiotheophroniens, Eunomeoeutichians, Aetians, Donatists, Luciferians,
Patripassians, or Theopachites, Heretics in the Church.
Photinians, Marcellians, Paulosomosetans, Apolinarists, Iovianists, Pelagians,
Platirians, Anthropomorphites, Nestorians, Sabbatians, Acephalians, Acarians,
Olympians, Quaternians, Monothelites, and other Heretics, having corrupted the
true use of the Sacraments ordained of God. And seeing also, that the Sect of
the Messalians, especially prospered in their ceremonies, taken partly out of
the Jewish Law, and partly from the Panyme Idolatries, he invented the high
decrees of the Alcoran, wherein he employed many Chapters and Articles called
Azoares, which are like Canons and Rules of the Mahumetan Religion.

This brief and compendious discourse of the Roman History, I thought
requisite to recite, before I began to describe the original of the sacrifice
of the Mass: that thereby I might induce the Reader to understand the truth of
the matter: how the Roman Empire was governed till the declination of the
same, which was about the year of Christ 410. and how the barbarous Idolaters
usurpt it since, for the space of 300. years: as also the Antichrists have
been raised, which still enjoy it at this day, and have done for some five
hundred years past.

CHAP. XII. Of the Mass in particular, with her true Original.
FOr beginning to this our brief Missall Treatise, Original of the Mass:
with exposition of the word. Dan. 11.
we must first express this term of Mass, called by the ancient Ronanes
Missa. Some have preferred this Missall Sacrifice, to take original from the
Hebrews: alleging that place of Daniell, when he speaks of Maozin, as if by
Maozin they would signify the Mass. But this word in sense, stands far from
the Missa or Mass: and there are some Hebrew words which come far nearer to
it, as Messa; which by interpretation is Conculcation: 4. Kings 11.
of which word mention is made in the History of the Kings of Israel. There
is also an other Hebrew word very conformable to the vulgar term of Messel,
Messa.
which is Missal, and that is hell, or the grave. But I suppose the great
Roman Pontifes would not derive the original of the Sacrifice of their Mass,
from the Hebrews, because then they must acknowledge the Mass, or their
Missell, Messell. Hell.
to be a Conculcation or extortion, an hell, or a grave. And to speak but
truth, the Author of the Roman Religion Numa Pompilius, never thought of the
Hebrews, when he first instituted the Mass: neither can this word Missa, or
Mess, take original from the Greeks. Because there is no sacrifice of this
name or title, though some have brought in a colorable reason from this Greek
word Myzein, which is to say in French; to hide or keep in secret: as if the
Messalian Sacrificers received from the ancient idolatrous Greeks, to mumble
secretly the principal words of their Masses, that the Auditors might not
hear the^: but they used to murmur and whisper betwixt the teeth, the Canons,
and some special words, which neither themselves, nor they that look on
understand. Nevertheless, neither the Hebrew nor Greek words cannot properly
be applied to the Missall Sacrifice. And therefore we must repair to the true
etimologie of the word Missa, Mass drawn from the ancient Latin Romans.
or Mess, drawn from the ancient Latin Romans, who used these words,
Missus, Missa, Missilis, and Missio: even as in French we have Messager,
Message, and Messives, for letters sent. Wherefore, when the ancient
Romane-Idolaters meant to dismiss the Assistants at the sacrifices celebrated,
they pronounced in the end these words. I licet Missa est: depart, Amongst the
Greeks the Priest having discharged his function, spoke aloud in this manner.
Laiois Aphesis, as if he discharged the people. Apui lib. 11. de Asin. anr.
it is permitted, and so the Assembly was dismissed to go home. But in time,
because this note signified a pleasing release of the people, to go home to
their houses, being a cheerful, and acceptable sound, it was suppressed, and
the Sacrifice honored with this term of Missa. To confirm this point, two
thousand years being now come and gone, these words are pronounced at this
present day. Ite, Missa est, which signifies a leave given to the company or
assembly, to depart: so as they themselves, which frequent these Temples, so
soon as they hear this pleasing note, Jte, missa est, commonly: they skip and
leap for joy, being assured that they are then licenced to go to dinner.

The Arabians, In the book of the description of Afric, by John Leo
Affricanus.
and Mahumetists, instructed for a long time by the Monk Sergius, as formerly
we cited, hold this word of Messa in great esteem. By which word they have
nominated three Towns or Cities called Messa, situated upon the Ocean shore,
upon the Cape, where Mount Atlas takes his beginning.

Near to the same Towns, in the Suburbs, Messa of the Turks.
there is a Templemuch reverenced by the Turkish Idolaters, because they
believe, that from Messa should come the righteous Pontife, promised and
prophesied of by Mahomet: they also think, that about that quarter or shore of
Messa, Messelmans. in the book of the great Turks Court, by Friar Autonie
Geffrie.
Jonas was cast up again, after his being swallowed up by the Whale.
Furthermore, they so highly esteem this name of Messelmans, as we do the name
and title of Christians. Intimating by this word Messelman, as much as saved.

Moreover, the Mahumetists honored their Priests with the name of Mess,
calling them Messen, and their Temples Messites, or Meschites: Wherefore, In
the book of the above said, Messen, Messi.
they that published the Anatomy of the Mass, the Centons, the Foundation,
Augmentation, and embellishing thereof, could not but write with special
reverence, in respect of the ancient Pompilian Religion and the Alcoran,
Institutions of Mahumet.

After we have thus decided the word of Mess, or of in the Roman tongue, to
be derived from the ancient Roman Idolate^s, and not from the Hebrews nor
the Greeks: we must now descend to the vestments of these Missal an
Sacrificers. But by the way, we must not omit the name of Pontife, Pont. li. 1.
of Comment.
or Pontifex, taking also it is original from the Romans, as we de^clared in
our Commentaries. The style also of Pope proceeding from the ancient Idolaters,
who used to enstile their God Jupiter, calling him Pope Jupiter, but especially
the B^thinians and Scithians. Which word Papa, comes from the Greek word
Papus: which is to say, great Father. As also the true title subscribed to any
suits presented to the great Roman Pontife, is: Most blessed Father. The next
purple Pontifes are termed, most reverend Fathers, and petty Bishops, reverend
Fathers: A Curate. Curio, a Priest, or Curat, who in his Cure, that is, in his
Parish had the care of sacred celebrati^^.
all of them retayning this word Father, or Pope, Great Father, which was wont
to be a common name to all Bishops: but afterward the great Roman Pontifes
reserved it only to themselves. Another title is also retained for the Demie
Bishops termed Curates, who are suporintendants in every Parish, borrowing this
nomination, from the ancient Roman Curates: which is to say, a rasing, or
shaving, because the ancient Curions and Sacrificers were cut, Tit. Live. lib.
1. Decad.
and shaven in their heads, after the Babilonian manner, or of the Herculean
Pontifes, called for this reason Stephanophores, as wearing a Crown upon their
heads. Nevertheless, by the reason that all the members of the Missall
Sacrifice, derive from the Pompilian Religion, we should wrong the ancient
Roman Idolaters, Tit. Live. Fenest. Pompo. Let.
to take from them the original of these names Mass, Pontife, and Curate, as
may be justified by the Roman Histories.

As for the vestment of Missall Sacrificers, Numa ordained that it should be
white, called by the Latin word Alba, an Aube: Aube. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4.
cap. 17.
which name of Aube continues to this day, for the vestment of him that
sacrifices and celebrates Mass. Moreover, Super tunica^ ancam pectori
regumen. 1. Decad. 1.
above his Aube, the Priest was appointed to wear a Tunickle painted, and
above that the ornament of a Pectorall of copper or brass, afterward changed
into gold or silver, which the Missalists term a Chasuble. They also used a
veil to cover their heads, when they sacrificed called Amictus, first
instituted by Aeneas. Virg. lib. Acneid. 3. Purpurce vel are comas ad apertus
amictu, capite ante aras Phrigius velamus amictu. Titilman. in tract. de expo.
Myster. Missx. and Gab. Eiel. in lib. de exposit. Missa


These are the principal vestments, instituted by Numa more then 700. years
before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. It Is true, that since, there have been
many Jewish orname^s added, as the Stole, Ephod, Zone, or Conture, the Myter or
Theare, and some other decorations, the better to pownce, and set forth the
great Bab^ (...) whore.

But the M^^^lians desirous to alter the original of their Missall vestments,
pretend that the Aube is a figure of Jesus Christ's conversation in the flesh,
or the purity of his body incarnate in the womb of the virgin. Others
interpret the white color, to signify chastity and continency. Some minding
to mock, and make Plays sophistically of the Passion of Jesus Christ, say,
that by the Aube, the white Robe is represented, which was offered by Herod to
Christ, when he was sent back again, like a fool to Pylat. Philo the Jew, a
more worthy Philosopher, in his Treatise of Dreams, subtly devises, that
the Aube signifies the solidity of the most resplendent light of the Dyetie,
which he calls Ens. The linen also whereof the Aube is made, they express for
the subtilty of the Scriptures. As for the Amict invented by Aeneas, they
adulterate it, for the Veil wherewith Christ was covered, when the Jews
mocking him in Caiphas house, did smite him. Titilman one of the subtilest
Missalians, devises, that in the Amict, Christ's Devinity, concealed in his
humanity, was intimated. Some likewise confess that the Amict was subrogated
in stead of the Jewish Ephod, by the Zone, Maniple, and Stole, which are three
Ligantents, they understand the three Cords wherewith Christ was bound, and
drawn before the High Priests: Apul lib. 11. le la no anri.
and after that, before the Roman Lieutenants in Judea. Biel another pregnant
Missalian, by the Zone, Procl. in lib. desacraft. and Gag Procl. Flat. Catnl.
E^us aquae ^spersione ^eccata prae-
conceives the rods wherewith Christ was scourged: By the Stole, extended in
form of a Cross, there was signified the Gibbet or Cross, which Christ bare
upon his shoulders. The Maniple also which he wears on his left arm, to
figure the band of love, wherewith Christ was bound. Another Mummerie they have
for the Zone, wherewith the Aube is trussed, and this signifies the band of
Gods charity. The Stole put over the Amict, at the Missalians neck, in form
of a Cross, deciphers Christ's obedience, even to the death of the Cross. The
Maniple worn on the left hand, signifies the reward of Christ's eternal
felicity. Other sophistries there are upon the Amict, as that it represents
faith: the Stole humility and obedience: the Maniple, the vigilancie and hearty
devotion of the Missalian Priest. Tittilman has another subtle devise for the
Maniple worn on the Priests left hand; which as he says, does express the
battle and power of Christ, against all visible and invisible dominations,
being as a buckler against all temptations: and the Buttons of the Maniple,
portend final perseverance.

He also further sophisticates, that by the left hand is understood the humane
infirmity of Christ, which being tied with the Maniple, that Christ is tied and
bound by his divinity, like a mad man. Brunus another Missalian Doctor,
fantasticates, that by the Maniple is inferred the Missalian Priests special
care to drive away bad affections: or else that it figures the Cord, Tit. Live.
lib. 1. Decad.
wherewith Christ was bound by the Jews; and that the Stole is a figure of the
Lords yoke, which the Mass Priest must wear garnished with the Arms of
Justice on the right and on the left hand. The other painted Ornament
instituted formerly by the Magitian Numa, they disguise by the name of a
Planet, as an errant Vestment; otherwise called a Cap, or Cha^uble, Tit. Live.
Fenest. Pompo. Let.
which they say resembles the Purple Robe presented to Christ, in Pilates Hall,
when they mocked and called him King of the Jews.

There is another sophistry, how this Vestment implies the Nature of Christ,
Aube. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.
wherein the Deity was couched. Philo the Jew immitating Plato, interprets this
Vestment so adorned with colors, to be a Figure of the signs, and celestial
Stars. Now these Mass Priest being roabed, Super tunice^ aneam pectu
regumen. 1. Decad. 1.
with his Aube, Amict, Zone, Maniple, Stole, and his Chasuble, or Cap of diverse
colors; he must stretch out his arms, to play two parts at an instant,
represented by the Chasuble, whose quarter before, is less then that behind,
figuring herein the Primative Church, from Abel till Christ, and by the after
part more ample, and enricht with the sign of the Cross Christian people are
signified. This Chasuble must be joined to the Amict, which was in the
beginning in the head, to represent the conjunction of Christ with his Church.
The A^ be also must be correspondent to the Chasuble: to intimate how Christ
applied himself to our infirmities. Besides, the above mentioned Vesiments,
Philo the Jew adds a Myter, Phi'o in lib. de prosug.
to declare the Messalians royal Diadem, who must have their heads anointed
with Cream, or sacred Oil, to signify the Priests dignity: which Mytrall
Ornament, is only preserved for eminent and higher Priests.

CHAP. XIII. The Mass divided, with the true nature of Holy Water.
NOw we must descend to the description of several parts of the Mass, Apul
lib. 11. de la no anri.
whose head and original we will particularly set down according to the truth.
First of all in those which are called high Masses, celebrated on Sundays, the
Missalian Priests, retain somewhat of the Pompilian Religion, Procl. in lib.
de sacraf^. and Gag procl. Plat. Catul. E^us aquae aspersione peccata
praesertim perjuria, mendati aquae dilui credebant. Blond lib. de Romans trium. O
vid. lib. Fast 3. Fonts of two sorts. Dijs superis sacra faclurus corporis
ablutione purgabaetur: cum ver^ inferis lijamdum erat, sola aspersio
sussicicbat. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans trium. Macr lib. 3. Satu. chap. 3
as to exercise a lustrall water, called holy Water, wherewith to besprinckle
the assistants or beholders at the Sacrifice. The conjuration and exorcisme
instituted by Numa, was of Sea or salt water, because (said he) salt did
participate of the fiery Nature, or of Fire, very proper to purify. For this
reason, the Ancient Roman Idolaters, besprinckled this salt exorcised water,
as a Mercuriall expiatorie and Purgatory water for popular offenses, especially
for perjurie and lying.

To preserve this consecrated, and exorciz'd salt Water, they had two sorts of
Holy water Fonts: One was large not moveable, but placed at the entry of their
Temples, where they adored their Images, that so they might sprinckle those
which entered into the same Temples. The other was a portable Font, to conveigh
therein Lustrall water into any part of their Temples or houses, that they
might be watered with it, for their expiations, and purifications. They that
were to celebrate Mass, if it were to the inferior gods, it was enough for
the sacrificing Priest to sprinckle himself with that Lustrall water. But if
the Priest celebrated Mass, to the superior gods, he must bathe his whole
body, and wash all his members therewith.

Furthermore, he was prohibited, not to use this Lustrall water for any other
purpose, but for expiations, and purgations. Conformable to which Pompilian
constitution, In Delij Apollinis templo praecipua erat aqua sacrificantium ujui
accommoda, quam ad alios u^us hausisse magni criminis instar eras. Alex. ab
Alox. lib. 4. cap. 17. Platino. Si crvis vitula aspersus populum ludaeorum
mundabat, multo magis aqua sale conspersa populum sanctificat, and i^nsidias
Diaboh avertit ea a quam, de consecrat. distmct. 1. The Law of God corrupted.
Numb 19 4. King. 2. Exodus 15. Numb. 19.
Alexander the first of that name, next successor to the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, and one of the first corrupters of the holy Sacraments ordained by God,
continued this Idolatry, of consecrating and exercising Lustrall water with
salt, to repel devils. Nevertheless, the better to mask Pompilian Magic,
he framed this comparison: so it is, said Alexander, that the ashes of an
inviolated red Cow for sacrifice, mingled with Fountain water, purified the
people of the Jews, and therefore by a more prevalent reason, water exorzed
with salt, must needs purify Christians, and drive away devils.

Was not this a violating, and corrupting of the holy Law of God, to content
and please the Romans, tainted with the ancient religion of Numa Pompilius
the Magician? If Alexander had not yielded to the use of salt, instituted by
the ancient Idolaters for lustrall water, he would rather have followed the
Jewish ceremony, and ordained Ashes to consecrate the water of expiation. For
if he thought to disguise it by the Miracle of Elizeus, that purified the water
with salt, Moses also did the like, with the wood which was brought him, when
the people of Israel were distressed for sweet water to drink. But in these
miracles no mention is made, that Elizeus or Moses instituted any lustrall
water to purify the people of the Jews. And we cannot find, that there was
ever any lustrall water amongst the Jewish ceremonies, but only with Ashes of
the victime offered for sacrifice. And therefore Alexander and his followers
must needs acknowledge, that the invention of salt water exorcized for the
remission of sins, took original from Numa Pompilius more then 700. years
before the Incarnation of Christ. This lustrall water was so religiously
observed by the Roman Idolaters, that more then 360. years after the
Incarnation of Christ, it is related how Valentinian the Emperor entering in to
the Temple of the Goddess Fortune, Hist. trip. lib. 6. cap. 3^. Valentiuian
the Emperor against holy water sprinckle.
a Priest who was Guardian of the same Temple, sprinkled some of this holy
Lustrall and salt water upon him, which he took out of a Font at the going
into the Temple: wherewith the Emperor being angered, struck the Priest with
his Asperges in his hand, alleging how it was rather defiled then purified.

By these true Histories the Missalians may boast, that the first part of their
Missall sacrifice is very ancient indeed; and that their holy water Fonts, and
their lustrall salt waters of expiation, proceed from the ancient doctrine of
Numa Pompilius, but not from the Evangelical doctrine of Jesus Christ, which
they term a new Doctrine, Sait holy water very ancient.
and the New Testament differing from the ancient Jewish ceremonies, and
heathen idolatries. And though I cannot sufficiently wonder, wherefore
Alexander presumed to renew the Pompilian Idolatry, considering he had means
to restore the water ceremonial after the manner of the Jews; and in this
doing, to follow rather the law of God, then that of Numa Pompilius: Against
the salt lustrall water of Alexander Pope of Rome. Ca. Omnes de consecrat.
distinct. 4. and cap. Altaria and cap. Vestimenta did. 2.
for he had easy means to get Ashes wherewith to compound a lustrall water
after the Jewish form: nay, precious and sacred Ashes: which is to say, Ashes
reserved in Reliquaries, coming from vailes, napkins, and consecrated vessels,
which Pope Clement, Alexanders predecessor, forbad to be applied to any
profane use, but when they were consumed with time to burn them in the fire,
and the ashes to be preserved in the Baptisterie. Yet were these sacred ashes,
to incite Alexander to restore cinderal and lustral water after the manner of
the Jews, if he had not bin so addicted to salt, and found a better relish to
maintain the ancient idolatrous Roman Religion. Alexanders successors, might
have gotten other ashes, that is, from the round azimall consecrated Hosts,
which the high Po^tife Higinus appointed to be burnt, if falling to the ground,
Cap. Altaris de consecra. distinct. 1.
they could not be lickt up by the Mass Priest, and the ashes of the said
Hosts to be laid up in a Reliquarie. He might also have had other ashes of
Ratts or Mice, or other creatures, when they devoured the said Hosts, ordained
to be burned, and reserved in a Reliquary. In lib. Cantel. Miss.
Wherefore seeing Alexander would not follow the ceremonial Law of God, to
institute a salt holy and exorcise water, at least why did he not emplore the
salt with the host of the Mass Priest, which they say they offer to God as a
saving sacrifice? In doing so, Levit. 2.5.6
he had imitated the Moysaicall ceremony, wherein they were commanded to offer
salt in all sacrifices, and to sprinckle therewith the sacrifices that were
emmolated for safety. But if Alexander and other his successors had followed
the law of God, they could have added nothing of their own brain, they could
have no memorial nor renown of their own Institution. And therefore in this
respect they would in nothing follow the law of God, but contrariwise, they
prohibited the use of salt with their round consecrated Hosts, The reason why
new Idolatries were invented.
to celebrate their missall sacrifices. They also forbid the mingling of ashes
in their lustrall waters, that in all their Institutions, they may not be
thought to have taken any thing from Gods prescription, neither from the law of
Moses, as also much less, from the Law Evangelical of Jesus Christ: they
thought to attribute these inventions merely to themselves, though they had
their original from the ancient heathen Roman Idolaters 700. years before
the Incarnation of Christ.

To resolve this first Missall part, it were much more expedient; O you
Missalians, in stead of your sacrifices and exorcismes of salt water, True holy
water for Christians.
wherewith you sprinckle the people, to preach purely, and sincerely the holy
Gospel, and to teach Christian people, that the true purification and washing
away of sins, depends on the blood of Jesus Christ, which is powerful enough
to repel devils, to deliver us from hell, Heb. 9.
to preserve us from eternal death, and to wipe out in us every spot and
blemish of sin: without using exorcismes, or conjurations with salt, to drive
away devils conformable to Pompilian Magic, and the heresy of the
Samaritans, Epiph lib. 1. tom. 1. see. 9 and 17. Cont. haer.
who thought themselves purified by those, and washing with the same every day.

CHAP. XIV. The Procession of the Mass.
AFter the Asperges is sung, 2. Parts of the Mass, Procession.
the lustrall exorcized water sprinkled upon the Altars, the Images, and all
the assistants at a Mass, then follows Procession, Platina Tit Live. li^ his
Decades Supplicationes, quis nos processiones vocamus, fiebaut circa delubra
fanaque and pulvinaria, in quibus honos dijs dabatur, pracedentitus pueris
ingenuis ac Sacerdotibus coranatis, ac lauream tenentibus manum, voce modulaeta
cancntibus carmen, subsequent maximo Pontisice vel curione: deinde sequentibus
patritijs ac senatoribus cum consugibus and libcris plerunque coronatis. Apul.
lib. 17. de Aso. aur. Blond. lib. 2. de Roni. triu^. Alex. ab Alex lib. 5. cap.
27. In the book of the discourse of the ancient Romans Religion. Lamprid.
Apul. lib. 11. de Asin. aur. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 50. cap. 27. Herod in his
Histories. Ierom. in his Epist. ad Iudaos in Babylonem abducendos. Ne verticem
deraditore, nove barbam vollitote. Levit. 19. Nec in gyrum ac rotundum
attondebitis comam vestram, nec radctis barbam. Ezech. 44.
which is attributed to Agapet the Roman Pope: But this was Instituted above a
thousand years before him; for the ancient Roman Idolaters called it
Supplication. A form Instituted by Numa to go on Procession, either to
appease the wrath of the gods, to obtain peace, or to pray unto God for the
fruits of the earth; the order was in this manner: First before the Procession
walked certain young children, then the sacrificing Priests clad in white
Surplesses, singing Hymns, Paeans, and Canticles to the honor of their gods.
Then marched the high Priest, or Curio: Then marched the Roman Senators, with
their wives and children: and sometimes the common people assisted. There was
commonly carried about in Procession, the Shrine or Reliquarie of god Jupiter,
or of Anubis, by some Priests clad in white Surpleses, with shaven heads, and
thereon wearing crowns. This Crown was of such reverence and esteem, that
the Emperor himself Commodus Antonius high Pontifex, caused his head to be
shaven and cut round, expressly to carry the Cabinet of god Anubis. Before the
Cabinet or Reliquarie, went a Cierger, carrying a light taper in his hand. When
the Procession went along through the streets, there were seats erected, to
serve for stations or places, where the Priests, which carried the relics were
appointed to rest and take breath. When the Procession was ended, the Temples
were opened, the Altars and Images perfumed with Insence, and the Reliquies of
their gods showed. On those days, when the Processio^ went abroad, a Feast was
celebrated, the shops were closde up, the Hall of Justice shut in, and the
prisonners unshackled: who can better discipher the order of Processions
observed even at this day, by the Missalians Instructed from father to son in
the Pompilian Religion. What other Author can be alleged touching the
Ceremonies performed in Procession, except Numa Pompilius himself? If the
Missalians sought not out further, for their crowned shaven crowns, and white
Surplesses which the ancient Aegiptian Idolaters were wont to use: the Priests
of the Goddess Isis, or the Babilonian sacrificers, wearing their heads and
beards shaven. As for the Law of God, the contrary therein was observed, and
the sacrificing Priests were forbidden, to cut their heads or hair round, and
to shave their heads. And as for the Law of the Gospel, there is no such like
ceremony commanded by Jesus Christ, nor by his Apostles: they must therefore
needs proceed from the ancient Pompilian Religion. For other things in the
Procession, they have added the carrying of the Cross or Banner: this Banner
was termed by the ancient Roman Idolaters Labarum: which was reputed a sacred
ensign, so much revered by the Dictators and Emperors, as also by the
soldiers that went to the wars. Antenor first pictured in that Banner a Sow,
by reason of the name Troja, which in the vulgar Italian tongue signifies a
Sow: which ensign Antenor vowed and dedicated in the Temple of Juno, Exlibris
Messalae ad Octavianum Augustum: Apul lib. 2. de Asin. aur.
Queen of the heavens: because the Sow, was the consecrated Victime to the same
Goddess. The old Romans afterward caused a Mercuries Caduce to be drawn upon
the Banner whereon was painted the picture of two Serpents coupled together:
then was an Eagle portraied for the Ensign of the Romain Empire: but
Constantine the Great, Emperor in Greece, made to be drawn therein a figure
of greek letters, a interlaced with an r, In the said book of the Religion of
the ancient Romans.
and on the two sides a and o in this sign, ^ signifying thereby this word
Christos, or Christ. This Banner was spread upon a pole or staff of wood, made
in form of a Cross, the Banner being four square, in the fashion of an
Ensign crimosine violet silk, edgd about with fringe of gold or silver, and
precious stones. In imitation of this, the Missalian Priests have adorned their
Pompilian Processions, in which they carry Banners, as if they meant to go to
the wars, or conduct a martial Army: but in stead of portraying therein the
name of Jesus Christ, they paint the effigies and Images of diverse gods and
goddesses, saints, men and women, the Patrons of each parish. This in sum is
the original of the Missal Procession, standing for the second part of the
Mass. Was there ever such palpable Idolatry used by the Israelites, when they
would celebrate the Feast of unleavened bread, to eat the Paschall Lamb,
which, had analogy with the holy Sacrament of the Supper, which the Missalians
have adulterated by their Missal sacrifices? did they ever carry about in
Procession the flesh, or the blood of the immaculate Lamb? Did they ever lay
it up in a Reliquarie to be carried in Processio^ about the streets? The
Serpent of Brass, though they much profaned and abused it, yet did they at
any time carry any part of it in a Reliquarie upon the shoulders of their
Priests, wearing their heads and beards shaven, as the Greek Pontife Urban
ordained, An. Christ. 164.
that the round consecrated Host should be carried in Procession by the
Missalians, and instituted a solemn Feast every year on holy Thursday, that so
he might convert the use of the holy Sacrament, to a more detestable Idolatry
then all his predecessors?

CHAP. XV. The third part of the Mass, that is, the Altar and Candels lighted.
AFter the sprinkling of holy water, and Procession performed, The third part
of the Mass. Altar, and Tapers Omil. lib. 4. de Fast. Apul. lib. 11. de Asin.
aur. Plut. in Numa.
Numa instituted that the Mass Priest, to celebrate Sacrifice, being clad with
his Aube, and Chasible, or painted coat, his head crowned, and beard shaven,
that he should approach to the Altar, prepared for sacrifice, set forth with a
lamp or light Taper, which ordinarily was of Tede or Pine. For without an Altar
and fire, no Sacrifice could be celebrated. He also ordained that the Mass
Priest should turn himself near to the Altar, toward the East. Porphirius
the Heretic did not only continue this Pompilean Magic, but further he
constituted, that the entry into the Temple, and the Images should be turned
toward the East, to the end that those which went into the Temples,
prostituting themselves before the Images, might adore and make their prayers
toward the cast: even as the Persians did, who worshipped the Sun in the
East. Are not these Missalian and Pompilian Institutions contrary to the
ancient ceremonial Law of the Jews, wherein they were prohibited to pray
toward the East, that so they might be different from the ancient Idolaters?
Alex. ab Alex. li. 4. cap. 17.
And therefore acknowledge, O you Missalians, that your erectio^ of Altars
toward the East, your Lamps and light Tapers, the Pictures and Images
worshipped in your Sacrifices, to have had their original from one to another.
For those Images and Pictures wherewith your Altars are enritched and adorned,
cannot be derived from the law of God: which does not only prohibit the
permission of any Images in Temples, Exodus 20. Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 5. Esaias 40.
Abominable Idolatry.
but the very hewing of them out, and that they should not be renewed. To what
can God be resembled? what Image, picture, or portrature can be devised to his
similitude? And yet nevertheless, out of most detestable and abominable
heresy, you (O Missalians) draw the Image and form of the Trinity, of one God
in 3. persons, in your round hostel, which you cause to be adored.

Nevertheless, two Missalian Doctors, Titelman and Biel, express the Altar
otherwise, when the Mass Priest approaches with the golden chalice in his
hand, they alleging, how this does figure Christ, bearing his Cross to Mount
Calvary. And then the Priests kissing of the Altar, to signify the Nuptials
and Nuptial sign of Christ, with his Church. The right side of the Altar to
figure the people of the Jews, Durand. li. 4 rub. de mn^at.
and the left the Gentiles. For this reason, Durand a subtle Missalian,
writes, that the Missall Mummery must begin at the right side of the Altar, and
conclude in the same: nevertheless, all the principal Monkeries are
celebrated on the left side of the Altar. As for the fire and light Taper, they
apply them to Christ, as being the fire which purifies the rust of our sins:
Or otherwise, the fire of charity environing all Christian people: and the
light Taper portends the light of faith, and the joyful coming of Christ's
Incarnation. And not these abominable sophistications, which Numa the Magitian
never dreamt upon, when he instituted the Altar, the fire, and light Taper,
wherewith to sacrifice.

To continue the order of the Missall Sacrifice, 4. part of the Mass.
when the Mass Priest has made his approach to the Altar, the Taper lighted,
and he adorned with his Aube, and Chasible, turning his face toward the East,
and contemplating the gilded, and beautified Images, he must say his
Confiteor, and confess himself, Confiteor. Rem divina^ facturus, ad suam
levandam culpam, semi primis reum dicere debebat, and noxae poenitere ac fateri
admissum, Vutumque submittere. Alex ab Alex. li. 4. cap. 37. Blond. li. 1. de
Romans Trinmph.
acknowledging his own proper offenses, and craving pardon of the Gods and
Goddesses; men and women Saints, requesting just and reasonable things, as
Pythagoras said in his golden Charms, and Orpheus in his Hymns. It seems
that Numa the Magitian thought the Mass Priests conscience cleared by
Confession, and without the Confiteor, that the Sacrifice could not be worthily
celebrated: wherefore Damasus and Pontiam Roman Pontifes, cannot justly take
unto themselves the glory, of being the first Institutors of the Confiteor, for
the Mass Priest. For above a thousand years before their time, it was forged
by the ancient Roman Idolaters: being also upheld to this present day: for
when Priests celebrate their Missall Sacrifice, they pronounce or murmur a
Confiteor in a language not understood by themselves, nor the standers by,
addressing their prayers and supplications to the Gods and Goddesses, men or
women Saints: in stead of reverencing, honoring, adoring, and praying to the
only true and omnipotent God, Creator of all good things.

Nevertheless Tirelmans Alcoran applies the Mass Priests Confiteor to the
confession of Christ for the sins of the people. Chap. 9.


After the Confiteor mutterd; First part of the Mass. Turnings and wheelings
about. Hae sunt vertegines in sacris, a Numae institutae, dextram ad osculam
far, and se in orbem circu^ agere. Blond. si. 1. de Romans Trinmph. Macro in
Saturnali.
for better observance of the Pompilian Religion and Ceremonies, the Mass
Priest must wheel and rewheele about, turn and return a long the side of the
Altar, first lifting up, then abasing his hands, with prayers and meditations
toward the East. For Numa the Magitian held opinion, that there was great
sanctity, in these wheelings, wreathings, and turning about of the Sacrificer:
As may be conjectured, it was an occasion of adding this pleasant song to the
Missall Introduction, when the Priest begins to make his wheelings and
turnings, I will go up says he, to the Altar of God, which rejoices my
youth. Has he not just cause to rejoice, when he sees the cloth laid, the
table set, the banquet prepared, the Music of Organs and other Instruments to
sound, Odours and Incenses, the Chalice full of wine, the Collation prepared,
and chink offertories ready to fill his purse? Are not all these means to
exhilerate the Sacrificers youth, Introduction to the Mass.
when he goes up to the Altar to say Mass, to dance and turn about, in form
to him prescribed by the Magician Numa Pompilius? And not only the Romans but
other Idolaters, also in celebrating their Sacrifices, were wont to turn and
wheel about, lifting up the hand to their mouth, and then turning the whole
body round about, Plin, lib. 28.
which windings and wreathings were reputed sacred.

Titilman in his Alcoran makes mention, that the Mass Priest in making his
vagaries along the Altar, discharges 7. reverences or salutations to the
assistants in his Sacrifice: that he may repel the 7. mortal sins, by the
sevenfold grace of the holy Ghost. But in performing the 7. reverences in his
Missall dance, he must turn about to the standers by, except before the
Preface, and the kiss Pixe, he being then employed in the fraction of his
round host, to convert it transubstantiate into an accident without substance.

When these wheelings, The sixth part of the Mass. The second of the Organes.
Antems. Collects. Gradualls. Tracts. Sequences. Hymnorum plures species crant,
Hypingos, Dianam, Apollini, poean, sit Prosaedia. Dionisio Dithirambus.
Caeteri, Iulus, Veneri, Crotyctus, praeter quos fucre, projadurs, Hypacthema,
and Stasimon. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Diverse Masses. Dry Masses.
windings, wreathings, and gesticulations, are performed by the Missalian
Priest, Numa constituted the sound of Organs, Flutes, and Viols, to sing
Hymns, Peans, and Canticles, to the honor of the Gods, in whose name the
Missall Sacrifices was celebrated. This part of the Mass has bin enritched
with diverse Antems and Songs, by many Roman Pontifes. Some, as Flaman, and
Diodorus, instituted Antems, Prelesporus Collects. Leo, or Gelasius Graduals.
Gregory, or Gelasius Tractes. Gottigerus Abbot of Sandal Sequences: which are
sundry Musical Notes, to serve for decoration and ornament to the sacrifice of
the Mass. But if the ancient Commentaries of the Roman Pontifes, instituted
by Numa were revealed, we might find great wariety of Songs, Peans, Hymns,
Canticles, and Odes, dedicated and consecrated to sundry Gods and Goddesses,
even as much diversity of Musical songs have bin annexed, by reason of
different Missal Sacrifices ordained for diverse Gods and Goddesses, men and
women Saints. For as the old Idolaters celebrated their Sacrifices to sundry
Gods and Goddesses, the Missalians also persever to celebrate their Masses to
diverse men and women Saints: some in the name of our Lady, others of St.
Sebastian: some of the holy Ghost, and others of Requiem, putting a distinction
even between dry, and common Masses, wherein the sop is steept in wine: so as
an infinite company of Missall Sacrifices have sprowted out to diverse Saints of
both Sexes, wherein are sung sundry Canticles and Sequences. Were not these
horrible and abominable corruptions of the holy Sacrament of Christ's Supper,
to make an Idolatry of it, after the manner of the ancient Sacrifices
instituted by Numa the Magitian? Wherefore Vitellianus the Pontife cannot glory
for having enriched the Sacrifice of the Mass, with the sound of the Organs.
For above 1200. years before his days, this Institution was published by the
Magitian Numa.

CHAP. XVI. Of Jncense and Offertories, with other parts of the Mass.
But to varnish this Babylonian Sacrifice, the Alcoranist Missalians interpret
the variety of their musical Songs by Pythagoricall Philosophy. As for the
Collects, that is to say, p eced or annexed Prayers; they command them to be
sung in uneaven numbers; that is, three, five, or seven: three, to intimate the
Trinity; five, to represent the five wounds of Christ; and seven, to symbolize
the seven words of Christ which he uttered upon the Cross; or else the seven
gifts of the Holy Ghost. Furthermore, for the more subtle Pythagoricall
Philosophy, the Mass Priest must not pass the number of seven, by the
ordinance of Pope Jnnocent the third of that name.

The Sophister Biel in his Alcoran of the interpretation of the Mass, adds,
That the number of the Collects are equal to that of the secrets; which is to
say, to prayers secretly mumbled by the Mass Priest, that they might not be
contemned of the people. After the Collects, the Graduall song more sharp and
grave, is a figure of the confession of Publicans, when they heard the
preaching of Saint John Baptist: notwithstanding, this Graduall note is not
sung in the missall sacrifices from Easter till the Feast of Pentecost, to
decypher the happy estate of the time to come.

Besides the sound of the Organs, Seventh part of the Mass. Perfume of
incense. Blond. lib. 1. de Romans triu^. Alex. ab Alex. lib 4. cap. 17. Iliacis
temporibus vete resnon Thure sed Cedri, and Citri fumo, deos adolebant. Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 4 ca. 17. Platina. Tit. Live. 3. Decad. 3. Tit. Live. lib. 9.
Decad. 3.
and musical songs, the ancient Roman Idolaters were wont to use in their
sacrifices, the perfume of Incense which they preserved in a little vessel
called Acerra. In this little Thurall Coffer lay the Odors which the Priest
took to incense the Altars, Images, Host or Victime, especially in Masses
celebrated to god Ianus, and to the goddess Vesta, who rejoiced in the Wine
and Incense offered to them. For in the Trojans time, in stead of incense they
used Cedar or Pomecytron wood for perfume. Wherefore it was not Leo the Roman
Pontifex that first instituted the use of incense, and to smoke incense at the
Missall Sacrifice: for more then seven hundred years before the Incarnation of
Jesus Christ, the ancient Roman Idolaters practiced mcense in their
sacrifices. As also the Romans retained the Latin word which signifies
Incense, Thus, from the old Greek word thno, that is to say, I sacrifice:
because the Idolatets in all their sacrifices used incense, as likewise they
had a portable Incenser, wherewith to incense: Although some have written, that
the ancient Roman Idolaters celebrated sacrifices to the goddess Ceres, and
used the gum of the Pinetree called Tede, instead of incense: Ovid. lib. 3.
Iast.
for which cause Ceres was termed by the Poets Tedifera.

In Titelmans Alcoran, the incense is interpreted for the prayer of the
Mass Priest, that it may mount up into heaven with the odor of swavity: even
as the fume of incense steames up on high. He sophisticates also with Biel his
companion, averring that the Jncense signified the grace of the holy Spirit.
These subtle Alcoranists allege the passage of Tobia, who drove away the
Devil by the perfume of a burnt Liver. The same Biel makes another
interpretation of the incense, as that it figures the unction of Christ by Mary
Magdalen, because Christ was anointed twice, the incense is also twice offered
in the Missall Sacrifice.

For another part of the Missall Sacrifice celebrated by the ancient Idolaters,
the Offertory of the first fruits comes in, The eight part of the Mass. Plin.
lib. 11. cap. 3.
which were offered to the honor of the gods, in whose name the sacrifice was
solemnized. This offering belonged to the Mass Priest, and he might freely
carry it home unto his house, for the nourishment of himself, and his family.
Notwithstanding there were other offerings distributed to such as were
indigent. Afterward through the Missalians avarice, this use was converted
into an offertory, or offering of gold or silver to line the purse, which some
attribute to Leo the Roman Pontifex; though this offertory had been practiced
more then a thousand years before his time. Blond. lib. 2. de Romans Triumph.
And for a justification hereof by the Roman Stories, when Numa had instituted
all the Ministers of his Religion, as Pontifes, Augures, Saliens, Fecials,
Curioes and others, he also constituted means to nourish and maintain them.
Sacerdo tioru^ sive benesiciorum duo cra^s genera: unum, quorum eoliatio ad
remp. aut principe^, aut ad pontisicum eollegium spectavat, alterum, querum
collatio ad aliquam familiam, ejusque successores pertinebat: quae beneficia
juris patrcuaius censebantur. Blond. li. 2. deRom. triumph. Dispensation to
hold many benefices. Tit. Live. li. 30.
He caused a fundamental allowance to be raised out of the public revennues
for the maintenance and entertainment of religious vestals.

After his example, many particular men did the like, so as their benefices
grew rich by these foundations or annuities: and these benefices were of two
kinds; one at the presentation and inauguration of a Prince, of the
Commonwealth, or of the C^lledge of Pontifes: the other were, at the
presentation of some particulars, patrons of the same benefices by them
founded, and endued with great richesse. Over which benefices the high Roman
Pontifes had usurped a power to give dispensation for the holding of two
together, as in Titus Livius it is related of Fabius Maximus, who by a
dispensation held two benefices when he was created Pontifex, more then two
hundred years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. This was therefore the
first revennue of Missalian sacrificers, to have benefices richly founded.
Foundation of Benefices. Offertories First fruits and vacancies. Tertia,
Sacerdetiorum opulentia, a solutionibus provenichat, quas inseriores
superioribus Pontificibus impendebant, quale apud nos est, cum Pontifici Romano
fructus premos, antistites and his minores Sacerdotes ad obtinenda beneficia
pecuniam dissolvunt. Blond lib. 2. de Romans Triumph. Viventes ut deos haberent
propitios, multa Sacerdotibus largiebantur soelicitati animarum consulturi.
Blond lib 2. de Romans triumph. Cic. in oratione pro dono sua Pontisices Blond.
l. 3. de Romans trium. Chap. 35.
Their second revenue or emolument, grew by offertories, offerings or
oblations. The third revennue consisted of annual means and contributions, as
the first years fruits, which the idolatrous Roman Pontifes were wont to
take, for the vacancy of benefices in their gift, or that they sold, and
dispensed with. The fourth revennue grew from obsequies, anniversaries,
legacies, and donatives conferred, to pray to their gods for the souls of the
deceased. All which is verified likewise at this day, by the monuments and
sepulchers of the ancient idolaters. The fifth revennue came in by amercements,
condemnations, and confiscations, which were adjudged by the Roman Pontifes:
As Ciceroes house and palace when he was banished, were co^fiscated to the
College pontifical: and specially alloted for sacrifices to be celebrated in
the Temple consecrated to the goddess Liberty. I was desirous by the way,
briefly to recite the revennues and supportations of the ancient Roman
sacrificers, to the end that men might more and more discern that all abuses
and idolatries succeeding in the Church of Jesus Christ, are not new; but
originally derived or revived from the ancient Roman idolaters, as the
foundation of Masses, Obits, Anniversaries, Dispensations for holding sundry
benefices, pensions, vacancies, first fruits, offerings, and the Missalian
treasure, all amercements, and confiscations adjudged within the demeans of the
Roman Pontife, with other ordinances revived by new Roman Popes, which have
descended from one to another. To this purpose we read in the Roman Stories,
that during the reign of the Emperor Valentinian the second of this name,
there happened a dangerous sedition at Rome, between the Christian and
idolatrous Priests, which strove who should amasse or heap up together most
wealth in the Church by grants, testamentary legacies, oblations and other
inventions: so as the Heathen and Infidel idolaters, who retained yet a Temple
to themselves, called at this day the Church of Saint Peter ad Vincula, fought
with the Christians at Rome, who would have dedicated it to their devotion.

After the Offertory, Titelmans Alcoran sets down how the Mass Priest should
be silent for a time, to figure the flight of Christ, or his disciples fear
to confess him before the Jews. Then this being performed, the Priest sings
aloud, per omnia secula seculorum: because after Christ had hidden himself, he
publicly came forth in Lazarus house: Then he sings Sanctus, sanctus,
sanctus; to allude to the Jews song, when Christ entered unto Jerusalem. When
this Music ends, the Priest must murmur in secret, and between his teeth,
counterfeiting sorrow, without any turne-abouts, but then he must express a k
nd of mure mummerie, by the making of many reiterated croysadoes, as shall
hereafter be mentioned.

CHAP. XVII. Of the round Host, with the Consecration of the same.
NExt to the Offertory, Ninth part of the Mass. Round host of flower. Plut. in
Numa.
we must come to the ninth part of the Mass, the most rich and most pleasing
for the Missalians. This is the Host or victime, which comprehends the end of
all this Missall Sacrifice. In the days of Numa the Magician, the Romans were
not yet accustomed to kill, and immolate with the blood of beasts: Pollux in
onom lib 6. Mysterijs peractis, qui sacris intererant rotundis panibus quos in
honorem De^rum adnibebant stantes vesceb. intur, nec nisi facri ficio
perfectovesci licebat. Alex ab Alex. li. 4. cap. 17.
but men were appointed to eat and communicate within the Temple, after the
end of the Missall Sacrifice, small round loaves consecrated to the honor of
the gods, in whose name the sacrifice was celebrated. These little round hosts
of fine meal, were earen by the Priest, and by the assistants, standing
upright, and not sitting. The flower whereof they were made, was called Mola,
and from thence came this word immolare. There were diverse hosts, that is to
say; little round loaves dedicated to diverse gods, as there were likewise
sundry Missall Sacrifices. With the said round hosts they also offered Wine:
the Altars serving for Tables. While the Priests and the assistants in the
sacrifice, eat and communicated together of the said little round loaves
consecrated to the honor of their gods, hymns and thanksgivings were sung, and
some used the sound of the Organs and Cymbals.

Before the swallowing of this round host, printed with imagery, the Missalian
Doctors ordained the Priest, to utter certain exorcismes, and conjurations,
with many signs of the cross. First, he must make three crosses upon this
round host, to figure the trinall tradition of Christ; that is to say, by the
Father, by himself Christ, and by the holy Ghost, in pronouncing these words;
Haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata. Some other Doctors
Alcoranists and Missalians interpret the third crossing for Judas treason, who
delivered his Master into the hands of the Jews. Besides the above mentioned
three Croisadoes, five other follow: to intimate the five days space from the
day of Palms, to the day of the Passion, or otherwise to represent the five
wounds of Christ; two in the hands, two in the feet, and one in the right side.
Of which five Croysadoes, the three first must be made over the Chalice, and
the round host; to figure the delivery of Christ to the Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, or to signify the price of Christ's sale, that is to say, three
times ten, which import the thirty pence. The two other crossings are made
distinctly; on which is the fourth over the host, and the other over the
Chalice, distinctly to manifest unto us the two persons, of Christ and Judas:
when this is done, the Mass Priest continuing in his fooleries and monckeries,
stretches out his arms, to delineate Christ spread upon the Cross: then, he
lifts the round host printed with imagery on high, that it may be adored:
Afterward, he returns to make three crosses; one over the host, another over
the Chalice, and third over himself: to play herein the part of three estates
or conditions of those that are in Heaven, in Purgatory, and in the earth. Then
he thumps upon his breast, to play the penitent thief that was hanged upon the
Cross. This thumping of his stomach must be performed with the three last
fingers of his hand, because the thumb and the next finger are reserved to
consecrate and transubstantiate the round host. Moreover, he must beat his
breast three times, to figure a triple offense, of the heart, of the mouth, and
of real act; exalting his voice, to represent the Thief or the Centurion
which confessed God in the Passion. Six other Croisadoes are afterward
reiterated, three over the covered Chalice, to commemorate the three hours
that Christ hung alive upon the Cross; and three other crosses are made over
the open Chalice, and the round host, being once more elevated, to decypher the
three hours, that Christ hung dead upon the Cross. Then does he add two
other crosses, after the Masse-monger has kissed his Chalice, to describe the
mystery of blood and water issuing out of Christ's sides. Besides all the above
mentioned mute mummeries, the Priest must lift the veil over the Chalice, and
release it from Plataine, to represent the rent veil in the midst, at Christ's
death. This being done, the round host is laid upon the Chalice, and couched in
the corporal, to figure the burial of Christ. When the Mass Priest has played
the part of the hanged thief, of the traitor Judas, of Christ, of the
Publicanes, he afterward comoediates the Centurion, singing the Pater Noster.
But Durandus Alcoran, by the petitions in the Pater Noster, expresses the
seven tears of the Virgin Mary, the seven virtues; or the seven mortal
sins. When this song is ended, the Priest remains silent for a while, to
represent the silence and repose of Christ in the grave. Another apery or
Monckery is played by the Mass Priest, with the round host, which he lays
upon the Pix to decypher the union of his divinity, with his humanity: but when
he plays the secret mystery, the host is hidden out of sight.

CHAP. XVIII. Of diverse parts and sundry Ceremonies belonging to the Mass.
WHen the sacrifice was ended, Re divina and ceremonijs celebratis, Sacerdos
tune, I, licet, succlamabat: qua voce illos qui interfucrant, missos faciebat.
Alex. ab Alex. lib. genesis dic. 4. ca. 17 Mass instituted by Numa more then 700.
years before the Incarnation of Christ.
and the little round hosts eaten, Numa appointed these words to be sung: I,
licet, or Ite, Missa est: which is to say, go, you are permitted, the Assembly
is dismissed, to repair home to their houses. Are not these all the parts of the
Missal sacrifice, most of which were ordained by Numa the Magician, above seven
hundred years before the Incarnat on of Jesus Christ: that is, the vestments
of the Aube, Chasible, Lustrall holy exorcised water, with salt, to repel
devils: the Altar, the light Taper, the sweepings and glancings along the
Altar, with prayers and meditations toward the East: Procession, with the
Relics and shrines carried on men's shoulders by the Priests clothed in white
surplices; and crowns upon their heads: the Confiteor addressed to men and
women saints; the sound of the Organs, Canticles, Peans, Hymns, and Odes: the
incenser and incense: the Offertory, the communication of little round loaves
consecrated to the name of their gods; and at last the note, Ite, Missa est?
Will you now at last acknowledge, O Missalians, that you borrowed all these
parts and members in your Masses from the Pompilian Religion? Why retain you
the name of Mass, which Jesus Christ called a Supper, or the Communion of his
body? Why have you made choice of the peculiar vestments of an Aube, Matthew. 27.
Luk 20. Mark 14.1. Cor. 11.
and painted Chasible, from the ancient Roman Idolaters; which habits were
never appointed you by Jesus Christ? Why have you given more credit to
Pompilians Magic, for the driving away of Devils with salt, exorcised water,
termed holy wate^, Mark 16.
then to the sacred Word and Gospel of Jesus Christ, who inapted you in his
name, to repel devils, and not with the Magic of salt? Who inspired you but
the spirit of Numa, to shave your heads round, to put on white surplices, to
carry about shrines in Procession with a banner? When Jesus Christ celebrated
his holy Supper, and instructed his Apostles in the communion of his body and
blood, did he command them to follow the rites of the ancient Roman
Idolaters? to have Altars set forth with Images, to use windings, and
wreathings along the Altar, to be cut round, to have aubes and chasibles;
addressing your Confessions to men and women saints, to sound the Organs, to
perfume the altars and Images with incense, to gape after the offertory, to
bring money to the Coquille for the Priest, to eat little ^ound hosts
consecrated and adorned with imagery, and then after all to singe, Ite, Missa
est.

But you Missalists, I foresee your cautels, wherein (Missalians) you will
readily confess that the main body, and principal parts of the Mass, were
digested and brought in by Numa Pompilius: the further additions
notwithstanding and ornaments were invented by other Roman Pontifes; and
especially by a Monck called Gregory, the first of that name, who attained to
the Papacy: who being instructed in Pythagoricall Magic and Philosophy,
Platina. Volaterra. Kyrie eleyson.
having also studied the laws of King Tullus Hostilius, successor to Numa, to
the end to perpetuate his name by some new addition to the sacrifice of the
Mass, instituted the singing nine times, these Greek words Kyrie eleyson.

Gregory held this ninth number in great reverence, Quoties prodigium
nunciabatur sacrum novemdiale per novem dies agebatur. Tit. Live. lib. 1. decad.
1. Alleluia.
even as the ancient Roman Idolaters had recourse likewise to the Novemdiall
Mass, upon any monstrous prodigies or sights. He also ordained, that at the
Missall sacrifice, there should be sung two Hebrew words to accompany the two
Greek words: and on some days these words to be sung, Alleluia: being on
other days forbidden.

In stead of which Alleluia is sung another song called a tract, with a loud
voice, and a portracted note, in a grave kind of Music, to decypher the
miseries of this age. Now, he that sings the Alleluia must sing with a higher
voice then he that howles the Graduall, as Titlemans Alcoran makes mention.

Was there not Magic enough in the Missalians sacrifice without adding these
Grecke and Hebrew words? and foisting in Pithagoricall numbers, and the song
Novemdiall; instituting a distinction of days, whereon to sing the Hebrew
words, on other days prohibiting them? and to invent croysadoes and mute
mummeries? Are not these corruptions of the holy Sacrament of the supper
ordained by God? Platina. Sabell. Gloria patri, Agnus Dei, Kisse-Pix. instimed.
some other augmented this Missal sacrifice, as Damasus the Roman Pontifice,
with a Gloria Patri: Sergius with the Agnus Dei song thrice:

Which Titleman interprets to be a figure of Christ's Ascension. Jnnocent with a
kissing of the Pix by the Priest.

Which Pix of gold signifies the Divinity of Christ, by the doctrine of the
Alcoran: the Gloria in excelsis by Symmachus, which must be sung with a low and
mild voice, Chap. 15.
and it represents as Titlemans Alcoran relates, the weak and infantine voice
of Christ while he was yet in the cradle. O blaspemous and detestable mummeries
of the Son of God! Leo the second instituted the kissing of the Pix, Chap.
56. and 57.
which Titlemans Alcoran says does signify the union of Christians, and that
the kissing of the Pix was subrogated in stead of the holy Communion observed
in the first and next primative Church to the Apostles. This kisse-Pix is sung
by the Mass Priest in saying; Kisse-Pix.
Pax Domini: and making three crosses upon the Chalice, when the third part of
the Host, is put into the Wine, to intimate the Incarnation of Christ, or to
signify the triple peace, of the time, of the Spirit, and of future eternity.

Furthermore, there is added the forging of the Missall Canon to Alexander,
Canon of the Mass.
Gelasius, Syricius, Leo, and Pelagius. These be pieces patcht together,
according to the humor of the Roman Pontifes, Authors, Restorers, Endowers,
and augmenters of the Missall Sacrifice.

We must not omit the greatest enrichment instituted in this Missall sacrifice,
Platina. Sabell.
which is, to say some passages of the old and new Testament, called Epistels
and Gospels: which the Missalians have cut out, and mixed with Pompilian
Idolatry, and therein profane the Law of God, as Sergius the Apostate Mahomets
Doctor did, Epistles and Gospels cut ont in the Mass.
who adorned the Alcoran with many passages of the holy Bible, and forged a
gallomawfry of Fables and Heresies, to be of equal authority with the sacred
Law of God.

The Missalians for the song after the Epistles and Gospels, constituted two
persons, to solemnize their Missall dance, which is to say, the Subdeacon who
marches before, to play the part of the first law of the jews; and the Deacon
who comes after in greater dignity, to represent the Law Evangelical. Which
Deacon caries a pillow against his stomach, to figure an humbled heart: The
Subdeacon receives no benediction from the Mass Priest, as the Deacon does:
because, say the Missalian Doctors, God sent his Prophets invisibly: But the
Deacon representing the Evangelical Law receives benediction, as being sent
among wolves, in that Christ sent his Apostles visibly like men. The Deacon is
enjoined to wear a crossed Stole hanging down his shoulders cross the reins
of the back, to figure force and continency joined together in the
Mass Priest. The Deacon playing his part, and singing some abstracted passage
of the Gospel, in a language not understood either by himself, or the
assistants, must wheel about toward the North, standing upright: because says
Titleman, the Northern parts are cold and obnoxious: for this reason he must
make a cross, to repel Northern Devils. Are not these more blaspemous
juglings and incantations, then all the Commentaries of the ancient Idolatrous
Roman Pontifes?

CHAP. XIX. Against the Idolaters Antiquity, and long Possession of the Mass.
IS not this long Possession, Against the long possession and prescription of
Idolatries. Against the Turks. Against the Israelites sacrificing to Moloch.
2. King. 16. and 23.
to confirm the Mahumetan Alcoran, which the Turks at this day have enjoined,
for above nine hundred years; having conquered Countries, Kingdoms, and
Empires, prospered in their enterprises, and always observed that abominable
law prescribed in their Alcoran.

Was the people of Israel excusable before God, when they offered sacrifice of
the blood of Innocents in the valley of Tophet to Moloch, by alleging the long
possession thereof and inveterate use, for above 1200. years before this
idolatry was wholly abolished by good King Josias? Did the Israelites murmr
against the virtuous King Ezechias when he demolished the brazen Serpent,
Against the idolatry of the brazen Serpent. Number. 27.
which was instituted by Gods express commandment, above 900. years before?
Were the people themselves excused of their idolatry committed in the two
Temples erected in Dan and Bethel, wherein were the images of two young Heifers
of gold, under the pretext and allegation of long possession, for they had
continued this idolatry for the space of three or four hundred years? The
Jews that are at this day vagabonds, Against the Jews infidelity.
shall they be excused before the Majesty of God, by presenting the long
possession of their ceremonial Law, instituted even by God himself above
three thousand years ago? Against the Missalians.
As likewise your selves, O Missalians, can you allege against God a long
possession and prescription of having celebrated Pompilian Masses for a long
time, that you and your predecessers used it, sold and set to sale your missall
sacrifices? Is long possession a sufficient and well grounded reason, as your
predecessors the Roman Senators alleged to the Emperor Theodosius, that
their Pompilian Religion had been observed for above a thousand years? The
inducing of long possession, and use observed of long time, will not be a
sufficient reason to approve your idolatries. For ^f God out of his unspeakable
mercy and patience, Prescriptio^ takes no place a against God.
has tolerated the Jews in their infidelity, the Turks in their Alcoran law,
and Christians in their Missalian idolatries, we must not argue nor dispute of
Gods incomprehensible secrets. But in humility re-enter the way of verity, when
he is pleased to point it out unto us, after long and palpable darkness,
whereinto people in all ages have fallen by straying from Gods true institution
and worship, as we briefly before declared of the Israelites an elect people
of God, who though they had Moses and the Prophets, which admonished them by
many miracles and comminations how they ought to honor God, and observe his
law, yet would they never cease idolatrizing with their own fund and humane
inventions.

If therefore during the reigns of Princes, Judges of Israel, when this people
was governed as in an Aristocracy, then yielding to the yoke of Kings, as by a
Monarchy: and at last reduced under the government of Priests, embracing the
spiritual and temporal, the law of God was corrupted, the sacrifices and
sacraments adulterated and violated, and idolatry erected and propagated, for
more then sixteen hundred years from the written law, published by Moses, till
the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, what may be hoped of the people of Rome,
instructed and nourished in all idolatry, like a withered tree, like a bastard
and heathen people?

Notwithstanding that the Missalian Heretics may not vaunt of long possession,
in their missall sacrifices, except it be by the restoration of the nine parts
formerly described, borrowed fto^ Numa Pompilius: the other members of the
Mass, were invented at diverse times by sundry Antichrists, corrupters of the
holy Sacrament ordained by God. And to understand the peculiar times and ages
of these famous Architects; Agapit Roman Pope, reigning in the year of Christ
577. added to the Procession instituted after the prescript form of Numa, the
Confiteor, restored by Damasus, reigning in the year 377. the Kyrie-eleyson
was annexed by Gregory, reigning in the year 593 the Collects, and Tracts by
Gelasius, reigning in the year 493. and the Sequences by Gotherus Abbot of
Sandale: the Gloria in excelsis by Symmachus, reigning in the year 508. the
Incense and Offertory, renewed out of the ancient Pompilian doctrine by Leo the
third of that name, in the year 800. the Kisse-pix by Innocent the first of
that name, reigning in the year 408. the Agnus Dei instituted by Sergius in
the year 697. Dirges for the dead, were invented by Pelagius in the year 558.
the Canon forged by Gelasius, Syricius. Leo and Pelagius, reigning in the year
800. Transubstantiation was instituted by the Roman Pontifes, about the year
of Christ 1062. But not ratifyed till Innocent the 3. about the year 1200. who
also instincted a new faith for the people to confess and believe.
And therefore what an impudency is it in the Missalian Alcoranist Doctors
falsely to aver, that the holy Apostles of Jesus Christ celebrated the
missall sacrifice? considering that this sacrifice was not restored to its
integrity since the days of Numa Pompilius, but above 800. years after Jesus
Christ. What approved History makes mention that such an idolatry was committed
by the holy Apostles of God? How can we possibly believe or imagine it, when
this great Babylonish Whore was not restored to her mask and vizard of
sanctity but long time after the Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XX. Against the Idolatry of the round Host.
But we must return to our Roman History, Continuation of Histories.
that we may more and more discover the true original of the Mass. In
discoursing of the parts and principal members of the missall sacrifice, we
related how the ancient Romans, before they were accustomed to sacrifice with
the blood of beast, used little round loaves consecrated to the honor of their
gods, which they eat standing within the Temples, at the end of the sacrifice.

These little round Hosts of wheat flower were taken by the Missalian
sacrificers, Abominable Idolatry.
but they have augmented the magic and idolatry of Numa Pompilius, in that
they beautify their little round Hosts with pictures and images printed within
the rotundity of the said Hosts, to make them the more sacred, yea that they
may be adored, out of Honorius invention a Roman Antichrist, reighing in the
year of Christ's incarnation 1226. which Numa the Magician never practiced
before, neither grow to this abominable idolatry: what more detestable heresy
can be laid open, then to paint the Majesty of God in the form of humane
similitude as the Anthropomorphites did? Against the idolatry of round Hosts.
Who taught you, O Missalians, to corrupt the holy Sacrament of the Supper of
Jesus Christ, in devising these little round loaves and Hosts, but the Magician
Numa? When Jesus Christ celebrated the holy Supper with his Apostles, did he
appoint them to have little loaves or round Hosts, to print them with humane
characters and effigies, to conjure and exorcise them with crosses and
croysadoes in equal or unequal numbers, and cause them to be adored?
Confess therefore, O Missalians, that the principal part of your Mass, that
is, your little round hosts, to be original from the ancient Pompilian
Religion, more then seven hundred years before the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ; who did not institute for you these rotundall hosts, or that they
should be rather round the^ square, tryangle or octangle: so far he was
from ordaining the round figure correspondent to Numaes form, that on the
contrary, when he instituted the Sacrament of the Communion of his body, he
used a fraction of bread by morsels, which he distributed to his Apostles, for
a Symbol, sign, and figure, signifying sacramentally his body by the power of
the holy Ghost.

And the Missalians have not only made choice of the round form in then
consecrated hosts, printed with Images, to make them be adoted after the manner
of the ancient Romans: but moreover they have exceeded all other Idolaters. For
in the days of Numa and his fuccessors, those that were present at the Missail
sacrifice, eat standing together the said little round consecrated hosts, they
using no charity toward them that assist in their Missall sacrifices?

Is this to follow the ordinance of Jesus Christ, who brake the bread and
distributed it to his Apostles? Jesus Christ the eternal Priest, stood he
alone near to an altar, munching a little round Host, printed with Images,
when he celebrated the holy communion of his body. O you Missalians, more
detestable, and less charitable Idolaters, then all the other ancient Romans,
can you so sophisticate and juggle, as to procure your Missal sacrifice
(wherein the Priest alone devoures the little round printed Host with Images,
giving no share of it to others) to be taken and received as a communion,
causing them that are present at your Mass by an admirable Magic to believe
that they have communicated together with the Priest, though they neither eat,
nor receive any portion of the round Host.

And yet further, for a more extreme Idolatry, the Missalian Doctors
Interpreters inform, that the round Host must be divided into three parts, one
for those that are in Paradise, another for those that are in Purgatory, to
obtain remission of their sins, and a third steept in wine, for those that
are living in the world. But Durands Alcoransets down, that the three broken
portions of the Host, represents the triple form of Christ's body, sleeping in
the grave, lying on the earth, and afterward raised up from the dead.

Biel another subtle Doctor, not to confess the body of Christ to be broken or
bruised in the round host, devises the fraction of the Host to be made of an
accident without substance. Are not these abominable Heresies, to make souies
that are in Paradise, or Purgatory communicate: instituted by Sergius a
Mahumetan Doctor, by the means of a round Host devoured by the Mass Priest?

But peradventure (Missalians) you may object unto me, the use of the Primative
Church observed in the Communion of the holy Supper, where every one of the
assembly in the Temple, took a portion of the broken bread; being also
consecrated to eat, and communicate together: which custom was retained till
this present day, in your Missall sacrifices, celebrated on Sundays, Communion
of holy bread. A notable difference between round consecrated hosts and holy
bread.
which you cause to be distributed of morsels of holy bread to those present
within the Temple. But this ancient commandment, was maintained only in
picture; because the Missalians abusing the holy Sacrament, have reserved the
round little consecrated Host to be eaten by themselves, distributing no
portion of it to the assistants: for whom they leave morsels of holy bread,
which for the most part were four square.

The round Host is azimall, and the holy bread made with leven: the round Host
is without salt, and the holy bread seasoned: the round Host is printed with
Images, and the holy bread is without characters or effigies: the round Host is
adored, and the holy bread received with thanksgiving: the round Host is
devoured by the Priest, and the holy bread distributed to every one of the
Assembly, to communicate and eat thereof: the round Host is in part steeped in
wine, and the holy bread is eaten dry without wine.

To conclude, there is so great a difference between these two several
Communions, as there is between the law of the ancient Idolaters, and the Law
Evangelical: but that they jumpe in one point: which is that both in the one,
and the other, there is a corruption of the holy sacrament of the supper
ordained by God.

CHAP. XXI. The invention of Transubstantiation, with confutation of that
labyrinth of Jaolatry.
WE must now descend to the very bottom of this Idolatrous Labyrinth:
Transubstantiation instituted.
we did recite the history of the people of Israel, who were not content with
the celestial bread, and Manna given unto them by God, while they remained in
the desert, but murmured against God, and Moses his Servant, they demanding to
eat flesh: the people also of pagan and infidel Rome, were not content with
the Pompisian institution in the communion of little round loaves; but that the
Roman Idolatrous Pontifes must needs further ordain the killing and
immolating of beasts, that they might eat, and communicate of the flesh of
victimes in their sacrifices, especially the sheep, Blond. lib. 1. de Romans
triumph.
the Sow, the Goat, and the Ox: which was first instituted by Evander King of
Arcadia. Wherefore, that the Missalians might not degenerate from the idolatry
of their predecessors, they must needs follow this communion of flesh: and they
are not content with their little round azimall hosts, consecrated, and printed
with images; Hosts made of flower transubstantiated into flesh, and the wine
into blood.
but with time they have invented a new magic to transubstantiate their
little hosts of flower, into flesh and bones, the bread being no more bread,
but an accident without substance: and by this means to convert the round host
of flower into a carnal and sanguinolent host.

The wine also offered in their Missall Chalices to be transubstantiated into
blood, the wine being no more wine, but an accident without substance.
Detestable Heresy.
Was there ever a more abominable magic, or a more detestable Heresy then
this Missaline transubstantiation? When the people of Israel murmured against
God, because they were weary of eating Manna and celestial bread, calling for
flesh, was the Manna transubstantiated into flesh, An. Christ. 1062. in
Chronol. Io. Volateran.
bones, and blood? When the ancient Roman Idolaters, meant to change their
round hosts of flower, or meal, and grew to eat flesh in their facrifices,
did they use this magic of transubstantiation? Wherefore I freely aver,
that this Missall addition was lately invented by the Missalians, more then a
thousand years after the Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

This Heresy began to spread very much of a Nicholai^an Antichrist climbing up
to the Roman Pontificacie, by the monopoly and suggestions of Hildebrand,
expelling by force the other elected Pope, Lanfrac. de sat.
which was Benedict the second of that name, in the year of Jesus Christ 1062.

Afterward by a Monopoly held in Saint John Lateran in Rome, it was advanced
during the ecclesiastical tyranny of Innocent the third of that name, about
two hundred years after the Palinodie canonized by Berengarius Deane of S.
Maurice in Angiers. Against which abominable magic and heresy we must briefly
by form of a recapitulation compare the institutions of the Sacraments
ordained by God.

First of all, Against Transubstantion. Tree of life.
the fruits of the knowledge of good and ill, forbidden to our first father
Adam, as sacred signs and sacraments of fear and obedience, whereon depended
life or death, were they transubstantiated or converted into knowledge or into
death, to leave their nature of being trees or fruits, reduced to an accident
without substance?

The celestial Manna, Celestial Manna. The Rock flowing out water.
and the Rock gushing out lively water, sacraments that had reference to the
holy Sacrament of the supper, were they transubstantiated into an accident
without substance?

The unspotted Lambs immolated by Abel, Lambs immolated by Abel.
in his acceptable sacrifice to God, were they transubstantiated into any other
nature?

The Fore-skinne circumcised for a note and mark of covenant to the good
Patriarche Abraham and his posterity, Circumcision.
was it converted into an accident without substance?

The blood of the Paschall Lamb, Paschall Lamb.
for an assurance of Isreal's salvation, was that converted into any other
substance?

The flesh of the immaculate Lamb, to be eaten on the day of the Passover,
having reference to the holy Sacrament of the supper, was it transubstantiated
into an accident without substance?

The brazen Serpent, which being only beheld, Brazen serpent.
health was granted to the sick, did it not continue a Serpent of brass? was
that transubstantiated, being ordained for a Sacrament and sacred sign to the
people of Israel?

Victi^nes offered in sacrifice, both of beasts of the earth, Victimes
sacrificed.
and azimall loaves, with other sacred signs ordained by God, for holy signs
and sacraments of expiation and salvation for the people of Israel, were they
ever transubstantiated into accidents without substance?

All sacred signs ordained by God in the Israelitish Church, though they
sacramently represented that which was by them figured, and not as a simple
picture without real effect, yet did there never live so detestable an
heretic, which invented or added thereunto this Magic of
transubstantiation. And nevertheless, O Missalians, you must needs confess
that the good and holy Fathers of Israel were adopted, engrafted, and
regenerated by faith in Jesus Christ, begotten before all ages: that they were
nourished, and purchased eternal life by Jesus Christ: that they and we have
but one God, and one only Jesus Christ, one Mediator and Redeemer: That by
faith, they sacramentally communicated, and participated spiritually of the
blood of Jesus Christ, for their salvation and eternal life: Comparison of the
faith of the ancient fathers of Israel with ours.
That there is no difference touching God, between them who did precede the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, and us that were since his incarnation: but both
they and we are equally the Church of God redeemed by the blood of the just
and unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus. For the rest, they had a faith of the future
promise, and observed the holy Sacraments and sacred Symboles of the Sacrifice
which should be consummated by Jesus Christ: D. Aug. contra Faust. 20. cap. 21.
and cap. 14. l. 19. and contra Petilian. li. 2. ca. 37.77. 1. Cor. 10. August.
in Psalm.
and we in the new law celebrate the memorial and remembrance of the
sacrifice now finished by Jesus Christ, having a fruition of the promise
accomplished.

If then the Israelites eat the same celest all bread, and drunk the same
saving drink, which we do by faith in one only Jesus Christ: If they had
sacred signs to represent actually and really the future death of Jesus
Christ, even as we retain sacred signs of his present, or past death: they
for the future, and we for that which is past; why did the Missalians invent
this new magic, to convert an holy Sacrament ordained by God, into a magic
of transubstantiation, and into an accident without substance? Against miracles
alleged by the Missalians. Exodus 7. Exodus 8. Exodus 14.
If God to approve his power, and to manifest the hardness and obstinacy of
Pharaoh was pleased to perform wonderful things by Moses and Aaron, by
converting a Rod into a Serpent, water of the river into blood, and into frogs:
the dust of the earth into lice: and then to make the navigable sea dry,
performing many other miracles: can we by this infer a transubstantiation of
the little round azimall host, printed with images, into an accident without a
substance? In what place of the holy Scriptures, when mention is made of sacred
signs, and Sacraments, or sacrifices ordained by God, is it said that the
sign or sacrament was transubstantiated? But on the contrary, Gods will
accommodating it self to man's infirmity, he ordained from time to time common
signs, for notes and marks of assurance of the thing signified: wherein Gods
power is the more renowned and exalted, in really giving us, what by the sacred
sign is represented by the virtue of faith, and of the holy Ghost, as if the
sign it self had been really transubstantiated by some occular miracle. For
the Sacraments comprehend in them, more spiritual then carnal sense. For this
reason God by his Prophets ever blamed his people of Israel, for understanding
the sacraments too carnally, as succinctly we have before declared.

But tell me O Missalians, when Jesus Christ made it known how himself was the
true bread of life descended from heaven, to confer life eternal; and how
these sacramental words of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, were to
be understood, wherewith the Capernaits your Predecessors were scandalized; The
interpretation of Jesus Christ touching the eating of his body.
did he teach us in this interpretation, that to eat his flesh should be
meant, by a little round transubstantiated host? that the round host of flower,
and the wine, is no more bread or wine, but accidents without substance? Is
this your abominable magic, the doctrine of Jesus Christ? Nothing less. But
Jesus Christ like a true and heavenly Lawgiver, who can only sincerely
interpret his own law, made answer to the Capernait Doctors, how they were
gross and carnal minded, John 6,
minding only the flesh, as you Missalians do, though the flesh alone profits
nothing: alleging how his sacramental words were spiritual: The flesh says
he, profits nothing: but the spirit quickens. As also, O Missalians, how can
you religiously accord your transubstantiation with the doctrine of Jesus
Christ, which promises and assures eternal life to those, that shall eat
his flesh, and drink his blood, if you conceive these words carnally? For you
cannot be ignorant, but that your own bodies when they have devoured these
round transubstantiated hosts into flesh and bones, drunk and taken down the
transubstantiated wine into blood, notwithstanding live and are mortal through
the necessity of the law. Wherefore eternal life promised by this communion,
cannot be understood by a mortal body, or flesh. And therefore of necessity
you must needs acknowledge, for the most sacred interpretation, that to eat
the body and drink the blood of Jesus Christ, must have reference to a
spiritual and heavenly life: and that the flesh profits nothing, but the
spiritual words; and the communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by
faith and spirit give eternal life. This interpretation is many times recited
by the holy Apostle Saint John, when Jesus Christ himself uses these words,
He that comes to me, shall never hunger; he that believes in me shall never
feel thirst, but have eternal life. Are not these terms intelligible enough,
to express this holy sacrament of the communion of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, without running to your magic of transubstantiation?

Another interpretation of the holy Doctor and author of the sacramental law
is described, Comparison of Baptism with the Sacrament of the Supper. John 3.
when Jesus Christ was interrogated by Nicodemus, of the means how a man might
be regenerated, and borne anew. Is it possible says Nicodemus, that a man can
return again into his mothers womb? Did Jesus Christ answer this demand, by
affirming that in the holy Sacrament of Baptism, the water was converted into
the body, into flesh and blood, and transubstantiated in a carnal womb, to be
there again ingendered and regenerate? Was there not also as great reason,
according to your Magic, to have returned this answer, as well as in the holy
Sacrament of the Supper? for by the one of these two Sacraments, we are
regenerated, and by the other nourisht. Now regeneration is as admirable to
humane wisdom, as nourishment; for conformable to humane and carnal judgment
it may seem unpossible, that we can be twice engendered and begotten. But our
good God uses the like interpretation of Regeneration, as of the communion of
his flesh and blood: which is, that these sacramental terms must be
spiritually conceived, and not carnally: for the flesh profits not; but the
spirit quickens. What is of the flesh is carnal, what of the spirit,
spiritual.

The holy Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.
relating to the Corinthians what he had received from Gods hand, admonished
them of the coming of Jesus Christ: during the expectation whereof, he
commands them to communicate of the body, and blood of Jesus Christ, by the
fraction of bread, and the cup of benediction called the new Testament, and new
covenant contracted by the blood of Jesus Christ: wherefore seeing we are
assured of the 2d coming of Jesus Christ, being ascended up into heaven, and
set at the right hand of God his Father: till the day predestinate that hec
shall return to judge both the quick and the dead: how will you reconcile
this passage, O Missalians, when by the magic you utter, you make him
descend, and return the body of Jesus Christ in flesh and bone, before the
time preordained for his second coming.

This Magic was by you restored, since the first author of your Missall
Sacrifice Numa Pompilius: Numa Pompilius, ut populum Romanorum sacric
obligaret, volebat vid^ri sibi cum dea Algeria congre^^us esse noclurnos,
ejusque monitu^e quae ccepia dij, immortalibus sacra sorent, insti ^uere. Val.
Max. li. 1. cap, 3. John 19. Exodus 12. Numb. 9. Corruption of the holy Sacrament.
who by his magic divulged, that he made his Nymph and Goddess Egeria come
down fro heaven, as also his Jupiter Elicius, by whose means there were
celestial secrets and mysteries revealed unto him. If by your magic the
round consecrated host, was transubstantiated into the true and real body of
Jesus Christ, the bread being no more bread, but the true body, how came you to
be so presumptuous, to break and tear in pieces the body of Jesus Christ,
according to the invention of Sergius the second of that name your predecessor
Roman Pontife? Are not you far more execrable executioners then your
predecessors, Lieutenants of the Roman Church, which crucified Jesus Christ,
and yet they never tare, nor rent his body in pieces, as he prophesied? And
notwithstanding you are not contented to have broken it into three pieces, but
in your Missall sacrifices you presume to drown and steep one portion in
wine, transubstantiated into blood, to be swallowed, and drunk.

To confirm your Magic of transubstantiation: why took you no order to
preserve from corruption your little round printed Hosts, which you keep and
lay up so curiously in reliquaries and boxes, after they are transubstantiated
into flesh, and bone, and into the real body of Jesus Christ? Against
transubstantiation.
Is it not an abominable heresy to believe, that the body of Jesus Christ is
capable of corruption? Nay, and oftentimes is eaten, by Worms, Weasels, Rats,
and Mice? Can you interpret this, to be an accident without substance? When
your Hosts become many times stinking and corrupted in your Cybaries? Many
times likewise devoured by brute beasts of the earth, which you cause to be
burned, and their ashes laid up in Reliquaries?

When Victor the third of that name, Pope of Rome, Herman. Cont. Blond. Plati.
received poison by your transubstantiated Wine into blood: was this an
accident without substance? Or when the Emperor Henry the seventh of that
name, was poisonned, by eating of a little round, consecrated, and
transubstantiated Host, was it without substance, when it procured death? There
was much more appearance for the celestial Manna, given to the people of
Israel, the which though it corrupted, when it was kept; yet that which was
reserved in secret, Nehem. 9. Ps. 78.104. Psalm. 16. John 6.
within the Arc of the Lords Covenant was preserved without corruption: but
yet for all this was it transubstantiated into flesh, and bones, to be called
celestial bread, bread descending from Heaven, the Bread of Life, or the bread
of Angels?

Now it remanes for us to contest with the subtle reasons of the Missalians,
who to make a foundation for their Magic, insist carnally upon the word est,
saying, that these words were expressly written: This is my body, this is my
blood, when Jesus Christ instituted the holy Sacrament of his Body and of his
Blood, under the Symboles of bread and wine.

But I desire all those that are zealous of the honor of God, exactly to weigh
the sacred Institution of this Sacrament, by which God meant to symbolize and
signify the communion of his body by the bread, and the drinking of his blood
by the Wine and Cup. All will confess, that the true and principal
nourishment of man's body, is comprehended under the kinds of bread and wine: so
that the term of bread is often taken in the holy Scriptures for the
nourishment and life of Man.

Let us enter into an examination of the passages of the Bible. Genes. 3.
Was not the first Man, created after Gods similitude, for the penalty of his
offense, told, that he should eat his bread with the sweat and labor of his
body? Can any man be so ignorant as not to confess, that this was understood
by the living and life of Man?

When Jacob prayed unto God to give him bread and raiment: Genes. 28.
did he not understand by bread, whatsoever was requisite for his whole
nourishment? When we hear recited, that God rained bread upon the people of
Israel being in the desert, and that the I raelites were replenished with this
celestial bread: Exodus 16. Nehem 9. Psalm. 78.6.
This term of bread, was it not conceived by the celestial Manna, sent by God
to sustain the people of Israel?

Is this Manna called the bread of Heaven, Sap. 16. John 6.
and the bread of Angels, given to the people without labor or travail?

When Melchisedech meant to furnish good Father Abraham's Army, did he not
present him with Bread and Wine? Genes. 14.


When Ahraham was to gratify and refresh three Angels that appeared unto him:
Genes. 18. Genes. 21.
Did he not expose unto them Bread baked upon the embers? Genes. 27.
Did he not give Agar Bread for her nourishment? Isaacs Mother to favor her
best beloved Son, gave him bread. Genes. 43.
Joseph in Egypt offered bread to his Brethren for their nourishment.

When we go about to discribe a Famine and scarcity of victual, do we not
say there wants bread? Genes. 47. Number. 27.
When God promised any mercy or favor to his people that did keep his
commandments: Did he not give them assurance of bread in sufficiency? When
he recommends unto us the poor, Tob 4. Psalm. 104.
as his members, commands he us not to give them breadreversed; It is bread
therefore, which nourishes and sustaines the heart and life of man.

When Satan enterprized to tempt Jesus Christ, Mar. 4. Luke 4.
to testify that he was true man: Did he not make choice of bread, when he
n^ited him to make the stones bread?

When Jesus Christ celebrated his banquets to give bodily nou^i^hment, once to
five thousand men, and then again to four thousand persons: Did he not show
his power under the Symbol of bread? Mar. 6. Luke 2.
When he taught us to address our prayers to God: Did he not expressly
ordain in the Lords Prayer that we should request of God to give us our daily
bread? And bread is not only mentioned in the holy Scripturs for vulgar and
corporal nourishment: But also in sacrifices celebrated by the Hebrew Priests,
Exodus 21. Levit. 24.
and the prescript Law of Sacred bread ordained by God: that was azimall bread
without Leaven. Other bread was termed the bread of proposition, which the
Priests every week renewed and eat, Mat. 11. 1. King. 27.
which David used, presented to him by Achimelech the High Priest.

Contrariwise the term of bread, is appropriated to the bread of iniquity,
of lies, of sorrow, to polluted bread of Idolaters, to bread of coinquination
offered upon the Altar; Ose. 7.
to bread of mourning, and to bread of trembling. The Ephraimites also called
ashy and unturned loaves, that is to say: Half baked, half circumcised, and
Idolaters.

And therefore, O you missalian Capernaites, you must not be so obdurate, and
inveterate in your carnalities, as not to observe the phrases of the holy
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 8. Mar. 4. Luke 4. Math. 15.
in which bread is oftentimes taken for terrestrial and corporal bread; as
when it was said, that man did not live only by bread, but also by whatsoever
proceeded out of the mouth of God.

Sometimes also bread is taken for the Word of God, and Doctrine. Math. 15.
Mar. 7.
When Jesus Christ commanded his Apostles to keep themselves from eating
leavened bread with the Pharisees: These terms of bread and leaven, are they
not expressed by the Doctrine of the heretical Pharisees? When the Cananitish
Woman demanded grace and mercy for her daughters health, detained in a long
malady of sickness: did not Jesus Christ answer her, how it was not lawful to
take the Childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs? Was not the bread in this
answer, taken for life and health, and not only for corporal nourishment?

Wherefore if bread be taken for the life of Man, which depends principally of
Bread and of Wine, and that Gods goodness, accommodating it self to our
infirmities, made choice of these two signs and symboles, or notable marks,
to signify his body and his blood; that is to say: The Bread, the Wine, these
two provisions being common to all Nations, was this any reason, to build upon
it a carnal transubstantiation, as if God without it were not mighty enough,
really to figure, and represent unto us sacramentally, that life was given us:
Yea, life eternal, by the communion of consecrated Bread, and Wine of
benediction; Mat. 26. Mar. 4. John 6.
these being figures and symboles of his body, and of his blood.

Jesus Christ produced these words, that the Bread is his body, and the Wine is
his blood: he also said, that himself was the Bread of Life, the living Bread,
and that he was the living Bread come down from Heaven. Further he says:
That he who eats of that bread, shall live eternally. Does this infer by
the word Est, that Jesus Christ is converted and transubstantiated into bread,
and that he is no more Christ, but an accident without substance. O abominable
heresies! have you any more reason, O you Missalians, to interpret these words
carnally: This is my Body, to transubstantiate the bread into the body, then
when he testifies, that himself was the bread, to transubstantiate him into
bread considering that it is written, how the communion of this bread gives
eternal life? Jesus Christ said: Hoc est Corpus meum, he also says of
himself. Math. 15. John 6.
Hic est Panis qui de Coelo descendit: in both these places, is not this word
est used? And yet must we needs hereupon infer a transubstantiation, in stead
of orthodoxally interpreting the same by a Metonimy and familiar comparison of
bread to Jesus Christ, that we might apprehend, how eternal life was given us
by him, and likewise by him our spiritual food is ministered, even as by bread,
a nourishment corporal?

Howsoever, we must always have recourse to the true expression of Jesus
Christ, the absolute Lawgiver, and Author of this holy Sacrament, who
expounding his own institution, says in the first place, that he is the
Bread of Life, then afterward he says, that this bread is his flesh and his
body, John 6
which (...) offered for the salvation of the world, He said: His (...) meat,
and his blood true drink, he says, that whosoever eat^s of his flesh, and
drinks of his blood, he will remain in him.

How does he himself expound this Manducation? Jesus Christ by his own words
expresses himself: Whosoever comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that
beleves in me, John 6.
shall never thirst. Is not this a true eating, and a true drinking, never
again to be hungry, nor never to thirst? Must we not in this have faith, which
consists in spirit?

To address our selves to Jesus Christ, our celestial bread, our spiritual
drink, wherewith to be satisfied for ever, to quench our thirst of sin
perpetually, must we run to the Magic of transubstantiation, and forge an
accident without substance? Wherefore, O Missalians, do you presume to invent
any other interpretation, then that of Jesus Christ, who witnesses that the
flesh profits nothing; but the spirit quickens? and that his words are not
carnal, but spiritual, giving spirit and life, by faith and confidence, that
he is the Savior of the world, incarnate, dead, and crucified, to purchase
for us eternal life: John 15.
and then raised up again, hec ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of
God his Father, remaining an eternal Priest, Propitiator, Mediator, and
Redeemer.

To return to this term, est, that does so molest the Missalians brains,
that they dream out of it a transubstantiation. If Jesus Christ uttered how
he was the true Vine, John 4.
that God his Father was the Keeper, and that we are the Branches. Can we
hereupon conclude by this word est, a Magic of the transubstantiation of God,
into the keeper of a Vine, of Jesus Christ into a Vine, and of our selves into
branches?

If Jesus Christ was said to be the immaculate Lamb that wipes out the sins
of the word; John 16.
can we hereupon induce a transubstantiation?

If Jesus Christ said, that he was the door of the sheepefold, by whom we
must enter to be saved: And that he is the good Pastor, and we his sheep;
Must we needs so strain and wrest these places of the holy Scripture, as to
think it necessary, because the word est is mentioned, to believe a
transubstantiation?

When Jesus Christ admonished his Apostles, Math. 5.
saying, that they were the salt of the earth; did he therefore
transubstantiate or convert them into Statues of pillars of salt, as he did
Lots Wife? Genes. 19.


If Jesus Christ said by his Apostles, that we are the Temples of God, 1. Cor.
5. 2. Cor. 6.
in which the Holy Ghost inhabits; must we therefore imagine, that we are
transubstantiated into a mass of stone?

If the holy Apostle writ, 1. Cor. 10.
that Jesus Christ is the Rock, out of whom came living water, to wash and
purge us from our sins; must we wrest out of this a transmutation, and
transubstantiation of Jesus Christ into a Rock, or a material stone?

If the holy Apostle testifies, 1. Cor. 12.
that we are the Body of Christ; may we by this infer, that we are
translated, and now no more men, but transubstantiated into an accident without
substance?

I readily foresee, O you obdurate Missalians, that you will object all these
pre-alleadged places: wherein this word est, is, and make no mention of the
Sacrament, which must the more exactly be observed, in that these be sacred
mysteries ordained of God: which is most true.

And this word est, is not only found in the holy Scriptures formerly cited:
but when we speak of holy Sacraments first instituted by God for his people of
Israel; it is written, Genes. 17.
that Circumsicion is Gods alliance and Covenant?

In the other holy Sacrament of the Communion of the Paschall Lamb; was it
said that the Lamb was the Passover, Exodus 10 13
which is to say the passage? But shall we induce hereupon a Magic of
transubstantiation?

Will you not confess, O Missalian transubstantiators, that in these passages
of the holy Scriptures, speaking of holy Sacrament, that this word est, can not
be otherwise interpreted, then to signify some real performance: Genes. 17.
and that Circumsicion was a sign and a mark of the Covenant and alliance
contracted by God with Abraham. The Paschall Lamb was also a sacred sign of
the passage, Number. 10. Psalm. 68.24 Mat. 21. John 2.
for a remembrance of their deliverie out of Egypt? The Arc of alliance for
another Sacrament, of which it is written, that it is the truth and power of
the Lord: Must we understand by this, that it was transubstantiated into the
real Majesty of God? We must, we must, I say, interpret the holy Scriptures
with discretion, and in humility without sophistication, and without Magic,
soundly to apprehend the conception of words, and not stick so close to the
letter, which kills: but receive the Word of God in lively spirit.

If then the sacred Arc is called the Lord, and nominated God, because in it
he exercised his omnipotent power, and declared his Oracles and mysteries, by
exterior signs, to draw the Israelitish people to be mindful of God, and to
fear and obey him. If Jesus Christ also said that he was bread which came
down from Heaven, the bread of life: and the wine was his blood: that the Cup
is the New Testament, by the external signs of bread and wine, to give us to
understand, that our life and saving nutriment depended only on Jesus Christ,
and that by his death and bloodshed, we have assurance of eternal life, even
as Bread and Wine serve for corporal nourishment, and that he meant and
ordained these sacred signs, to be to us for Sacraments, to approve and
confirm our faith: Did he determine we should hereby Capernice, and Nicodemize,
to enquire, or make doubt of Gods power how it is possible to eat the body, or
drink the blood of Jesus Christ: how we can possibly be regenerated and borne
anew? Seeing the promise was made unto us by the word, wherefore have you, O
Missalians, conceived a carnal taansubstantion, destrusting in the
incomprehensible power of God? May it not suffice you simply to believe, that
the body and blood of Jesus Christ was really and sacramentally offered, to
communicate thereof for our spiritual nourishment, and to grant us eternal
life, through the Bread and Wine consecrated, with giving of thanks; the Bread
being truly his Body, and the Wine his Blood, which we must worthily receive
by faith, and purity of conscience, as sacred signs and marks of the divine
Caracter, without searching too subtly after the means, other then the
plain interpretation of Jesus Christ, that the flesh profits not, but the
spirit quickens, and that his words are spirit and life? Should we doubt
whether God has power, by the symboles of Bread and Wine consecrated, to make
us communicate of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, though the bread remain
bread, and the wine wine? If it were other wise, this could be no Sacrament,
but rather called a Miracle. As when Jesus Christ converted the water into
wine, John 2.
he then used the miracle of transubstantitation, changing the water into
wine; but he ordained not this for a Sacrament, as he did the communion of
his body and blood, by the sacred figures of bread and wine.

Was it not also as easy for God to change the wine into blood, Exodus 4.7.8
or the bread into flesh, as for Moses and Aaron, to change the water of the
River into blood, to confirm the hardness of Pharaohs heart,; or when the
clouds were turned into the flesh of Quails, Exodus 16.
that rained upon the people of Israel? Nevertheless, God did not ordain,
that these miracles should serve for ordinary Sacraments: but herein he
applied himself to our infirmity, exhibiting to us sacred, but not
transubstantiated signs, and yet are not vain nor fantastical: but signs
external that we may behold, touch, eat, and taste, remaining still in their
substance: and nevertheless they represent sacramentally what is by them
comprehended, and intimated, wherein consists the approbation of our faith, to
manifest by a sacramental work and ministration, that we are in the number of
the regenerate, and sustained by the holy Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Supper.

CHAP. XXII. Comparison between the two holy Sacraments.
IF we may presume to make comparison of the two holy Sacraments of Baptism,
and of the Supper, Comparison of the two holy Sacraments
though there be a difference between it, and regeneration, which is not
reiterated; For it suffices that we be once regenerate, and begotten a new;
but this spiritual nutriment is often renewed, according to the course of
nature, and other differences, very amply described by the holy Apostles, and
Ministers of Gods Word, Nothwithsta^ding the same end, the same Jesus Christ is
represented as well in Baptism, as in the Supper. Tit. 3. John 3.6.
By the Blood of Jesus Christ we are regenerated, and by the same Blood
nourished. By the Blood of Jesus Christ we are renewed, set, and engraffed;
and by the same Blood we are entertained, Romans 11. John 6. Gal. 3. Ephesians. 4.
and preserved from hongring or thirsting for ever. By the Blood of Jesus
Christ, we cast of our old corrupt skin, and put on his body, from which
likewise we receive nourishment, and eternal life. By the Blood of Jesus
Christ, we have access and entry into the Kingdom of Heaven: And by the same
Blood we have fruition of the same Kingdom.

In this sense the holy Apostle testifies, that we were all baptized by the
virtue of the Holy Spirit, 1. Cor. 19. 1. Cor. 10.
and we all likewise drunk of the same spiritual drink, given unto us by
Jesus Christ. Be not these comparisons drawn out of the holy Scriptures? to
witness that Jesus Christ is the only aim and scope, whereto we must tend
both in Baptism and the holy Supper? If therefore that the signs of
sacramental water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Supper of Jesus
Christ, are sacred Signs, Earnests, Gages, Hostages, Symboles, Seals, and
Sacraments, instituted by God for an assurance, and approbation of our faith.
Against the Missalians.
Wherefore, O Missalians, seeing you have invented a Magic of
transubstantiation for the Sacrament of the Supper: why did you not likewise
with the same Magic sophisticate the Sacrament of Baptism? Why have you not
constituted that sacramental water, after it is by you exorcis'd and conjured
with salt, to repel devels, to be transubstantiated into the blood of Jesus
Christ; the water being no more water, but an accident without substance, as
you have forged by the bread and wine? What difference do you assign, but
Sophistries, Sophismes, and Missalian subtilties? If you persevere in your
heresy, John. 3.4.7 Tit. 3. Gal. 3.
by reason of this word est: This word is also used in the water of Baptism,
which is termed renovation, and regeneration; it is named the Holy Spirit, and
the Vestment, by, and with which we are revested, renewed, and regenerated in
the blood of Jesus Christ. Seeing therefore you acknowledge, O Missalians, that
you could never yet meet with a second Berengarius, to institute another Decree
of a Palinody, for the extending of your Magical transubstantiation, to the
sacred water of Baptism, and by the same means likewise to transubstantiate
your lustrall Phlegm and Spittle; your Oil, your Creames, Against the
corrupters of Baptism.
your Salt, and other Drugges, wherewith you you have corrupted the holy
Sacrament of Baptism; why are you so inveterate, and obdurate in your
Pompilian Religion, as to hale Jesus Christ from the right hand of his Father,
to make him in body and blood to descend by your muttered Magic, like another
Jupiter Elicius, before the day preordained for his second coming?

I may well propound unto you the similitude of the Sun, Luke 1. Mal. 4.
Comparison of the Sun to Jesus Christ, which (...) the Martyr used in his
Treatise of the Exposition of faith. chap. 2 A notable comparison of the Sun,
utterly to confute the erroneous doctrine of Transubstantiation.
called by some Apostles the Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, because light
comes from Heaven, by this luminous and glorious sphericall Planet: and so
spiritual light is exhibited to us by Jesus Christ, who out of the night and
darkness of sin has brought us into the brightness, and clear sunshine
of his grace.

You may now therefore understand, carnal and gross Capernaites, this
sufficient and evident comparison, to intimate that the infinite power of God,
is much more complete and perfect, then your abominable invention of
transubstantiation.

Will you not acknowledge, except your eye be blinded, and obfuscated with the
palpable darkness of obstinacy, that the Sun gives us his light, his force,
his heat and vigor, and yet nevertheless, the body it self of the planetall
Sun remains and continues in his sphericall Orb? Do you not use to say in
ordinary common language, when the window of an house is open on that part
where the Sun shines, that the Sun is come into the house, although the Sun
remains still in the Firmament? Must we therefore violently hale and pull the
body of the Sun, to make it descend, and be transubstantiated into this
earthly substance, before it can afford its heat, beams, light and
nourishment, to Plants, Trees, Herbs, and Beasts of the earth? Are you so
brutish, O Capernaits, as not to recognize that the true Sun of Righteousness
Jesus Christ, has more power then this Astrall Sun, being but mortal, and
created?

If then a mortal crature has this power to infuse into us the virtue and
efficacy of his body, by his beams, light, and heat, extended really and
effectually over the whole earth, the body remaining still in its heaven: and
shall we not believe that God an immortal Creator has much more power to
grant us the true Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ: to give us the virtue
and power of his body and bloodshed for us by the beams, light, and heat of
his holy Spirit, except he be by your Magic plucked from the right hand of
God, and his body drawn out of Heaven, to be transubstantiated upon earth? Why
should not Jesus Christ have this power to afford us his light, and to offer
his body and blood to enter intous, if by faith and a pure conscience we be
ready to receive him, by the efficacy of his holy Spirit, as well and better,
then the sphericall Sun can enter into our houses with his force and power,
and never be drawn out of its heaven, to be transubstantiated?

The Snnue is an entire body created, residing in heaven: the cause of the
generation of Plants, Trees, and Herbs, which by its force and calidity, gives
sustentation to whatsoever lives upon the earth, and in one and the same
moment, has power to quicken, heat, and nourish, an infinite number of Plants,
Trees, and Beasts of the earth: and yet his body is never separated, divided,
drawn out of his spherre, nor transubstantiated. The body also of Jesus Christ
which he assumed up into heaven, set at the right hand of God: has not that
more force, more virtue, more power, to regenerate, nourish and sustain us; to
give us his virtue, light and beams; to inspire, quicken, illuminate and
nourish us, and in a moment to make us all by faith partakers of his body and
blood: to make us members of his members, united in, and by him, through his
true promise, comprehended under the symboles and sacred signs commended unto
us, till the second coming of his humanity be revealed upon earth?

Wherefore the^, O Missalians, have you divised this Magic of
transubstantiation, to blaspheme against God, to impair his omnipotency, and
disable his virtue more then you do that of the sphericall Sun, but his
creature?

Why should you hale the body of Jesus Christ out of heaven, before the
preordained time, to transubstantiate it into your little round azimall hosts,
printed with imagery, which you cause to be adored, Jesus Christ as God assies
all.
seeing Christ as God, there assists his Church perpetually, and has the power
to regenerate, feed, and sustain us: yea, with an eternal life and
nourishment, by his most assure promise, testified by the holy Sacraments of
Baptism and the sacred Supper.

For other more familiar and domestical comparisons, consider, O Missalians,
how earthly and mortal Princes are reputed, reverenced and honored by such
sacred signe^ as they ordain; I will only propound unto you two, which is to
say, wax and metalls: of one the Princes seal is composed, with which,
grants, pardons, and remissions are sealed, charters, and privileges by the
Prince conferred.

He that falsifies this seal is he not punished as in case of high treason,
even as if he had outraged the person of the Prince? Does not this seal
represent his own person, even as if himself were present?

Nevertheless the seal though it be called the seal of the Prince, is not
transubstantiated, but still remains wax: Familiar comparisons of Princes
seals and coynings, which if they be conterfeited or falfified, the
counterfeiters thereof are executed as offenders to the Princes person.
but otherwise having received the sacred character of the Prince, being then
no more called wax, but the Princes seal.

Also the metals of gold or silver coined with the Princes stamp, do serve
for money, although they are no more called gold nor silver; but having once
exchanged their names at the Princes will, they are either crowns, Angels or
Pistols, or else shillings, groats or penies, or other such like names; they
are yet notwithstanding metals of the very substance as they were before,
there is but that difference, that they have the Princes impression upon them,
by and in which he is represented really: so that whosoever clips or falsifies
that money, is sorely punished by death as a fellon and a traitor to his Prince,
for it is in a manner as bad, and as if he had offended and conspired against
the Princes own person; by far greater reason the bread and the wine, consec
rated and ordained to be Sacraments of the precious body and blood of Jesus
Christ, 1. Cor. 11.13.
represents them really, and not by picture. Wherefore whosoever receives it
unworthily, commits a heinous crime against the supreme and Divine Majesty of
him, to his eternal damnation, but it is not to conclude a transubstantiation by
a most abominable conjuration or witchcraft.

But if you Missalians or Mass Priests, Nicolaits and transubstantiators, Here
is proved by the Doctors, the words of Christ concerning the Sacrament of his
body and blood to be spiritually taken not carnally, and so utterly
Transubstantiation is confuted.
be not sufficiently satisfied with Jesus Christ and his Apostles
interpretations, as likewise with those similitudes and familiar comparisons,
to reduce and bring you to the sincere way, and certain form ordained of God
for to celebrate his holy Sacraments, in abolishing your Pompilian and
Missasique Idolatries, ejecting from you your abominable witchcraft of
transubstantiation.

At the least will you not believe at all the interpretations of the ancient
Authors of the Church: hearken but to the saying of St. Augustine against
Adamantine that notable heretic: S. August. interpretation. Lib. 3. de
doctrine Christ. and in Praes. Psalm. 3.
Even as the blood, says he, in many parts and places of the holy Scripture
is said to be the water, the Stone also to be Christ; Even so the bread is
said to be his body: which three places must be understood and interpreted to
be sacred signs and figures, then when this very author said Christ Jesus
uttered these words: Hoc est Corpus meum, this is my Body, in presenting and
breaking bread to his Disciples, he gave them the sign of his body, for
otherwise it should seem to be a thing both inhumane and unlawful, to
devour the precious flesh and blood of Jesus Christ; if there were not the
figure of the bread and wine for to keep in memory his flesh and blood, the
body of Christ having been sacrificed to God his Father for our life and
eternal nourishment.

Again the same Author used this interpretation: Lib. 10. de Caut. des. cap.
5. ea. sacrificium de co^sc. did. 2 Tertul. lib. 1 and 3.4. Etiquid paras
dentem and ventrem? creed and ma^duca^^, ea. ut quid, de consec. dict. 2 Aug.
in lib. demmed paeniteud. and in Joan. tra. 25. cap. 6.
The Sacrament visible is the new Testament, that is to say: The sacred sign
of the invisible sacrifice: the like interpretations are described by
Tertullian against that heretic Marcion: Christus acceptum Panu^ Corpus suum
fecit, dicendo: Hoc est Corpus meum, id est, figura Corporis mei.

Wherefore then, O Missalians, have you not followed the authority of these
holy Doctors, of the Church which would not blaspheme against God by the Magic
of transubstantiation, bat have freelly and virtuously acknowledged the
Sacrament to be a visible sign or sacred figure, signifying by faith and
spirit that which is invisible?

Wherefore do you prepare the mouth and the belly for to devour the body and
blood of Christ corporally, really and carnally? Why offer you not your selfs
by true and lively faith for to eat worthily Christ Jesus? Why have you not
understood the manducation of the body of Christ, by the notable distinction of
that loarned Doctor St. Jerome, saying: S. Hieron. in Epist. ad Ephesians. Ca.
dupliciter eadem distinct.
The flesh of Christ Jesus is to be understood carnally, when it is spoken of
the shedding his blood, and crucifying of his body for our salvation; but
spiritually, when it is said that his flesh is the meat for us to eat.

For another proof, S. Gelase against Entychius and Nestorius.
I will allege that learned Prelate Gelase Bishop of Rome, the which disputing
against the heretics Eutichines and Nestorians, does afirme the bread and
wine consecrated and made Sacraments are nevertheless in substance bread and
wine, but to be signs of the body and blood of Christ Jesus by the mystery of
the Sacrament.

And if ye desire larger testimonies, S. Ambrose in the book of Sacraments.
cap. 1. and 11.
S. Ambrosius upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Corhintians has explicated
and made manifest, that the eating of the bread and the drinking of the wine,
does signify the flesh and the blood of Christ Jesus offered for us.

Origin likewise in his Homilies, Origin. in Lev, hem. 7.
teaches the Sacraments to be figures, which we ought to examine really, and
not carnally: Because, says he, that those words: Hoc est Corpus meum, not
understood spiritually kills the soul, when he writes to eat the flesh of
Christ. Wherefore St. Chrysostom admonished the people to honor that holy
Sacrament in offering himself, his soul to God, S. Chrysostom. hom. 31. cap. 15.
tont. 1.
for the which Christ Jesus was crucified; and that by that holy Sacrament of
bread and wine, is signified to us the similitude of the body and blood of
Jesus Christ.

For the resolution, we must follow and be ruled, according to the instruction
and interpretation of our holy Savior Christ Jesus and his Apostles, to honor
and reverence his holy Sacraments instituted of him by extorior signs, to lift
up our hearts, and raise our spirits and minds to Heaven, Psa. 12.
for to comprehend that which by those signs is represented to us, and not to
esteem, hold, and account them a vain picture or apparitions; but endeavor to
receive them worthily by lively faith and virtue of the Holy Ghost, to the end
to be fed and nourished with celestial bread, to the salvation of our souls,
thereby to attain life eternal.

Let us then be assured in Christ Jesus as members of his body, 1. Cor. 10. 1.
Cor. 12.
that we may be reduced and brought all into one unity, for to communicate and
eat the same bread and drink the same wine, compounded of many grains united
together, to the end that we may say with the holy Apostle: All we faithful
are the body of Christ Jesus, saved and redeemed by his holy body crucified,
and precious blood shed for us, and so remaining permanent in faith in Christ
Jesus, in eating his body, and drinking his blood, to believe firmly to have
been crucified and risen from the dead, D. August. in Joan. tract. 30. Art. 1.
and 3.
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God his Father, until
that he returns as he is ascended with his humanity, and nevertheless his
Almighty power and Divinity to be distributed to us and diffused in earth, and
in all places, especially in his holy Sacraments, which he has left us for a
pledge, and exterior approbation of our faith, for memory and recordation of
the death and passion of our Savior JESUS CHRIST.

FINIS.
Invincible proofs, that Transubstantiation is but of late years, gathered
out of authentic Authors and confessed by the most learned of the Papists.
NOw to manifest that the Church of Christ taught none other doctrine
concerning the Lord Supper, then the reformed Churches do teach for one
thousend years since Christ, here I do produce undeniable testimonies. First
the Book of Alfricus, Archbishop of Canterbury Anno 996. in the reign of
Etheldred King of England, which book does remain in the Library at Exeter, and
a copy of part of it dedicated to King Henry the 8. by Doctor Cranmer; And by
the same book Alfricus having translated So. Sermons out of Latin into the
Saxon tongue, of which he made two books, and he was of such learning and
eloquence and of such worthy esteem in the Churches of England, that whereas
they made a book of Canons after his death to govern the clergy, they did
collect out of some general counsels, and other ancient Fathers, in which
they did insert two of the Sermons in that book of Alfrieus his translation
into the Saxon language, the one was read in the church on Easterday, before
they received the Lords Supper, and there any may read it in the Saxon
language or in English recorded by Mr. Fox, and there are two of these books
extant, and one of them is to be seen in the Library at Exeter, and the
Italians and French did not understand the Saxon language, and I take it that
was the cause they did not suppress it, as they did others. For Mr. Fox does
show there, how they have rased out of some of the Latin sermons, which are to
be seen in those of the Saxon tongue, and thence he does show that they were
such words, as made against their superstition: So it is manifest that this
doctrine of Transubstantion was not received in the Churches of England for
fifty years after, for this book of constitutions was in use till Langfrank was
Archbishop, and it does appear that sermon was read in those Churches until
William the Conqueror came into England, and had reigned there some years, in
likely hood till the year 1070. and Capgrave and William Mamsbery, who were
History writers, do both of them affirm, that this Alfricus was Archbishop of
Canterbury about the year 996. And by the rehearsed book of Canons and
constitutions it does appear that this Alfricus was holden for a man of found
judgment and a Catholic writer, and this book of constitutions was given unto
the Church of Worcester, by William Bishop of Worcester, for an especial
treasure; as does appear in the same book. Besides this book, there is
another book given to the Church of Exeter, by Leofrious, the first and famous
Bishop of that Sea, which has those two Epistles before rehearsed.

Many other proofs ye may see in Mr. Fox, for the truth of this Author.

And it does appear that Langfrank did alter this doctrine, for before he came
into England, I do find that he was one of the four, Henry Bulling de ongine
erroris cap. 10. Counsel Vercellense do say, many French stood with him,
William Mau^^usbury affirm, the same.
which did dispute against one Beringarius, Archdeacon of Angreas in France,
who was turmoiled and persecuted by four Popes, for defending in the Lords
Supper, Bread and Wine did remain, and that the faithful received Christ
spiritually and not with their carnal mouths, his last recantation he made
under Pope Hildebrand, named Gregory the 7. Anno 1079. Upon which he with
grief and sorrow did give away his living, and all his goods to the poor, and
wrought for his living in his old age, after he had been persecated thirty
years: one Author does say, he did repent his forsaking of the truth before
his death.

These with many other testimonies are to be seen in the answer to the 6.
Articles, recorded by Mr. Fox. And Osbon, who did write an History at the
appointment of Langfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, does say, that at that time
certain of the Priests and Clergy were deluded and seduced by wicked error,
did hold and maintain that bread and wine which are set upon the Altar after
the consecration do remain in their former substances, and are but a figure of
the body and blood of Christ.

Thus was the manner of the Popish Priests thus to deprave, where it is certain
by that before rehearsed, and this herafter testified, that this was the
judgment of the Church: and the reasons he used to show what made them alter
their minds are certain false miracles, which are common in their Legendaries,
and may be read in the forenamed History, which if I should rehearse would be
thought lying for the Whetstone.

Whilst this abominable doctrine was in hatching. See how many thousand
witnesses the Lord did stir up to maintain his truth, even by their own
Authors confessed.

See rerum Francicarum scriptores about the year 1283. He says, the heresye
of the Waldenses spread throughout Europe.

Look a Railing Book, written against Mr. Fox his Book, printed 1603. in the
528. Section he says, the doctrine of the Waldenses was spread in more then a
thousand Cities, speaking of the year 1200.

There is a Cronicle of Lambertus a Monk of Hersfield, Anno 1078.
he writ from the beginning of the World to this year, in which he does
much complain of the Clergy, but most of the Monks, he affirms them to be
proud, and ambitious and destroyers of the Lords Vineyard by their ungodly
life, and great iniquityes, by which they have polluted the whole Church.

The Bishop of Florence did teach and preach, that Antichrist was then
manifested, as Gabellicus testifyeth. Anno 1101.
Upon this Pope Pascalos called a counsel and putt him to silence, and
condemned his books. And Blondus Platina testifies he also disalowed of many
Ceremonies, for which the Pope deprived him of all his goods. See the two
former testmonies.

A counsel holden at Rome, Anno 1124.
where was assembled one thousane Bishops and Abbotts, there they did ordain
that this transubstantion should be put for an Article of faith, yet it does
appear that it was opposed, for Innocent the 3 did 86 years after enact it in
a counsel, but here by this connsel the Pope sent his Cardinal to the Monks
of Caslam, that they should acknowledge the Church of Rome had received power
from St. Peter, and he had delivered it from the mouth of Christ, that all
Churches and Cloisters are to be planted and established by the Sea of Rome,
and all ought in conscience to be obedient to that Sea, and to acknowledge that
he has received power to open the gates of Heaven to whom he would, and also
to shurt them against any, and that the Romain Church was builded on the Sone
of God, which all ought to believe; and this is builded on the faith of Peter,
and that Peter and Paul did plant the Church at Rome with their blood, and that
it was the Mother church of all other Churches, and those which did oppose that
Church did oppose the Word of God. See the counsel of Cissinences.

At this time was Arnulphus Bishop of Ludom, Anno 1127
a zealous man he rebuked the wicked life of the clergy, and their much pride,
and he exhorted all to follow Christ in poverty as his Apostles did, and in
holiness of life. This man for his holy life and godly preaching was well
accepted of the Nobility, and of the Citizens; but the Cardinal and clergy
hated him, and sought to make him away privately: But he having a revelation
before what death he should dye, he declared unto them in his teaching, that he
knew the clergy would murder him privately, because he told them the truth, in
blaming their pride and wicked living, and therefore they were offended with
him, he protested he was commanded of God to cry out against their great sins.
It does follow that the clergy murdered him: and there is a book of his, does
inveigh against many superstitions, printed at Collen.

The Archbishop of Ments, Anno 1131.
Hildebertus, a man of great learning, did earnestly preach and write against
the Sea of Rome, and against the abominable wickedness: He affirmed them to be
Tyrants, and the sink of all iniquity, and that they banished away all goodness
out of the Church, and for this doctrine he is sent up to Rome, and there
cruelly handled, and imprisonned. See Rainul in poli Chrocit.

Peter Blesensis Archdeacon, Anno 1167
he wrote a book very learnedly, in which he proved Rome was that Babylon St.
John wrote of in the Apocalypse, and that all their clergy were adversaries to
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the very Calvs of Bethell and Dan, and Baals
Priests, and Egyptian Idolaters, they selling all things for money. S e
Trethinius Gesnerus,

Peter Conster, a Priest at Troyes, a man of great learning, Anno 1182.
and an eloquent Orator, he wrote 20. books, and sundry Sermons, in which he
does prove the clergy neglect the Word of God, and feed the people with their
own inventions, and that the Church goods, which belong to the poor they
consume wickedly, and he affirms them to be false brethren, for which the
wrath of God shall fall on them. See Trethemius Vens^nttus.

I will now set down some testimonies of some of those, Of those which were
banished and suffered death. Anno 1105.
which did testify the Lords truth the time this idolatry was in hatching.

Before there was any general Law to maintain this Transubstantiation. I
find under the Bishop of Trare four persons banished, and accounted heretics,
for that they affirmed the bread and wine do remain in their former substance
at the Lords Supper, after the words of consecration. They denied the Pope to
have authority over other Churches. See the Catologue of the Bishop of Trare.

Doctor Fulck in his answer to the Rhemish Testament, See Reve, 17.4.
does say, that the church of Leedium, before this was under great persecution
under Pope Pascus, for affirming him Antichrist.

Two Preachers in France, one named Peter Breves, Anno 1135.
the other is called Hendrick van de Tollhouse, they were well known in France,
and of good estimation for their great learning, and they did much bewail the
Apostasy of the church, and they spared no man of any degree, whatsoever they
were, affirming that they were fallen from the estate of grace and from Christ,
and they affirmed the Pope to be the Prince of Sodom, and the City of Rome to
be the Mother of all abomination, that all the Bishops were cruel Wolves, they
detested the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and affirmed the Mass, prayer for
the dead, was Idolatry before God, and that Images and the Cross might not be
prayed unto, nor suffered in the Churches: That the Priests manner of singing
was mockery before God, that praying to Saints and vowing of Chastity, and
their manner of building Temples, and observing of Holidays were superstitious
and wicked, and all humane inventions in Gods worship wicked Idolatry. These
men continued in their preaching twenty years, and having great refort coming
to their preaching of all sorts and estates, at last they were apprehended by
the Popes command by a Legate of his, and Peter Brise was burned a St. Ioyls,
the other was apprehended and committed to prison, but what came of him we
find not: but the followed great persecution, and many of their Disciples went
to their death joyfully. Look the 65. and 66. Letters of Barnod to the Earl of
St. Ioylls. There wrote against them Peter Abbott of Clugnam, which Barnod did
record, and in likelihood with envy. See the Cronicle of Paulus Meriam.

Ilyricus in his boock Detesbus, Anno 1158.
speaks of two called Gurhardus and Dulcinus, who did preach diligently
against the Church of Rome, affirming, that prayer was no better in one place
then another, and that the Pope was Antichrist, and the Prelates and Clergy of
Rome were rejected, and the very whore of Babylon, prefigured in the Apocalypse.
These two Preachers came into England, and brougt with them thirty, in the
reign of King Henry the Second, and by means of the Prelates, they were
imprisoned, and branded in the cheeck, and banished the land, and after putt to
death by the Pope.

This year was Peter Waldus called in question, Anno 1160.
for that he taught the truth of the Gospel against the Popes superstition.
The means of his conversion was this: He being a rich merchant of Lions (some
say he was a Magistrate) sundry of the Merchants being together merry, suddenly
one of them was stricken dead, and so the rest being stricken with great fear,
he gave himself to prayer and reading the Scriptures and good books, and
instructed his Family in the grounds of Christian Religion, showing them the
great superstition of the Romish Church, so that they had forsaken the Heavenly
Truth, which the Apostles planted, and in stead thereof they did burden their
consciences with superstition: And he being very rich, gave much goods weekly
to the poor, instructed them well in the grounds of religion, so that many
came to his godly exhortations, and to confer with him concerning the truth
of the Gospel. He kept sundry learned men in his house, he caused good books
to be translated in the French language. He himself was learned, as does
appear by a parchment writing of his own hand, in which he had collected the
Fathers into a good form, as that writing shows.

First the Bishops and Priests sent unto him, and forbad him to have any mo
such meetings in his house upon pain of excommunication; to which he gave this
answer: That it was his duty to teach his household the grounds of religion,
and whereas his neighbors came to hear him, he did not find where that he ought
to forbid them, but he was assured it was his duty to teach his household, and
he would obey the voice of Christ, and when he was called into question, that
which they laid to his charge was, that he affirmed that the Mass was
abominable before God, and that he denied any more Sacraments, then Baptism
and the Lords Supper, and that it was an abomination, to offer for the dead,
and that Purgatory was the invention of men, and that there was no ground in
the Scripture for it, for the Faithful go presently to joy after this life,
that honoring of Images and praying to Saints, was idolatry, and that the
Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon, and that Christians ought not to obey
the Pope or the Bishops, because they were no better then Wolves to destroy the
Church, and that they ought not to meddle with the temporal sword, and that
their additions of mo Sacraments then two, was wicked. Item, that the Vow of
chastity was found to be Sodomitrie, and that the many orders of the Monks was
the mark of the Beast, and abominable against Christ; For friars were not then
hatched,
that celebrated days for dead men, and all inventions of men in Gods worship
were ungodly.

And because the Popes champion Bernard, who is saincted for his work, and
Peter of Clumin: write so spightfully of them charging them with sundry
heresies, and that they deny childrens baptism. I will set down the
testimony of one, who was a bloody persecutor of them, as it is in a little
book that he wrote against the Waldenses, about the year 1270. wherein when
he has spoken all the evil of them he could, yet God, who opened the mouth
of Balaams Ass, caused him to write these words of them. They are (says he)
more pernicious against the Roman Church, then all other heretics, for three
causes. The first is, because they have been of longer continuance, for some
say they have been since Silvester, others say, they have been since the
Apostles time. The second cause is, because they are more general, for there
is almost no land in which this sect does not creep. The third cause is,
because all other sects, do bring a horror, with the haynousnesse of their
blasphemies against God: but this sect of the Lioneses has a great show of
godlynes, because they live justly before men, and they believe all things well
concerning God, and they believe all the Articles, which are contained in the
Creed. They blaspheme and hate only the Church of Rome. This is to be found in
a little Treatise of Renerius, imprinted near a hundred years since. Who was
a bloody Inquisitour, and gave sentence of death against sundry of them.

The Jesuit says, that one Cesarius writes, that the Doctrine of these
Waldenses was spread in more then a thousand cities, In a book against Fox
535. fol.
and that they had an army of 70000. that were destroyed by Simon of Momford,
with a small army: but there is no mention of an army, which they had in the
Cronicles.

Now we will show what the heresy was for which they were persecuted, as
Langfrank says.

That the sacrifice of the Church consists of two things, the one visible,
the other invisible, that is, of the Sacrament, and the the thing or matter of
the Sacrament, which is the body of Christ, if it were here present before our
eyes, it were a thing visible, and to be seen; but being lift up to Heaven,
and sitting on the right hand of his Father, to the time of restoring of all
things, as Peter says. It can not be called down from thence, for the person
of Christ consists of God and man. The Sacrament of the Lords Table,
consists of bread and wine, which being consecrated, are not changed but
remain in their substances, having a resemblance or similitude of those
things, whereof they be Sacraments. See Langfrank.

The adversaries did teach this Faith following.

I believe the earthly substances, The Pop^^^ Faith.
which upon the Lords Table are divinely sanctified through the ministratio^ of
the Priest, to be converted unspeakably, incomprehensibly, and miraculously by
the operation of Gods mighty power, into the essence of the Lords body, the
outward forms only of the things themselves, and certain qualities reserved,
and that for two respects. The one lest the sight of the raw and bloody flesh
might otherwise make man to abhor from eating thereof, that they which
believe things, which they see not, might have the greater merit for their
belief. The conversion of which earthly substances into the essence of the
Lords body notwithstanding, yet is the self same body of the Lord in Heaven,
and there has his essential being at the right hand of his Father, immortal,
inviolate, perfect, undiminished and uncorrupted, so that truly it may be
affirmed, the self same body both to be received of us, and yet not the self
same, I mean as touching the essence, property and virtue of his true nature,
So much of Langfrank, Archbishop of Canterb.
and yet not the self same, as touching the forms of bread and wine, and
other outward qualities occurring to our outward senses.

The Doctrine of Guimundus, Archbishop of Aversam, Those who will see further,
let the read the answer to the 6. Articl.
is as gross, as appears by a Book, printed at Lovan, which says: That the
body of Christ is pressed and torn with teeth, even like as it was feit and
touched with the hands of Thomas.

And further, he answers an objection putt forth, that it is not lawful for
Christ to be torn in pieces with teeth, he doubts not to pronounce, that
whether we take tearing for bare biting, it is not repugnant nor disagreeing,
but that by the will of God agreeing thereunto, the body of Christ may be
b^tten, with mouth crushed, yea and divided in pieces with hard or soft
pressing of the teeth, and that as he was brursed upon the cross, according to
the Prophets laying, he was bruised for our iniquityes, so the same body for
the health of the faithful, may devoutly be torn and tent with their teeth,
any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Cuimundus lib. Sacrament fol. 30.

Let all which fear God observe now these do oppose the word of God, Exodus 12.46
which says: They shall not break a bone of him.

Thus I have showed how this abominable doctrine of Transubstantiation crept
into the church, and that it was hatched by the Monks, and by the Histories we
may see how they confirmed it with miracles, and their holy bishop Duaston did
triumph over the Devil, when he would have enticed him to lust after a young
Woman. He got the Devil by the nose with a pair of red not tongs. Such like
miracles are to be read in their Legend.

Another miracle of a lewish Boy, For which testimony he was putt into the
fire to be burned of his Father, but the fire had no power to touch him, for a
beautiful woman, whose the Child was, kept the sire from him with her gown And
this was the virgin Marie.
that said, he saw in the Church of the Christians a Child broken and divided.

And seeing the Papists, do affirm, that the Church of Christ did in all ages
teach Transubstantiation to be a Catholic doctrine: We will examine one of
their Historie-writers, who wrote in the time this idol was a hatching, called
Osbon, who did write the lives of three Archbishops of Canterbury, about the
year 1076. in which History he says: In the days of Odo, certain of the
Clergy being seduced by wicked error, did hold and maintain, that the bread
and wine, which are set upon the Altar, after the consecration, do remain in
their former substance, and are but only a figure of the body and blood of
Christ: But (says he) that holy Father Odo did convert them, which was about
the year 951. He recites the means which Odo did use, to convert them by a
certain miracle. He says: These Clergy Men being before him, he persuaded
them, seeing they could not be convicted by argument, yet he requested them, to
stay and see him say Mass, and to communicate, which they did, and seeing,
after consecration and breaking of the Host over the chalice, the blood
dropped out of the Host into the chalice Odo. (says he) wept for joy to see
his petition accomplished, which he so carnestly prayed for. On the sight
thereof, he says: these clergy men behoulding and seeing were converted, and
blessed the Archbishop, thanking God that he was borne to manifest his truth to
them, and thus they were converted to believe Transubstantiation, and blessed
the Archbishop for their conversion, and they desired him to pray again that
it might return to the former substance, and presently he returned it into the
same substance.

Now I would gladly know what was the reason, that after this great miracle,
and the conversion of this clergy, that this contrary Doctrine should be
taught, and that an Archbishop Alfrecus should translate and write against this
miracle and doctrine, and that all the Churches in England should with him
teach against this Transubstantation, and that for 90. years, if not for a
hundred, and yet should not be excommunicated by the holy Father the Pope, and
not once proceeded against, seeing that 60. years after, the clergy of
England made a book of constitutions to be governed by, in which they did all
approve, that in the Lords Supper, there remained bread and wine, and yet the
faithful received Christ spiritually, and yet for all this the Pope did not
proceed against them.

Again what was the reason, there were so many Latin sermons tolerated in the
Church, which taught against their superstitions, and they not condemned by
some general council for heresy, if the Church had formerly concluded this
Doctrine.

Again what is the reason that these Latin Sermons are all made away, except
one, and that that should have some words utterly razed out, and the same
Sermon remaining in the Saxon language, has these words: Notwithstanding this
sacrifice is not the same body of his, wherein he suffered for us, nor the same
blood of his, which he shed for us, Anno 1141.
but spiritually it is made his body and blood, as that Manna, which rained
from heaven, and the water, which did flow out of the Rock, as Paul says.
These words so razed out are restored again by the same sermon in the Saxon
language, and is to be seen in a book at Exeter.

Again I marvel those clergy men were suffered to be so near the Bishop at
his celebrating of Mass, and were not rather committed to ward like heretics.

Again I marvel that this Odo, Popish Writer found falsh.
he being a man of so great authority, who had such extraordinary gifts in
working miracles, as never any Prophet or Apostle had, yet that he would suffer
those Latin sermons in the Church, which Alfrecus did translate 46. years
after him into the Saxon language, and not he to have so much as writ against
them, and that heresy, and to leave some testimony of his detestation against
it.

Again I do marvel that Osbon does not make mention of their singing to Deum,
seeing it was in the Cathedral Church, where so many singing men were.

That Jesuit, who can clear these Doubts shall do as great a miracle, as Odo
did, when by his prayers caused a sword to come flying from heaven into King
Ethelstanes scabard, when he had lost his own, and he being in fight with
Analnus. Or as great a miracle as Odo did, in making that all the time the
roof of the Chuch of Canterbury was a building, he caused that not one drop
of rain fell in the Church, nay that Jesuit deserves a Cardinals hat.

All these reasons well considered, do show that this Osbon did seek to
delude the people, and his testimony is found to be against them, and to
manifest the truth for us.

And this Doctrine was not established by general consent, till Innocent the
3. by the counsel holden at Rome, Anno 1215. It was by 1300, Bishops, and
there they did decree, that all must go to confession once a year, and come
to the communion, and this was made an Article of Faith.

About the year of our Lord 1280. lived Johannes Scotus, he is called Downs,
he was Master of Sciences, and in his 4. book he writes thus of the sacrament
of the Lords Supper, the scriptures might be expounded more easily and more
planely, without Transubstantiation, but the Church did choose this sense,
which is more hard being moved thereunto, as it seems chiefly because of the
Sacrament, men ought to hold as the holy Church of Rome holds.

And in the same place, he does allude unto Jnnocent the 3. and the counsel
holden in the Church at Rome, called the Laterane counsel.

Erasmus on the 1. Corinthians. 7. says: The Church of Christ has lately
determined Transubstantiation in the Sacrament, it was enough a long season to
believe Christ's body to be either under the bread consecrated, or else to be
present after any other manner, this he wrote about an 120. years since. He
was as great a learned man, as any lived in that age.

This Pope having (as it is manifested) altered the institution of the Lords
Supper, he having ordained a new faith, and having chosen 4. orders of Friars,
which brought forth a new Gospel, called Cirillus, by which they taught that
God governed in the time of the Law, the Sone in the time of grace, but now by
the coming of the 4. orders of begging Friars, the Holy Ghost began to reign,
and should reign till the end of the world, and those which believed this new
Gospel, should be saved.

And if the Lord in mercy had not stirred up many witnesses, Rev. 16.13
to withstand there croaking frogs, they would have razed out all Christianity,
amongst which was that famous divine Gulielmus, Master of Paris, who proved by
39. Arguments, that friars are false teachers, and all the Scriptures, which
are against Antichrist, he applied against them. See more in Mr. Fox.

This Innocentius the 3. came to be Pope Anno 1198. He was Pope 19. years,
and he having brought in many superstitions into the Chuch: He commanded
Almericum of Paris to be burned for an heretic, because he disallowed
Transubstantiation, and that whosoever did not go to confession at least once
a year, should be excommunicate. He ordained the Lords Supper should be
celebrated without wine: he ordained that the consecrated Host should be
carried to the sick by the Priest in a gorgeous habit, with torches or candles
light, and a bell before him, and so to go to the sick, and give him of it.

It is recorded, this Pope was exceeding subtle and crafty, he brought the
Emperor under him, and all the Kings in Europe, as Abas Vespergincs says. He
got all the wealth in the world by his wicked devises. He compelled king John
to receive his Crown of him. See Fox 253.
He decreed, that whosever spoke evil of the Pope, should loose his life, yea
that he should be tormented in hell sire.

This Pope did first institute the fowr orders of Friars. whereas the order of
Monks were made first clergy men by Boniface the third, in a counsel at Rome,
Anno 610. There it was decreed that the Moncks might preach and baptize,
excommunicate and absolve, whereas before they did not attend any such office:
See Vencenee Belovanses Hist. lib. 30.
and it does appear, that the Priests did much oppose them. For I do find,
that Pope Honorius after did conform them to those degrees.

To return to this Innocentius, there he did ordain, that the foresaid Friars
should refort to all houses, and that they having received from him power to
teach, to bind or to loose all which they should judge of, and thus they kept
the people in great fear of them. Anno. 259.
He ordained, that the Mass should be received with equal authority, as if it
had proceeded from the Evangelists or Apostles themselves.

These Popish orders of these croaking frogs were not lesie then an hundredth
sorts of them, and they were in all parts of Christendom, not one village was
free of them, and these were established to suppress the heretics, as they
did account the^.

These Locusts were prophesied of before by Heldegardis, which Mr. Fox does
record. Exodus


The Holy Ghost has foretold us, that there should arise a number of Locusts
out of the earth, ^evel. 9.
which should have stings like Scorpions, those are the Friars and Monks, who
when they could not pervert men from the truth of the Gospel, then they would
falsely charge them, and affirm they did maintain certain gross heresies, which
they did always detest and abhor, and thus have they slaundered these
faithful Servants of Jesus, as Master Brightman does well observe.

And of these false teaching Friars there needs no farther or clearer
testimony for their conviction, then the condemnation, that Hildigardis
foretold of them, and her testimony touching them, is void of exception, since
they hold her for a Prophetess: she prophesied first against the Prelates and
Priests, charging them with their abominable living, in neglecting the Word of
God, and betraying the truth, and destroying the Law.

She foretold thereof 70. years before they were.

And this testimony M. Fox affirms, he received in parchment, written in old
Characters in Latin, and he does show certain ancient writers, who have
alleged it. And this is M. Brightmans, translated into English, as follows.

In those days there shall rise up a sort of Blockish fellows proud,
covetous, perfidious, and crafty, The Prophecy of Hildegard.
that shall eat up the sins of the common people, carrying a certain show of
foolish superstition under a fained coverture of beggary: preferring theselves
before all other men, by reason of a counterfeit Religion; Men of an arrogant
disposition, and fained holiness, void of all shame, or fear of God: In
inventing many new mischiefs strong and stout; but all prudent men, and
faithful Christians shall curse this pestilent order.

Men who will shun labor, and give themselves wholly to idleness, rather
choosing to get their living by flattery, and beggary, and that will bend
themselves with all their might every way they can, perversely to resist the
teachers of the Truth, and hinder them, and for this end they will flatter
noblemen, that they may assist them in this purpose: They shall also deceive
the Nobles, and draw them into error, that they may furnish them with all
necessaries, yea with all the delights and pleasures of this world.

For the Devil shall ingraft these four principal vices into their minds.
Flattery, Envy, Hypocrisy, and Sclander. Flattery. wherewith to purchase great
matters to themselves. Envy when they shall see benefits bestowed upon others
besides themselves. Hypocrisy whereby they shall seek to please men by means of
a conterfait dissembling. Slander, whereby they shall extol and set out
themselves with praises, by derogating from others, that they alone might be
renowned among men, specially the simpler sort that are deceaved by them.

They shall preach indeed diligently, but without all sense of pietve, and not
after the manner of the holy Martyrs of old. They shall derogate from the
secular Princes, they shall take away the Sacrament from the true Pastors, and
shall take alms of those that are very sick, and miserable, insinuating, and
by little and little winding themselves, into the hearts of the common people.

They shall have familiarity with women, teaching them how to deceave their
husbands and friends, with sugared, and dissembling words, how to rob them of
their goods, and then to give the same being thus purloined unto these their
teachers. For they shall lay hold on whatsoever men get, or howsoever it be
gotten, by stealth, robbery, or by any legerdemaine; and will say to them, give
it unto us, and we will pray for you, so that laboring to cover other men's
sins, they shall quite forget their own.

And alas, they shall receave any thing, from rogues, filchers, Thieves,
Robbers that steal by the high way side, Sacrilegious persons, Usurers,
Adulterers, Heretics, Scismaticks, Apostats, whores and bawdes of Noblemen,
perjured Merchants, corrupt Judges, Soldiers, Tyrants, or any that live
contrary to Gods Laws. Perverse and wicked men they shall be, embracing the
persuasion of the Devil, the sweetness of Sin, a soft and delicate life, and a
certain fullnes and abundance of all wordly things, though it be to their own
eternal damnation.

All these things shall manifestly appear to be in them, and they shall every
day ware more and more wicked, and that with minds more and more obdurate. But
when as once their crafty conveiances shall be found out, and all their other
wickedness, then shall their large gifts cease, and they shall go from house to
house like hungerbitten, and mad dogs, looking down upon the earth, and
drawing in their necks likes drones and all to get their fill of bread. Then
shall the people pursue the^ with this outcry: Woe be unto you miserable
wretches, that are ordained to sorrow, the world has deceaved you, the Devil
has guided you with his raines hitherto, your flesh is frail, your heart is
altogether without wit, grace, or wisdom, your minds are unstable, and
wavering, and your eyes are blinded with much vanity and folly. Your idle
bellyes have lusted after delicate dishes of meat: and your feet have been
swift to wickedness. Remember the time when you were in sight happy, yet privily
envyous: poor abroad, but rich at home, covertous in show, but great
flatterers in deed, unfaithful, treacherous, perverse backbiters, holy
hypocrites, supplanters of the truth, immoderately just, proud, unchaste,
unco^sta^t teachers, delicate Martyrs, gainthirsty Confessors, gentle, but yet
slanderers. Religious, but yet covetous: humble, but yet proud: merciful: but
yet impudent liars, pleasant flatterers, peacemaking persecutors, oppressors of
the poor, bringers in of new sects, devised by your selves, men that were
counted merciful, but are found out to be wicked wretches, lovers of the
world, conjurers, dronckards, ambitious, patrones of wicked facts, the pollers
and pillars of the whole world, unsatiable preachers, that seek to please men,
and to deceave women, sowers of discord, of whom that famous Prophet Moses
spoke wisely in his Song: A people without counsel, and understanding, would
to God they had knowledge and understanding, and could have foreseen their
latter end.

Ye have built your nests on high indeed, and when ye could rise up no higher,
ye fell down like as did Simon Magus, whom God destroyed and smote with a
mighty plagne; So shall you also be thrown down upon the earth out of the
clouds, and that by means of your false doctrine, your wickedness, lies,
slanders, and detestable facts. Then the people shall say unto them: Out upon
you, get ye packing hence, you Captains of mischief, overturners of truth, ye
shunamitish brethren, fathers of heresies, false Apostles, that counterfaited
the life of the Apostles, whereof ye have been imitators by no means: You
sons of iniquity, we will not follow the manner of your ways. For pride and
arrogance have seduced you, and insatiable covetousnes, has entangled your
erring minds. And seeing that you would needs ascend up higher then was meet
and equal, ye are fallen back headlong into everlasting shame and reproach by
Gods just judgment.

These things wrote Hildegard about the year 1146.

It is recorded, that the people were so oppressed with them, that they make
suite that their number might be less, for they were not able no maintain them
all, for they kept the people in fear of them, so that they durst not
displease the^, for if they did, they would excommunicate them, or else accuse
them to be heretics, and those that did obey them, they would flatter, and
tell them they would pray and prevail with the Saints, that they should not
be tormented in Purgatory. And if they were rich, and lay sick on their
deathbed, then they would persuade them to give to their order and house at
least a child's portion, that they might not be tormented in purgatory, yea if
they gave liberally, they would promise them their souls should go presently
into Paradise, and thus they did beguile the simple people, and defrand their
posterity of their inheritance; so that in less then 400. years they had got
the third part of the wealth in the world.

To the like effect also prophesied Catharine, whom they have canonized for a
Saint. She affirmed that all their Clergy were deceivers of the people, and
perverters of the truth.

And holy Bridget did affirm, that most of the Popes were in Hell torments,
for their deceaving the people, and perverting the truth of the Gospel.

This Pope sent his Legate into France with 12. Abbotts, to suppress the
Waldenses, which taught the Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon, and his
ordinances wicked, and their Mass full of abomination, contrary to Christ and
his Gospel, and never known to the Apostles.

And this Pope did first institute an inquisition, which did condemn the poor
lambs for heretics, and the like they did in Spain, and appointed Diedicus a
Bishop there, who did persecute them with all cruelty. See the Cronicle of
Paulus Merium, Anno 1206.

The Cronicle of Munster, Anno 1210.
written by Harmannia Mutye, does say, that at Strausborow there was an
hundredth putt to death in one day, and 80. at another time, and 39. at Ments.
These were burned for that they maintained the same doctrine against the Pope,
which the Waldenses did, and in other countries there suffered many, as in Alvia
and Langwedoc, and Narbon Casan. Record at the Tolehouse many suffered.

Mascias says, there suffered in the Provinces 140. and at Narborn they suffered
great torments in the fire, and at Paris suffered 24. And the year following (as
Masays testifies) there was 400. putt to death, 80. beheaded, Prince Americus
hanged, the Lady-of the Castle stoned to death.

I do find by those, who do record this, some difference of the time that
this was. See Fox 420. fol.

The Bishop of Narbon put in a Castle near the Tolhouse 224. of these Martyrs,
and burned them to death. Anno 124;
See the Creniele illius Temporis.

I have formerly showed that these Locusts, sting like Scorpions, and those
which live in countries, where Scorpions are, do say, they are so bold, that
they will set upon a man, and sting him, and for the present, he shall feel
but little pain, but if he have not cure within one hour, it will so infect
his flesh, that with great anguish he dies whithin 2. days of it, therefore
the holy Ghost has made a fit comparison, Rev. 9.
for these Locusts do make show, their abominable Doctrine is not hurteful,
but those, which do receive it, it does so infect their souls, that except
they be cured in a short time they become worse then mad, for it does torment
them unto eternal woe for evermore,

Or if we do understand it of the sting they gave of the faithful witnesses
of the Gospel, when they could not pervert them from the truth, they would
give out their stings, that they held sundry gross heresies, to make them
odious to all indifferent men, as does appear in their writings.

Rerum Francarum in scriptorum writes, Anno 128;
there was of the Waldenses heretics in all Christendom, and that they were in
all Cittyes, and although they were slaundered to hold sundry heresies, yet I
have formerly showed that a bloody Inquisitour did confess, they believed all
things well, and their evil he charged them with is, they blaspheme the
Church of Rome.

THE DOCTRINE Of the Church of Christ for one thousand years after his
Ascension.
IRENEVS says, Anno 180. Ieven. lib. 5. and lib. 4. cap. 34.
that the bread is broken, and the cup next after the vocation or calling upon
God, cease to be common bread any more, but are the Eucharist of the body and
blood of Christ, and he manifests how, for faith he the Eucharist consists
of two things, one being earthly, which is bread and wine, the other heavenly,
which is the body and blood of our Lord.

And herunto Tertullian does teach the Sacrament, Anno 200. Tertul. lib. 4
to be a figure, sign and memorial of the Lords body. And elswere, he says
against Marcion: He gave his body, that is to say, a figure of his body.

Dionisius calls the Sacrament of Christ's body, Dionisius.
no otherwise then bread, as Eusebius does relate.

Ciprian says, Epist. 6. lib. 1 and 3. lib. 2
in his last Supper, he gave bread and wine, and his body upon the Cross.

He says: Christ drunk wine at his last Supper, because he would root out the
heresy of certain, who used water in administration.

Chrisostom says, Anno 350. Hom. 13. on Matthew.
that only bread remains.

And Theodoretus in his first Dialogue, bread remains, still its former
nature.

At a Counsel holden at Leadium, Anno 364.
in the 25. Article they decreed what they should do with that remained in the
celebration of the Lords Supper, and there they call them by the same names
they were called before the consecration, bread, and how they should dispose it.

Hesichius, Anno 500. Hesechius lib. 20. in Lev, cap. 8.
who was 500. years after our Lords passion, says of the mystery: It is both
flesh and bread, that is the true believer receives Christ and bread.

Emissenus, compares a man converted to Christ, Emissen. ^e Consee. did. 2.
quia corpus.
by regeneration, unto the holy mysteries, consecrated to the body and blood of
Christ, that is outwardly nothing is changed, but all the change is inwardly.

Augustine says: The bread does not loose his first nature after the
consecration, but it receives another quality, whereby it differs from common
bread.

And against Maximinus he says, Sacraments are figures, Anno 400. August.
lib. 3 cont. Maxins.
being one thing indeed, yet showing forth another thing.

And in another place he says: There are no other sacrifices then prayer,
praises, and thanksgiving.

Gelasius says: The Sacraments, which we receive, Anno 492.
are divine things, yet cease they not to be bread and wine in nature.

Beda writing on the 21th. Psalm, has these words: Anno 730.
Poor men, despisers of the world, shall eat indeed really if it be referred
to the Sacraments, and shall be filled eternally, because they shall understand
in bread and in wine, being visible before him, a thing invisible, to wit, the
true body and blood of Christ are true meat and true drink, which fills not
the belly, but the mind is nourished. Haymo about 850. taught the same
Doctrine.

Now to observe the Article of our Faith: He ascended into Heaven, and sits
on the right hand of God.

Augustine says: Aug. supper lean. tract. 30. tract. 50.
The Lord is above even to the end of the world, and yet the verity of the Lord
is here also, for this body, wherein he rose again, must needs be in one
place, but his verity is spread abroad every where.

Elsewhere he says: Let the godly receive also that Sacrament, but let them
not be careful for the presence of his body, for as concerning his Majesty,
his providence is invisible, and unspeakable graces, for these words are
fullfilled, which he spoke: I am with you to the end of the world. But
according to the flesh, which he took upon him when he was born of the Virgin,
and was apprehended of the Jews, and was fastened to a tree, taken down again
from the Cross, lapped in linen clothes, was buried, and rose again, and
appeared after his resurrection, so ye shall not have me always with you and
why? Because as concerning his flesh: The conclusion of Doctor Ridlye.
He was couversant with his Disciples 40. days, and they accompanied him
seeing him, but not following him, for he went up to Heaven, and is not here,
for he sits at the right hand of God his Father, and yet he is here, Math.
28.
because, he is not departed hence as concerning the presence of his Divine
Majesty.

Mark well what Augustine says, he is aseended into heaven, and is not here,
says he, therefore believe not them, which say he is here still upon the
earth.

Also he says, doubt not, but that Jesus Christ as concerning the nature of
his manhood is there, from whence he shall come, and remember well, and
believe the profession of a Christian man, Aug. Ep. 57
that he rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right
hand of God his Father, and from that place, and none other, not from the
altars shall he come, to judge the quick and and the dead: and he shall come
(as the Angel said) as he was seen to go up into heaven, that is to say; in
the same form and substance unto which he gave immortality; but changed not
nature after this form, meaning his humane nature, we may not think that it is
every where.

And in the same Epistle he says, take away from the bodies the limitation of
places, and they shall be no where, and because they are no where they shall not
be at all.

Vigilius says: Vigil. contra Vryche. lib. 4
If the word and the flesh be both of one nature, seeing that the word is every
where, why then is not the flesh also every where: for when it was on earth,
then verily it was not in heaven: And now, when it is in heaven, it is not
surely in earth, and it is so certain, that it is not on earth, that as
concerning the same, we look for him from heaven, whom as concerning the
word, we believe to be with us in earth.

These few testimonies I have produced to show, that in the maine differences
of our Religion betwixt the Pap^sts and us, we have proofs not only from the
Scriptures, and authentic Fathers: but also from the confession of the Popish
writers themselves, and that for one thousand years since the Ascension of our
Lord.

And for these points I have related, I could produce as many more, but I
hasten to be brief.

In the next place I will show the Fathers, Judgment.
concerning our Justification by the free grace of God.

That we are justified freely by tho grace of God, apprehended by Faith, is a
Doctrine, taught by the Apostles, and testified by the ancient Fathers.

And now, this Doctrine was opposed by the Pelagians, Anno 420.
against which Augustine wrote snndry large volumes.

And twelve years after his death, Comentary on the Proverbs of Salomen,
wrote Salomus Bishop of Viennen, who used these words: No man is chosen to
Salvavation of God for any foreseen goodness he did see in him, nor any man is
chosen of God for his good works, but only by his grace and mercy, and of his
mere love. See of him Sidonius in an Epistle on Salloman, lib. 7. and
Providentia Prosper his Cronicle.

And the year following there was a council houlden in the City Arragon
against the Pelagians, which denied this doctrine, and maintained freewill, and
it was condemned in this Synod,

Venerable Beda departed this life, when he was 72. Anno 734.
years old, in his time he wrote much. And on the 21. Psalm, he affirms:
We are justified by the grace of God, and not by works. He dissalowed Images
and praying to Saints. He translated the Gospel of S. John into English.

This Doctrine was maintained by sundry other Fathers, Anno 776.
as Falcanus, a man of great learning, Anno 780. and the Patriarcke of Aquilla
and Haymo, Anno 850.

At a Council houlden at Ments against Godsaeldius, Anno 848.
a Priest of Belgica, where he was charged by the Bishop of that place Rabinus,
to hold Erroneous doctrine, in that he affirmed: That no man is chosen of God
for any foreseen goodness he saw in man: but we are saved freely by the grace
of God. Which doctrine he did maintain very learnedly, there did dispute
against him fowr, and because they could not pervert him for to give over, they
did banish him. See the Counsel of Anelaus Apetheajedict frodurdes lib. 3.
cap. 13.

And it does appear, this Doctrine was not yet established.

For there was a Counsel houlden at Valence in France, Anno 855.
concerning this Doctrine. Which certain Scottishmen did defend this Doctrine
in the said Counsel, the whith Godsaldun had defended before, and was
banished: Yet we find not there was any proceeding against them, neither did
they conclude any thing there against this Doctrine, but there they decreed,
that none should be admitted to the ministry before they did dispute, and could
defend their ordinances, and that they must take their oath to teach no
Doctrine contrary to the Romish Church.

Remegus, Anno 884.
Bishop of Attexerre in France, was accounted of great learning in sundry
languages, in his writeings he proves that no man is made righteous by his
own works, but only by laying hold on Jesus Christ, by a lively faith. He
does affirm no man since Adams transgression, have freewill to do good. Faith
if we take the word amply and largely, signifies a certain knowledge and
resolving of the assurance of witnesses, which cannot deceive.

Justifying faith is a knowledge, which a man does firmly assent to every word
God has revealed unto him, and resolves that the promises of Gods graces
through Christ, belongs unto him, and he has a full persuasion, and
confidence in the favor of God toward him, so he overcomming all f^are and
pensivenes.

For the confidence of justifying faith, is a motion of the will and heart,
consisting of a joy conceived for the certainly of the present grace of God
toward him, and of the Hope of our future delivery from all evils.

There is no faith, but that, which rests on the will of God, revealed in his
word.

All true faith is wrought in man by the Holy Ghost, either by the voice of
Gods heavenly Doctrine, or by his imediate revelation, and seeing God will
kindle, frame, and confirm ordinary faith in us, by the Doctrine of the
Church, all are bound to hear it, and meditate thereon.

Faith always in the ellect, is imperfect in this life, and sometime
languisheth, yet howsoever, he feels in his heart an earnestnes against
doubts, which arise in his mind, yet he does certainly resolve, he is endued
with true faith.

This true faith, being once kindled in our hearts: although often it
languisheth, and is darkened for a time, yet it is never wholly extinguished;
for by faith only we apply the promises of grace, and we obtain the promises
of grace, receiving righteousness before God and the participation or communion
of Christ, with all his benefits.

So true faith is the persuasion of the heart, whereby the soul is truly
assured of redemption, and remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness
through Jesus Christ.

Let us hereto observe what our Savior says: Mat. 7.22.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
but he which does the will of my Father, which is in Heaven. And hereto says
the Apostle: Make an end of your salvation with fear and trembling.

And therefore says the Apostle James What avails it my Brethren, if a man
says, he have faith, when he has no works: Phil. 2.12. Iemes 2.14.
can that faith save him? That is, it cannot save him.

All which have this true faith, do daily judge and examine themselves of
those sins, they have fallen into, and they are truly sorye for them, and
they do humbly beseech the Lord, not only for pardon, but they do instantly
beg of him for strength of his grace, that he may subdue his natural
corruptions, which is an especial work of true faith: and therefore Christ
says: Come unto me all ye, which labor and are laden, Mat. 1^ 29
and I will ease you.

For all which have the spirit of regeneration, do not allow that which they
do, for they labor to do that, which they are unable to perform, therefore
they do as little Children do, who when their Father bids, bring them
something they are unable to do, and perform, yet if the Child do his best to
do it: his father does accept it as well, if he had performed it. So is it
betwixt us and the Lord, if we subdue our corruptions, and be sorry for our
faults, and be earnestly sueing to the throne of grace, for strength of his
Spirit, that we may subdue them, then are we those Christ speak of: Blessed
are those, which mourn for they shall be comforted. If we have these effects,
then are we those the Apostle speaks of, saying: He which is borne of God, 1.
John 3.9.
sins not.

The consideration of this, caused the Apostle to charge the servants of God,
to mortify their lusts, because the time is come that judgment does begin at
the house of God. And he says: If it do begin with us, what shall the end
be of those, which obey not the Gospel of God, for if the righteous scarcely
be saved, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear?

For if Christ reign not in our hearts, then he is not our Lord, Luke 19.27
therefore he says: Those mine enemies, which will not have me reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. For every tree, which
brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Thus I have pointed at the true justifying faith, which the ancient Church did
maintain: But if I should explicate it, it would require a quyer of paper to
manifest it. But I hasten to other things.

The Jesuit says in 484. folio, That wrote against Mr. Fox.
that the true Church is universal and perfect, and does hault in no one point
of bele^fe.

From his own affirmation I conclude their Church is false by reason their
faith was not known the first thousand years, nay nor till Jnnocent the 3. who
was the first Father of it, although there were sundry Popes before him in
hatching it 250. years, yet was it not brought forth, till the Counsel of
Latteran Ao 1215. where there was decreed sundry other superstitions, and as I
have before showed a new faith was inacted, which Langfrank Archbishop of
Canterbury did hatch, and bring forth against Baringaris.

The Jesuit does vaunt that Rome is the Mother Church, and that she had
converted Britain before Paul came to Rome; which is very false by the
testimony of records, for St. Luke does tell us, that at the persecution of
Steven, there was great persecution, B^nardus Precoris faith, there was put to
death 200^.
and the Church was all scattered except the Apostles. And some write, that
there fled out of Jerusalem 15000 upon this persecution, and some of them fled
into many nations, preaching the Gospel. And that this persecution was very
great. Paul says: He went into every house, and drew out both men and women,
and put them in prison, and thus he did even in strange Cities.

And to this end, I will show what three of the Fathers have written.

Tertullian, who lived about one hundredth years after, says: That the faith
of Christ was received in the reign of Tiberius, of the Medes, Persians,
Messapotanians, Jury, Cappadocia, See his book contra Ildos.
Pontus, Asia, Egypt, Pamphilia, Morians, Spain, France, Britain, Denmark,
Germany, Suhia, He says, in all these Countries Christ is received. And
Gildas says: The faith of Christ was received in Britain the reign of
Tiberius.

Gregory speaking of the multitude, which fled out of Jerusalem upon the
persecution, when Steven was put to death, says: That the faith of Christ did
spread over all the world, by the multitude of them, which fled.

And St. Paul wrote to the Church at Rome, about 21. years after, and he
says: The faith of Christ was published throughout all the world, which was
before Peter came at Rome. Act. 28.22. Romans 1.8. and 16.26.


And it does appear that those, which planted the Gospel in Britain, came
not from the Roman Church, because they did so much dissent in ceremonies,
for the observation of Easter day, which is one of the ancientest traditions,
they did dissent from Rome 700. years, and although Austine the Monk did
corrupt the Church with the Roman superstitions, yet he was opposed by many
learned Britains, and they sent unto Augustine, to confer with him concerning
their differences, and they did agree to have a meeting where Austine came with
his learned men; and the Britain Churches sent thither one Donatus with 7.
Bishops, where they met at a place called Austines oak, and there it does
appear, that they could not agree, on which Austine did threaten them with
war, if they would not receive his superstitions.

And as Segebertus says, Beda, Baleus, Galfridus, and others, Beda lib. 2.
Austine would have them to receive Altars, and Gregorius Masse-booke^, and the
Crucifix and Procession, and observation of Easter Day, as the Romans did,
which they did oppose, and that they did so contend, and strive in this
contention, that there was bloodshed in this assembly, upon which Austine did
threaten to stir up wars against them; the which we find he did, and
caused many to be murdered, and although he prevailed against them, Fox in
folio 131. Anno 798.
yet Mr. Fox does show, that when Charles the Great did send into England to
the King and Bishops and Nobility for to receive the Roman ceremonies and
Images in the Churches, they appointed Albinus to answer it, which he did, and
when he had answered it, they did well approve of it, and sent it with the
book to Charles King of France, and appointed this Albinus to go to him with
it.

And howsoever it has since prevailed, See the Chronicle of Panlus Meriall.
Anno 794.
yet there was the same year a Counsel houlden at Franckford of 205. Bishops,
which did condemn the worshipping of Images, and the second Counsel of Nice
for establishing of them.

But it is objected, Foxes book is a book of lies, and therefore not to be
credited. I know the Papists do so charge it, but (we say) how comes it then,
that they have wrote two Books against it, and instanced sundry of those
stories affirming them to be lies, unto which he has made answer in great
modesty, and so cleared their objections, that all men of indifferent judgment
may see they are mere calumniations, He being a Noble Man and suffered so many
arraignments, and imprisonments, and at last death itself.
and false charges, one I will instance, by reason it is almost as rare as a
black Swan; and that is of the Lord Cobham, whom these blasphemous men say, was
a rebel, and that he came against the King with an army of men to St. Gyles
feildes, the which does very evidently appear to be false, as all may see in
his answer, imprinted in both his last impressions, and yet for all this they
have wrote a third book after his death, and never answered any thing unto his
showing them their false accusations, Tit. 3.10.11. 2. These. 2.12. 1. Tim. 4.2
but scoffing and wondering at his number of sheets written, and yet a great
part of his book is in answer to their slanders. Therefore I conclude, they
are such as the Apostle speaks of, which have their conscience seared with an
hot iron. Anno 600.


And thereto Galfridus Monumentisis in his center. 6. Epistle says: That
before Anstine the Monk came to Britain, they had the profession of Christ
more purely then he brought from Rome. And Dagonus Bishop in London, coming as
he traveled to an Inn, where Austine was, when he understood that he was in
the house, refused to stay there, or so much as to drink in the house, by
reason, he had so corrupted the worship of Christ. And like as the Popes
champions dealt in our land, Anno 752.
so we do find they did in other countries, as here in the country now under
the States.

Boniface Bishop of Vtrecht, accompanied with 52. of which one was a Bishop,
and ten Priests and Monks, travailed to Doekum in Friesland, about 60. miles,
and there sent for the Officers of the Churches of Lewarden, and thereabouts,
and they would compel them to receive the Roman ceremonies, which they
refused to do, and thereupon they fell at so great contention, that the
Bishops with all their train were killed. Thus they were rewarded for their
pains. Look Joan. Baka Lupus Frerariensis epist. 5. on Carolus Magnus.

Many Preachers or Bishops in Bavaria did much dislike the Bishop of Ments,
Anno 735.
because he brought in the Roman Ceremonies, and they told him, it was
contrary to all truth, and equity, for to stand with the Pope in disinheriting
the right heir of the Crown of France, and that he did great evil in
bringingin Images, and teaching purgatory, praying for the dead, and forbidding
marriage to the Ministers, and that he himself had an evil report in that he
had women come in such manner to his house: upon which, this Bishop Boniface
was very angry, and he went to Gregory the Pope, and complained of them, and
the Pope sent for them, and condemned them for heretics for 14. years before
he banished fowr Preachers the land, for refusing to observe his traditions.
Look Aventanus lib. 3,

Kilinus Bishop of Whitzburgh a Schotsman travailled through France, England,
and Dutchland. Anno 687.
for to persuade the Clergy to observe the Roman ceremonies, which he could
not accomplish, then he caused to be sent unto him two other Messengers from
the Pope, Look Otthe Frisingenses lib. 5. cap. 13.
and then they theatened them that they should be forced to receive them, for
which the people set upon them, and beat them so sore, that those three died
of it.

And their Histories do show, thus they dealt in most parts of Christendom,
between the years 610. and 800. And then they do write, they were converted to
the faith of the Roman Church, whereas it is certain they perverted the faith,
for by the testimony of Histories, the faith of Christ was professed in those
Countries long before, as I have partly related.

I have alleged some Fathers here, to show how it does appear, that they have
given testimony unto the truth, we confess; not that I do build my faith upon
their writings, or upon any man on earth, I do reverence the graces of God, I
find in them, but my faith I build upon the word of God, as the Apostle says:
2. Pet. 1.19
We have a sure word of the Prophets, to which we shall do well to take
heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the day star arise
in our hearts. Seeing the Lord has charged us, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
not to add any thing unto his word, which he commands us, neither may we
take any thing from it, which he has appointed, or commanded, and he has
protested, that all, which shall add unto his word, he will add unto him
those plagues, Revel. 22.18.19.
which are written in his books, and if any shall take away, or diminish any
thing of his word, then will take away his part from the book of life, and
from the holy City of God.

For the Fathers themselves, do desire not to be followed, but as they follow
Christ. Therefore when the Donatists alleged Ciprian, Augustine.
for to prove a doctrine against Augustine He answered thus: We do Ciprian
no wrong, when we distinguish any of his writings from the Canonical
Scriptures, and therefore was the Ecclesiastical Canon of the Scriptures so
carefully appointed, contrary to which we dare not judge, and according unto
which we may freely judge all other writings. August, cont. Crescon lib. 2.
cap. 31. And he says: I am not hound to the authority of Cyprians Epistles,
for I esteem not it as Canonicail, but hexamine him by the Canonical, and as
it agrees with the authority of the Divine Scriptures I receive, with his
praise, and what accords not with it, I refuse with his leave. Ibid. cap. 32.

And when he disputed against an Arian, he says: Now must not I allege the
Council of Nice, nor you the Council of Arimine, as to prejudice either, for
I am not bound to the authority of the one, nor you of the other. We are bound
to the authority of the Scriptures, which are witnesses not peculiar unto any,
but common to us both. Let the matter cause and question between us be
discussed. Contra Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14. Also he says: Let us not bring
deceiptfull waights, by which we may weigh what we will, and as we will at
our pleasure, but let us bring the Divine Balances out of the holy Scripture,
as out of the Lords treasure. Yea, let us not weigh, but let us acknowledge the
things already weighed of the Lord. D.baptist. contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Also he says: Whether it be concerning Christ, or the Church, or any other
matter, which belongs to our faith, and life, there we may find what we ought
to do: and if an Angel from Heaven should teach otherwise then we have
received from the Scriptures, let him be accursed. Contra Petil. lib. 3. cap. 6.

Chrifostome says: When the wicked heresy, which is the army of Antichrist,
has prevailed in the Churches, there can be no proof of the Christian
Religion, nor any other refuge for Christians, that would know the true faith,
but the Divine Scriptures. Whosoever would know which is the true church of
Christ, how shall he know it, but by the Scripture only? Whereupon the Lord
knowing, that there should come such confusion of things in the last days,
does injoyne the Christans, which would have assurance of the true faith,
Chrisest on Matthew. 24. Homil. 49.
they must cleave to nothing, but the Scriptures, otherwise if they look to
any other thing, they shall be offended and perish.

And having written on John the 10. he says: On John 50 Homdis,
The Scriptures will not suffer us to go astray: By this door must both the
Pastors and all others of us enter in, for whosoever uses not the holy
Scriptures, but climeth up other ways, that is, by a way not appointed, he is
a thief, and those are false Christ's and Antichrist. And in another place he
says: It is not absurd to tell money and count it after another has told it to
us, and yet for matters far greater, some are so simple, to follow the
opinions of others, which he does note for great folly, seeing we have an
exact balance, and rule out of the Scriptures, wherefore I entreat and beseech
you, to leave of what this man or that man thinks; and enquire all out of the
Scriptures. Chris. on the 2. Corin. 13. homil.

Hierom says many Fathers both Greek and Latins have erred, Hieron. in an
Epist. Dammach.
whose names I need not mention. Now seeing I do simply acknowledge their
erring, I will so read them as the rest, because they erred as the rest. After
he says: Why do thou bring forth that, which Peter and Paul would not
deliver? Again whatsoever things brought in by any, although otherwise holy and
learned since the Apostles, let it be cut of and have no place, on the 86.
Psalm.

Tertullian says: Tertul.
None can prejudice the truth, not the continuance of times, nor the
superiority of persons, nor the privileges of Countries, for by means of these
is custom made commonly of ignorance; and succession of time, made strong to
be used against the truth. Christ our Lord calls himself Truth, not custom.
If then Christ be allwaies and before all, the Truth then it is a thing
perpetual and ancient. Let them therefore look unto it, to whom that is new,
which to him is old. Lib. de Virgin Veland.

Again he says: As for us we may not please ourselvs in any thing of our own
co^ceits, neither may we choose that, which others bring in of their own Will.
The Apostles of the Lord we have for Authors, who did not themselves choose to
bring-in any thing of their own will, but did faithfully assign to the Nations
the discipline they received of Christ, therefore although an Angel from
Heaven should speak otherwise, we should say he were accursed. Ibid. cap. 6.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK,
CHap. 1. Of Sacred Signs. Fol. 1 Chap. 2. Of Sacrifices Fol. 5 Chap. 3. Of
Corruptions Fol. 9 Chap. 4. Corruptions punished Fol. 16 Chap. 5. The
ceremonial Law accomplished by Jesus Christ Fol. 18 Chap. 6. Of Sacraments
ordained by Jesus Christ himself Fol. 20 Chap. 7. Of the corruption of the
Sacrament of Baptism. Fol. 23 Chap. 8. Of the corruption of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper Fol. 25 Chap. 9. The ancient religion of the Roman Empire Fol.
31 Chap. 10. How the Bishops of Rome began their corruptions in the Church Fol.
34 Chap. 11. The first greatness of Popes, proving Antichrists, and bringing
in the sacrifice of the Mass Fol. 38 Chap. 12. Of the Mass in particular,
with her true original, and from whence it came first Fol. 41 Chap. 13. The
Mass divided, with the true nature of holy Water, derived from the heathens
Fol. 47 Chap. 14. The Procession of the Mass Fol. 50 Chap. 15. The third part
of the Mass, that is, the Altars and Candles lighted Fol. 53 Chap. 16. Of
Incense and Offertories, with other parts of the Mass. Fol. 57 Chap. 17. Of
the round Host, with the consecration of the same Fol. 61 Chap. 18. Of diverse
parts and sundry ceremonies, belonging to the Mass Fol. 63 Chap. 19. Against
Idolaters antiquity, and long possession of the Mass, as also what times the
Mass was by pieces brought into the Church Fol. 67 Chap. 20. Against the
Idolatry of the round Host Fol. 70 Chap. 21. The invention of
Transubstantiation, with confutation of that Labyrinth of Idolatry Fol. 73
Chap. 22. Comparison berween the two H. Sacram. Fol. 85 Undeniable proofs,
that the church of God rejected Transubstantiation for 1000. years after Christ
Fol. 95 All the faithful did oppose it, the time it was in hatching Fol. 97
What their bloody Persecutors confessed on the^ Fol. 102 A new Faith invented
Fol. 103 A Popish Writer examined, and found false Fol. 104 It is confessed of
Popish Writers, that Transubstantiation was concluded but of late years Fol.
106. A new Gospel Fol. 107 That great Idolatry was then brought into the
church Fol. 108 The Prophecy of Hildegardus Fol. 109 The great murdering of
the Faithful Fol. 112 What Faith the true Church did maintain Fol. 114 The
Roman Church got dominion over other lands by tyranny Fol. 122
Christian Reader impute not Literal faults.

FINIS.

