The Catechism in Meter, for the eafier learning, and better remembryng of
those principles of our Faith, which we ought most familiarly to be
acquainted withal.

For the proof of those things, which I have not quoted, I refer you to
the usual Catechism. Only in the margent I have quoted those things which
I have added for plainness.

The verse will agree with most of the tunes of the Psalms of David, and it
is divided into parts, that each part may be song by it self.

Jmprinted at London by Robart Walley. 1583.

To the Christian reader, mercy and peace in Christ.
HE, that considers the dulle untowardness of our nature in learning of
heavenly things, the tediousness that easily creeps upon us, the scorn
that many have to teach, and others to be taught by their Pastors and
Masters, the difficulty and infinite travail in teaching, and the small
increase of continual labor with the^, besides the diligence of the
adversaries, in blastyng abroad their poison, and how necessarily therefore
the people of God are to be foreseasoned and confirmed with the co^terpoison of
truth against them, shall easily perceive this to be no idle or vain
Poetry, but a needful and Christian policy. This is more then enough to
the godly wise: He that gives increase to the Planter and Waterer, give a
blessyng here unto, that it may spread it self to his glory, and the increase
of his kingdom. This Newyeres day. 1583.

Thine in Christ. T.R.

G.S. To the Author.
Amongst a number of Cathechismes, which fly abroad, I have not read any,
either for shortness more compendious, or in matter more substantial, or in
manner of style more easy, or for the capacity of the simple more facile, then
this Metricall Cathechisine of yours, which lately came to my hands: which
though it were sent by you to your familiar friends, as a testimony to them
of your good will, (being at the first far from any purpose to have it come
to light, or to be published to others) yet presumyng upon your freendly
acceptance of my good meaning, I have adventured to put in printe, that a
work so needful for all, should not be made private to some few, but
communicated to many. And I doubt not but that the good acceptyng of these
firstlings of your labors, and the great profit which this small book
shall bring to the Church of GOD, will enbolden and animate you to proceed to
the publishyng of greater matters. For howsoever in humility you seek to
shrowde your self intra domesticos parietes, carefully and painfully keepyng
your self within the compass of your own charge, yet you cannot so hide your
rare and excellent gifts (I write without flaterie) but that profitably they
break for the to the aduau^cement of Gods kingdom, and great benefit of his
children. And I would wish (such is my desire to have others profited, as I
my self have been comforted and confirmed by you) that as you have been by
preaching the word, a fruitful labourer in Gods vineyarde, so you would
vouchsafe also by writing at your convenient opportunity, to do good to many,
who though they have not seen you, yet desire to be partakers of the fruits
of your labors. You are better known then you surmise, and more is expected
at your hands, then you imagine. Employe your Talentes every way to the
uttermost and apply your self to benefit not a private Congregation only,
but the whole body of the Church also, so far forth as it shall seem good
to your godly wifedome. I take not upon me to direct you, but I tell you
what I wish, that the same benefit which I myself and other your hearers,
have received by your preaching, might also by other your travails, redounde
to the comfort of them, who never heard you.

Your loving friend. G.S.

The first part.
WE live this life, to learn to live,
that is to know the way:
To be discharged before the lord,
for sin at Judgment day.
Again we live to honor God,
by care to do his will:
And not in recklesse brutishe life,
our fancies to fulfill.
The way to learn our true discharge,
is first our charge to know,
That is th'inditement of our sin,
and our deserved woe:
The meaning of Gods holy law,
indites me for my sin: The ten Commandments.

And does pronounce the fearful curse,
that I deserve therein.
God did enjoin me by his law,
to have no Gods but one:
That is to love, to fear, to pray,
and trust to God alone:
Next that I do devise no Leuit. 26.1. Exodus 32.4.8. We may not make any
signs as remembrance of Gods person, for the sign ca^ not agree with the
thing signfied Abac. 2^8. but of his love, (...) mercy, justice, (...)
deliverance, and^ we may have signs and remembrances, as Gene. 28.18.
sign,
or image of the Lord:
Or any thing to worship it,
but serve him by his word:
The third that both I think and speak,
of him with reverent fear:
In trifles not to make him God is made adge either by oath Heb. 6.16. or by
lottes, as in Cards and Dice, or in any other casual trial of controversies.
Prou. 16.33.
Judge,
by creatures not to swear.
The fourth to rest one day in seven,
Deuteronomy. 5.14.15
Gods works to muse upon:
And every day to rest from sin,
Heb. 49.10.
which is our work alone.
Next to ^^aye my par^^tes For besides our natural ^aren^es, Magistrates are
so called. Judge. 5.^. pastors. 1. Tim. 1.2. Master 1.2. King. 25.12. Old men.
1. Tim. 5.1.
all,
which rule me in Gods steed:
And I as Parent rule and Heb. 13.17. Gene. 18.19.
teach,
my charge with careful heed.
The sixth forbiddes my heart my hand,
or tongue to wreke my spite:
And bids me save by all these means,
the life of every wight.
The seventh condemns both thought and deed
and cause of wanton lust:
Commaundyng to suppress it still,
or live in wedlock just.
The eighth to shun the stelth of heart,
of craft or wrongful deed:
To labor with contented mind,
and help my brothers need.
The nineth all falshoode does forbid,
in witness, talk, or thought:
To speak it, or believe it, till
redress and truth be sought.
The tenth condemns both stain of birthe
and Romans 7.23.
first devise of sin:
Though neither action nor consent,
nor The first thoughts of sin are often, times odions to the godly so sone
as they arise, and yet they be sinful, because they are the wisdom of the
flesh, that is to say, enmity against god. Romans 6.7.
pleasure pass therein.
The second part.
BY she Law bewra^^th our imperfections.
this I see there can no flesh,
this perfect law fufill:
And yt in thought, in word, in deed,
I still offend Gods will.
And to my least ungodly thought,
Gods curse is due by right:
Which bryngs hell fire and woeful worm
that gnawes both day and night.
From these so everlasting pains,
no goods can ransom me:
Nor worldly woe nor works of mine,
from hell can set me free.
And though our God be merciful,
yet is he just and true:
And must of justice punish sin,
with plagues by justice due:
Which none is able to endure,
and save himself at length,
If he be but a Jude. 6.
creature,
and have no greater strength.
Wherefore our Christ becommyng man, Christ has done that for us which we
could not do for our selves.

his Godhead joined thereto:
That he might compass that for us,
which we could never do.
As man to take man's cause in hand,
and subject be to woe:
As God to vanquishe Death and Hell
and Satan overthrow.
And yet by this none saved are,
but that with faith vnfainde
Are sure Gods promise in his Christ,
shall firmly be maintainde.
This faith is full belief of heart, Faith.

upon Gods promise stayed:
And by the holy spirit of God,
into my soul conuayed.
Whereby I know that all that Christ,
has done pertains to me:
And is mine own, as if my self,
thereof could worker be.
By this my faith I see my sins,
forgiven, and plagued also:
For I am quitte, yet Christ for me,
this plague did undergo.
Thus God to me is merciful,
and just in Christ his son:
And counts me also clean and pure,
by that which Christ has done:
And this belief of Gods free grace,
does frame my thankful mind,
To serve my God with cheerfulness,
that was to me so kind.
This faith the Creed contains in somnie
which does us all direct: The Creed.

What to believe of God, and of
Gods Church his dear elect.
The third part.
The Eternal God the father of Christ
does all Christ's members take
To be his children with their hedde
for Christ their Sauiors sake. I believe in God the father,

Again, this God Almighty is, Almighty, make^ o^. etc. Heb. 1^.3.

'creatyng all of none:
And he in heaven in earth and hell,
does govern all alone.
Of Christ the son of God, and God, And in Jesus Christ, etc.

I steadfastly do hold:
That he by holy Ghost conceiude
did take our fleshly mold, Conceiu^d,

Of Virgin pure, Borne,
to be our pledge,
and so was free from sin:
And Romans 8.3.
all his life performde Gods Law,
for us that failde therein.
At length he was condemned, Suffered,
and cursed by hangyng on the Tree,
From Gods most fearful judgment bar,
and curse to set me free.
On cross he suffered (c) 1. Pet. 2.24. Math. 27.46. Crucified, Dead, Buried,
Descended,
hell, and death,
Gods wrath to pacify:
And that as he was dead for sin,
so I to sin mate die.
From grave the third day he arose, Rose again,

as conqueryng Death and Hell:
That I may rise to virtue first,
and last in heaven to dwell.
He did ascend, Ascended,
that so may I,
and intercession still
He makes for me, Heb. 10.14.
alonely by,
his blood which he did spill.
His father has endued him, Sits on the right hand.

both God and man with might,
To rule his Church by his decrees,
and all the world with right.
And therefore I believe at length, Shall come to judge,

that Christ as Judge shall come:
To quit his chosen Sheep, and damn,
the rest by righteous doom.
God holy Ghost I do believe, I believe in the holy Ghost.

does seal into my breast,
That Christ is mine, and killyng sin,
to virtue makes me pressed.
The Father Son and holy Ghost,
I call them God all three:
And yet one God because his word,
has so set down to me.
Gods Church or flock to person, place, Holy Catho.

or time particularly
Not tied is, God knows them all,
and loves them tenderly.
The same from Christ their hedde all gifts, Communion of Saints.

of soul and body draw
In Romans 12.3.
measure, for to help the rest,
by Christian mercies law.
To these forgiveness of their sins, Borgiuenesse,

in Christ his blood is given:
The raisyng of their flesh from dust, Resurrection, Life everlasting

and life with Christ in heaven.
The fourth part.
OF this my faith by preaching bredd
by preaching still I have
Increase, Sacraments.
and by the Sacraments,
which Christ as earnest gave
Unto his Church, whereby he binds
himself to ransom me:
And I by taking bind my self,
his servant for to be.
These are but two: in Baptism first
the water is our sign: 2. Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

And in the Supper of the Lord,
we have the bread and wine:
The water serves to teach that as, Baptism.

it washes clean our skin:
So Christ his death does cleanse my soul,
from guilt, and plague of sin.
So I and all are Baptizde, which
with Christ to sin are dead:
And raise d with him in righteousness,
a better life to lead.
The bread and wine do teach, The Lords Supper.
that as
without the natural food
Our thirst and hunger none can swage:
so Math 11.28.
naught but Christ his blood,
And suffryngs can refre she the settle,
with sin oppressed and pinde:
Which still does run into despair,
till Christ do come to mind.
But when with lively steadfast faith, Ioh. 6.40.

my Christ on cross I see:
And all his hellishe woeful pains,
that he endured for me:
Then is his flesh my meat in deed, Ioh. 6.47.54.

his blood then do I drink:
If that my soul refreshed be,
when on his death I think.
What thing can then this food of soul,
more lively represent,
Then food of body bread and wine:
and so a Sacrament
It is in deed, in nature not
transformde, but use alone:
Not flesh of Christ, but signifiyng,
that flesh we feed upon:
For if the bread be turned to Christ,
in Godhead, flesh, and bone,
By force of consecratyng words,
then Christ, which is but 1. Cor. 8.6.
one.
Shall Be so many Christ's, The last counsel of Trens affirms, that in every
piece of the consecrated host, is whole Christ God and man, and curses all
that deny it. Cano. 3 de. Sacamento Euch.
as crummes
were ever consecrated:
And of the substance of the bread,
Christ's Godhead is created.
His manhood subject to no Luc. 24.39.40.
sense,
no flesh, or bone shall be:
So both his natures overthrown,
by this we plainly see.
To eat this food I must prepare,
my soul by greef for sum:
And true desire in holiness,
a new life to be ginne.
Next, faith must teach me that my sins,
in Christ have full release:
And I with all men, even my foes,
in heart must be at peace.
The fifth part.
THis care is chiefly then required,
when I do take this food:
But yet I must frequent the works,
that holy be and good
Continually, for though in Christ,
my full redemption lie:
I work not for my self in deed,
yet God to glorify,
And for to she we my thankful heart,
to make my cassyng sure:
To Isa. 38.^.
help the helpless, and to Christ,
some others to allure.
And these good works by Gods precept,
must still be warrantable:
And flow from faith, or else to God
they be abominable.
Amongst these works our prayer is not
the least, which does avail
To strength my faith exceadyngly:
for God, Tit. 1.2.
who can not fail,
In pledge of love, does Ioh. 16.24.
bid me ask
of him, in Christ, with faith,
And earnest importunity,
what he by promise says
That he will give, and I shall have,
for me what may be best:
And to that end has left to his,
this form of true request.
OVt father which art in the heavens, The Lords prayer.

all praise to thee be given:
Thy Church increase, thy will be done
of us as it is in heaven.
Give us this day that may suffice,
our sins to thee release:
As we in heart forgive our foes,
and mean to live in peace.
Lord yield us not to suares of sin,
from Satan set us free.
For kingdom, power, and glorte is thine,
O Lord so let it be.
The sum of all.
THe Law be wraies my deadly wou^d
by sum, whereof the cure
The Creed does teach by Jesus Christ,
the Sacraments make sure,
That by that means I cured shall be,
the prayer of the Lord;
Confirms Gods love, because he bids,
me ask, and does accord
To grant me ought that may be good,
for me in any wise:
Like as a father to his child,
no needful thing denies.
Or else thus.
The sixth part.
THe state of all mankind to God,
mate be resembled well
In some respects, unto a Prince,
and subjects that rebel.
The Law on treason death decrees,
and they in ward are cast:
Till time of execution come;
but yet the Prince at last
Of his free mercy does devise,
those traitors to preserve,
And eke as tustice does him bind,
not from the Law to swerve.
The Death that Law on treason setts,
his only Son shall dye:
And he by this will rescue all,
that will be saved thereby.
This pardon sealed he proclaims,
and bids them ask beside,
What thing soever he may give,
it shall not be denied.
Of this free mercy some take heide,
which know the Princes trothe
And faithfulness, some others are,
to leave their dungeon loathe,
And rather choose of traitorous heart,
to dye then for to take:
The grace so freely proffered them:
some others lewdly make
This promise plain of noue effect,
as though it could not be,
That he should mean good soothe with the^,
that dealt so traiterouslie:
Or that his son would dye for them,
or if he did, it might:
Suffice the sentence of the Law,
from death to set them quight.
The rest do hope by other means,
though this be clean neglected,
By pity or their own deserts,
that they shall be accepted.
Of which at length none saved are,
but they that fly unto
The Princes pardon: all the rest,
their sentence undergo.
Even so all we by sin have been,
rank rebels to our God:
The Law pronounces hell thereon,
and we have here abode
Upon this earth as twere in ward,
till execution day:
But yet our God of his free grace,
has found a wondrous way
To save us and perform his Law,
by yeeldyng up to die
His only Son to be our pledge,
and able surety,
To pay the debts of all the world:
here of the patent letter
He has by Scriptures given to us:
and to confirm us better
He settes his Sacraments thereto,
this pardon so to seal
And farther bidds us boldly ask,
and he will not repeal
Our lawful suits: upon his word,
and promise some do stay,
And claim his pardon, knowing sure,
that he will not vnsate
His promise made: some others like
this yearthly dungeon well:
And for to dye, they spare not still,
most lewdly to rebel.
Some others think it but a tale,
that God such grace should show
To them that had deserved so ill;
and these do make a mow
Of Christ his death: the rest do hope
God will not be so rough,
Or by their good evil works, and toys
to please him well enough.
But these shall be defeated all,
except those first alone
That do take hold of grace in Christ,
and only stay thereon.
And as those faithful subjects saved
by trustyng to that grace
Which Princes pardon offers them.
cannot in any case
But show their thankful heart to Prince
that dealt so graciousite,
And wholly for to please their king,
hereafter do apply
Themselves: even so the Christian saved
by faith in Christ his death,
Does consecrate himself to God
as long as life and breath
Does last, to serve him saithfully,
that has him so deserved,
And by so dear a ransom has
from death and hell preserved.
When you have done singyng so much as you will, it were good to add that
prayed for the Church of God, in the 28. Psalm 9. verse.

Thy people and thine heritage,
Lord bless, guide, and preserve:
Increase them lord and rule their hearts
that they may never swerve.

