THE UNFORTUNATE POLITIC, First written in French By C. N.

Englished by G. P.



OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD for JOSEPH GODWIN An. Dom. 1638.

TO THE COURTEOUS AND INGENIOUS READER.
THou have here presented to thy acceptance, a brief History of the most
remarkable Actions and Fortunes of this irreligious and improsperous
Politician: By Birth (as the most approved Authors contend) an Idumean; a
nation of most implacable malice and hostility, against God's chosen people; by
usurpation and borrowed title, a King of Judea; but in Fact and Government, a
most bloody and barbarous tyrant: was (...) all (...) affection to his (...)
and alliance; (whereof (...) one (...) his Treachery or Fury: without all
civil or legal regard of his people; and in one word, after the execution of
those Infant Martyrs, the fittest Instrument to have involved the son of God
himself (had that horrid attempt of his been feasible in one union massacre if
innocent man kind.

The Almighty providence was pleased to exalt him to an higher station, that
like some malignant Contet or Prodigy of nature, he might be more eminently
discovered, and possess the remotest and dullest eyes, with admiration and
horror. But a land: mark that shows a Rock, is as useful in navigation, as a
compass that guids directly, and examples instruct as well by avoidance as
imitation: And if those Ancients, that erected statues and trophies by the way
side, to preserve the memory of their worthies did wisely to place Gibbets
there also, to affright passengers with the memory of notorious malefactors;
then certainly a most effectual spur to Religion and Virtue may her drawn from
the contemplation and horror of this Monsters impleties and vices.

The truth of the history being selected out of Josephus and other approved
writers, may pass without further warrant: The collection and composition,
which is as the lineaments and colors, (or indeed the spirit and motion of the
picture) we owe to a foreign, but a judicious and fortunate Pencill, of one,
whose name among the most discerning spirits, has affectionately received the
highest attributes, the judicious and eloquent Causinus; who collecting the
materials and substance from more ancient and authentic records, has added
shape and varnish according to the Idea of his own judgment: And exposing it
to the world in a French attire; I presume it will prove nothing the less
attractive ^^ graceful to an English eye. The habit it wears in English, it
owes to a Translatour, that needed not have suppressed his name, if his modesty
would permit him to accept that Testimony, which I think, he has justly
gained, to have retained in this last draught, (so near as imitation can
express Copies, or a second draught taken from a former Picture, can match
that which was first taken from the face,) the original and native beauty, and
in this small Piece to have had the happiest hand.

So that if either truth and singularity of example, Art and Elegancy of
composition, Activenesse and life of expression, Fidelity and Felicity of
translation may affect thee, I hope this short History, if it fail of thy
applause and acclamation, shall assuredly find thy excuse and acceptance. To
either of which, (as thy judgment shall incline thee) I leave it, and Thee
(after an hour or two's vacancy to this recreation,) to thy more serious and
useful employments.

Farewell.
THE VNFORTVNATE POLITIC, OR THE LIFE OF HEROD
I Have cast my eyes and thoughts on diverse Histories, but never could light on
any that might better bring great ones really to apprehend how much they are
deceived, who sway a Court, or State by pure policy, and humane wisdom,
squaring religion to their own ends, and interests, then the life and death of
this unfortunate King of Jury. He had a natural judgment of a deep reach; an
understanding, that could pierce unto, and fathom the most wonderful and
mysterious practices; and a courage mounted to the highest degree and pitch
that can be expressed: A man that had sprung out of nothing, yet built his
fortunes as high as a Throne, and established it amidst so various, so knotty,
and intricate affairs, that he made himself to be admired even of the most
understanding heads the^ in the world. But since he built on that impious
maxim, That he ought to make Law and Religion his stalkinghorse for to serve
his own purposes, he led a life as full of villainy, as disquiet, which ended
with the most woeful death that imagination can reach unto to conceive. What
made me yet to resolve upon this History (which I have taken out of Josephus,
and some other smaller fragments, and Commentaries, spinning it out according
to the copiousnesse of my style, and not strictly tying my self to any exact
translation) was, that (beside the Unfortunate Politic) you read there
Innocence persecuted and wearied in the life of a Lady that was the very
mirror of Patience; and whom I propose here in the first rank, as one of the
greatest Ornaments of our holy Court. It is not here without reason, that I
would cull the fairest Roses amidst the sharpest Thorns; show her serenity,
and calmnesse in the greatest tempest of a troublesome state; and seek a honey
Comb even in the jaws of a Lion: since from Herod's Court I go to fetch out a
chaste, and patient Mariamne, the very Tablet of Innocence most despightfully
entreated. The patience of this poor Queen deserves to be consecrated with
the pen of a Diamond to the Temple of Eternity; since it is able to eclipse
the glory of the greatest Heroes, to transcend the power of Rhetoric, and to
ravish the spirits, even of those that use not to admire ought that is obvious
and vulgar. God who rayses the glory of his chosen on the foundation (as it
were) of the greatest miseries, seeing the soul of this Princess to be of a
most hardy, and noble temper, thought fit to give her a spacious field for
combat, that so she might win the more glorious and triumphant Palms of
patience: And to this end he gave her wicked Herod to her husband, a
Persecutor, a barbarous, and infamous Executioner, but by so much the more
suitable to the patience of Mariamne, by how much the more like a Persecutor,
and a Headsman then a husband, and a head. To know the strength, and roughness
of this anvill, we must know the hammer that beat upon it: The better to speak
the singular goodness of this Queen, we must oppose unto it an anti-parallel,
the malice of Herod; we must observe how this disloyal person, holding his
Life, Scepter, and Crown from the house of Mariamne, in recompense thereof,
took away from her both Scepter, Crown, and Life. After he had ripped out her
bowels (as I may so speak) putting to death her nearest blood before her eyes,
and at last he flings her too, all weltring in her blood, upon the pile (where
her kindred, and brethren were made a holocaust) to be the last sacrifice to
his hellish fury; yet could he never shake her invincible patience, and
constancy. Each one speaks of Herod, as a man composed of clay tempered with
blood, as of a Tyrant that would murder mercy it self: But every man knows
not the art, and subtlety, which he used to get into possession of his
Mariamne, and David's Scepter; oppressing the one with all Ingratitude, and
swaying the other with extreme Tyranny.

About fifty years before the Nativity of our Savior, the kingdom of Judah,
that since David stood on its bottom near a thousand years (though in that
period it often had suffered strange ecclipses, and changes, being often rent,
and sore shaken, and by those concussions often knit again, and took deeper
root,) found its Tomb, and utter ruin in the fatal discord of two Brothers.
Hyrcanus an honest man, but a bad King, did then bear rule: he had neither
strength, resolution, nor courage; as coward like in his charge, as innocent in
his manners, and conversation. His over-facile demeanor made him degenerate
into a kind of stupidity, and though unable to do any harm, yet did he suffer
himself to be an instrument of all the insolences that were committed, for
that he was too ductile, and capable of the impressions of another: Being
apprehensive of this his weakness, he casts the honor, and burden of the
Realm (with all willingness) on the shoulder of his brother Aristobulus, a
man valiant, and hearty, but who had more imploiments then good success.
During this declining and tottering state of Royalty, Palestina was much eyed,
and courted of her Neighbors, and above all, by Antipater (the father of this
Herod) an Idumean by birth, in's manners an Arabian, a factious spirit, well
monied, and by his stratagems able to overturne a great Empire; who had of a
long time on foot a project upon the Realm of Judea, he well foresaw that it
would be a hard task for him to put in practice his wicked designs, as long
as that bold Lion Aristobulus stood on the top, or pinnacle; but if he were
once dismounted, and Hircanus restored to the throne, then all should be at his
arbitrament and disposal. What does the Arabian, but go about sowing the
seeds of rebellion in the hearts of the people against their Liege Lord
Aristobulus? Telling them, they were disloyal cowards, to permit their lawful
King Hircanus to be dethroned (in whose hand nature had put the Scepter,) and
the Kingdom to be transferred on a mutinous, and a turbulent spirit, who ere
long would make them the wracks and desolation of all Palestine; that they had
abandoned a King, whom they could not tax with ought, but excess of goodness,
to admit of one, who having entered at the gate of treachery, could not reign
over them without the trouble, and combustion of his country, when good
Hircanus would divest himself of his right, they were to blame to co^descend
to his modesty, who was by so much the worthier to rule, by how much he deemed
himself the more unworthy: The glory which he did fly from in undervaluing
his own person, should have pursued him to his grave. If they did object
against him too much gentleness, it was the more agreeable to the piety, and
sweet behavior of the Jews. If the Doves were to choose them a King, they would
ever make a choice of a Stalue, before a Sparrow-hawk. This subtle head, by
such like remonstrances found many that gave ear unto him, partly amongst
those that loved innovation, and partly too, among those that were carried away
with the pretended justice of the cause, and none would yet epsy his drift,
which under the color of public good, went about to erect a Monarchy for
himself, or his heirs. Having now thrust the iron so far into the fire, he
studied how to win the heart of Hyrcanus with all manner of obsequiousness,
and testimonies of friendship, which was not difficult to purchase; this Prince
permitting himself to be overruled by those that would make any semblance of
good will toward him.

Behold him now (become as it were) Lord Protector, or Guardian of this
flexible spirit, when under pretense of love he possesses in that manner, that
all the actions of Hyrcanus past current no longer by any other authority, then
the directions and counsels of Antipater. Nevertheless when he began to egg
him forward for to make war on his brother for the recovery of the royal
Throne, he found his heart so far benumbd that he had much ado to warm it,
and strike a spark of courage into his soul, for the excessive coldness and
the unmanlinesse of his Nature. But at length he preached one day effectually,
and did edify much, telling him, that this quitting of his kingdom, which he
had translated to his brother, was a thing that could not stand with his
Honor, and safety of Life. What eye would not distill tears to see him in
that contempt, and misery, while his brother lived in riot, and pomp: This was
to confound the Laws of nature; this was to authorize tyranny. Petty thieves
are cast into a Dungeon, or Stocks, and Aristobulus that had usurpt a kingdom,
rufled in silk, and sparkled with Diamonds.

A Kingdom was a shirt which a man should not shift off, but with his life:
they were the tales and dreams of idle talking Philosophy, that Crowns were
lined with thorns, whereas they are Rubies and Diamonds, that never yet
molested any man's head. The life which then Hyrcanus lead, would better become
an Essean Monk, or a Capuchin, then a King: And to conclude, that all the
people desired with passion to see him reenstated in his fathers Throne. He
possessed his ears with so powerful Rhetorique, that he began now to gain
upon him But there were many reasons, which held him in suspense. The one was
his oath, by which he had renounced his Royalty; the other want of sufficient
strength for the enterprise. For the oath, Antipater soon resolved him of that,
telling him, he swore a heinous crime, and there was nothing could obliege him
to the performance; and for strength, he acquainted him with the auxiliary
forces of lusty Arabians, which he could levy at his command. While he yet
staggerd at this unsteedy footing, he went on to breath into his heart black
mistrusts, and jealousies touching his brother, as though (after he had preyed
upon his estate) he had an enterprise upon his life; surmising conspiracies to
be plotted against him: and this he did with such art, and slight, that
Hyrcanus yielded to him, and gave him full commission of war, or peace, to do
according as it liked him best. This concluded, the Apple of discord was flung
into the midst: Antipater failed not to implore the aid of Aretas King of the
Arabs, who comes up with a mighty army, which like an inundation overruns all
Palestine, committing overruns all Palestine, committing all outrage, and
hostility, sacking and depopulating (without mercy) all the way he went,
insomuch, that he drove Aristobulus to a very narrow strait, beseiging him
within Jerusalem the Metropolis, and Royal City.

But as the greater Serpent devours the lesser; so happens it hereupon, that
the Romans under the conduct of Pompey the Great, now displaying their
dreadful Eagles on the plains of Syria, leading an army of fire, before which
all other Roytlets or minor Princes were but as chafe, make this Arabian glad
to retire within his own territories, they march on victoriously without
control, and interpose themselves to prescribe laws, to pronounce peace, or
war, how, and to whom soever they pleased. The two brothers made all Courtship
to the Roman, to purchase his favor, and amity; each one striving eagerly to
win him of his side, well perceiving that the obtaining of this would speedily
put a period to the controversy. Aristobulus (as the more generous hold, and
King-like) at the first accessefound the more favor, in regard that among
other largesses, he presented him with a vine al of massy gold, one of the
rarest, and most exact workmanship in the world, which afterward, for a long
time served for an ornament in the Capitol. At length behold both brothers
prostrate at Pompey's feet, contesting both, and pleading not for a Hamlet, or
Vineyard, but a Kingdom; nothing suspecting that while they staked their
fortunes in the hands of a stranger, (who knew no other law but his ambition)
instead of Umpire he would play the Vulture, and clasp them in his tallons.
Antipater seeing at first the balance to perpend to Aristobulus his side, as
one that the Romans had reason to hope would be more serviceable, and
advantageous to their designs, never ceased to decry him, to cast black
aspertions on his reputation, and to work the Romans to a mistrust of his
inclination toward them, still fawning, and couching like a Spaniell before
Pompey: insomuch that Aristobulus foreseeing that this pernicious spirit,
abusing the name, and weakness of his brother, would sell both to the Roman,
sets himself on his guard; where he had but too much resolution, and too little
strength to cope with the Army of so potent an Empire. This poor Prince being
overmatched, and sinking under the weight of such an encounter, was taken
captive, bound in chains with his two soones and so many daughters, and led
away to Rome to furnish a triumph for Pompey: Jerusalem is made tributary, the
Pontificate conferred upon Hyrcanus, but all the authority committed to the
hands of Antipater. This was a spectacle that drew tears eve^ from those, who
before times could not affect Aristobulus, to see this unfortunate King in
bolts, laden with iron, together with his Princely sons, and the poor Ladies
his daughters, all the heirs of their fathers misfortunes who were, leaving
their native country, where they reigned in such Honor, for to seek through so
uncouth and tedious voyages by sea and ^and, their thraldom or death, which is
the more ordinary wish of unhappy wights.

Antipater reapes the bays of this victory, and begins (though as yet staind
with blood) to establish his little Monarchy which he had been so long a
co^triving. Hyrcanus seemed like an old sepulcher which retained nothing but
the name, or inscription. All things were effected by him in appearance, though
not any thing indeed: The other entertained the Romans out of his Exchequer,
bestowed presents, sent, and received Ambassadors, practiced confederacies,
corrupted the forces of his adversaries and rid his way of all the rubs, and
impediments that might oppose his advancement, and greatness; and made it
believed that this mild Pontiffie was prime mover and author of all. Then
seeing himself each day to grow stronger in repute and authority, the better
to assure the Realm for his sons after his decease, he made the elder
(namely Phaselus) governor of Jerusalem, and on Herod his younger son he
conferred the Prefectureship of Galile. In short time after, when he had sucked
up all the wind with his flatulent ambition had engendered, and being now at
his non ultra, not knowing which way to bend his machinations, he sucked up a
glass of poison that was ministed unto him at a feast by the device of Malicus
his enemy. Behold here the issue of humane practices! Those who are drunk with
ambition, and are mad for Honors which they seek to arrive at by mischievous
plots, and all the travel of body and mind, are like those little bubbles
which arise on the surface of the water in a tempest, they swell, and burst in
a moment. Antipater being dead, his two sons, Phaselus and Herod share
equally in the succession, each of them maintains his own station firmly, and
studies to temper the matter so as to get Hyrcanus still to act the same part
to represent a King. Herod was no sooner entered upon his charge, even while his
father was yet living (being not full fifteen years of age) showed early what
in time he would prove by some excursions of his inbred disposition, which
sometimes he made to sallie out, like those little streaks, and sparks of heat
in the air, that burst out of a cloud, and then after flash in lightning. He
was of a fraudulent, and malignant spirit, ambitious even to a degree of
madness, whose fingers did always itch to be imbrued in blood, and slaughter;
and indeed he stained his tender years and the prologue of his reign with
effusion of humane blood, putting to the sword Ezekias, who indeed lived in the
esteem of a Rover and common robber, but he cut in pieces many other Jews with
him without discerning the guiltless, fed the guilty, which caused that many
innocent souls were involved in this common ruin. The mothers of these people
who were massacred by Herod, stirred not out of the Temple, lamenting, and with
their heir disheveld, demanding justice from Hyrcanus, who was but an Idol,
or Statue of Majesty. Notwithstanding being importuned with the cries of these
distressed women, and set on by some of his Nobility, he caused Herod to be
summond for to appear in judgment. In this action it was well that this young
Prince showed some resolution, and gave some assurance of courage. Others that
were accused came to this Parliament of Judea, all sad and dejected, but he
arrived thither as to a feast or Theater, attended with a flourishing convoy
clad in Skarlet, all perfumed and his hair frizel'd, and moreover with Letters
of recommendation from the Romans, which were writ in the style of authority,
and military language, commanding the Judges to acquit him without any further
process. He was scarce fifteen years of age, and yet with his very presence
dashed the Judges, and Advocates so out of countenance that of all those that
had provided long haranges against him, there was not one that durst open his
mouth while he was there. One of the Judges whose name was Sameas, a right
honest man, and of more courage then all the rest, spoke aloud to King
Hyrcanns, who was there present: Idoe not wonder that this young Lord appears
before this Tribunal in such equipage every man would secure him self as well
as he may; but I do wonder Sir, that you and your Counsel should omit this
demeanor, as if he came hither not to be judged, but to cut the Judges
throats. You will now pardon him in favor, but he will one day assacinate you
in justice. And indeed of this whole Senate there escaped not one that Herod did
not put to death, when he had got the full power of the kingdom, except him
only that had delivered his opinion of him with this bold simplicity. It is
recorded of this Sameas, how that some years after a question being made of
receiving Herod to be their King; when others did stiffely oppose it, he spoke
freely that he gave his suffrage to Herod, and as they were wondering at the
speech, marvel not at the matter (quoth he) God would give you a King in his
anger, and he could not find one naughtier then Herod: He is the scourge
which you do want to chastise your infidelity. Hyrcanus then seeing the Judges
somewhat animated by the speech of Sameas and to be more inclined to the side
of lustice then Mercy, made him secretly to slink away, for he loved him
entirely, and so hatched the egg of a Cockatrice within his own bosom. Herod
who came not any way behind his Father in policy, following his examples and
practices adhered firmly unto the Romans, winning them by all manner of
observances, and entertaining Hyrcanus with all pleasance, and flattery. The
kingdom of Judea seemd as yet to be far enough from his reach, Phaselus as
the elder held the better part of it: Aristobulus whom you have seen led away
in chains to Rome, had yet two sons, whereof the elder called Alexander was
father to chaste Mariamne, whose patience we do here blazon; the other was
Antigonus, who spunne Herod a spindle full of matter to untwist. But he was
soon rid of both; for unfortunate Alexander successor of his father
Aristobulus his disasters, being come to the field with certain forces, which
he had picked up as well as his weak fortunes enabled him, was oppressed by the
Romans, who came to the assistance of Herod. Antigonus being got loose from
captivity, wherein he was detained at Rome, together with his father
Aristobulus, cut out much employment too for Herod. For casting himself into
the arms of the Parthians, he made them so many promises, and swelled them
with such hopes that they undertook to invest him with the kingdom: and
forthwith they made preparations by Sea and Land, and prevailed so far both by
force, and cunning, that they chased out Hyrcanus, and Phaselus: Herod very
narrowly escapt his life, and though he had a courage of steel, yet was he so
amazed with this surprise, that he went very near to make himself away.
Hyrcanus was very coursly handled by the command of his Nephew Antigonus, he
had his ears cropped off, and so was made forever incapable of the Pontificate.
Phaselus, Herod's brother, being so enraged with this unexpected chance of
fortune, dashed his brains against a stone.

Herod, who had always stuck as close to the Romans, as the lvy to the wall,
seeing his affairs in such a plunge and extreme hazard, implores their aid,
and complains in most pathetick expressions of the violence of Antigonus, the
incursions, and hostility of the Parthians, puts them in mind of the good
services of his father Antipater, and promises on his part the Ocean, and all
the scaly Legions. Which letters found so good success, that he (beyond all
hopes and expectation) was proclaimed King of Judea, and Antigonus an enemy to
the Roman estate because a fugitive, and allied to the Parthians. Herod pursues
him with hue and cry, being assisted with the forces of the Roman Empire.
Antigonus still unfortunate in all adventures, after a fierce encounter, and
long resistance was taken prisoner, and was the first of any king that by the
command of M. Anthony was executed in a manner so unbefitting his quality, and
to the Romans unusual, leaving his head upon a scaffold in the City of
Antioch, for no other reason then seeking to recover his fathers inheritance:
But Strabo says that M. Anthony knew no other way to make Herod to be agniz'd
for King; both for that there were yet living some of the blood Royal, that
were capable of the Scepter; and for that the people loved their natural King,
but hated the stranger.

This Tragoedy ended, Herod mounted on the top of fortunes wheel. Lo^ all the
thorns in his way (as he thinks) now grub'd up. There now remained of the
Illustrious race of the H^smoneans, but an aged and weather-beaten Prince, one
infant Boy, and two Girls to be defeated. Hyrcanus was that aged Prince, who
intruth drew an unwilling breath, whose head many turmoiles, and vicissitudes
of fortune hastened his hoary hair, he was then held captive in the Parthians
hands; but the King, though a Barbarian, had compassion on a mild, debonaire
nature in so deplored a case, so that he permitted him to live within the
walls of Babylon, with all the liberty as might be desired. This poor Prince
who lived all his life time without any ambition did bear this change of
fortune with an equal temper, and tenor of mind. The Jews who lived in that
Kings dominions seeing him so maimed, and in a manner excoriated with stripes,
poor and forlorn, yet gave him the respect of a King and expressed such
honor, and reverence toward him, that he found a kingdom (in a manner even
in his captivity.) Herod who saw that this man might stand him yet in some
steed against those that could disquiet and annoy his anxious and unsettled
estate dispatcheth an Ambassador strait to the King of the Parthians, with
many fair presents, and Letters fraught with sugared words, and soothing
complements; wherein he does beseech him not to bereave him of that only and
best contentment that he had in the world but to ad this courtesy unto his
former favors wherewith he had obliged him: Hyrcanus, says he, was his good
Benefactor, his Protector, and Father, and since God had now given some repose
unto his affairs, it would be a singular comfort unto him to communicate the
Scepter, the cares and pleasures of a King with one so trusty and so worthy to
be beloved. The Parthian King willing to gratify Herod whom he saw to be
supported by the Roman Empire (which he did more fear for its puissance, then
honor for its valor) granted full leave to Hyrcanus to go whither he would.
He (good man) consulted with the principal men of his nation, who did
altogether dissuade him from it, but the easines of his good nature (which did
always swallow the bait without heeding the hook) yielded to those supposed
courtesies of Herod, and so returned straight to Jerusalem, where he was
received with all demonstrations of joy, and amity. Behold no wall the Royal
family in the hands of this barbarous usurper. Hyrcanus had but one daughter,
who took not after her father kind, for she was extreme haughty, and in this
servitude did fret, and champ upon the bit, with much discontent, she was the
mother of two children, a Boy and a Girl, his name was Aristobulus, and hers
Mariamne, who was after married to Herod. Mariamne was esteemed the most
beautiful Princess in the world. For Gellius who went about to survey the
rarest features in the world, for to return a List of them to M. Anthony,
having well scanned the most excellent pieces of Nature, when he saw Mariamne,
he protested that all other beauties were course, and cast in a mould of earth,
in comparison of this which seemed to him to have dropped from the spheres, and
to have been drawn by some divine, and immortal Limmer. This man saw but the
bark, and casket, and yet was ravished with admiration; but her comeliness of
body was nothing in comparison of the noble qualities of her soul. This was a
tender Imp of the stock of the famous Machabees, well verst in Gods laws,
discreet, modest, and respectfull, that as Susanna, but above all courageous
and patient; living in the Court of Herad as Job upon the dunghill. Never was
beauty, and goodness so discountenanced, and unhappy in the fortunes of one
person. This creature that might have been courted by so many Princes, that
might have had such attendance ever ready at her feet, had now Herod for her
Lord, who had nothing of a man but skin, and shape; and it was even all one to
couple the Lamb with the Lion, the Dove with the Hawk, and tie the living to
the dead, joining the^ mouth to mouth, as to wed such a Lady to such a Monster.
But he that had now the power in his own hand, sues for her very passionatly,
both for her unparalled beauty, and moreover the better to strengthen his
estate, considering that the alliance of this young Lady, who descended from so
great kindred, would add honor to him, and his house, who was but lately
sprung up, and might make him to place more confidence in the lews, and make
them more loving, and loyal to him.

Hyrcanus the Grandfather of Mariamne, and Alexandra her mother, seeing that
Herod had now got his head above the waters, and was become master of his
affairs, having now got the Scepter into his own hands, although by tyranny,
and intrusion; yet they measuring all by his place, and fortunes, not by his
person and conditions, judged that this marriage might be yet for their
advantage, and that his wife might supple his harsh nature, and make him more
favorable to the Royal house. This noble maid foresaw well that to put her
into the hands of Herod, was to cast her into the Lions jaws: But not to
contradict those to whom she owed her being, and to obey the laws of
necessity, she submitted her neck to the yoke, fortifying her royal heart
against all the storms that seemed to threaten and come thronging upon her.
Behold her now married! Herod loves her, as the Huntsman does his Venison for
his own ends, and benefit: not loosing by love one grain of his former
ambition, or cruelty. This perverse thing held a kingdom like a woolfe by the
ears, still fickle, and shaking, and when his affairs seemed to be well
settled, he studied nothing but how to rid himself of those, whom he had
stripped naked of their fortunes, and strength. His Queen could find no respect,
nor could she any whit mollify, and reclaim his savage conditions; he showed
how little affection he bare to her soly, when he wrought for his own pretended
interests, at that time when it was debated whom to Surrogate to be grand
Pontifie in liew of H^^^nus who (by his late deformation) being irregular in
the law, was excluded from the Altar. Herod saw every day before his eyes in
his own Court young Aristobulus, the only brother of his wife a Prince every
way accomplished, and generally designed for the Tiare, yet he casts his eyes
abroad and goes to seek beyond Euphrates in the City of Babylon a foreign Jew
named Ananell, and created him chief Priest. This was a pill which Alexandra
the mother of Aristobulus, and Mariamne could not easily swallow. It was in
vain to candy over the business: She saw manifestly the rejection of her
house, in that her son (notwithstanding so many obligations) was in a manner
dispossessed of an honor, which blood and nature, and the general vote of the
world did call him unto, and to be bestowed on a man of no worth, no repute.
She could not well repress her anger from breaking out, and that in a higher
strain then the miseries of the times, and malice of Herod would suffer
unquestioned. Mariamne all this while enjoying the tranquillity of her noble
mind, goes upon a day unto the King, and with her natural gracefulness, and
sweet carriage tells him, that the prop, and stay of her house was sore fhaken,
and greatly weakened, and at the present in such a plight that she had no joy to
hold a Scepter any longer: She desired only she might quit the world with
honor: Had he then bestowed the Miter on her brother, he had advanced a
creature, whom he could not stand in fear of, his Scepter being thereby the
more secured, and of whom he could not (in all reason) but hope the best, who
was but young, and tender as wax (being in his own hand) she could temper, and
stamp what impressions he pleased. This act would have made him reign in
hearts as well as Provinces, when men should see him the father, and protector
of the young son of Hyrcanus, whose virtues he had always hououred. Lastly,
that the honor which did redound to her by his alliance could not seem to her
consummate, so long as she saw her own blood debarred from those honors, and
promotions which he could place them in, without any prejudice to his own
estate.

Herod suffered himself to be won for that time by the charming language of
Marinmne, and when he had well pondred the business, after mature
deliberation, he resolved to confer the Pontificate on young Aristobulus his
brother in law, which was performed with great solemnity. He assembles his
friends in the Palace hall; then calling for Alexandra, he made a set speech
against her in the presence of them all, much co^plaining of her behavior, and
telling them that she studied nothing but how to thwart, and disquiet his
affairs, and to take from him a Scepter which Heaven made him to purchase with
much travel, and sweat, for to put it into the hands of an Infant to the
prejudice of the Queen her daughter: nevertheless he could forget injuries,
but could not forget his nature, which was to do well to those that sought to
do him harm. Intestimony and confirmation hereof, he conferres the
Pontificate on her son, his purpose being never any other, and the Surrogation
of Ananel made with no other intention then to continue for a time, while he
did expect the child should grow to riper years. This poor mother ambitious
according to and beyond the nature of her sex (upon this tender of the
Pontificate) was so transported with joy, that her heart melted at her eyes,
and thereupon avowed freely to Herod, that she attempted all the means possible
to retain the Tiare in the royal house, judging it a matter very unbefitting
to transfer it another way: but as for the Kingdom that she never pretended
any right to it, and that such designs were far from her thoughts: when it
would please God to sequester her from the world she would dye with a contented
heart, leaving her son great Pontifie, and her daughter Queen. Moreover if she
had lasht it out beyond the bounds of duty and decency in uncivil speeches,
that she was excusable, as being a mother very tenderly affected toward a son
that deserved to be beloved, the mother in law of a King to whom such a near
affinity would permit some more liberty of speech, and the daughter of a King
to whom servitude was such a tough morsel, that her stomach could not well
digest: and since he did deal fo friendly with her, that he should have no
occasion hence forth to complain of her contumacy, and disobedience. Hereupon
they join hands, and behold them now very good friends. But alas how like are
the friendships of this world to the felicity of it: Worldly friendship is
fickle and deceitful, and worldly felicity hangs on a rotten Cable, and has
its foundation on the Quick-fands. This poor mother rejoiced for a little
tickling of her ambition, but could not perceive that her son was not a
Priest indeed, but a sacrifice to the cruelty of Herod. Wise Mariamne, who by
long experience had learned to hold prosperity still in suspicion, would not
permit her heart to be so dilated, nor give the reins to her joys, but that
she armed her self each day against the revolt of fottune. The feast of
Tabernacles which is so solemnly celebrated among the Jews, being come, Ananel
after he had served a while for a Cipher is shamefully discarded. Aristobulus
begins to exercise his function: He was then but seventeen years of age, but
of a very tall stature, well proportioned, and straight as a Palm Tree,
glorious as a Star, and very much resembling his father: When the people saw
him accoutred in his Pontificalibus, which were full of Majesty, marching up to
the Altar, and performing his office with such gravity and decency, he seemed
to them like a new Sun that issued out of the Clouds, and came to guild the
world, which was before enwrapt in gloomy darkness. The hearts of all the
Hebrews which had groaned under the pressures of civil wars, did now spread
like Roses by the favorable aspect of this young Pontifie. His natural
comeliness enchafed (as it were) within his Majestich Robes did cast an
incredible luster, and stateliness, which did dazzle the eyes of the
spectators. Some beheld him with a wist, and earnest look, remaining like
statues, but yet their tears proved that their eyes were not of marble. Others
did betray their affections by many dumb emblems, and inarticulate expressions.
Others gave vent to their joys, and their mouths delivered what their hearts
conceived; not being able to forbear acclamations, though somewhat too free in
respect of the times; yet pardonable in their simple affection. They called to
mind the prowess of those ancient Macchabees, who had redeemed them from
Idolatry; they knew how that poor Hyrcanus was but a Ghost, or shadow
surviving his own funeral. They had fresh in memory the Grandfather of this
young Pontifie, the great Aristobulus, who was led away manacled, and fast
bound in cords like a Gallie-slave to Rome. They were not ignorant how that
Alexander his father, and his uncle Antigonus had lost their lives in opposing
the usurpation of a stranger. This young Prince alone remained, that had escapt
so many wracks, and they saw that in his youth did live and spring forth the
hopes of their country, and (as it is easy to believe what we love) they
persuaded themselves, that Herod who at the beginning demanded the Realm in
the name of this young Prince Aristobulus, was now to relinquish the booty,
yielding to equity, and right. And for this effect, they did express their
applause with the more freedom. But the ignorant multitude were far out in
their accounts.

Herod having well observed the posture of this peoples countenance, saw that
to talk outright according to maxims of state, or to make a grave moral
speech, would have savoured somewhat of a Clark, (and this was not his method
or ordinary style) but enters into a furious jealousy, and causes the
Pontifie, and his mother, and his own wife to be so narrowly watched, and their
actions pried into, that they could not wag a finger but he was advertised
thereof. The prudent Mariamne, among these suspicions, still living in good
respect, appeasing discontents on either party, as much as her employments
would permit her: But her mother Alexandra being pricked to the heart to see her
self among so many spies, and evesdroppers, who ever used, and still would
feign converse with Royal freedom, resolved to play hazard, either to quit
losses, or to double them, and to break the bonds of her specious servitude, or
to offer her neck to Herod's fauchion. So high a point did her miseries carry
her to! In this extremity, what does she? Cleopatra that Queen, whose name
had traveled the world over, and filled it with the noise, was at that time in
Egypt; and she hated Herod naturally, both for his barbarous conditions, and
for some respects of her own: for she understood by good intelligence that he
had entermedled in her affairs, and had counseled M. Anthony to forsake her,
yea, and to take away her life too. This Tyrant was so accustomed to the word
Kill, that he prescribes easily to others those remedies which himself used
for his own maladies. It Is a strange memorable thing that Cleopatra being to
pass one day through Judea, he took a resolution to send her to another world,
thinking to gratify Mark. Anthony by this means: but his friends dissuaded
him from it, telling him it was an enterprise too rash, and difficult, and able
to ruin his fortunes eternally. But yet the project was never discovered.
Cleopatra had but too much reason to hate Herod: which did embolden distressed
Alexandra to write unto her in these terms.

ALEXANDRA to Queen CLEOPATRA Sends Greeting.
MADAM
SInce God has made you to be borne with that advantage above all other
Queens for eminent qualities, it stands with good reason, that your greatness
should serve as a refuge, and Sanctuary to the innocent, and an Altar to
miserable persons. Poor Alexandra that has much innocence without support,
and too much misery without all succor, or consolation, casts her self into
the arms of your Majesty, and is now become your suppliant not for the
recovery of a Scepter, but for the security of her life, and the life of her
son, which is the most precious gage, and pledge of heavens bounty, that was
now left her. Your Majesty is not ignorant how that fortune made me the
daughter and mother of a King, but Herod has reduced me to the rank, and
condition of Maidservants. I am not ambitious of my suffering which I had
rather dissemble, then with ostentation repeat, but all that a slave can endure
in a Galley, do I undergo in a Kingdom, by the in humanity of a son in law,
who having snatched the Diadem into his hands, would feign deprive me also of
life. We are all the day among spies, knives and the apprehensions of death,
which would do us lesser harm if it were more sudden. Reach out your
assisting hand to the afflicted and grant us some small obscure nook within
your Realm, while we expect this tempest to be blown over; while we wait the
dawning of some hope, and some light of comfort to shine again on our
affairs: The glory will remain yours, ours the eternal commemoration of your
piety.

Cleopatra having received these Letters, made answer without delay, and
invited her to come down to Egypt with all speed convenient, and her son with
her, telling her that she held it an honor for her to be able to serve for an
harbor to the afflictions of such a Princess. Departure is fully resolved of,
but the means to contrive it was a piece of difficulty. Poor Io knew no way
to steal her self away from this Argus, who had so many eyes upon her: at
last (as the wits of women are nimble for inventions, especially in cases that
nearly concern them) she without imparting her intention to any body, no not
to her daughter Mariamne, fearing lest her too soft, and tender nature would
advise her to continue still within the bounds of patience, rather then to
undergo so dangerous, and wearisome a voyage: she (I say) consorting the
business only to her own fancy, caused two Coffins (by an unlucky omen) to be
provided for to put her self and her son in; (thinking by this means to
delude the diligence of the Guard, where in they were to be conveyed to the
seaside, where lay a Ship ready to waft them, and so to save her life
through the dominions of death. But by misfortune one of her servants named
Esop one of those that should have carried the Coffin, going to visit one
Sabbion, a man well affected to the house of Alexandra, happened to let fly some
speeches touching this adventure of his Mistress, as thinking he had talked to
one that was privy to all her secrets. Perfidious Sabbion had no sooner pumpt
out the whole story from this groom, but he repaires straight to Herod, to
disclose all that he had heard, judging this to be a very expedient course
for to purchase a reconciliation: for he was a long time suspected to be of
the faction of Alexandra. Herod, when he received this intelligence, multiplies
the number of his spies and sentinells. The poor Lady is apprehended, and
taken out of the Coffin (as out of the Sepulcher of the dead, and condemned to
live a longer captivity) all abasht, and chafing for that the Comoedy sorted
not to a wished effect, thinking that (since she mist her aim) she should not
desire to live any longer. Yet notwithstanding Hered (whether it was that he
feared the great name of Cleopatra, or that he would not startle Alexandra,
that he might oppress her by some more facile way,) did nothing to her for
the present: He kept close within himself, dissembling over the matter without
speaking one word thereof, though he saw the clouds to gather thick, and ready
to burst into thunder and tempest.

This royal Devil that had rid so many souls out of the world by Martial
Law, and force of Arms would now send away one in sport. Upon a day in summer,
as he dined with unhappy Alexandra, fayning all that had past to be buried in
deep oblivion, tells her that in favor of youth, he would play the young man,
and invites Aristobulus his brother in law to play at Racket, or some such
exercise. The match is made, the emulation grows hot, the young Prince being
earnest at his game had not played long before he was all in a sweat, as many
other Lords, and Gentlemen were. Behold they run all to the waters, which did
glide along near the place of recreation. Hered (who well knew the custom of
Aristobulus, and presupposed that he would not fail to go and fling himself
into these cold bathes,) does villanously complot with some youngsters, who
(under color of sporting) should make him drink more water then should serve
to quench his thirst. All things succeed according as he had forecast.
Aristobulus seeing others in the water, strips himself of his clothes, and
bears 'them company, he had no other intent but to swim, play, and skirmish
on this element, always dangerous, though not so treacherous as Herod. The
poor sacrifice frisks, and leaps, nothing aware of the misfortune that
attended him: But the execrable murderers knew it well, forespying their
opportunity at this fatal sport, they stifle the poor Pontifie under the
merciless waters, being the 18 year of his age, and the first of his
Pontificate. This fair sun which arose with such splendour and applause, sets
under the waters never to rise again but with the palenes of death in's visage.
O humane hopes, where, or what be ye? Mere dreams of waking men, aerie
phantasmes of flitting fire, that shine only to be extinguished, and in
extinguishing bereave us of light, leaving us a bad stench, and the sorrow of
your loss! This Prince in whom was built a new all the hopes, and glory of the
roy, all house of the Hasmoneans; This Prince that should have reunited the
Miter, and the Diadem, and revived the honor of a race quite extinct, behold
him now by accursed treason stifled under water, in such an age, and of so
comely a personage, that they made this accident by so much the more full of
pity, by how much it was more desperate of all remedy. At this news all the
City of Jerusalem was in such amazement, as if Nebuchadnezar being returned
from the other world stood again before her gates. Every where there was
nothing but tears and lamentations, but horror and astonishment, outcries,
and the image of death. You would have said that each house carried forth to
burial their first borne, as had been seen long before to fall out in Egypt.
But above all others Alexandra the pitious mother afflicted her selse with
sorrow that would admit of no consolation: Sometime she bemoaned, lying
prostrate on the dead corpse of her son, seeking within his eyes (those two
ecclipsed luminaries) and on his cold lips for some remnant of life: Sometimes
she roles her eyes like some frantic Priestesse of Sacchus, crying for fire
and sword, halters and precipices, that she might put a period to her life and
miseries! Heavy Mariamne, (though the patientst of all) yet had much ado to
withstand the violent assault of incomparable grief: she loved this brother
entirely, as the portrait of her self, as the dispositary of her heart, as the
hope of her house too miserably rent, and all wounded with grief (as she was;)
yet (good Lady) she thought of the sorrows of her mother, and lies behind the
dead body of her brother, as if she had been the very shadow thereof. Then
turning to God with an affectionate heart she sends up this ^jaculation.

O my God behold me now in an estate wherein I have nothing more to fear but
thy justice, and nothing more to hope for then thy mercies. He for whom I
feared, and in whom I hoped all that might be feared or hopt for in all the
events, and affairs of this world is ravished from me by some secret decree of
thy providence, which I have taught my heart to adore, though the weakness of
my apprehension cannot trace the footsteps of it. If among so many calamities,
I did yet suck any sweetness from the world in presence of this object, which
thou have bereaved me of, lo I am now robbed of all; hence for ward, I shall
find nothing but worm wood, that so renouncing all earthly comforts, I may
learn to relish those which are proper to thy children reserved in Heaven.
Behold how pious and gentle souls can extract honey out of the rock and turn all
to merit even the distillation of a tear that trickles down the cheeks. The
impatient, as Alexandra, wound themselves without all consolation, torture
themselves without remedy, and sometimes split against the rock of despair
without remission.

What shall we say that Herod too in this sad consort of grief did bear his
part? He made (indeed) an outward show, and by close hypocrisy, did well
personate a real mourner. He cursed the sport, railed against fortune: He
charged Heaven with sinister envy in bereaving him of an object, on whom he
desired to express all the cordial love, and respect that he bore to the
royal house, to the which he did (in part) owe his advancement.

He went to visit the Queen, and her Mother very ceremoniously, and when he
beheld them bemoaning about the dead body, the brinish tears gusht out of his
eyes: whether it was that he had taught them to drop at command, to carry this
dissembling the more artificially, or whether indeed he had some compassion, or
pang of grief beholding on the one side this tender flower, so early cut down
with deaths impartial sickle, together with so many celestial graces, which
found their period and horizon, at the point of their uprising and nativity;
and on the other side considering the poor Queen drowned in a sea of sorrow,
which to behold might force tears from rocks. This perfidious wretch that had
something yet of a man, and I believe that nature for that time did extort
those tears from his barbarous cruelty: hitherto he feigned himself to have
suppressed his grief manfully; then turning to the Ladies, tells them that he
was not come then to dry up the floods of their tears so soon, which had but
too just a subject to be spent upon, himself had not the power to keep back
his, he was forced to give nature leave to have her course, and act her part,
time would shortly act his too, and apply a plaster to their griefs; that he
would perform in the memory of the dead Prince as much as an only son could
expect from an affectionate father, and potent King, and that thenceforth he
would be the son of Alexandra, the husband and brother eke of Mariamne, since
God would needs redouble his obligations by the loss that they had suffered.

Genuine Tytanny, what is it but an insatiable appetite of revenge? Alexandra
who (a man would think) should have thundered in injurious and reproachful
terms, as one that knew well that Herod (whatsoever he put upon it) was
author of this Tragoedy, did dissemble the matter very strongly without showing
toward the king on her part, so much as a discontented look when time and
place would favor her. Herod withdrawing himself now from the stage, thought
he had acted his part wondrous well, without casting any shadow of suspicion
on his side, seeing that Alexandra did not utter a syllable, whose manner was
to pout, and quarrel on far smaller occasions. To bring in the last
lenitive, he causes the funcralls of the deceased Prince to be celebrated with
such pomp, and magnificence, that nothing more could be added, both for the
order, or conduct, and for the rarity of the spices, and odours, and also for
the costly structure of the Sepulcher: the simpler sort did verily believe that
this proceeded from a true, and sincere affection; but wiser judgments said
they were but feigned tears, or wrung out perforce, and that Herod could not
be sad in earnest for this accident, which took the mote out of his eye, and
did lettle him in full possession of the Kingdom of Jude a. Alexandra joining
the passion of sorrow with that of vengeance, fayl'd not presently after
funeral rites performed to advertise Queen Cleopatra of all that had haphed,
and in such doleful accents, that each period seemed to have been writ in
tears of blood. Cleopatra, who was already well prepared, took fire suddenly:
she entertaines the matter so hotly, as though it had been her own, she gives
the alarm to the whole Court, she storms and does continually lash the ears
of M. Anthony, crying, that this was a thing insupportable, to see a forreigner
wear a Scepter, that did by no right belong to him, to massacre the heir
apparent with such barbarous cruelty, to keep poor Queens in slavery against
all reason, and the privilege of their births. Anthony who knew that Herod was
his creature, and the work of his own hands, did not willingly give ear to
these complaints: Nevertheless to satisfy Cleopatra, he swore a solemn oath,
that he would examine the business, and would send for Herod, and if he found
him guilty of such barbarousnesse, he would execute exemplary justice upon him.
Behold Herod is summoned to Laodicea, where M. Anthony for a time was to
sojourn', hither he is city to make his appeara^ce, and to purge himself of
the murder of Aristobulus, which he was held to be the author of. This was a
crack of thunder to his guilty soul, which did terribly awaken him, when he
least of all thought of it, and put him in such fearful dumps, and
apprehensions that can scarce be imagined. On the one side he had before his
eyes the guilt of his ofsence, and the voice of blood which cried loudly in his
ears: On the other side, he saw that all his fortune did depend on M.
Anthony, who would not have stirred then, but by the instigations of Cleopatra
his mortal adversary, and whom he knew to have had a great longing after the
Kingdom of Judea for her own accommodation. But nothing tortured his brains
so much as some frantic fit of jealousy, for he imagined that Anthony, a
wanton Prince, who went about to observe the beauties of Queens, would have
had a taste of his wife, whose picture had been before brought unto him, and
that for to purchase his quietness, he would cause him to prostitute her, as a
sacrifice to his lustful pleasures.

The man was puzzled and perplexed on all sides, and did descry every where
objects of fear and danger; sometimes he resolves on a voluntary banishment,
sometimes he thought it the better course to rid himself out of the world,
another time he musters up his wits, and strength, and goes about to make
resistance, but nothing seemed better in his judgment, then to delay, and
protract the business, as much as he could possibly. Anthony being ready pressed
for his expedition against the Parthians, sends for him in good earnest; his
delays, and evasions did improve the former suspicion. He must needs travel:
or resolve to loose all. He takes leave of his Mother-in-law Alexandra, and
his wife Mariamne, without all fear, or complaining, not showing any sign of
coffeehouse, as if he had been tomake a journey only for pleasure. Moreover,
he had yet his own Mother at Court, and his Sister Salome, to whom he gave
strict charge to watch heedfully the steps and behavior of those who^ he
thought had wrapped this web for him. Then taking his uncle Joseph aside, he
speaks to him in these words; Uncle, you know the business which calls me to
Laodicea, which is indeed of no small consequence, seeing my innocence
undermined with so much study, and eagernes, and by many powerful personages,
who were the more to be feared, if their purposes could take so much effect as
it has of affection. But I hope to break through this mist, and foul weather,
that you shall see me triumph over calumny by mine integrity, as you have er'st
seen me triumph over hostile attempts by mine Arms: if God dispose of it
otherwise, all this trouble is procured me for my beauteous wifes sake, on
who^ M. Anthony might have some plot, and this might be the occasion of
hastening my journey, for to give his passion more ease, and liberty. But for
the present I adjure you by the respect you did always bear toward me, by my
fortune which you do reverence, by our blood and nature, that if
(peradventure) you do understand that I be otherwise entreated, then my
quality and innocence will bear, you permit not after the death of Herod that
his bed be injured. Maintain the Kingdom for you and yours, and cause my wife
forthwith to be dispatched out of the world, for to bear me company in another
life. Kill her resolutely for fear some take possession of her after my death.
If souls departed have any sense, or seeling of the affairs of this world,
this will greatly solace, and content me.

Joseph was not a little startled at this tale, yet promises notwithstanding to
put all things in execution according to his will, in case necessity required
it. But his fortune always dreadful, and invincible, made him to conceive
far better hopes: Hereupon he sets him on his way, taking with him the
choicest pieces, and ornaments in his Treasury for to present unto those, whom
he should stand in need of: showing moreover such confidence in his
countenance, as he harbored despair in his heart.

When he was arrived at Laodicea, he found many strange informations, and
articles drawn against him, which did charge him sorely with the murder of
Aristobulus. It was made manifest to M. Anthony, that Herod had always his
eyes, and thoughts bent upon the kingdom of Judea, set on by his furious and
exorbitant ambition, so that nothing more did check his hopes then to see
Aristobulus living, to whom he knew in his conscience, the Scepter so justly
to belong, that he durst not beg it himself from the Romans, but with the
title of Regency, and Protectorship, during the minority of the right heir.
That he had converted his Regency first into a Royalty, then to Tyranny,
removing (as much as possibly he could) the blood Royal from all dignities,
for to advance men of naught into such places, witness Ananel substituted to
the Pontificate, whereof Hyrcanus was dispoil'd, that which made him change his
purpose was not his good will and affection, but importunity, and the apparent
danger which he saw to arise by the peoples insurrection, for the repulse of
the Royal family. That Aristobulus being promoted to the and received with the
general shouts, and acclamations of the people, this action was so distasteful
and odious unto him, that he could not conceal the madness of his envy,
under the mask of his ordinary hypocrisy, that since that time he never gave
over to persecute the deceased Prince and his mother, in such amanner, that
they finding no place of rest among the living, hid themselves in the Coffins
among the dead, so to be convei'd to Sea, and thence to sail for Egypt; that
he caused them to be apprehended in the fact, and that from thence forward,
he studied nothing more then how to rid them out of his way, that the young
Prince died in the waters not solitary, and abandoned to himself, but stifled
manifestly by some insolent Pages of the Court, and bosom of Herod.

All this process, or bill of information (say they) was so evident, and
clear, as if it were written with the Sunbeam. The voice of blood reached up
into heaven, that the Traitor could not still the cry. They showed the picture
of this poor Prince, which was a little before his death brought into Egypt for
the singular admiration of his beauty, they made his Ghost also to speak, and
to dema^d justice of M. Anthony, for being so inhumanely assascinned in the
flower and spring of his years, by the blackest treason that ever had been
devised. The regrets and sorrows of the poor mother amongst all these were not
pretermitted in her absence. Cleopatra did act on the Tragoedy, the onset was
hot, the battery very fierce, and violent: Herod who never wanted an eloquent,
and smooth tongue in his own behalf, makes his Apology with a most demure, and
sober modest countenance.

Illustrious Prince,
ANd you my Noble Lords that assist at this Council, I do not hold the
Scepter of Judea from Hyrcanus, nor yet from Alexandra, I never had the
intention to flatter them to this effect, and have less reason yet to stand in
awe of them: You know (most noble Anthony) that the Kingdom that is now in my
hands I hold from you; by you have I advanced my greatness, and in you are
terminated all my hopes. If you command, I am ready at this hour, not to lay
down my Scepter only, but also my life, which I was never desirous to preserve
but for your service: But it troubles me that the way of death, being wide and
open to all the world, that of reputation (which to me is dearer then my life)
is blockt up against mine innocence. I am persecuted by women, and I do
greatly wonder that the soul of Cleopatra all divine could engender so much
choler, and rancor against a King, who never failed in his respects justly due
to her worth and honor. For Alexandra I do not at all marvel if she raised
this tempest against me; her fierce, and high spirit has still tempted my
patience, laboring by all sinister ways to avile, and disparage my
government, and to take away perforce a crown, with a more puissant hand then
those of her forefathers has set upon my head. What reason could she pretend?
Since by the favor of the Romans, I do peaceably stand in a Kingdom, which
was cast upon me with the consent even of my adversaries. I never sought for it
(my ambition was so regular and modest) if I had, I had been guilty of a crime
so horrible, that could not come within the thoughts of a mankind-wolfe. There
is no man would play the villain merely for pleasure; the Idea of vengeance,
which is represented to the fancy, carries (as it were) a torch before the
offense for to reveal it to the world. To what purpose had it been to attempt
the life of Aristobulus? Was it to establish my estate? That was secure enough
already: Your favor (most noble PRINCE) has conferred on me more then all
casualities whatsoever shall be able to conquer, or ravish from me. But I have
ever put back the royal house from all promotions. How put it back? What in
calling the disjoynted and scattered kindred within my bosom, as much as lay
in my power? Every man knows, how that Hyrcanus chief of the royal family,
being detained prisoner among the Parthians, I stretched my nerves, bent my
veins, and engaged all my credit to set him at liberty, and make him return
to Court where he lives now in contented peace, partaking of all the rights,
and privileges of Majesty, without molesting his head with any care of Civil
affairs. It Is well known I have shared with him my Crown, and my bed with his
daughter Mariamne, making her Queen of Nations, and the spouse of a King. I
gave the Pontificate to her brother Aristobulus of mere free will, being no
way constrained thereunto, as being absolute in the managing of my estate; and
if I have adjourned it for a time, it was because the age of the child did not
tread equal paces with my desires, for in effect they have seen him Pontiffie
at eighteen years of age, which was no ordinary favor. Alexandra his Mother
which caused all this stir and turmoile, ever had full liberty in my Court,
except the License to undo her self, which she so often, and eagerly desired.
For what reason had she to thrust her self into a Coffin, and be carried by
night as a dead body, to steal away out of my Court, and after she had reviled
me in my house, now to go and disparage me abroad among strangers? If she had
desire to make a journey to Egypt, had she spoke the word, it would have
sufficed; but she pleased to surmise false dangers in true safety, and to put
those into hazard of their lives, that made her to live in all security. When I
had discovered this imposture I have not let out one harsh distasteful word
against her, making her to enjoy with case the spectacle of my patience, and
judging that every foolish offender is sufficiently punished by his own
conscience. A short time after followed the lamentable death of the young
PRINCE, which drew from me bitter tears of compassion, for I loved him dearly,
and I am sorry his Mother altered the sweetness of his good nature, and caused
so much trouble to his younger years. He died not with me, but at his Mothers
house, and by an accident which no man could prevent; died sporting in the
water, an element that we cannot trust unto, where thousands have perished,
without any treachery; died with some pages of the Court, with whom he did
usually take his pastime. 'Twas his own motion that brought him to the water:
The alacrity of his youth made him play with danger it self, which none could
dissuade him from, and his dismal fate drowned him. It were too hard, and
unreasonable a task imposed upon me, if Alexandra would have me be accountable
for the youthfulness of her son, as though I had been his Governor, or for
the infidelity and inconstancy of the elements, as if I were Lord over them.

This pernicious head delivered this speech with such grace, and plausibility
that he took off the edge of their spleen. Such power has Rhetoric even in
the tongue of a miscreant! Lo he is past all danger, being as yet but got
abord (as they say,) walking in the Court of Anthony with all freedom,
expecting his sentence of justification. In the mean while (as he was
courteous and liberal on occasions) by virtue of his donatives he won the
hearts of the chiefest men in the Court, and made all the accusations to be but
the pettishnesse, and spleen of a woman misinformed. informed. M. Anthony
himself told Cleopatra that she did ill to intermedie so much in foreign
Kingdoms, and if that he should offend by her incitement she might stir up
enemies to the hazard of his estate; that Herod was a King, and it was not fit
to use him as a subject, nay it was his happiness to have him rather for his
friend then his foe. While matters were a canvasing in Anthony's Court, the
Mother and sister of Herod failed not to observe with all diligent
circumspection the actions of the Queen Mariamne and of her Mother Alexandra.
His Uncle Joseph was Keeper of the Prison, and did often visit Mariamne,
sometimes for business, and sometimes for complement. This man began to be
sindged like a butterfly with beams shot from the eyes of this incomparable
beauty, and did bear a great deal of affection toward her, and though he saw
himself far enough from all manner of pretensions, yet notwithstanding he
took a delight, that he had placed his love on so high an object. This passion
turned his brains, and made him foolish and talkative, being already clown
enough by ill education, which made him talk wonderful ridiculous, and
foolish. For one day when there was a speech made of the affection that Herod
bear to his wife Mariamne, Alexandra her Mother jeered at it very ironically,
according to her fashion; Joseph who would have the Queen still to entertain
a good liking of her husband his Master, whether he was mad or drunk spoke
with a loud voice:

Madam, let your Mother Alexandra speak her pleasure, but to show you an
evident testimony of the love the King your husband bears you, he gave me a
charge, in case he were put to death himself, to kill you also, for that he
could not be without your company in the other world.

At this speech the poor Ladies grew pale and wan with fear. Alas the Tyrant
(quoth Alexandra in her heart) what will he do being alive, since that in his
death he causes those to die that survive him. In the mean while there went a
rumor very brief in Jerusalem (the dreams of credulous men) that Herod was
dead, that M. Anthony had sent him to execution, being convicted of the death
of Aristobulus. Whether this brute was divulged abroad by some of Herod's
enemies, or whether himself made it be spread secretly, for to prove the
countenance and inclinations of men. Wise Marianme seemed to give it no credit.
Alexandra grew impatient and shrudded like a bird on the perch, beseeching
Joseph with all supplications possible to take them out of the palace, and to
lead them to the Court of Guard of the Roman legions, committing them into the
protection of Colonel Julius, that they might thence pass with safe conduct to
M, Anthony; for she greatly desired that this PRINCE might see her daughter;
persuading her self that as soon as he should have a view of her, he should
be captivated with her eyes, and would show all possible favor. These
intentions being naughty, had no good success at all, and all the pursuits of
Alexandra served for nothing but to vent her passion. Herod at length returns
victoriously with authentic testimonies of his justification, notwithstanding
all the endeavors of Cleopatra: God reserving this Paracide for a Cain's life
which concluded with a wretched, and fearful death. His mother and sister
failed not to present him forthwith at his arrival with a model of their
mystery, and to acquaint him with the intention that Alexandra had to put her
self under the power of the Romans. Salome, who envied Mariamne beyond
measure, dipping her serpentine tongue in the gall of calumny, accused her of
secret familiarity with Joseph: Wherefore Herod who was extremely jealous,
thought instantly to cure it, and taking Mariamne apart, asked her whence
proceeded that amity which she had contracted with Joseph. The most Chaste
Queen, whose patience was never vanquished, showed by her eyes, by the posture
of her countenance, and speeches that she was so stung with this black slander
that her perfidious husband did easily perceive how far she was from such
thoughts; and (in truth) being ashamed of himself for proposing such Questions
unto her, he craved pardon, shedding hot tears, and thanking her for proving so
faithful to his bed, and making a thousand protestations of immortal
affection. The good Lady somewhat displeased to see so much hypocrisy, told
him covertly, that indeed he bare real love to his wife who would needs have
her company in the other world. Herod presently apprehended at half a word
what she meant, and entered into such distemper and violent passion, that he
seemed to be distracted, tearing his beard and hair, and crying Joseph had
betrayed him, and that now he must needs say he had too much intelligence
with Mariamne; otherwise no man could be so simple and sottish as to reveal so
important a secret. Hereupon he commands Joseph to be killed outright for a
sacrifice to his return, not permitting him to come in his sight, nor would he
hearken to one word of excuse. It did want but a little that he did not the^ fell
down more sacrifices to his wide insatiate cruelty, and did not put Mariamne
too to death; but the assured proof of her innocence, and the impatient heat
of his love suspended the blow, that he might make his anger (like nimble
lightning) fly further off, which he discharged on Alexandra, whom he did
confine for a ^^me, keeping her asunder from Queen Mariamne her daughter,
taking it now for certain that it was in her forge that all the machinations,
and conspiracies for his ruin were framed and filled.

Not long after, Herod saw himself imbarkt in another business no less
dangerous then the former. M. Anthony (who ever lent him his shoulder to
support him) had a long time contended against the fortune of Augustus Caesar,
and was quite discomfited in the battle of Actium, ending his hopes and life
with a sad Catastrophe. This accident astonished the Tyrant more then can be
imagined, seeing the prop whereon he leaned, ruined: His affairs which he
thought were now well knit, ripe again in a night, and had him for an
adversary who was so forward in his design for the Empire of the whole world.
His friends and foes deemed him one of the forlorn hope: He that escaped so
many shipwracks does not a whit despair in this extremity, he takes a
resolution to go, and find Caesar who was then at Rhodes, and to cast himself
at his feet: but before he sets out on's journey, he commits one most
barbarous and inhumane act. Hyrcanus the right and lawful King, who by his
gentleness and facility of nature first raised Antipater, then saved Herod's
life, promoting him to the Kingdom to the prejudice of his own blood, was yet
surviving in a decrepit age laden with years and cares: for he was past
fourscore years. The Tyrant fearing that he alone being left of the Royal
blood, should be restored to the throne by the requests of the people, who did
tender his innocence, seeing him now at the brinck of the grave flings him in,
expelling (by brutish violence) that soul which he was ready to surrender up
to nature. This was judged mere savage cruelty without any color of justice,
wherewith this abominable monster ever used to palliat his actions: others
write the death of Hyrcanus to have been hastened by this occasion.

Alexandra (who could not shake off her ambition but with her skin) seeing that
Herod went on a voyage, whence, peradventure, he was never to return, boords
her father Hyrcanus, and shows him that the time was come wherein God would
make his venerable old age to flourish anew in Royal purple: The Tyrant is
entangled in such nets and labyrinths that he shall never get himself out
again. Fortune knocks at Hyrcanus his door to render him the Diadem which is
due unto him by right of inheritance, and taken from him by tyranny. It
remained that he would but help himself as much as in him lay, and his good
fortune would work out the rest. Hyrcanus replies; daughter the time is come
that I should rather meditate on my grave then a Royal Throne. You know what
esteem I made of greatness being yet in an age, and condition when I had all
reason to entertain them, yet I have reno^^ac't them with a free will,
preferring my rest before all the Diadems in the world. Now that I am in the
Haven would you have me lanch again into the tempestuous Seas: Forbear such
fond speeches (good daughter) I have beheld but too much miseries, talk to me
of a Sepulcher, and not of a Scepter. Alexandra replies, that since he did not
pretend to the life, nor the fortune of the living, yet notwithstanding that he
ought not to neglect his own blood, that he should give way to equity, and he
needed not to disquiet himself, but only to write a few lines to Malchus
Lieutenant of Arabia, and he would supply him with money and sufficient forces,
as much as he had need of. Lastly, he was bound in conscience, and by the law
of nature to preserve his daughter and Grand child from the teeth of this
Tigre. She did so ply his ears with these and the like reasons, that at length
he yielded to her, and treats with Malchus, that he should levy for him
anumber of horse. The Letters are delivered into the hands of one D^sitheus (a
Cosen of this Joseph which Herod had caused lately to be slain) for to be
carried withal safety; but this perfidious slave betraying the blood of his
allies, and the fortune of Hyrcanus, instead of carrying faithfully the Letter
to Malchus, delivers it into the hands of Herod, who bids him go and deliver
the said Letter, and bring back the answer to him for to discover further the
countenance, and intention of the Arabian. He failed not to promise Hyrcanus
all assistance, inviting him with all kindness to come over speedily unto him.
Herod having discovered the whole matter, calls for Hyrcanus, and asks him if
he had received any Letters from Malchus? Yea (quoth he) but they contained
nothing but complements: the other demandes, if with these Letters he did not
receive some presents? He confessed that Malchus (indeed) had made him a
present of four horses to draw his Coach. Hereupon without any further form
of proceeding, the Tyrant commands the reverend old man to be murdered, dying
with blood the hoary head of him who had been his Nurse, Protector, Father and
all. Then after he had cag'd up Alexandra, and Mariamne in some place of
strength under the guard of Joseph his Treasurer, and Soheme the I^urean, he
goes straight ways toward Rhodes, committing the whole charge of his Realm
to his brother Pheroras. The History makes no mention of the laments of the
Queen and her Mother upon the death of Hyrcanus: It Is credible that all was
conceald from them a long time, being kept in close prison, having no
communication with any body. Alexandra champt upon the bit with much
impatience: Mariamne did bear out the tediousness of this captivity with
noble constancy,and sought by all means to addulce her Mothe^s discontents.
All her comfort was in God, for what else could she speak of, or think on? My
God (quoth she) thou steepest all thy creatures for me in wormwood: If I have
at any time loved them and sucked any sweet from the world, thou gave me for
one ounce of Honey a pound of Gall, Ever since I laid the Diadem on my head, I
have felt nothing but thorns, and sovereignty was to me but a gorgious and
noble slavery. My God, when shall we behold that joyful day to shine upon us,
which we do each day wait for, that shall dry up our tears, and bursting the
bonds of our captivity, shall send us into Abraham's bosom, and into the
freedom of thine elect? These poor Ladies remained there in durance among
horrid walls without seeing any thing but rocks, and wild solitude, which seemed
to retain some compassion of their griefs: they knew not how the world went,
much less how any of the affairs of the Court stood: Every time the keeper
came to visit them, they expected no other tidings but the doom of death.

The Guard at the beginning showed some severity in their looks, and were
reserved in their speeches, and all seemed full of horror, fear, and sad
silence. But there is no iron but molifies at last in the fire. Soheme,
visiting them the oftener according to his commission, felt the rays that
issued from Mariamnes eyes so sharp, that they pierced his heart with relenting
compassion; judging it too harsh dealing, to detain a Queen captive, who by
the liberal endowments which heaven had enricht her person with, could
captivate all hearts. He begins to carry a more benign aspect toward her,
and Mariamne seeing him one day in a good mood took occasion to speak to him
with boldness, and to ask him some news from the other world.

Soheme (says the Princess) you see us now in a very woeful estate, and our
personages, but a day will come (perhaps) when this tempest will be blown over:
misfortunes do not always attend at the same haven; you know what I am, and
that in showing me favor you shall not oblige an impotent much less an
ungrateful creature: only give us some hint of Herod's purpose in deteining us
here, and in what case the affairs are now abroad. Soheme at these words felt
his heart sorely shaken with a mosT fierce assault: on the one side represented
to his thoughts the revenge of Herod, which he observed lately in the example
of Joseph, on the other side he was so touched with commiseration at this
noble Princess, that this frozen heart began now to melt and to break forth at
his eyes. Mariamne seeing him perplexed, and at a stand: Speak boldly Soheme,
this shall no way prejudice thee being locked up in deep secrecy, and it may do
us much service, for the safty of our estate. Soheme imagining that either
Herod would never return in the quality of a King, or that being in the
protection of Mariamne, he might easily purchase his pardon, unfolds his heart
and tells her.

Madam I commit my secrets, and life into your power; also I desire to dye the
death before that ever I should come to execute the barbarous command that
Herod gave me, in case the affairs where of he now treats with Caesar, should
not succeed according to his expectation. And what was it (quoth Madam) Madam I
tremble only to think on it. It Is a matter that concerns your life. My friend
(replied Mariamne) this is his ordinary style: so ran the mandate to his uncle
Joseph in his first voyage. But are there no means to get out hence? Soheme
makes answer, that Pheroras Herod's brother had charge of the Realm, and that
(as extremely jealous and mistrusting) he has a heedfull eye, left by some new
device you contrive your escape. Well, dye then we must (quoth the Princess:)
to what side shall I turn my self? I see nothing but angers and the Image of
death, with which I begin now to be familiarly acquainted. Soheme comforted her
as much as lay in his power; but the stopping her ears thence forward to all
charms of worldly comfort dilated her heart to receive some from heaven;
purifying her vexed soul day by day in a Bath of tears, and the smarting
furnace of her afflictions. O the providence of the Almighty! It Is very true
what the Scripture says, Thy paths are in the deep, and thy tracks on the
waters, who can discover such dark footsteps! When this most chaste, and
innocent Queen in an obscure prison swimmes every day for a good part of her
life in her own tears.

Herod being imbarkt (as yet all bloody with the massacre committed on the
person of Hyrcanus) finds the Seas and Winds, men and opportunity all
propitious to his affairs. This Proteus whose wit was pliant for all
adventures, seeing that he could not dissemble the services he had done to M.
Anthony, still prostrating himself, like a fawning Curre at the feet of his
fortune, intends to put a fair gloss upon them, and cover them with the
mantle of virtue. He knew that Augustus was a Prince well born, generous and
just, and that he would employ faithful servants in this new motion of
businesses which he had the^ in hand; he disguiseth himself under the shadow
of virtue, and cheats under the color of constancy, and pretext of fidelity.
Lo now he presents himself to the Emperor and bespeaks his Highness in these
terms.

Great Emperor,
BEhold my Person and my Crown at your Highness feet; it is reason good that all
should rise by your greatness, since that God would commit the Empire of the
universe to your hands. As for me I cannot feign, and belly what I have been,
no more would I dissemble what I ought and should be. I have hitherto ('it is
true) stood for my noble friend M. Anthony, and if he had given ear to me as
he did to Cleopatra his Mistress, you should have found ( Caesar) how much I was
your enemy, and his friend; but this unhappy Prince being gulled and besotted
by that creature took money from me, and advise from her to ruinate (by so
doing, his own fortune, and to build yours upon their ruins: I have followed
him even to the margen of the grave but did not enter in, in regard my death
could no way advantage him; he is in that condition that I ca^ do nothing but
send him the tribute of my tears; To you (great Caesar) are due the services
which I do tender with a fre and ready heart, if you be pleased to accept of
them on the condition not to constrain me to think or speak any thing
injuriously to the memory of my ancient Master, whom being not able to serve, I
ought nevertheless to respect, and love after death.

Augustus liked well of this bold language, and deemed that this man was of
good proof and mettle to make a good servant of, not seeing the subtlety of
the Fox, measuring all for his own interest. He takes the Crown and places it
on the head of Herod, saying, I would you should live peaceably in your
dominions, and be but as loyal to me as you have bin to M. Anthony.

Herod after this so lucky an access, ceast not to set himself forward to the
good liking of Augustus, seeking all occasions so to do, but most of all in
that voyage of the Emperor made to Egypt, where he did continually give
assistance and serve in many good offices. This business so happily sped, he
returns in triumph to Jerusalem with the astonishment of all the world. This
was it that the virtuous Queen Mariamne did protract a life for ever to be a
sacrifice for the solemnity of her bloody husbands triumphs.

Let us now see how this Lamp was extinguished, we cannot expect any ill sent,
the fair qualities of her life did accompany her to her death. As Soon as Herod
was entered within the chief City, he goes to salute the Queen his wife whom he
had caused to be set at liberty, being his affairs were in safety, and brings
her the first tidings of the happy success of his voyage, he was so swollen
with the conceit of his good fortunes, that he could hardly contain himself
within his skin, and the love of so amiable an object as was then present after
so many dangers exhausted, did let his tongue loose to much boasting and vain
superfluous speeches, thinking that by his discourse he did much improve his
honor and reputation. Mariamne pined away upon her legs with fretfulnesse to
hear his vanities, and as she was free and genuine in all her carriage, she
showed how little pleasure she took in his Rhodomantades, which his joy did
heighthen to a degree of folly. He imagining this at first to be but a fit of
Melancholy which would soon vanish into smoke, did cheer her up the more with
words, showing more Court-ship then usual. Among these caresses, the poor
Lady breathes out a sigh or two, calling to mind the secret command lately
given to Soheme. He well perceived by her countenance that she was somewhat
discontented, and entered into a suspicion that Soheme also had the flux in the
tongue as well as Joseph. He knew not then how to compose his countenance, so
much was he moved within himself. Love, choler, and jealousy did incessantly
hurry, and disquiet him: he could not be angry as he would, and could not
choose but love whom he had still impotently loved. This haughty spirit that
could never stoop to any, but to deceive, was ashamed to see himself thus
disarmed, and become as it were a Zanie in amorous dalliances not ordinary to
his nature; then seeing that these subtilties did not succeed, he torments
himself the more, and thinks now to flourish with the sword, but love was so
predominant over wrath, and withheld the stroke: Hereupon he retires, shaking
his head, and muttering I know not what between his teeth, as cursing that love
which made him merciful in despite of his inclination. But alas there is no
hatred to that of women against their own kind, when a jealousy once seiseth
on their brains! Cipre an Arabian by nation, the mother of Herod, and Salome
his sister, seeing him so passionate failed not to blow the coals with their
tongues, and to kindle them with impudent slanders which the Tyrant gave credit
to in part, but yet could not resolve to strike the stroke. It was a long time
in agitation ere any thing could be concluded upon; at last there arives an
unhappy day, when at noone-tide having withdrawn himself to his privy chamber
he sends for Mariamne, who presently comes upon the message: But Herod being
minded to a game in bed, she would not consent thereto, telling him the law of
nature forbad her to lie with a man that had murdered her Father and her
Brother, meaning Alexander, who by the persuit of Herod had been overthrown by
the Romans, and her brother Aristobulus so cruelly stifled in the waters. Here
Josephus the Historian, after he has so highly extolled Mariamne as a chaste
Queen and truly endowed with an inviolable faith (for these be his words) taxes
her with a little disdain which was (as he says) grown up with her nature, in
that she did disrespect the caresses of her husband. But he that would well
ponder how Herod had entreated her nearest kindred, massacring them most
indignly, and how that holding the Scepter from her house he did not esteem of
her as of a Queen, but as of a poor victime, which he caused to be shut up,
commanding it to be beheaded whenever he ran in jeopardie of his life, for
fear that any other should enjoy her after his death; he shall find that the
Lady had sufficient reason to give him this answer. Nevertheless Herod that
could not brook such freedom of speech, was so incensed at these words that he
went near then to do her a mischief; his eyes sparkling with anger, his
voice rough, and his hands lift up to commit violence. As he walked up and down
in his chamber in a chafe, skirmishing thus with his choler, Mariamne standing
by without any farther reply, treacherous Salome thought it now a convenient
time to give vent to her malicious project; she sends a servant that had
pawned his faith and credit, and whom she a long time had been instructing for
to make him depose a slander as wicked as ridiculous, which was, that Mariamne
having an intention to give her husband a philtre (or love potion) she addressed
her self to him, who being then the Kings Taster and sought to work him to do
this feat with many rewards, and promises, which he would never give care unto.
Moreover he was so taught his lesson, that if, peradventure Herod demanded the
ingredients of the Philtre, he should answer without farther hesitation that
the Queen had the contriving of it, and that she required of him only but to
administer it. This miscreant enters the chamber in cold blood, and makes
deposition most seriously: whereat Herod, who was all fire already, being more
inflamed then ever, thought with himself that he needed not wonder any more
whence this impatience of love should proceed. He commands presently an Eunuch
of the Queen, one of the most trusty of them to be attacht, thinking that
nothing past without his knowledge, he puts him to the rack, insomuch that his
body being already weak enough, not able to bear out the violence of the
tortures, and on the other side having nothing to speak against his good
Mistress, in whose conversation he never knew any thing but what was honorable
and honest; he was kept a great while in this miserable plight, at length he
lets fly a word, saying that he had seen Soheme talking a long time in private
with the Queen, as though he made some discovery and that since that time he
well perceived that she was much dejected. Herod had no sooner heard this
speech, but it is enough, says he, take him off and call Soheme.

Soheme knew nothing of this that passed, he lived in great content, having
lately attained to some good place of command by the Queens recommendation. He
was quite astonished when he saw them lay hands on him and compel him to
confess the discourse he had with Mariamne when she was in prison: he utterly
denying the matter is forthwith slain. This day Herod retires into his Cabinet,
drinking by full draughts the gaul and venom of his fatal anger, meditating
in his heart on the fury which he should make to burst out shortly in
public: for without allowing any truce to his laboring brain, he assembles
his Privy Council, and sends for his Queen, who exprected nothing less then
such arraignment. This monster that studied always to set a color of justice
on his most unreasonable actions, begins a long Oration which he had indicted
at his leisure, and as every man stood like a Ghost struck with fear and
filence, expecting the issue of this Tragoedy (only bold Mariamne stood armed
with an undanted constancy for all events) he speaks to them in these terms.

It seems God would counterballance my prosperous affairs abroad with the
unhappiness of domestic evils: I have found safety among the winds and
tempests in irksome voyages I have undertaken, and in many perilous
achievements that I have brought about, to find in my return a tempest in
mine own Court. You are not ignorant how that I have fostered all the house of
Hyrcanus in my bosom in those deplored times, when it was at a low ebb, and
near confusion; in recompense whereof as if I did sit upon the eggs of a
Serpent, so I have found but hissing and stinging. God knows how often I have
dissembled injuries, and how often I have cured the^ with patience, but yet I
cannot bring my heart to so obdurat and brawnie a temper, but it is ever and
anon stirred up and scarified with some new sores. Behold there my wife, who
following his Mothers steps, is ever bent to trouble my repose. As soon as I
was returned from my late dangerous voyage, as you know, I brought her tiding
of the happy success to my affairs, she showing how little esteem she made of
my estate and person, did hear me with such a coy and disdainful carriage,
that notwithstanding all the Courtship I made to her, I could not draw from her
pride one good word, nay she was not content with this, she proceeds to open
mischiefs, and bloody machinations, which I had rather (in honor of your
ears) pass over in silence, and come to effects. Behold there one of my
faithful servants, that does testify how that she had suborned him to give me
a Philtre, that is, poison for to giddie my brains, and take away my life,
which God does still preserve to make a recognizance of all the good offices
which all in general and you in particular have done me: So you see that I am
arrived home with my temples girt with Laurells, honored and favored by the
most renowned men of the world, to be the shittle-cock of a woman's malice,
and the But of her treachery. I could not win her by ardency of love, or any
good turns, no more then if she had been a Lioness. Consult among you what
you ought to do, I deliver her to the power of your justice, being not (in
this case) to follow mine own judgment, that posterity may know that mine own
interests come always below the truth, to which I have taught them ever to
stoop and bend the knee.

Herod in speaking these words would seem to be very calm conjuring down his
passion, and curbing his nature which was pliable enough, but yet his choler so
wrought and fumed up, that the Council soon discovered his malady, and that he
had a full purpose to exterminate the Queen. They summon her to answer upon the
sudden without any Advocate. This glorious Amazon, a young Impe of the
Macchabees, and heir of their heroic patience, being presented before this
crew and conventicle of malignant spirits, 28 years before the coming of our
Savior in the flesh, did then what may instruct posterity most illustriously
by her example. No man ever observed an impatient word to sally out of her
mouth, she used not any word of recrimination, or charged back any with their
own crimes, and being able to lay before the Council the many outrages she had
suffered in her own person, and in her kindred, she swallowed all wrongs with
more then humane patience only touching the main Article of her accusation, she
said that for the draught or potion that was objected to her, 'twas a thing in
the judgment of all that would confider it well, farthest off any thing from
her thoughts, seeing that she had always dreaded the love of Herod more then
his hate: moreover that she made not any account of her life wherein she had
endured but too many afflictions, much less of the Court where she never drew
any air of delight, and that if they would oppress her innocence by false
witness, it was most easy to overcome her, no subject more obvious and
probable. It was most easy to take the Diadem off her head and her head off
her shoulders, but it would be no easy task to take from her the reputation
of a Lady of Honor which she held in Capite from her ancestors, and which she
would carry along with her to the dust.

The poor soul was as a filly Lamb in the jaws of a Lion, and in the fangs
of many Wolves: They proceed to judgment and all proceed according to Herod's
propension. They knew it was his will to rid her out of his way, that was
sufficient. There was not one found that had the boldness to stand up in the
defense of the innocent Queen, or to assuage the passion of Herod in any
manner. Each man's conscience was clogged either with crimes, or timorousness;
whence it happened that these impious judges did more in favor of the Tyrant
then he would have done, for they all concluded to adjudge her to death: he
was struck with some horror at the first, as bloody a man as he was, and
commanded that she should be committed to safe custody within the Court,
suspending the execution, thinking perhaps thereby to make her the more
tractable to his humor. But enraged Salome that had stirred up this tempest
not willing to leave a thing half done draws near to the King her brother,
and makes remonstrance, that such birds were not to be kept in cages that this
was a business which concerned his Crown and Life, and that all now tended to
a revolt, if he delai'd this execution he would hasten his own ruin and the
estates both: whereupon Herod let slip this speech, Why let ber be taken away;
and immediately a Tribune was dispatched, to the good Queen, who brings her
news of her last hours approach, saluting her with all reverence, Madam the
King calls for you, and you are presently to die: she nothing moved with the
message replies, let us go (friend) outright, Herod cannot be so speedy but he
seems slow to me: and when she had thus said she advances forward, and
marches straight to the place of execution, without changing her color, with a
clear countenance which drew tears from all spectatours to crown her patience.
As she was ready to receive the fatal stoake, Alexander a her Mother, her
companion in Prison, the Cabinet of her thoughts, that both seemed to have but
one heart intwo breasts betraying her blood, nature, and all piety for some
mischievous reason of estate that she might not be suspected of Herod as though
she had consented to her daughters perverseness, comes there to tax her with
horrible injuries, and she went near to dragge the poor Princess by the
hair of the head, and to hale her along the pavement, telling her in extreme
rage, that she was an untoward peevish dame, and that she did well deserve
death for that she would not agree with so good a husband for the supporting of
their common fortunes. See here the greatest indignity that can be conceived!
In such an accident there is no better honey, nor a worser sting then that of
bees, and no better amity, nor worser enmity then that of kindred. Patient
Mariamne did not speak a word, not so much as, Good Mother permit my soul to
depart in peace which is now upon my lips ready to take her flight, and trouble
not my last and eternal rest; but with a generous silence sealing her mouth to
all replies, and opening her heart toward God the only witness of her
innocence, being thus indignly handled, she profers her neck to the headsman
for to seal with her blood the last testimonies of her patience. Josephus
speaks not so expressly of the manner of her death as being a matter without
controversy that she was executed according to the ordinary manner of those
times, which was to behead all delinquents of such rank. This fair breaking
of the day which as yet carried comfort and healing in his wings to the poor
afflicted souls that were in this horrible confusion of Tyranny, was then
obscured and quite put out with her blood: the eyes of all the throng that did
assist at this ruefull tragedy being bathed in tears did behold her in her
red lips. When they saw this countenance (armed with royal Majesty) so
courageously to affront death which makes the boldest heart to tremble, and her
alabaster neck stretched out and stoop't to the glittering axe to be severed
from her fair body, a cold horror ran through the shivering joints, and bones
of all the crowd, and there was no rock so hard but would have sweated watery
drops of tears to ransom her blood from being spilt. Her head was severed
from her body, and her body from her soul, but this will never be separated
from her God, who rears to her memory an eternal trophie of patience. Her
trunck lay cold, and extended upon the place, and the voice of innocent blood,
which now mounted up to pierce the Clouds, and demand revenge from the
protector of innocence, was incontinently heard to good purpose, as you shall
e're long understand.

This faithless husband that had so barbarously handled a Princess so worthy
of all respect, was soon as she had yielded up the ghost as if he had been
struck with an invisible dart, cried out of grief, and sai'd that he had given
a blow that deserved God's anger and vengeance; then with fearful howling he
invokes incessantly the memory and name of the deceased Queen, to whom he
could not by his plaints restore what he had taken away by the executioners
hatchet: whither soever he went, he was still accompanied with the Image of his
crime; black furies revelling in his co^seience, and terrifying him with sights
and fearful apparitions: he tried all manner of feasting, dancing, and
delights to expel melancholy; but it increased the more, in so much that he
was constrained to abandon the helm of government, though he had been active
and indefatigable in this exercise: he became at first a dotard, and all
stupid, not knowing what he did; for sometime at dinner he speaks to his
attendants, and bids them call the Queen to him, as if she had been still
alive, they hearkened unto him without returning a word, and all the Court was
struck with silence and amazement; at last he being not able to endure the
palace walls, as though they did upbraid his cruelty, he goes and haunts the
groves and uncouth places of retreat like a salvage, thereby contracting such
a strange disease in his brains, and so violent a frenzy, that the Physicians
saw no way to remedy it, telling him freely that it was a blow from heaven: God
who did reserve him for further calamities would not vouchsafe to take away his
life at that present. That wicked Mother Alexandra that so outragioussly
scolded at her daughter on the scaffold, went shortly after the way of all
flesh, tasting the bitterness of death but loosing the glory of it. In the
rear of this, followed a pestilence which swept away many of Herod's
counselors of state; and all these were but the scourges of heaven to avenge
this so lamentable death, but never enough lamented. Mariamne from her chaste
bed left Herod two sons, Alexander and Aristobulus who were very young,
capable to endure much more in aftertimes, but as then incapable to understand
their present miseries. Herod for to take away from them the resentments of
this horrid fact, and to raise them both together by good education to the
glory of his Scepter, packs them away in good time, and sends them to Rome to
be trained up in Augustus Casar's Court, held at that time the Academy of
Kings, and the most renowned School of the world. After some years expired he
took a desire to make a journey into Italy for to salute Casar, and by that
means to see his sons, whom he found very well improved, and ingeniously
brought up, and so complete, that he would feign with the good leave of
Augustus bring the^ along with him back to Judea, and so he did: These young
Princes returning to Jerusalem with Herod, did ravish all the people with
admiration; they were of a very comely proportion very nimble and active, and
well exercised in feats of arms, well spoken, affable, and as much worthy of
love as their Father of hatred. Men beheld them as they do the two stars of
Castor and Pollux after a tempest; they filled all with joy, and seemed already
to have won hearts enough to win them crowns according to their merit, yet
those that called to mind the usage of their Mother Mariamne could not contain
their tears.

Pheroras, Herod's brother, and his sister Salome, who had both of them a hand
in the murder of the innocent Queen, entered into such apprehensions that
cannot be expressed, seeing that the blood which they had spilt was one day to
rule over them: They began thenceforth tartly to traduce them, and convey (by
some creatures subborn'd thereto) many reports to Herod's cares, which were in
effect to inform, how that the Princes his sons (in regard of what had
happened touching their mother) were very averse from their Father, and would
never beinduced to affect him again. Herod who was yet warm with the heat of
his affection toward the^, gave no credit to the slander; for seeing them now
upon the march toward ripes years, he bethought him how to match the^
honorably, sueing for his son Alexander the daughter of Archilaus King of
Capadocia named Glaphira, which was granted him, and for Aristobulus he was
betrothd to the daughter of Salome, his cousin Germane; thus cementing the
breaches and enmities of his house. Alexander and Aristobulus did converse
together very freely, and spoke all that lay upon their hearts, talking of the
death of their mother, in such a manner, that they showed that they were
sensible of it: Pheroras, and Salome very close and malignant spies, did not
cease to toll them into dangerous ipeeches, and all that they had spoken
(either through vanity, or some fit of anger, or through presumption of
secrecy) was presently reported to Herod's ears. Crafty Salome yet beating
sway over her new married daughter, who was a simple harmless creature, did
shrife her punctually, to know of her what her husband did use to talk of in
the privacy of their mutual embraces. She forth with related all the
speeches, which these poor Princes had spoken in simplicity or merriment,
namely, that Aristobulus bragged, that the Empire appertained to the issue of
Mariamne as the lineage of a true Queen: as for the sons of Herod, they were
sowed abroad, and dispersed in good number (for he had some nine or ten wives)
so that he made most of them advocates in petty Towns, and it went well with
them if they had learned to read and write; she added moreover, that Alexander
spoke in a bravado, that he was somewhat of another mold then his Father, yet
notwithstanding when he conversed with him, seeing him of a jealous humor he
kept himself within his scabbard, not daring freely to express himself, for
fear of casting shadows of his ability; that going to hunt, and walk with
Herod, he used to contract and wind in his body, that he might not seem bigger
then his father: If he went to draw a bow, he did it very bungler-like, of
purpose to free himself from all envy. This was a maine piece of wisdom to
do so, but the trick of a very novice to talk so much, though words as
innocently spoken, as sinisterly and captiously interpreted; and above all a
very simple error, to commit their secrets to a woman, whose breast (for the
most part) is as fit to guard any thing entrusted to its custody, as a five to
carry water. When Pheroras, and Salome had diligently plied the ears of Herod
with these petty informations, seeing some suspicion to plant, and take rooting
in his mind, and that the fathers affection toward his sons did wax cold,
they strike in opportunely, and advise him seriously to take heed of his sons,
that they were in labor with some great exploit, and spoke loudly, That all
those that had any hand in the shedding their mothers blood, should not bear
the punishment off in the other world: For indeed as they were harping on that
harsh string, such like speeches did escape from them. Herod was exceedingly
astonished at this freedom, as thinking it necessary to repress their
boldness with some counterprise. What does he to take down the spirits of
these Princes? He goes, and takes him one of his other sons called
Antipater, (begot upon one Dorid a woman of mean rank, and who was afterward
shamefully banished the Court) he hoists him in a moment to the top of the
wheel, not that he purposed to leave him there, but he would have him serve
as a Check-mate for the sons of Mariamne, judging him a fit instrument for that
end: For indeed this Antipater was a dark, sullen, and malicious spirit, who
held much after the Father. When he saw himself on an instant so highly
mounted, he resolved not to descend, but with the loss of his skin, and to
share of the Realm as well as the rest, by some device or other. Well, to that
end he fits the Scene, and conforms himself to all fashions for to get into
credit with Herod, (who from that time began to like him very well) and he
failed not under hand to put on foot afresh those accusations, to get surer
footing in this new preferment, that had been commenced against the sons of
Mariamne. And when he had flung the stone, he drew in his arm so neatly, that
he seemed not to have any way stirred in it; for he did always bear a most
respectful carriage toward Alexander, and Aristobulus, as toward his Masters,
espcially when he caused those false reports to be instilled afresh into his
Fathers ears, by some creatures well taught and rewarded. He feigned also, with
a borrowed modesty to take their cause in hand, but he excused them so slily
to his own advantage, that he brought them within greater suspicion then
before. King Herod for to bring him into some esteem and authority, thought it
were not amiss to send him to Rome for a time, which he did, giving him a
flourishing attendance, and an infinite deal of recommendations. Here he sat
a brooding more ingenious mischiefs, and from hence pursued his plots more
closely, and with more art. In a letter to his father, he wrote that he had
discovered at Rome strange plots, that he should beware of his brethren,
Alexander and Aristobulus; for they had every where engrossed the hearts of the
people, and that their design was no other, then to shorten his days, and to
dispossess him of his kingdom. This had the more color, for that the young
Princes being not a little moved with their late rejection or degradation could
not dissemble their discontents, and did daily cast about some words, which
were gathered up by the spies of Pheroras, and Salome, that no fillable fell to
the earth. It grieved Herod to see that having composed all in peace abroad,
the fire had caught hold on his own house: and thence forward he had a mind to
seize upon his sons, but he would not make any attempt upon their persons
without Casars command, to whom he referred all, both for the expression of his
obeisance, and for the safety of his estate. After he had meditated on the
matter with himself very carefully and seriously, (for it did much grieve his
heart whence all his Counsels did spring, and had their first rise,) he
resolved to bring his sons to Rome, and there to accuse them before Caesar.
All along the way from Palestine to Italy, did he carry his thoughts so close,
that his looks did never betray them, nor did he show any symptoms of distaste
toward his Sons, lest he should cast some shadows of suspicion. Being
arrived at Rome, he understands that Caesar was then in Aquilegia, whither he
posts without delay, bringing his two sons along, who were by the Emperor (who
was as a father to them) very courteously received with all demonstrations of
affection. In the interim this wretched father, espying his opportunity begges
from Caesar a day of audience, in a business (as he said) of great
consequence, which he granted him, and he came upon the very instant agreed
upon, bringing with him the two delinque^ts, who intended nothing as then, but
to laugh, and pass the time with their old acquaintance. When they were in the
midst of a glorious assembly (which were of purpose there met) Herod fetching a
deep sigh, addresseth his speech to the Emperor.

You now behold ( Great Caesar) a King happy enough by your Grace, and favor,
but a most unhappy Father in the disgraces, and ill fortunes of my house: if
nature had denied me issue, fortune would have saved me much misery, and
trouble. It does much grieve me to soil your ears (renowned Caesar) with the
recital of such ungraciousnesse; but necessity which has no law compels me,
and your justice which protects all Laws, invited me to it. Lo here my two
Sons (unnatural Sons) who had the honor to be brought up at your feet,
after that they had received from me all favor, that might be expected from a
king by your goodness potent enough, and from a father by his own nature most
indulgent, betraying the glory of their education received at your hands, and
forgetting their blood and nature received from me, they have attempted a crime
which I am afraid to utter. I endured much for them, add their welfare, and I
enjoy a kingdom now a fair term of years, which I have purchased with so
much sweat, and turmoile; I have opened the gate of honor for them to enter at
after my decease, when a natural death should close up mine eyes; but they
would needs enter in at the gate of paricide, laying ambush for my life, for to
take away the spoil soakened in my blood. I have them here at your feet, not
retaining in mine own wrongs any right of a King, or father, but what your
justice will think fit to ordain, and prescribe: Yet ( Creat Caesar) I must
beg of you this request, that you would grant my old age, which you have so
much honored, some rest in mine own house, and to rescue me from the hands of
these Paricides. Also I do not think it any way expedient, that such
graceless, and ungrateful Sons, that have trod under feet the Laws of God and
men, should any longer look the Sun in the face, which should both witness,
and upbraid their folly.

The man spoke this with wonderful vehemence, so that he did amaze all the
assembly; and the poor youths which had as much innocence, as simplicity,
seeing themselves thus battered, and overborne with a tempest of words, which
they did never presage, made their eyes to weep an Apology, and they fall a
crying in good earnest: they strove to recover their speech, fearing that their
silence would prove them guilty; but the more they labored to vent their
thoughts, the more did their sobs interrupt their course.

Augustus Caesar, a judicious and humane Prince, saw well by their demeanor,
and countenance, that the young men were guilty of more misery, then mischief,
and casting a gracious look upon them Courage my Youths, says he to them,
stand firm, answer all by leisure, let nothing dismay, or trouble you. All the
Court did now pity them, and Herod too showed in his countenance, that he was
a little moved; so eloquent are our natural strength and arms Alexander seeing
the eyes of all to cast propitious, and favorable beams upon them, wakens his
spirits, and breaking through a throng of sighs (as he was pretty well tongued)
he spoke as follows: My Lord and Father, your Majesty has not (I trust)
brought us so far before the Altars of mercy, for to make us a sacrifice to
vengeance; we are at the knees of Caesar, as in the temple of clemency,
whither being conducted by your consent, and command, I must needs say, that as
your words were rough, and bitter, so are your proceedings most faite and
gentle. If calumny could have so altered your good nature, as to have wrought
you to assail our lives, to the disadvantage, and hazard of our innocence,
this you might have done in Palestine, as a Father, and as a King, the doom
and execution was in your own power: but God permitted it, that you have led us
to the court of Caesar, not to leave our heads here, which you have destinated
to a Crown, but to bring them back victoriously triumphing over detractio. It
is a strange thing, to invent so erroneous a crime against persons of our
quality and reputation, without alleging why, or how. Here is no speech of any
letters, poisons, complots, treacheries, Ministers subom'd to practice them,
only we are proclaimed Paricides, and the proofs left behind, not any
produced: if this suffices, there will not be found such exalted innocence in
the world, which slander will not dare to fasten his teeth upon. Our enemies,
who of a long time have been weaving this web, say nothing, but that we have
age and courage enough to perform this, and that we would one day attempt to
avenge our Mother Mariamnes death. As for the first reason, who sees not how
weak it is? If there needs but age, and courage to commit a murder, this were
to make the whole surface of the world a (...) and to overwhelm it with a
deluge of blood; to make all parents jealous, and mistrustfull, and all
children criminal. For the second reason, which touched out deceased Mother,
she has left us at those years, that we cannot as yet bemoan, or apprehend
well our miseries. Since we have outlived our childhood, we were never
desirous to pry into your cabinet counsels, to examine your justice: Her falt
to do ill should not have made us the more bold, but the more heedfull, and
studious to do well. We bestowed our tears upon her only, not to bewail her
death, but to satisfy our sorrows, seeing that our enemies ceased not to
disquiet her urne, whole blood they spilt. Father, if our tears which did
issue forth by the command of nature, behold crimes at your bar, where shall
we find any safety, but in your justice? Never among these our complaints did
there escape a hard, or irreverent speech against your self, but indeed
against those, who abuse your authority to the ruin of yours. We have no
reason to hate your life, but to love it; and by so much the more, in that you
have judged us capable, and worthy to inherit your Crown, before all our
brethren. You have given us all the ensigns of sovereignty, all the honor we
can expect; so that to demand more were to beg a License to undo our selves:
Why should we seek a Kingdom by a murder, which is to fall to us with your
consent, and good liking, that so Heaven, Earth, and Se as conspiring with
Caesar might bar those gates againstus, to the which we would have made a key
tempred in the blood of our Father. Your Majesty (it may be) has begot us
more unfortunate, then now it were expedient for your estate; but we shall
never be so foolishly impious, as to commit a villainy that would eternally
ruin us without recovery. Most honored Father, expel that fiend of suspicion
which has possessed you; or if it please you to entertain it longer we will both
part with our lives, whereof we are not so tenderly enamored, that we would
retain them, with the displeasure of him that gave them.

This speech attended with the tears of the young Princes did ravish all the
Auditors, and as they saw them both with dejected eyes, expecting the sentence
of the judge, each man burned with a defire to stand up in their justification,
Caesar casts his eyes on Herod, who showed himself to be much moved with
pity, and would have wished he had never thought on such an accusation; for
indeed this accusation did put him much out os conceit, and credit with the
assembly, and made him blame his credulity. Augustus not willing to shame him,
pronounced that (in truth) the children were much to blame, that they had any
way molested him; but as for the crime intended, he ought to raze it out of
his Register.

The young Princes were well bred, and brought up hitherto; it remained that
they should live henceforward in good correspondence, and renew the sacred bond
of nature, which could not be broken by so good a father, nor by the children,
who did promise so much and so fair for the future. This being spoken, Herod
embraces his Sons one after another with weeping eyes, which drew tears even
from those that were no way interessed in it.

After many Leuvoyes, and complements, behold them now on their return,
together with their father, and brother Antipater, who did act (though behind
the curtain) all this fair Tragoedy; nevertheless he did captivate them with
his courtesies, rejoicing and congratulating their good success, as if his
heart had blazed in joyful fires. So works the tyranny of dissimulation in
Courts until that God one day take off the mask! Being returned to Jerusalem,
a year did scarce run about, before that malice laid new giones, to the
innocence of these poor Princes. Pheroras thought within himself to possess
Alexanders head with jealousy, telling him with much secrecy, that his father
Herod did wantonly sport and dally with Glaphyra, his wife, (daughter of King
Archelaus) judging that this would be a powerful way to make him revolt, and
set him all in a rage against his father, and so to precipitate him to his
ruin. These words indeed did very senfibly touch this noble soul, that he
began thence forvvard to observe with a jealous eye, the actions of Herod,
who in truth played the minion all day with the young Princess, who was
endowed with surpassing feature, but more he could not discover at all in his
conversation: save the blandishments of a father in Law toward a daughter,
worthy to be cherisht for her many good parts. Yet notwithstanding Alexander,
after he had taken in this subtle intelligence of Pheroras, turned this honey
into poison, interpreting all to the worst, and was so transported therewith,
that (rushing one day to his fathers chamber, he declared unto him the
jealousy, and suspicion that he had conceived, with many sighs, and tears of
anger. Herod was much troubled with this imputation, and deeming it a thing
unbefitting his person to stir in justifying himself with multitude of
words, in excuse of that which vvanted not any, he says to him only, my
good Son, who has put this into thy head? The other replied. That he knew it
partly, and Pheroras did assure him of it. Pheroras is presently sent for and
Herod, who d^d ever u^e him like a servant, frowned upon him, as though he
would have looked him dead. Thou Rake-hell (quoth he) what have thou spoken to
this young man? It was not a tale which thou have vvhisper'd him in the ear,
but a sword thou have armed his hand with against his father: for he does
justly not to brook acompanion of his bed, no more would I of my Realm.
U^gratefull wretch should not thou have torn thy heart out of thy breast,
rather then conceived such a thought of thy brother? The house was never
tainted with such crimes, nor never shall, except thou pester it with thine:
Pa^k, and let me see thee no more; I ordain tortures for other delinquents,
but for thee (in that thou art so wicked) I leave thee to the rack of thine own
conscience, not finding a fitter executioner.

Pheroras nothing amated with this noise, answered, that he knew nothing, but
what Salome (who was there present) had told him; as indeed it sprung from her.
But the crafty Megera incontinently crying out, and tearing her hair, said, it
was a lamentable case, that she should be persecuted by all the world, only
for being faithful to her brother. Herod could not choose but stand amazed to
see these ruptures in his house; and he saw not in the mean while, that his bad
example was the sourse and original of all these curses that befell it. He did
nothing to Pheroras, but discard him for a time: for though he was much
incenst, yet he did not storm in earnest, but against those that he thought
to conspire against his estate; and Pheroras seemed to be none of those, for
he was a lewd person, a libertine that had married his maid for lust, refusing
a Kings daughter, and all his thoughts were bent only upon pleasure. It was by
others judged that this was no sufficient penance for Pheroras in such a fault,
and that this might increase the defiance between the Father and his Son. Now
see the reason why Antipater, who had always maintained his credit with Herod,
taking hold on this occasion, begins the battery more furiously then ever, and
having observed some familiarity between Alexander, and the three Eunuchs, that
were most entrusted with Herod's chamber, he gave intelligence under hand, that
Alexanders conspiracy was all finished, and that the chiefest Eunuchs about
Herod's chamber were his accomplices here in. They are forthwith attacht, and
tortured. Their bodies grown effeminate with ease and delicacie, seeing
themselves so rudely pincht, spoke both what they knew, and what they knew not,
and after all, they could not speak any thing, but of the bravery and youthful
boastings that had slipped from Alexanders mouth, as these and the like; That
these Eunuchs were but fools to adhere to an old dotard, who did color his
hair for to seem young, but it was bootles, his houre-glasse was run out, his
time was past, and theirs was come: that the kingdom could not escape them,
having justice, strength, and good credit to their side, yea and so many sons
of Mars, men of steel, and valor, that would not fail them in time of need.
Such speeches they uttered, but no such as Antipater pretended, and they spoke
too much for a suspicious head. It was a misery to see this miserable Court so
much dismembered, here was nothing to be heard or seen, but accusations,
defiances, distrusts and tortures. Every man looked one upon the other, and
thought he had no other way of security, but to prevent his companion. They
depose each day many ridiculous and improbable things that took no effect.
There were not found but one or two, that being pressed with the extremity of
pain, and to rid themselves out, said that Alexander had given out in Rome,
that his father was more inclined to the Parthians then to the Romans, and as
they redoubled their torments in the favor of Antipater, they did even speak
what ever they would have them; as that Alexander and Aristobulus had conspired
to make away their father by poison, and then to go to Rome to demand the
Crown, which had no show of probability; and as they were asked where was this
poison? They added that it was in the Castle of Ascalon. And diligent search
being made, there was no such matter found: Nevertheless Alexander is arested;
he being of a generous temper, and much moved to see executioners so busily
employed, spoke with a loud voice to Herod, by way of Irony, What needs all
these butcheries? Since that you will needs be deceived, why I have conspired
against your life: And if you desire to know with whom, it was with Pheroras,
your brother and sister Salome, with Ptolomie, Lapritius, and others of your
Conncellers. Kill all the world and you may reign alone in safety. He spoke
too mueh to be believed, and spoke it with an accent, that spoke nothing less.
He is hereupon shut up in prison for some days, until that Archelaus (King of
Capadocia) his father in law, being advertised of this disaster, arrives at
Herod's Court. He makes with Herod no rash encounter, charging him with too
much credulity, and the like with a mild temper. This was not the course to
deal with a man that desired altogether to justify his actions. The
Capadocian with a mild temper strikes sail, makes a show of great pity to see
him in these troubles; saying, that his sons did him great wrong to molest him
in this wise, that he came thither not to excuse his own son in law, but to
punish his own daughter, if she were faulty. Herod took such comfort to hear
him speak in that manner, that the tears trill'd down his cheeks: And
Archelaus seeing that he found it fit season for persuasion, begins by degrees
to tell him, that intruth the young Princes showed somewhat too much
stubbornness, but their youth and gentleness were abused, and it were well if
this were looked to. He acted his part so well that he at last dispelled the
mist of calumny. And Glaphira seeing her self now upon the stage, did with
good language, and her tears carry all she would for her husband, so that the
poor prisoner was forthwith released.

Herod began now to live like a Cyclops in his Cave, walking still in the
mists, and darkness of distrustful fears, and each moment upon the point to
perpetrate fresh cruelties. And when they saw him to be so much frighted with
shadows, Antipater did not fail to supply him with stuff, and matter to feed
his suspicions, thereby to advance his own tortunes. There arrives an impostor,
a Grecian to the Court of Judea, named Euricles, in the state, and equipage of
a Prince, and bestowed many presents on Herod, for to insinuate to his favors.
The unhappy King likes well of the man, and places him in the list, and number
of his most intimate friends. He did Iodge with Antipater, and (seeing him
predominant in Court) in all his actions he studied to win his favor, and
liking above all, which he did abtain by conversing frequently, and familiarly
with Alexander, and fetching the secrets of his heart, which he would after
report (true, or false) to the ears of Herod, who did give him much credit.

Three years being scarce past over, behold calumny disgorgeth the rest of
its venom: Two soldiers of Herod's guard being casheer'd for some light
offense, were afterward imprudently received into Alexanders house, who did
favor them seeing they were men of goodly personages, and capable of good
service. These are accused to have partakt in the conspiracy, they are
immediately apprehended and put upon the rack; the violence of the to^ments
forced them to say that by the solicitation of Alexander and Aristobulus they
had a design upon the person of Herod for to kill him in hunting. At that very
time the Governor of the Alexandrine Citadell (which was one of the strongest
piec^s of the Realm) is charged to have promised to betray it into the power
of these young Princes which he did stiffly renege.

But his son who had suffered some disgrace by his father, steps out and says
the deposition was true: then he produced letters as from Alexander, which
confirmed it, which were thought notwithstanding to have come from Secretary
Diophantes, who made a trade of such forgeries.

Herod required no farther proofs, he makes his two sons to be laid hold on,
and resolves to destroy them. And indeed every man from that time forward held
them but lost men. While these things were in motion, Melas one of the
Councillors of the King of Capadocia comes to Judea to know where lay the
knot and difficulty of the business; he finds the discord very much rankled
and festred beyond his art and remedies. The wicked father convents his son
(calling him from prison) before Melas, there to examine him, and to charge him
with such crimes as were deposed against him. Alexander asks where the
depone^ts were? It was answered they were now dead. H^e replied that this was
wrong dealing to put them to death with a lie in their mouths, which was
extorted from them by force of torments, and to seal the^ up for ever that
they might not deliver the truth. As for him and his brother Aristobulus they
had no other intention then to fly to Capadocia and thence to Rome for to
deliver themselves from the violent hands of their father. When Herod heard him
speak of the voyage to Capadocia, he desires Melas to enquire particularly of
Glaphira, if she did not reveal more evidence touching this design; who when
she law at first entry her husband in bolts, it was a pittious thing to see how
it afflicted her. O my dear husband, says she, are these the favors your
father bestows on you! Is this the Diadem that he has promised you? Grief
that clogged her heart smothered the rest. A spring of tears flowed from
Alexanders eyes, who loved her most dearly, and all the company was so moved
with this piteous spectacle, that those who sat there to examine them, looked
one upon another, and forgot the formality of justice. Herod demanded of
Alexander if his wife were not, privy to all his secrets, he made answer, that
for her deserts and discretion he, never concealed ought from her. The poor
Princess was somewhat frighted at the speech, yet spoke very simply that she
was ignorant of all that was past as the child that was yet unborn: howbeit she
was very ready to tell a ly for to save her husband, and she never used to
disavow any fault that her husband should tax her with. Alexander being touched
to the quick with her pious intention tells her, Madam never wonder at it, you
know well that I never had any other drift but to bring you to Capadocia to see
the King your Father; lo that is all our offense. This did not cure Herod, but
made his suspicion yet to extend toward King Archelaus, taking it ill that he
would have withdrawn his son without his leave, and knowledge: he sends the
prisoners back to their quarter, and in the mean while dispatcheth new
Embassadou^s to Rome for to justify himself of some false aspersions cast
upon him, and to obtain from Caesar the liberty to dispose of his Children
according as justice would require, which was granted him. The young Princes
were so exclaimed upon and belied with such strange reports at Rome, that there
was no man would adventure to undertake their defense. He being very glad of
such specdy and successful audience (as he was a man full of formalities, who
did always give his passions the gloss and tincture of justice. He calls a
Council for the arraigning of his sons, admitting all those that he saw, and
knew to be ill informed, for to favor his intentions, and omitting others that
might any way divert or hinder them; among others Archelaus, who was expressly
named by Caesar for to examine the cause. Morcover, which was horrible
injustice, he would not have his sons to appear before the Judges to hear
what they could speak in their own defense, but he enters to the Court full
gorged with gall and venom; he was never seen to change the Copy of his
countenance so much as that time; his passions had all transsigur'd him in such
sort, that he spoke such words, and did such actions as little beseem his
gravity: his friends were mistaken in him, and he seemed to them to be a savage
rather then a King: sometimes he did complain and lament, sometimes stood
mute and stamped for anger; he produced some Letters of his sons that carried
nothing of weight but only their journey to Capadocia, and yet notwitstanding,
as if he gained some greatvictory, he cries out, my Masters, what say you to
this? See you not this ungracious dealing! O that I had dyed before I had know
and seen such treachery! Then he says he would refer all to the course of
justice, that he would do nothing through passion, and anon he proclaims,
that he had not called the Assembly for to pass a Judgment, but to follow and
subscribe to his sentence, that posterity might with the more horror speak of
such Parracides, then playing the Scribe or Theologer, he quotes Deuteronomy,
where it is permitted to Fathers to stone their rebellious children to death,
then he shows Caesar's Letters, which with them carried more strength then his
Deuteronomy, and insisted so much upon them, as if the Delinquents had been
formerly condemned by the sentence of Augustus Caesar. When they came to reckon
the voices, Saturnine a Roman, one of Consular dignity and great authority,
diswaded plainly this cruelty, telling him that he was himself a Father, and
he knew what it was to be such a one, and that Herod would repent of his
rashness: this good man had three of his sons with him at that time, all
gallant men and employed in places of dignity and trust, who did plead in
favor of the young Princes, but all to no effect. After them starts up one
Voluminous a rude fellow, who was a prime man, and a leader of the factious
file, which was impanell'd to serve Herod's purposes; these all with one accord
past a sentence of death most unjustly: when this arrest was divulged abroad,
an old soldier of Herod's guard named Tero, much moved with the news, straight
goes to the palace, and desires to speak with the King in private, which was
permitted him: This good man taking him aside uttered his tale so seriously,
and withal so boldly, that he stuck not to say that he had lost his wits, when
he would put to death the true heirs for to set up a Viper, who in fine would
gnaw his bowels when he thought himself safest. Herod at first listened to him
patiently; but when he ran on to much on that strain, he asked him who were
those that found fault with his proceedings? why that is I (said the old man)
and these and these persons of quality, which he reckoned unto him. Herod sends
him to safe custody, while he makes sure of the rest, whom he dooms all to die.
Then causing his sons to be brought all to the City of Sebast, he
dispatcheth two of the most cruel Lictors that he had in his service, for to
strangle them in prison. The poor Princes, who expected nothing less then such
a sentence, seeing the dreadful visages of these hel-hounds, and the horrid
shape of death before their eyes, grew pale and bloodlesse with fear, and asked
them what news they brought? but they taking them apart like sheep aocounted
for the slaughter, and showing them the instrument of death, they plainly
discovered the reason of their coming; for without any more ado they took
them by the throats, and putting the fatal cords about, strangled them by
maine force without any mercy. Poor Glaphira, who did yet cherish a good hope
of her husband's desiverance, when she was a preparing of new batteries to move
her Father in law to mercy, she hears at once the sad story of Alexander's
death, and her own widow. hood: she was for a good while in a swoune, and
after recovery stood as mute as a statue, then recollecting her spirits, and
fetching a deep and hearty sigh, Alas quoth she I never thought that Herod
would proceed to this! Tell him his sacrifice of cruelty is not yet complete:
Lo here one moyty of it yet survives. Alexander, my dear Alexander, that
live eternally in my heart, must thou have ended thy candid innocent days by
such an infamous executioner? Must thou have for thy hangman one whom nature
had given for thy Father? Thou should at least have called for me to receive
the last breathing of thy departing soul, to receive thy last speeches, and to
lay them up in the Cabinet of my heart. Then turning to her two children that
were by her side: Alas poor Orphans, your Father will no more dandle you, and
you must now begin your apprentiship of misery in this tender age. The poor
Lady did afflict her self extremely day and night, and being not able to live
any longer in the Court of Judea, no more then in a Lion's den, she was sent
back to Capadocia to the King her Father. Herod retained her two sons under
color of bringing them up; but indeed for his greater safety, for fear that
their name might serve for a pretense to some revolt.

O the providenceof the Almighty! Thou seem too tardy in pouring vengeance
upon the heads of malefactors. These young Princes the children of so virtuous
a Mother, so well educated, and so complete for all good parts, being declared
heirs apparent to the Crown: These Princes, who were seen (but five years
before) to return in triumph from Rome to Jerusalem, like the two twin-starres
that gilded all Palestine with their resplendent beams: These Princes who
promised so many Trophies, and so many wonders, behold them now in their
verdant years, in the flower of their hopes, at the gate of the Temple of
honor, for a little freeness in language unmercifully massacred, and instead
of a crown upon their head, die with cords about their necks, strangled by the
hands of two of Herod's guard! Lo the goodly apprentiship, and essays that
Herod made three years before the birth of our Savior for to prepare himself
for actions, yet more horrible and tragical! It is said of Sylla that if mercy
her self were in humane flesh upon the earth, he would have slain her; but
Herod did what was worse, after so many butcheries his thirst of blood could
not yet be satisfied, but imbrues his hands in the blood of 14000 Innocents,
and seeks to destroy the Savior of mankind, the Son of God himself, as every
man knows the story out of holy Writ.

It Is now time to see the guerdon of these distorted degenerous souls, that
we may observe the line or course of divine providence, which does use to
inflict some exemplary punishments here on earth on the wicked, and to give
them a relish of those eternal pains they shall endure in hell.

Detestable Antipater, who had contrived these mischiefs, seeing the two
heirs of the Kingdom made away by his undermining wit, thought he had
already mounted half the degrees to the Throne: He continued in his quaint
rogueries, and malicious pranks, still lurking under the mask of piety, as one
that had extreme care of the life and state of his Father, aiming in the mean
while at no other but then to make himself shortly absolute Lord: And fearing
that Herod's affection toward him (which was ever wavering and changeable,)
should cool, he goes about every day to practice great intelligences to make
his cards, and win benevolence; but he was hated of the people as a Tigre,
and the soldiers that knew him guilty of his brethrens blood (who were so well
beloved of the nobles) could never affect him.

The Commonalty above all were extremely touched with compassion, passion, when
ever the children of Alexander and Aristobulus (who were brought up in Herod's
court) were led in the streets. All the world beheld the poor Orphans with
weeping eyes, and with much anguish of soul called to mind the disasters of
their Fathers. Antipater saw well that it was exp^dient for him to absent
himself from the Court, both to extinguish envy, and that he might not sindge
his wings by flickering too long about the candle, fearing that in time his
Father (who was but too cunning in such matters) would sent him out and his
projects. Yet not withstanding he was so close, that he would not openly
beg leave of Herod for absence, for fear he should engender suspicion, but
he got his friend at Rome (with whom he dealt under hand) to write letters to
his father in his behalf, which effected all that he desired, namely; that it
was expedient for him to send him to Rome, for to break and divert some
enterprises of the Arabians on the Kingdom of Judea. Herod having received
these Letters, dispatcheth him presently, with a very goodly equipage; with
great Presents, and the Testament withal, whereby he was declared King after
his fathers decease. Lo fortune has filled the sails of his desires! But as
the eye of the Almighty never sleeps, and takes the crafty in their own
imaginations, it happened that Pheroras, who as we have related, acted his part
in this bloody tragoedy, departed this world by a sudden death, and poisoned
as it was thought by the maid which he had married.

Herod being entreated to go over to his brothers house to make inquisition of
the fact, finds by good warrant and far besides his thoughts, how that
Antipater his son had sent Pheroras (when he was in disgrace and out of favor
at Court) some poison for to make away his father then while he was at Rome,
that so he might return immediately to Palestine with his temples girt with a
Diadem. This was deposed by a son of Antipaters farmer, whom he had made
overseer of his estate during his absence; which was seconded with such
pregnant and strong presumptions and evident circumstances, that there was now
nothing left to suspend his belief. Herod asks where was this poison? The
young man replied, it was with the window of his brother Pheroras she being
questioned concerning it got up to an upper room, pretending to go and fetch
it, but being got up to the top of the house, in a desperate manner she casts
her self down headlong; but it pleased God that this fall proved not mortal
according to her desire. They did encourage her and made all promises of
impunity, if she would but freely confess the truth: She confesses that
indeed her husband had a poison sent from Antipater, and that he was once
minded for to do the deed, but it repented him a little before his death, and
he detested such wickedness: and upon these words she takes out the poison
which they sound to be most deadly, by making experiment upon condemned
persons. At that very time Eathillus a freeman of Antipaters was surprised,
coming from Rome to Judea, to advise Pheroras to hasten his design, and
bringing another poison, in case the former did not prove effectual. In the
mean time Antipater writes to his Father, that he labored diligently at Rome
to dispell some clouds of slander and to clear his affairs, which he hoped
to bring about, and to return very shortly for Judea. Herod who would have long
since caught him in his claws, sends to him these lines;

Son, my declining age and the crazinesse of my body do every day instruct
me that I am mortal, one thing comforts me that I have made choice of your
person to succeed me in my Throne: I shall see my old age spring again and
flourish in your and my death to be smothered (as it were) in your life, seeing
that I shall live in my other half, which is your dear self. I would you had
continued still near my person, not only for the assistance your piety still
afforded me, but for the prejudice that might acrew to your fortune by your
absence: Fail not therefore with the good leave of Caesar to render your self
here present with the best speed you can; delay will not any way favor your
affairs here. This bayt had charm enough to allure, and art enough to conceal
the hook. Upon these news, he was ready to ride upon the wings of the wind to
present himself in Jerusalem: He dispatcheth his business, takes leave of
Augnstus, and makes all expedition possible to show the behests of his father.
It was very strange, that he could never have any advertisements by the way of
what had passed, so odious was he to God and man! But being at Cilicia he
learnt that his mother was discarded and expelled the Court, which did much
affright him, and he thought to beat his way back again: But one of his
Council (perchance suborned by Herod) begins to tell him, that if there were
nothing intended against him he needed not to fear, and if any slander was
broacht of him, he ought to make the more have to quash it, other wise his
absence would but cause further suspicion. He swallows the advice, and (not
withstanding some secret reluctancie, and remorse of conscience) he follows
the road for I^dea. when he was arrived at the haven of Sebaste he began to
(...) into deeper apprehensions of danger then ever; for having seen at this
very Port not long before at his departure such a throng of people tearing the
air with their acclamatio^s, not for any love they owed to him, but to show
their obeisance to Herod, who would have it so; but he now perceived that
fortune had turned tail, he was received with a lowering countenance, and some
did look upon him askue with a quarter face, and murmured between their teeth,
as cursing him for that he had spilt his brethrens blood. He was engaged too
far on to make retrair, and Gods vengeance had already marked out his lodgings.
He goes on from Sebaste strait for Jerusalem, and marches to the Palace,
sumptuously apparelled, and with a numerous train: the Guard made way for him
to enter, but were commanded by the King to keep back all those that attended
him; he was quite astonished to see himself caught so like a bird in a net,
nevertheless he goes on his way, enters the hall where his father staid,
expecting his approach, accompanied with Quintilius Varus lately sent from Rome
to be Governor of Syria. When he had made a most reverend submissive congy,
he draws near to kiss his father according to the manner of the Country,
but he straightvvaies hears the roaring of a Lion, for Herod dravving a step
back cries out, Stand aloof Murderer, it is not for you any more or any such
to receive the welcome kisses of a father: Behold there Q. Varus your Judge,
bethink your self by to morrow how to answer to such crimes as you are charged
with. He was thunderstrooke with this speech and withdrew himself out of the
room with palenesse in his face, and the horror of his crime in his
conscience. In the next chamber he finds his mother and his wife all drencht
in tears, who with lamenting eyes had already solemnized his funeral: such an
astonishment seized upon him that he had neither a tongue to comfort them, nor
so much as tears to bewail his own misfortunes. He past over all the night
with much disquiet of mind, finding now by experiment that it was easier for
to commit a crime then excuse it. The morrow being come, he was called before
the judgment seat, where he found his father with Q. Varus and a good number
of the Counselors of state. Upon the very point, news was brought of some
letters of his mother that were intercepted, which did give him notice that all
was discovered, and that he should beware to return and put himself into the
hands of his father, if he would not fall into the jaws of a Lion. This was
showed him at his entry into the Council* Chamber, he expected but the hour
when he should be strangled, he was already under the Strapadoes of his
conscience; therefore casting himself down on his knees, he begs of his
father that he might not be condemned before he were heard: Herod replies,
Varlet what have thou to say? Has God reserved thee to be the last scourge of
my old age? Thou know I have taken thee from the bottom and lees of fortune
for to place thee above thy brethren, both beyond and against all hopes. I have
put all my treasures, my revenues, my authority, my affection, my secrets, my
heart, and my Crown into thy hands by a testament scaled with mine own hand,
and could not thou expect till thy Fathers eyes were closed up by a natural
death, that thou might freely enjoy them? This was it that thy designs did
then aim ^^ when thou did so hotly pursue the death of thy brethren. I have
done nothing in their araignment, but by thy denunciation, and advice. Accursed
wretch, I am afraid that thou have stained me with their blood; thy crimes
does now give light to their (...) At these words he wept bitterly, recalling
to mind his Mar^^^^, and unhappy children, he fou^^ his heart so oppressed with
sorrow, that he was feign to entreat his Chancellor Nicholas Damascene to
proceed. Antipater prevented him and spoke in his own defense, That they did
him great wrong to believe slaves, and women to his prejudice, that he had
Casars letters (whom he could no more deceive then God himself) which gave
ample testimony of his good abeare, and what content he gave to all at Rome;
that he was never wanting in his piety toward his Father; and it were a piece
of extreme folly to thrust himself into uncertain dangers for a Crown that he
was certain of, and had in his own hands. Briefly, not to make a longer
discourse, that he offered himself to be used like a slave, and to be set
upon the rack to prove his innocence. And speaking this he did rave, and stamp
in a fearful manner, insomuch that he began to move all the bench to pity
and wonder. Nicholas Damascene being a stern and rough Judge, takes him in
hand, confronts him with witnesses, canvasseth him, presses, puzles, and quite
confounds him, then discharges a invective against him, exaggerating (like an
Orator) all the circumstances of his crime. Is it not (says he) a brutish
stupidity to conspire against your Father, the blood of your brethren being as
yet before your eyes, and all the assurances of a Scepter in your hands. must a
man needs be a Parricide for to be possessour of a Crown which was bequeathed
you by Testament so solemn and authentic? Did you expect any more then that
your Fathers blood should be the seal? and such a father whose life is precious
among all good men, and whose nature is so indulgent in favor of his children,
deserve they never so little. An ingratitude able to make heaven to blush, and
the earth to tremble under our feet, yea and worthy that all the elements
should conspire to chastise it. The man ran on thus in fire and fury; pouring
out a torrent of words, while the wreteh Antipater with a dejected countenance
pra^'d God to work some miracle in his behalf for to manifest his innocence,
seeing that he was mercilesly oppressed by the malice of his adversaries. It is
strange that a man who had no god in his life time, would now seek one at his
death. This man lived as though there were neither heaven nor Hell, and seeing
him so near the brink of death, he besough a Daity to patronize his offense.
Varus speaks to him, my friend, expect not any extraordinary signs from heaven
on your behalf, but if you have any specious reason or Apology produce it
into evidence, the King your Father desires nothing more then that you might
quit your self nobly. Upon this he was confounded as a lost man. Varus taking
the poison which was brought to the judgment seat caused it to be given to a
Malefactor that was sentenced to death, who died immediately in the place;
whereupon all the assembly arose forth with, thereby giving manifest token of
Antipater's condemnation. His Father now holding him for convict, demands of
him who were his accomplices, he named but Antiphilus

Philus only who had brought the poison, and said that that Varlet had been the
cause of his undoing. It wanted but little, that Herod did not then presently
execute the sentence of death; but according to his ordinary proceedings he
resolved to acquaint Caesar therewith first, and to send him the process with
full instructions of the examination, that so he might do according to his
good pleasure. In the mean while Antipater is shut up in close prison,
expecting each day (like a piacular victime) the fatal stroke.

Herod moreover had now about threescore and ten years upon his back, and by
the feebleness of his age perceived the signalls of deaths approach: This was a
bit very tough to digest, never did any man love this life so well; he had
verily parted with his portion in the other world, that he might enjoy this
forever, for that, indeed he was superlatively wicked. Toward his later days
he grew so pensive and thenso choleric, and furious, that his domestic
servants knew not how to board him. He was in his Court like an old Lion bound
in the chains of incurable diseases: He persuaded himself, that he was
hated of all the world, and he was not deceived in his opinion, for he had
given but too much occasion.

The people burst the yoke of duty and allegiance, and could no longer endure
him. As soon as the rumor ran of his sickness, Iudes and Mathias, two of the
most famous Doctors of the Jewish law, who had all the youth of Jerusalem
under their charge, instigated stigated some of the boldest of their sect unto
a ve^turous attempt, as thus. Herod having reedified and much beautified the
Temple of Jerusalem (as he had always showed himself for his own interrests
an Idolater of Caesar's fortune,) caused on the chiefest gate thereof to be
planted the Roman Eagle which glittered all in gold: This was a great eyesore
to the Jews, who never could endure any shape of man or beast within their
Temples: so much did they abhor these monsters which their fathers in Egypt
adored. Lo this was the reason why Judas M^athias, who were as the principal
men (thinking that Herod's sickness favored their purposes) began to exhort in
good earnest the most valiant of the young men that frequented their houses, to
take in hand Gods quarrel according to the noble spirits of their ancesters
and to batter down this abomination that was advanced upon the Temple: the
danger was not now so great, Herod being cumbred with businesses and diseases,
but if it should happen that any should loose his life, to dye in so good and
glorious an act was to dye triumphant, and Laurells would grow up out of their
tombs. They faild not to spur up these younkers, and to set an edge on their
courage, with many specious and plausible arguments. Lo a regiment of the most
resolute of them, goes forth at midday, armed with axes and hatchets, who
scale the Temple and quash in pieces the Eagle in the sight of all the world;
Judas and Matthias being then present, and serving as trumpets to the sedition.
The noise arrived presently at Court, the Captain of the Guard runs thither
with a maniple of the hardiest soldiers, he was afraid of some greater matter
toward, and that this demolition was but a velitation, or skirmish of a
greater tumult. But at first onset, when he began to charge, the people did
retire, which did encourage him to fall on, and to follow closer: forty young
men that were busiest were taken in the place, Judas and Matthias bearing them
company, thinking it a dishonor to recoile, and that they ought to follow them
at least into danger, whom they at first had lead into mischiefs. As they were
presented to Herod, and being asked whence proceeded that insolent presumption
and rashness, they frankly answered that the business had been consulted of,
and well discust among them, and if it were yet to be done, they were ready to
put into execution: forasmuch as they were more obliged to obey Moses then
Herod. Herod some what startled with their resolution, and fearing greater
commotions, caused them secretly to be conveyed to Ierico, whether himself was
carried, though weak and sickly. Then assembling the chiefest of them, he
speaks to them from his couch, making a large narration of the good offices he
had done to that nation, of the Temple which he had built, the ornaments with
which he did enrich in; adding that in few years he had done what their
Hassamonean Kings could not in 120, and in recompense of his piety they went at
high-noon to violate with strange insolence a sacred donative he bestowed on
the Temple, in the which God was more interessed then himself, and therefore
he did so much the more require a reason of this attempt.

These men fearing to awake his anger, further did falsify and clude the blow,
and did transfer it all on their companions, abandoning them to the discretion
of the king. Thereupon the Priest hood was taken away from Matthias, and
another Matthias, who was held to be a ringleader in the sedition, was burnt
alive with his companions that same night, at which time was seen an eclipse
of the Moon, which made the spectacle yet more terrible. Herod some few days
after having tried, and spent in vain all humane remedies, was brought into a
miserable state of sickness, which is pertinently described by Josephus and
Ensebius. It was Gods pleasure he should drink often and deep of the cup of
his justice in this life, wasting his wretched body with tedious pains.
therefore he was smote from heaven, and was charged with a fierce squadron of
incurable diseases, he that from his youth up did bu^^ with a furious ambition,
felt at his death a greedy fire feeding on his entralls: he that all his
lifetime, had an insatiable thirst of a massing treasure (insomuch that he
dug up the tombs of David and Solomon for to ransack the spoils) was
tormented with a Dog appetite; a horrible disease, and which modesty fears to
deseribe, which made him cry out for hunger, eating day and night and could not
be satisfied, he that made so many voiages and performed so many achievements
to raise himself above the level of ordinary fortunes, saw then his feet
swolen with redundant humors. He that practiced so many ^ortures in his life
time, was now rackt with the violent and intolerable pangs of a Chollick: he
that bereaved so many men of their breath, did now draw breath with much
difficulty and pain: He that held humane wisdom and policy for the nerves
and strength of his estate, felt now in his body such Cramps and Convulsions of
Nerves and Sinews, that he was sorely and pitifully shaken: He that had
shed poor Mariamnes blood, murdered her Sons for to make the Kids boil in
the milk of the Damme, as the Scripture speaks: He that had imbrued his hands
in the blood of about

14000 innocents with an intention to involve the Savior of the world in that
general massacre died in his own blood afflicted with a cruel dissentry. He
that had abused his member. with monstrous luxury was overrun and consumed
with an army of Lice, accompanied with an ignominious satiriasme, a disease
which I scarce dare name. And now, say the eye of providence is not awakt for
the punishing of delinquents. This desperate wretch at his death instead of
adoring the justice of God and kissing the rod that gave him correction, thinks
on now slaughters. He assembles by an edict the most principal of the jews
out of every Province unto Ierice, and having pounded the^ within the cirque
he calls to him his Sister Salome and her husband

Alexander, and addresseth his speech unto them in this manner.

It grieves me not at all to dye and to render that tribute to nature, which
so many Kings before me have paid. But it troubles me that my death will not be
so much bemoaned as I could wish, if you do refrain your hands. Know then that
for this purpose I have sent for these Nobles of Irdea; As soon as ever death
shall draw these Curtains over mine eyes, let them all fall by the edge of the
sword, and let not my death be divulged before that the news of these men's
death arrive at each ones Country and kindred. By this means I hope to fill
all Judea with lamentation and woe, which will be music to my soul as her
last departure. This pernicious fiendin thus spealing, be fought

Sister with hot tears, by all that she esteemed in the world most precious
and sacred, and as she hoped for Paradise, to perform his will, and to give him
content: she must promise it with an oath at that very instant, though
afterward it was not at all put in execution.

In this sole act he showed that he was not informed with a reasonable soul,
he was but a wolf in man's skin and shape, and that the thirst of humane blood
was now changed into his nature. As he was making this goodly Testament,
Letters were brought him from Caesar which did acquaint him that one Acme a
lewish Damsel, who was of the train of Livia the wife of Augustus, had been
convicted of bad intelligence with Antipater, and was therefore punished with
death, as for his sons he referred them wholly to his own disposal. This
man at the point of death sucked revenge yet with wonderful pleasure. This
news was balm to his tortured carcass, he calls for an apple and a knife,
thinking to pare it himself, but thereupon his pains (that had given him but
short truce) assaild him with double force, so that he was quite weary of his
life which he had so dearly loved. One of his grand children named Achiabus,
who at that time stood near the bed, perceived that he rolled his eyes
furiously, and looked as though he would have rid himself of his torments with
the knife he had in his hand, which did much affright the young Prince, who
holding his arm as gently as he could, he began to cry out, as though his
good father had yielded up the Ghost, wherewith the whole Court was mustered
up. Antipater out of his prison overheard the tumult, and suspected that Herod
was a dying, he did not yet despair of the Crown, offering mountains (as we
say) of gold to his Warder to let him escape.

But behold the judgment of God! the keeper of the prison instead of all the
ample rewards that were promised him, and which he might have enjoyed, he goes
strain way to the Father and relates to him how that. Antipater had urged him
withal supplications and promises to let him loose out of the prison, that he
might take possession of the kingdom. Herod ra^ing and beating his head, cries
out. what will the villain murder me in my bed, I have yet life enough to
take away his, then raising him self a little upon the boulster, and leaning
upon his elbow, he calls to one of the Guard, go you (quoth he) hence to the
prison and kill that parrici^e there, and let him be interred in the Castle of
Hyrcanus with out any Rites, or solemnities of a funeral. This was instanrly
executed, and such was the end of this unhappy thing, who moved Earth and Hell
for to mount his fathers throne, according as some Matherfaticians had foretold.

Five days being exphed from the death of Antipater, Herod after he had
declared Arche^aus for his Succed out in the Realm, contrary to (...)
determination, whereby he had designed it for Antipater, after he had astorted
to his two other Sons such portions as he thought good, and beqdeathed large
Legacies to August us Caesar he gave up his wretched soul in rage, and
despair, in the year of his life threescore and ten, and of his reign 37. A
man (says losephus) whose actions always overrul'd the Laws, land his
passions them, who notwithstanding all his prosperity was esteemed the most
miserable man in the world. Mark how this Author speaks, who was a wise
Statesman to instruct humane policy, that there is neither wisdom, nor
greatness, nor happiness where God is wanting. For to let pass (...)
eternal torments of the oth^^ (...) which this barbaro^^ (...) under the hand
of (...). I am verily perswad^^ (...) there is no Pesant, nor Hin^^ (if he be
not stupid) would change one day of his life for the thirty seven years of

Herod's reign, which he past in continual jealousnesse, troublesome
affairs, perilous voyages, sinister mistrusts, barbarous cruelties, and
remorse of conscience, which is the harbenger, and preamble of Hell. Leaving
more over behind him a numerous, and unhappy Posterity.

FINIS.

