Precepts of Cato with annotacions of D. Erasmus of Roterodame very profitable
for all men



To the right worshipful, sir Thomas Cauerden knight, Robert Burrant wishes
much prosperous health and wealth.
RIght worshipful sir, all questions set a part, the only fame and good
report, which ye do right worthily deserve of your so very excellent gifts
and qualities, and especially your upright judgment, with most prudent and
sage wisdom in Marciall affairs annexed, seem not unworthy the patronship of
the precepts of the antique and witty Cato Forasmoche as ye do not only
imitate and follow like circumspecte gravity and policy, but also do with
your like factes and propreties reuest and newly garnishe the wisdom of Cato.
I suppose that if the fates and destinies would suffer Cato to revive again,
and were certified into whose tnicio^ and saufe defense he were dedicate, he
would either coumpt himself the most fortunate of all other, or else would
willingly surrender his right and title, that he could claim or demand in
this his precepts, unto your discrecion. Co^sideryng that ye were hable to
purchase unto him a more ample inheritance of fame immortal, whom he would
find so legitimate and natural a soonne, and heir of his politic wisdom,
who for his merueilous inuencions and witty coneighaunce in warrefare, is not
only of ancient Capitaines to be followed, and of young warriers to be
practiced, but also of children to be learned. And finally, for this his
excellency deserves not only of the Grecians, and Latinistes to be read and
known, but also to be translated into the Oulgare toungue of all nations.
Receive therefore here your father Catons inheritance.

And with your like wisdom, caufe kept his substance.



To the reader.
AS often as I do by my foolish wit and simple brain (most beneuolent
reader) somewhat earnestly considre the witty, sage, yea, rather divine and
heavenly then humain and worldely scio^ces of the antique Philosophers, they
do cause me not a little to marvel at the wounderfull gifts of God. For
truly if a man should judge them only in their monumentes and writings,
and there were no perseverance of their names, times, or belief, I know not
who would coumpt them unworthy the names of perfect christians. Forasmoche as
their precepts and teachynges, their judgments and wits, and (if
Historiographers be to be believed) their honesty, civility, and most
brotherlike conversation, were so passing and excellent. what Chistian is hable
in this our time to comprehend like works to that very Heathen Plato or
Aristotle. Would to god (o Plato) thy faith might have deserved the name of a
divine philosopher, as thy writings did. Show me one of us all (that have
rather the name then the true perfection of christians) that is like, or in any
part resembles the humility and patience that Socrates had? Diogenes was
called a dog, either for some sluttishe co^dicio^s he had, or else for his
barkyng at other men's evil living. But yet where is the perfeictest liver of
us all that can vouchesafe with as glad a will to forsake the world and his
delights and felicities, as that Dog did? Shall we show our selves to be
of less perfeccio^ then this dog? truly we lack soche a good barkyng curre
now a days, to bark at these mischeuous theftes, coueteousnesse, Lechery,
pride, perjury, and Deuilishe Simonie. But least any soche banddogge chance
to open his mouth at us now, we will be sure to have in our sleue either some
little cord to tie him up in a kenell, or else we will cast him a gobbet of meat
to stop his throat, that he may leave his barkyng. But nothing, no bread or
meat no cherishyng, or making much of, could make this Dog Diogenes cease
his barkyng. Oh it was an exceadyng good Curre, and had many good propreties:
to bait bears, that is, coueteous, lecherous, and proud persons, ye might
use him for a ba^dogge or mastife. To keep wolves, or other rauenyng beasts
from our sheep that is, extorcioners and oppressors from the simple people, he
was as a good shepeherdes curre. To find and put up game, and to retrain
the same, that is, to seek out evil disposed persons, and openly to reprehende
and rebuke them, there could be no better Spanell. To overtake his game, that
is, to pervert the naughty purposes of evil livers, there was no swifter
Graiehounde. And for to pursue the steps of the wicked, he was a passing good
bloudhounde, I pray to God that we be not found wourse, then this dog, or
at least ways having that worse propretie of a dog that is, retournyng to
the flithie vomit of our sinful life. I would to Christ's passion there were
no more desire of worldelie felicities in the Church of Christ, then was in
this simple Heathen dog Diogenes. But yet Diogenes, nor any of all the
philosophers, or of all the wise antique sage me^, had so singular and perfeict
gifts, nor pricked nigher the straight mark and poinct of a catholic man
then this severe and most prudente Caton. Whose lack of faith and
christianity, there is no man of understanding and Judgment, but (...) most
pensiuely sorome and lam(...) Let a man only with good judgment and sincere
intelligence peruse this little work of his Precepts, he shall find nothing
to have missed or wanted in this Cato, to the perfeccion of Christ's religion,
saving the hope and faith that a christian man ought to have in the bloudde of
Jesus Christ. There is no degree among me^ but here they may learn their
duty and office toward God and man. All kinds and all ages has here their
lesson taught the^, how to behave the^ selves in all states and co^dicions. So
that this little book does worthily deserve to be had in favor with man
woman, and child. Forasinoche as in it is contained the good instruccion and
better reformacion of all their lives. He that will have good and Godly poses
and titles, either in his arms badges, cognisaunces, or in the borders
(...)his hanginges, in this book ma(...) have them, which be right worthy
to be graven and written with golden letters, or if there be any thing more
precious. Howbeit we se many yea, to many (if it were the will of god) to
ornate and deck their shildes arms, and houses with goodly and gorgeous
letters, yet they the^ selves never a lote the better in their living So that
they have fairer arms and walls, then soulles, and minds. I would not
therefore that thou should painte thy house, and florishe thy arms, and
leave thy soulle filthy. But I would thou should furnishe the behauiours of
thy mind with these good lessons, and there is no doubt, but thou shall
avoid the occasion of many euilles, and attain to the perfeccion of many
Godly knoweleges and divine Precepts, and of no aucthour Heathen, then of
Caton, more sincerely and perfe^ctly written.

THE PREFACE OF Cato his Precepts.
AFter that I perceived not a few to err and miss in the true trade and way
of good nurtour, I thought to put to my help yng hand and counsel in the
repairing of the same their ruin: for this inte^r specially that they might
live i some reputacion and honesty, and might thereby attein and come to some
promocion and prefermente. Here now (my dear beloved son) I shall instruct
thee how to order thy self, and to furnishe the behauioures and the manners of
the mind. Therefore read thou my precepts and lessons with soche diligence,
that thou may thoroughly understand them. For to read any thing, and not to
understand what it means, is none other but these(...) to neglect and
despise. Firs(...)fore I will the God to honor

And next him thy parents have in honor.



The chifest love, zeal, and affeccion that ought (by teachers, fathers, and
mothers, and all other bringers up of youth) to be graven and lively fourmed in
childrens hearts, should and must be the perfeict and fervent pity and dasire
toward God and godly things. And under this precepte is commanded all
virtue, first of all to be infused and powered into the new and fresh
vessels of tender Babes hearts. And after this love ones perfaictly founded
and rooted, to learn the^ the true favor and affeccion, with like obedience
and humility, that ought of children to be given and showed toward their
fathers and mothers. Wherein they so brought up, may in more age(...)
(...)owlege due reverence and duty (...)heir rulers, superiors and betters.
The next love to this, for to be had in dignity.

Is the love of thy aliance and consanguinitie:



Here is the third love that ought to be kindled in childrens stomaches that
is, the love of their kindrede. Which love although the Law of God had given
no precept to be observed, yet very nature and reason would this love to be
had, seeing that no small bond of friendship is thereby knit. And without it, no
little occasion of dissencio^ may be ministered For if this precepte were not
observed and kept: what tragical and mischeuous dissencion should there be
while the son resists the father? the ne(...)ewe the uncle, the brother his
a (...) natural brother As it appears in the history of Thyestes and Atreus
in Nero, and in other tragedies not unlike these, or as bad altogether. But now
it shall be necessary to declare in what things these three loves does, and
ought to consist, and how every one of these ought to be reverenced, and had
in estimacion. Then the love of God does consist in geuyng true honor, true
praise, and true sacrifice to him, of whom we receive all things that are
good. And this sacrifice canbe no purer, no cleaner, no pleasaunter, then to
yield unto him a spirit sorry for our offenses and fully with a firm purpose
to return no more to the filthe of sin. The father and the mother, the
ruler and superior are loved, when al things lawfully and godly by them
commanded are obeyed and followed. We do love our kinsfolk (among who^ the
nerest kinsman that we h^^e, our neighbor is to be chiefly rekened) when we
do with mutual benefits, offices, duties, and honest familiarity and
co^uersacion one love the other, one help the other: and one instruct the other,
in good example of living. Fear thy master for to displease.

And with thy negligence do not him disease.



This tear is hard to find, and chances but to few children. And the
cause thereof is sometime the masters negligence. And therefore this fear ought
so to be tempred, that it be not compelled by threatenynges and stripes, nor
diminished by remission and lenity. I tought to be soche that the Scholar
should more fear the displeasyng and vexyng of his Master, then the
sharpness of the ^oode. In the old time Princes and noble men took unto
them informer (...)d instructours of their children^ whom they called
Pedagoges, and whom we now call Scholemasters. Soche a one was Aristotle with
king Philip, teacher to Alexander. Pliny to the Emperor Traiane And soche had
Marcus Aurelius for his son Commodus. And many of these teachers were but
bondmenne, whom noble men boughte to teach their soonnes. As it is witnessed
of Diogenes in the Apothegmes, who was bought in the market of Xeniades, and
was in the house with him teaching his children to his lives end, and was of
his own scholars buried Whatsoever is committed to thy fidelity.

Keep it privy, and do it not discrie.



Herein is every faiethfull friend taught a lesson and rule how to keep in
trust, scilence and faithfulness, soche secret matiers as shall be committed
and given to his fidelity: how be it he makes not his precepte, things to be
kept in Scilence and Huggermugger, but those things only that shall not
offend either God, nor his Prince, as Heresy or treason. Yea and besides
these, leat a man have a just respect to his own conscience, so that the
hiding or the uttering of any secret matier be to the wrongful hurt of no man, and specially of his own soulle. Be thou at al seasons in a readiness.

To apply thy market and business.



Whereas thenterpretours mind is that a man should in those sciences most
chiefly occupy himself, which might help him to the knowelege of the law,
forasmoche as in Catones time, and in our time also, the next and spediest
way to promotio^, is by soche means: Yet I do rather follow his (...) mind
and will, that is, for a man (...) apply himself to things present, and as
the time serves, according to the Proverb and common saying: Take thy market
while time is, Least of thy price thou do miss. And then it be said unto
the, thou come a day after the Fair. with good men ever let thy
conversation be.

And then shall thou get much honesty



It is communelie seen, that he that touches pitche, is of the same defiled,
spotted, and carries some token of it about him, either in savor, or one part
or other of his garments is therewith distained. So it fares with them that
company with evil disposed persons, that hau^t suspected places, either they
smell of the same naughtiness, or they get unto them as bad a name as though
they were naughty packes in deed: for no man can let the peoples judgment,
which will judge according to the behauiours of them that thou art in company
withal. So that by the company of good me^ thou shall ever be sure to lose
nothing, but rather win somewhat, either in name or in perfeictnesse of living.
Enterprise not to come in presence.

where thou see men talk in scilence.



This lesson serves not only to the ignorant minds of young children, but
also to the rudeness of some carterly and loutishe fellows, and to the
malopert boldness of some Jack sauces. Which all for lack of nurture, do
sodeinly without all regard or blushyng, thrust theimselues into the secret
counsall of wisemenne, and so disturb them from their earnest matiers, with
their unlearned rudeness. In thy mind and bodily favor.

Be thou clean and of an honest behauor



Surely there is no better token of the disposicion of the mind inward, then
is the fashion and behavior of the body outward. And there is no readier
means to furnishe the body, then first to deck and garnishe the mind with
godly virtues and nurtures. So that the one is in manner shape^ by the other,
and one the fairer for the beauty and ornament of the other. And in this the
furniture of both is very expedient and for every good Christian to be
dilige^tlie observed, but always pride is to be abandoned, and to be over
curious and picked. whosoever thou dooest mete.

Gently and gladly do him salute.



There is no redier way to get the love and frendeshippe of many, then in
metinges and communinges together, for a man to behave himself gently and
lowly in his speaking and gestures of his body, so much that manne is of
soche pureness of nature that with gentleness he is soon pacified though he
be in never so great a rage of fury. yea and by gentle intertainmente
friends are long time kept. Whom after we have ones lost, is very hard, yea
nothing more hard to find and get again. when thou have to do with one
greater then thou art.

Yield unto him mekelie, for so it is thy part.



It is no small strength and virtue that may be inge^dred in the learning, and
due observing of this precepte. Therefore it is necessary for all degrees and
states to harken unto it. Learn here thou subject to forbear thy rulers and
their Officers: thou servant, thy master: thou Scholar, thy instructour: yea,
and thou wife thy housbande. For by contention of inequalities, that is the
lower with the higher the weaker and porer with the richer and mightier, all
occasion of mischief is wrought and ministered. In strief thou that art
superior.

Be ever favor able to thine inferior.



A precepte having no less strength of love and prefeict amity, then the
other before. And would to God every one of power and might would with little
children learn this lesson, I would the rich cobbe to favor the poor sely
labourer in the ieoperdous and peinfull wrastelyng of the Law. And I would to
God that there might be indifferent sticklers set between them, that is
upright judges to se the poor man take no foul play at the mighty man's
hand. Likewise I would have used in spiritual judgments, whose courts for
lack of sand be so slipperie, that except a man be the connynger, he is
lightely tripped and laid on the four quarters. whatsoever gooddes, God
does to thee send.

Keep it, and foolishly do not it spend



I am afraied least some keep this rule to straight, and observes it with
ouermoche diligence, for some there are that be soche hinchers and pinchers,
that they had rather break their neck, then spend one ferthyng more then very
shame drives them to do and scarce then. Other there are, that need more
then one soche good lesson. And they are those prodigal soonnes who will not
stick to spend their whole enheritaunce upon a foul salowe queen, and to
hassarde and dice out at six or seven, their fathers purchase in one little
moment of an hour that he labored for in all his whole life time, and then
must they go steal or take a staff and a wallet, and go beg. whether thou
be in the state of wedlock or virginitee.

See that thou keep thy self in chastity



Great head is to be taken, least this vice of the flesh, that is to say,
lechery do rain in the tender age of any child, or young manne, specially
for that soche age is most prone and ready to soche manner of uncleanness, and
then reason and fear lacking, the weak flesh of young persons is sone by
very little temptacion over thrown: Yea leat not the elders disdain hereof to
learn how to lead a life pure and immaculate, from the ^tlthie carreine and
stencious rotteunes of carnal lusts. In all thy business take good head.

That thou apply the with good speed.



The earnest desire and prompte will in a servant or scholar is much regarded,
for thereof it comes, that be the matier never so hard, yet by diligence and
good will it is easelis brought about, and with a good luck ended: Where as
by negligence there is nothing that spedeth, or is well brought to pass. If
thou will prove to be a good scholar.

Be ever reading one book or other.



Long life thou may have and many things may thou by experience and
practice learn, yet peradventure in reading some frutful work thou shall
perceive more wit and judgment, then ever could by experience be attained
unto, or by any man hereafter invented, forasmoche as graces and gifts are
nothing so plentious, as they were in the beginning of the world, when God did
make manifest his woundreful power and might in the wits of the Heathen, for
the better instruction, and confirmation of the faith of the christians to
come. whatsoever thou haste seen bear it in mind.

An forgette not things that be behind.



Some are of that opinion that they think the perfeictnesse of learning to
consist and be in the swift and hedlong readyng over of many aucthours There
be also some parents of like judgment, which think their sons to have
profited nothing, if they be one year in one book, or one day in one lesson,
but both these are far deceived, for they profeict in learning who does
thoroughly understand what they read, and the same so understand, do firmly
and surely fasten in their perfeict memory. Seek not in another house what
there does want.

But provide, that in thine own be nothing scant.



There is many a busis body that will find faults in another man's
doings, although he himself be in his own matiers most negligent and
ouerseen. And soche does often times give better counsel to other mo^ then
they can give unto theimselues. But surely most quietness shall be for every
manne, to have to do in his own causes, and to suffer other men to have
their wills and pleasures in their own business. For brablets and
intermedlers were ever causers of contencion and variaunce. And many there are
that mark how little meat another man has in his dishe, but he finds no
fault with his own cold cost at home. Behave thy self gently to every one.

And in fellowship a good companion.



The behavior of a man or child is much commended, and excepted among men
of honest reputacion. And more is he set by that is poor and gentle in his
behavior, and can play the good fellow, the^ is the rich churl with his
proud and disdeinful look. But that is a special grace, and greatly esteemed,
when that the noble do humble them to the felowelike company of honest
poor men: for so did King Philip exhort his soonne Alexandre to do, whereby
he wan the hearts of many a true subject. without a cause, be not thou angry.

Nor for a trifle driven into a fury.



There is no man, except he be a very blockehead, but he has some mocion and
passion in him of anger, and displeasure, seeing that no man keeps his nature
so clean, but it is corrupt, either with colere, fleume, or else with some
other corrupt inatier. And as it is more like a stock then a man, not at
all to be moved: So is it more nearer the propretie of cattes and dogs then
men to braule and wrangle for every wagging of a straw, yea and some time upon
no occasion: soche is the waiewardenes of many froward and weiwarde weasels.
Disdeigne not the poor, no, nor yet skorne thou any body.

Nor for an others misery, think thy self more worthy.



It is a wounderful thing to see some stately merchauntes, who^ God has
indewed with a special gift and qualite above many other, how they abuse
the same grace in disdaining their eue^ Christians and fellows in the faieth and
vocation of Jesus Christ, which made al of vile claie and dust, and to
the same has promised us that we shall return. And then leat them see how
much they pass by their proud looks, the poorest wretch that goes by the
high ways side. when thy neighbor is fallen into misery.

Reioise not, nor have therein felicity.



To mock and scorn at naughty packes and vicious livers, to cause the^ to be
ashamed of their leudnes, and abominable life, is to be commended but surely
to see thy neighbor or fellow in danger of sickness, pouercie, or other
mischau^ces of this world thou have more cause to weep, then laughe, seeing that
thou may and have deserved a worse thing to chance unto thy self.
Therefore says Marcus Aurelius on this wise. It is given to every man of
nature.

One to augmente another hurt and displeasure.

Lend if thou may any thing spare.

Yet to whom thou lendest, see thou beware.



There is choice and head to be taken in lending and giving. For some times a man may either lend, or give to his own hurt, and the borower may be
made his enemy, which pretended to be his friend. Therefore to ouerie beggar
thou must not give, nor to every borower and crauer thou may not lend, but
unto a faiethful asker, or where wretched poverty is, or unto them that thou
think worthy, upon whom a good turn may well be bestowed, or else
toward whom thou bear favor and frendelie affection, there stick not to
exte^de thy liberality and charity, least peradventure otherwise thou may
be constreigned thus to say.

When I lent, I was a friend.
And when I asked, I was unkind.
So of my friend I made my to.
Therefore I will no more do so.
when thy clientes matier is in trial of judgment.

Then stand fast at the bar and ever present.

I would to Christ's passion every atturneie, outter harrester, councellous
sergeaunt, and judge of the law, would print in their upright consciences this
precepte, into whose hands is committed the right suite, and splee of many
(...) poor man, the which they sometimes willingly (when they are of the
contrary part well bribed) and sometime neglectlie (when of their clientes
they are not largely and plentifully rewarded (let the matier grow(...) to a
nonesute, or drive him to sue (...) commission into the country, where(...) by
frendshippe and mastershippe the poor man between.ii. stools lies flat upon
the ground. And thus the poor man is utterly enbarred of his right, either by
the negligence of the attorney in calling slackly upon the counsailers, or else
by the cou^sailers and sergeantes absentyng theimselues from the court bar,
or else the judges themselves in deferryng judgment, or at least way by the
corrupt favor of the country. Feastyng and bankettyng seldom do thou use.

And them to haunte often, utterly refuse.



Whether of these two thou customablie dooest use, thou shalt be sure to
have a ready displeasure and hurt following. As if thou be a common feast
maker, it shall wear the hangelles of thy purse, and make thy living full
bare. And then look when all is spent, which of thy gestes will bid the to so
many feasts again? Also if thou be a commune smelfeast, thou shalt by and by
run in the sclaunder and infamy of a pinchefist and a commune rauenyng dog
that thrusts his head in every man's pot, and licketh of the crommes from
every bodies table. But now and then to feast thy friend, and thy friend to
feast thee, is the sign of frugalenes and much humanity. Sleep quietly, and
take thy rest.

As much as shall be thought for nature best.



There are some soche sluggerdes, which put so great delight and pleasure in
slepyng, that they think the only felicity and happiness of this life to be
in sleep, whereas they are in very deed dead images, and the lively pictures of
death. And their saying is we think no man hurt, as long as we sleep soundly,
although when they are wakyng, they can speak as evil and as shreudely as the
wourst. whatsoever thou haste sworn with thy will.

Keep thine oath and thy promise fulfill.



Behold christians the precepts of an Heathen, against our customable and
damnable oaths and blasphemy that we use. we may be ashamed that very
infideles shall pass us in Godly conversation of living. Seeing unto them was
given no rule or commandment, but soche as reason and nature did instruct
them in. But how often have we of god himself commandment not to swear either
in vain, or to the mischeuous and naughty purpose of any thing? Yea, when we
do, or be caused of right to swear, how little truth and credence is there
found in our oath? Derely none but perjury aboundauntly. And in our promises,
be they by never so great an oath made, we are crafty and slow performers,
and subtle dealers with our neighbors. Drink wine with temperatnesse.

And in thy drinking use no excess



It is not unknown how many incommodities have and do daiely ensue and
follow the great excessive bibbyng and bollyng of wine. Some of these
swilbolles have their yies bleared and winkyng. Some have rotten tethe and
breath stinkyng. Some their faces empearied with rubies, and saphires of the
tavern. Some blobchekes and puffed faces. Some gore, bellies and slaggyng
stomaches. There be other that have goutes, dropsies, their livers consumed,
yea, their brain and wit confounded and dulled And will ye have few words?
they shorten their life, mar their youth, hasten and bring quickly old age,
and many times sodein death. And as for youth to drink wine, is none other,
then where there is a good fire and heat sufficient, to cast in oil to make
the flame bigger. If thou will needs fight, fight for thy country.

And try thy manhood against thine enemy.



There are many braggers and crakers, that will for every small trifle lay
their hands upon their daggers and be ready to kill God have in(...) upon his
soulle, while they are among their own nation, and show their strength like
valiant and puissaunt champions, in defendyng their country from foreign
enemies: But then soche braggers will be readier to crepe in at a be^che hole,
then to show their heads, or bide one stroke in a field. There be also
soldiers that will proffer themselves to go a warfare more for the lucre and
vau^tage of the spoils, robberies, and prays taken of their enemies, then for
the love and affeccion that they bear toward the saufegarde of their
country. whatsoever thou hear, be it good or badde.

Do not hastily believe it until the truth be had.



Such is the nature and condition of many one, that they think every tale of
Robinhode and little Ihon, to be as true as the gospel. And of this sort are
the common people, who for lack of reason and knowelege, report those things
that first come to their ears as things of very truth when there is in deed
nothing more ferther from the truth. And hereof it comes that tales, rumors,
and tidings be in so short space conueighed into so sondrie and diverse
places and far countries. For if every man would take deliberacion and
aduisement upon soche things, as are told them. News and lies would not
run abroad with soche short speed. I think many matiers would come to pass
well.

If first of thine own self thou would take council.



Many a man runs from place to place to seek help and remedy of his griefs
and troubles, where as perchance if he would somewhat depely ponder the
occasions of soche unquietness in his own mind and conscience, he might with
light cost and less peines, redress and amend soche his troubles and
displeasures, and never set step out of his own door. It is good therefore
first to counsel with the familier spirit of a man's own mind, and there
see whether any ferther remedy be to be sought for, or not, and so
accordyngly to proceed. If thou must needs other men's counsel take.

Be sure to follow the best, and the evil forsake.



Thou must not take every manne to be thy counsailer, neither every man's
counsel is to be followed, but that counsel must thou chiefly stick unto,
by the which thou shall get spedy and sure remedy of thy business. For many
there are that can give counsel, but few gives cou^saill profitable for
their clientes, and many tourneth their cou^sail to their own commodities and
profeictes. As witnesses the tale of Esope, where the Crow cou^saileth the
Egle how to break his coccle, by fliyng up an high, and lettyng the coccle fall
down upon the hard stones, whose counsel when the Egle had followed: the
Coccle letten fall and brast, was by the same Crow co^ueighed clean out of the
Egles sight. Eschew harlottes and queanes company

And to verteous lerning thy self apply



There is no better means to restrain and keep in youth from the wanton and
volupteous lust of the frail flesh, then earnestly to occupy the same in some
verteous and Godly exercise. And of the contrary part the only prouoker,
tickeler, and setted forward of filthy delites, is sluggishenesse, and idle
wanderyng of the mind, who being delivered of all good and honest occupacion,
draws brittle flesh to his most corrupt and stinchious lusts and desires.
So that one Egistus demaundyng of the Gods upon what occasion he was made an
adulter. Answer was made him. Marie thou warte ever slothful and idle.
whatsoever of the shall be demanded.

By truth alwaie, let it be answered.



In all ages, and in all degrees, liyng is a vice most odious and detestable,
and contrary to the profession of christianity: but yet most especially in a
noble man's child, which should be the mirroure and example to the baser
sort: liyng is abandoned as a thing chiefly dishonoring and distainyng his
nobility. There is no man that knows what a thief and a lier means, and
what their qualities be, but will with all his heart be rid of a lier to
take a thief, for of the thief he may be ware, of the other he cannot. To
good me be thou always beneficial

And unto kind persons be thou ever liberal.



It would grieve the to bestow thy benefits, to have nothing for them again:
but how much more would it grieve thee not only to lose thy good turn, but
also for the same, to be requited and reco^pensed with a shrewed turn, and to
have for thy kindness and good will, a churlishe pra^ke or shrowed touch
played the? As thou shall be sure to have, if thou do good for a churl.
Therefore, if thou look to have good of thy benefits bestowed, bestow them
upon good men, and upon soche, who^ thou know to have kind hearts, and ca^
bear in mind who have dooen them good in times past. Be thou no common
checker nor railer.

Nor of other men's deeds a sauci(...) deprauer.



Good it is, yea and christenlike to monishe and warn one another, when any
thing is amiss: But to rail at, skorne at, disdainfully to rebuke, or
arrogauntly to check and taunt one another, is not only vnbesemyng, but also
far from the part of any good men, in whom any morsel or cru^me of
honesty or civil behauior does abide. And what shall I doubt any thing at
all, to exempt them out of the number of men, and number the^ among the most
savage and brutest beasts that be, the which have any soche co^dicio^. For
they are the disturbers and breakers of al good order and uniformity of al
peace and tra^quilliti(...) In what estimacion soever thou be in

Lose it not, but study more to win.



A good estimacion and name passes (...) number of riches, in so much that
(...)he preciousnesse of it, surmounteth (...)he value of the gooddes of the
whole world, and no treasure is to be compared with it. What strong boltes and
(...)kes, what bulworkes, munime^tes (...)nd defenses, what vigilante and
watchefull kepers ought we then to set about this incomparable treasure? and
specially because the loss of it ca^ ve^ (...)y hardely be gotten again: and
seldom (...) is seen to be recovered, and to like ^ignitie and favor to be
restored. Let thy Justice be indifferent, and ^hy Judgment right.

Judge wrong to no man by power ^r might.



Oh Cato Cato: if that thou could (...)arc and epsy this fault in the
Judges and Justices of thy time, when only the law of nature and reason
^uled, and not the fear and knowelege of God: what would thou now say if
thou should behold what false accusyng, what unjust pleadyng, and according
to the same, what most false condemnyng is of poor sely so(...)lles, and very
innocent persons? If thy father and mother be displeased with thee.

win the^ again by pacient humilitee



Although thy father and mother do chastise thee somewhat sharply and
extremely, yet it shall not be thy part for to behave thy self stubburnely or
frowardly against them, or else to go about by any means or ways how to
exasparate them, and to minister more occasion of displeasure: but with meke,
mild, and gentle words to molifie, pacify, and quallifie their anger. For
nature abhors in the very brute beasts, that the young one should resist or
he in any thing displeasaunt unto his damme, no not in the fierce Molues and
Tigres, or in the venomous Serpents. If thou receive of any man a benefit.

Remember with like kindness, the same to requite.



I do judge him worthy, to whom not only any good turn ought to be given
at any time after, but also to who^ great unkindness ought to be showed, the
which will not knowelege himself to have received a benefit at his friends
hands, or does by negligence and oversight forgette to requite and repaie,
when he is hable, like kindness as he had in his necessity and need received.
Surely many there are that remember very well what they do for other men,
but what other men do bestow upon the^ that is quickly forgotten or slowly
remembered, and nothing at al requited Stand at the bar, harken what is there
said.

That thou may learn other men's matiers to plead.



A very notable science and a learning much esteemed was the law in the time of
Cato, so that the next and the spediest way to promocion was then to have a
perfeicte sight in the Law. And even in these our days it has nolesse, yea,
rather more authority, and is had in far better estimacio^. Therefore this
precept of Cato may be well marked of the youth of this realm, who wills
and exhorts the^ to the knowelege of the Laws, not for to avenge his own
wrongs, with extreme suit, and not for to work injury, and to woe
displeasure: but to maintein right, to help the nedy and poor sely creatures
to their true possessions and enheritaunce to see justice ministered, and true
causes always preferred. Soche gift and qualite as God has to the lent.

See that with discretion it be spent.



If God have endued the with manhood and corporal strength, this gift is not
to be turned into the use of auenging every injury, and displeasure, not to
quareling and fighting for every light matier, not to bloudsheding and
manslaughter, but to the defense of thy prince and country, to the
mainteinaunce of thy wife and children, by dooyng soche labors and occupacions
as thy strength may well sustain and bear, yea in whatsoever gift and
quality thou dooest excel, it is not to be used for any forceable oppression
by might, nor for any disceitful detrusion by gile and policy. Tempre thine
anger, and Lefraine thy displeasure.

And the same to avenge, take respect and leisure.



His council was heretofore not to be angry for every wagging of a straw.
And now his ferther and better advise is, in no case to be offended, or
displeased; but then to punish and then to avenge, when anger and malice
does not blind reason and expel godly charity. At the top and scourge let
thy play be

And from the dice, see that thou fly.



The top and scourge is a plate most agreeable and welbeseming for children,
dicing was of an evil report and much abandoned among the very Heathen and
Gentiles. Do nothing according as thou art of power and might.

But let thy doings be of justice and right.



What can there be more apperteining to a very tiraunte then for a man put in
aucthorite, to have only a respect and regard what he is able to do, and
not what thing becomes him, or is lefull for him to do. And in soche a
person may well be verified the saying of the Poet.

For reason true and just.
Stands his own will and Just.
Thy inferior do thou not despise.

Neither yet him refuse in any wise.

To bear either hate, displeasure or disdain to a man, being of less
abilite and power then thou thy less art of, is a very evident sign and
most manifest token of a proud arrogant and presumpteous mind and not of a
lowelie and kind heart. An other man's gooddes do thou not crave.

And by untruth, desire not them to have.



There is no one thing that does more manifest and declare the brickle and
frail nature of man then that he rareth neither what, nor whose gooddes they
be, nor by what means he has them, so that he may get them ones to be his
own. Love thy wife with a true affection

For at al says she must be thy companion.



A world it is to see the diverse affections of men in chosing and having of
wives, but this one thing remember that thou ought to take thy wife of love,
and neither for gooddes nor beauty, and then lovingly to use her, remembering
that of.ii. ye are made but one body, least it be said among us Among the
Heathen Matrimony was well esteemed.

And among us Christians little regarded.

Instruct thy children to virtue, and understanding.

And in ignorance and blindness let them not be wandering.



I do not only marvel, but rather woundre what phantased folly reigns in
the heads of many fathers the which either altogether witholde their children
from the education and bringing up in honest disci^ lines and knoweleges, or
else will set them to no other masters, but to soche as may and can
tendrelie, yea, rather wantonlie and negligentlie instruct them and teach
them. Look what thou dooest make upon other.

Be not agreued in thy self the same for to suffer.

Soche measure as thou make, soche look thou receive again.

when thou art sitting at thy meat and table.

Of diverse and many things, do thou not babble.

Talk little, and let it be with aduisemente.

Let ever thy study and endeuer be. About that, that is just and honesty



Endeavor your selves with an earnest desire and diligence to follow and do
those things whereof comes no rebuke, shame, or dishonestie. No man's love
have thou in disdain.

But every man's good will, endeuer to obtain.



All means and ways are of a quiet heart and mind to be sought how to
avoid the displeasure and hatred of the least child that gooeth in the
street. For asmoche as there is nothing so precious as love, and no man
does possess better riches, then he that has the love of many.

The precepts of Cato with annotaciones of D. Erasmus added thereunto.
Cato. 1. SITH THAT GOD IS a spirit as writings do testify Then with pure
mind honor him effecteouslie.

Erasmus. The commune people did recke^ that God was pleased with sacrifices of
beasts, and with soche exterior works. But in asmoche as God him self is a
spirit incorporal, therefore it is most likely that he deliteth in soche
things as he himself is. And therefore ought he chiefly to be honored in
purity of heart.

Cato. 2. Delight not in sloth, but from sleep soon arise.
For rest and idleness is mother of all vice.

Erasmus. Seeing (as Pliny says) that our life is but a waking time, the^
lose not that time by sleep, considering also that sloth is noifull both unto
the body and unto the soulle.

Cato. 3. The chief of al virtues is, thy tongue to repress.
He is next unto God, that well can hold his peace.

Erasmus. The chiefest of al virtues is, to refreine thy tongue, and to speak
nothing unadvisedly, for god the father of al wisdom speaks but seldom,
and that is necessary, therefore he is accoumpted nerte unto God, which can
order his speech by soche discretion.

Cato. 4. Be constaunt in thy saying, and do not contrary.
A foul vice it is with thy self to vary
For needs thou must another offend. when with thy self thou do contend.

Erasmus. He that is repugnaunte to himself can never agree with other. And he
that does not order his life according to some rule or order, is not meet to
keep any man's company.

Cato. 5. If thou considre well in thy mind.
The fashion of men, thou shall truly find.
How every manne, other does defame.
For there is no man, that lives without blame.

Erasmus. Al men lightelie mark othee ^nennes faults and look not upon
their own. And yet there is no man ^ut and if he were well tried, there ^ight
be spied enough in him, wherefore he might justly be blamed.

Cato. 6. If thou have a thing though thou ^oue it never so well.
And if the having thereof should ^he offend.
Rid thy hands of it by my council.
For, for a profeicte thou must some ^ime thy moneie spend.

Erasmus. Some time it is expedient to ^eparte from those things that we
^earelie love, if there be ieoperdie in ^he keeping of them, as to give gold
and silver to save thy life, and to forbear thy pleasure to recover thy health.

Cato. 7. Some time be thou merry and some time be thou sad.
As place and time requires to be had
For in a wise manne, it is no manner of crime.
His manners to change according to the time.

Erasmus. A man may well change his manners as time and place requires, As
sometime it shall be expedient for the to be hard and stiff in thy cause, and
another time to be easy and soft.

Cato. 8 Believe not thy wife, if thou will live in rest.
when on thy servants that she will complain.
For look whom that the housbande loves best.
The wife for the most part has him in disdain.

Erasmus. It is most the property of all women to set their housbandes at
debate with their servants. Therefore he warns them that they shall not
believe to lightly soche co^plaintes

Cato. 9. If thou warn any man of his vice.
Though with thy warning thou perceive him grieved.
If he be thy friend, yet I the advice. Stint not, but let his vice be repreued.

Erasmus. If thy friend offend, thou ought not to give him a light warning,
and so let him alone, but still to lay upon him to amend it, if it be any
soch^ thing, as does perteine either (...) his honesty, or to his profeicte.

Cato 10. Strive not with words, but rath(...) hold thy peace.
Against them that of words never will cease.
For to many men is given the gift of speech.
Yet discretion with them perhappe is for to seache.

Erasmus. If thou argue with wise-menne thou shall not need to spend many
words. But if thou meddle with (...) fool, thou shall never have dooen.

Cato. 11. Love other so that unto thy self thou be a loving friend.
Likewise be good unto good men, least thou come to an evil end.

Erasmus. Do so to thy friends that thou be most friend unto thy self, and
so do for other, that thou lack not thy self.

Cato. 12. Be thou no forger of tales that be new.
From all soche things, look that thou eschew.
For it never hurted manne to be in peace.
But it does hurt often, to put the tongue in prease.

Erasmus. Spread no tidinges nor tales among the people, for often times he
that so does, has cause to repent.

Cato. 13. Make no promise upon trust of other men.
For thereby thy crede^ce thou may hap to spill.
For it is the fashion of many now and then.
To promise much more then they will fulfill.

Erasmus. That which thou have thy self thou may be bold to promise, but
if thou trust to another man's word, thou may chance to be deceived,
for it is the condition of many men, to promise more in a day, then they will
fulfill in a year.

Cato. 14. If one to thy face do the laud and praise
Be judge unto thy self of that thing that he says.
For think thou never, that another manne.
Can know the better, then thy self can

Erasmus. Believe not him that so will flatter thee, but search thine own
conscience and see whether it be so or no. And if thine own conscience show
the that thou art far other then he makes the, then believe not him, but
believe thy self.

Cato. 15. If a good turn, unto the be wrought.
Spare not to utter it, both to least and most.
But unto another, if thy self have dooen ought.
See in any wise, thereof thou make no boast.

Erasmus. If thou have done a good turn unto another man, it is not thy
honesty to speak much of it, for that in a manner is half a castyng in the
teth unto him, to who^ thou have done it. But if thou haste received any
benefit of another man, if thou speakemoche of that, it is a token of
thankfulness.

Cato. 16. when men be old, they use often to tell.
Of their deeds passed, either good or badde.
Therefore in thy youth, order thy self so well.
That of thy deeds to speak then, thou may be glad.

Erasmus. Old men that have seen many things in their time, use often to speak
of soche things. And therefore we ought so to direct our youth that we may
speak thereof in our age, to our worship and honesty.

Cato. 17. Though that men do speak or mutter priuelie,
whatsoever they say, care not thou a fly.
But he that is guilty, in any manner thing,
Thinks that only of him is all their whisperyng.

Erasmus. Although thou se men speak softly, or round to other, do not by
and by imagine that they speak of thee; for that were a token that thou were
guilty in some fault.

Cato. 18. when thou art in wealth and prosperity. Beware of the dangers of
aduersiue.
Nor trust not fortune her chances are so slike.
For the beginning and endyng is not alwaie like.

Erasmus. When thou art in most prosperity then beware of adversity, for
fortune uses ever to change, and of a ioious beginning, chances a lame^
table endyng. Therefore, when thou art in most wealth, then ought thou
most to premeditate, how to take adversity, if it chance to come: least if
it sodeinly chance to the, thou be therewith miserably oppressed.

Cato. 19. Since this life is uncertain here, that we hold.
And die we must needs, we cannot other chose.
To trust to another death, then be not to bold.
For it is evil looking after deadde men's shoes.

Erasmus. This lesson is good for heirs and executours, for they gape after
other men's deaths, for many times it comes to pass, that they that look
after other man's deaths, be the first that die, albeit that they be far
younger and stronger then the other

Cato. 20. If thy poor friend give thee ought be it never so small.
Receive it gladly, and thank him there withal.

Erasmus. A gift ought not to be esteemed according to the value only, but
according to the mind of him that gave it, for we read ofdiuerse princes that
have received sometime alitle water or an apple, or soche a small trifle,
as well and as bemngly as though it had been a greater treasure.

Cato. 21. If thou be in poverty, so patiently that thou take it.
And think how, into the world, thou came all naked.

Erasmus. If we consider how nature brings us al naked into the world, we
may thereby perceive that richesse is not our own, nor does not of nature
belong unto us. If thou should lose a membre or a ioincte, thou had then
a cause to be sorry therefore, thou had then lost somewhat of thine own:
But if thou lose thy gooddes, never vex thy self therefore, for as concerning
those things that a man may say are his own, the poor man has asmoche as
a King, will thou know truly what thing thou may call thine own? Remember
what thou had when thou waste borne, and that is thine own and no more.

Cato. 22. Of death hardely, be not to much dismayed.
For sure we must all, needs follow the trace.
But he that of his death, always is afraied.
Loses of his health, in the mean space

Erasmus. He that so sore fears his death, can thereby never the sooner escape
it, but besides that he loses his health, and the life which he has: for to
live always in soche agony, it were as good to have no life at all.

Cato 23. If thou have done good unto one before
And he have not the gentleness to thank the therefore.
Blame not him for his vnfrendlinesse.
But for soche men; hereafter do thou the less.

Erasmus. There is nothing more grievous then a^n unkind friend, which if it
so chance thee, yet that ought not to be imputed to god as though it were his
fault, for some men use, that if they be not rewarded for their deeds
(according to their minds by and by) they blame GOD as though he were unjust,
and yet the fault is in them self, that took no head for whom they did good
unto.

Cato. 24. The good that thou haste, spend it not to fast.
For fear least thou chance to lack at the last.
Therefore to thy substance, look thou take good head.
And reken evermore, that thou shall have need.

Erasmus. Ever keep somewhat in store, for fear of lackyng another day, and
trust not to much unto thy self, but ever reken that thou may well enough
come to necessity in thy age.

Cato. 25. If thou be disposed, for to give or lend
Many promises thereof, look thou do not make.
For where thou coumptest, to be taken for a friend.
They will then say, thou can naught do but crake.

Erasmus. A man ought never to promise more then he can perform. And to make
many promises of that which he will not perform, is but crakyng and boastyng,
and no good manner at all.

Cato. 26. He that with his flattryng words does feign.
For to be thy friend, and yet he is not so.
with the same sauce, serve him so again.
For with craft, to beguile craft it is but well do.

Erasmus. Use gile with him that uses gile to the, for it is better to
entertein soche a feigned friend with fair words, then utterly to make him
thy enemy

Cato. 27. Trust not him that has a fair tongue. For lightly it is a sign of
great deceit.
For the fouler with his feigned song.
Deceives the birds, and brings them to the bait.

Erasmus. The fair speakers be ever to be suspected, nor yet esteem men
according to their fair words, but according to their true deeds, for he
that speaks fair goes about to deceive the. And remember that by soche
dissimulacion are the poor birds beguiled. And so likewise by flattery is
many a man deceived.

Cato. 28. If thou have many children upon thy hand.
And lackest gooddes wherewith they may be found.
Learn them some science whereby they may.
Help theimselues therewith another day.

Erasmus. Science serves not only in every country, but also it helps in
every fortune. Therefore it is a sure conclusion, that wheresoever thou come,
if thou have science thou shall therewith be hable to get thy living. But now a
days many people bring up their children like lords soonnes, whereby they be
brought up in slouthe and idleness. Ferthermore, that which he here says to
poor men, that would I counsel princes to do, to bring up their children
in some craft or science, whereby they should attein a double profit, for first
when youth is used to be occupied, it has the less leisure to learn vice,
and another is, that if fortune should change and bring them to poverty, as
it is possible to be seen* Yet then they should not be compelled to beg,
nor to get their living unhonestly.

Cato. 29. what other men set most by, let it be vile unto thee.
That other men set least by, esteem it best of all.
So to thy self, thou shall no nigard be
Nor other men shall not the coueteous call.

Erasmus. Despise thou, that other men delight most in. And set by that,
that they least set by, so shall thou not be a nigarde to thy self, for that
that a man sets not by, he forces not how sone he spends it, nor other
me^ shall not think the to be coueteous when thou dooest not covet, nor art
gredie of soche things, that they would so fain have, for commonly the people
set much by riches, and care little for virtue and learning, for every thing is
valued according as men's minds list to take it, but be thou of contrary
Judgment to the common sort, as for example: the most part of people esteem
Phesante, and Partriche to be a very deintie dishe, but esteem thou them but
for gross and reken thou that eggs, milk, and these be the deintiest meat,
that thou can find. And so thou shalt live a pleasant life thy self, sit
he thou have that, which thou demest best, nor thou shall never care to take
other me^nes pleasures from them, in so much as thou accoumptest the^ naught
worth.

Cato 30. That thing which in another thou art wont to blame.
Be well ware that thou offend not in the same.
For it is very shame, when a man will preach.
If that his deeds, against his words do teach.

Erasmus. It is a foul fault for a man to blame another for soche things
as he himself most uses, for the sinfulness of the preacher minisheth
greatly the authority of his word.

Cato. 31. If thou require aughte, see that thy demand be.
according unto right, and to good honesty
For doubtless, he were a very fool in deed.
Soche things to demand, as he ought not to speed.

Erasmus. Every man is not to be required but he that in manner ought to grant
thy request, nor every thing is to be craved, but soche things as a man may
ask with honesty.

Cato. 33. Forsake not those things which thou know of old.
For things which thou do not know
For of that thou know thou may be sure and bold.
But of soche as be new thou can be nothing so.

Erasmus. Change not thold for the new, neither thy old friend for a new, nor
thy old trade of living for a new, which thou know not, for that which thou
have already tried, thou can tell how to use the^. But as for the new, thou
wotest not how they will prove, for often it happens, that those which at the
beginning seem very good, in the end will prove the contrary.

Cato. 33. Seeing how frail the life is that we have.
And through how many ieopardies daiely we run.
Every day that thou haste escaped well and save.
Accoumpte it firm and sure, that it is well won.

Erasmus. Seeing our life is so uncertain, and subject to so many dangers, we
may reken every day well won that we have freely escaped, for there
passes us no day, in which we might not have chanced to die, nor we had
never no warraunt of our life. Therefore feeing there ha^ges so many
ieopardies over us, it is meruaille that we escape any day.

Cato. 34. Though thou of thy power may have althy will.
Follow it not always, but sometime give place.
For if thou of ge^tlenesse do other minds fulfill.
So shall thou best stand, in thy friends grace.

Erasmus. This saying is as true as can be for if thou sometime break thy
own will and follow other men's minds thou shall acquire great benevolence.
But some be so stiff minded, that they will contend and strive with their
friends, and that for a matier of no weight and had rather be at utter
destaunce with his friend, then ones break his wilful mind.

Cato. 35. As thou would that other men should give unto the.
So to give to other thou must contented be.
For soche mutual benevolence ever.
Causes men in frendshippe long to persevere.

Erasmus. Frendeshippe must be used upon both sides, for as the common
Proverb says.

One good turn asks another.
Cato. 36. Beware that thou engendre no debate.
Nor kindle no malice betwixt thy friend and the.
For wrath engenders strife and hate.
And concord ever causes love and charity.

Erasmus. Be well ware, thou fall not out with thy friend, for soche
dissension breadeth great hatred, therefore to thy friend thou ought to use
all gentleness.

Cato. 37. when thy servants offense does move the unto ire.
Look that with discretion thou moderate the fire.

Erasmus. Beat not thy servant in thy anger, for ire can do nothing well.
Therefore first tempre thy wrath, as a Philosopher said ones to his
servant, and I were not angry (quod he) I would surely now walk thy coat.
And so upon a time Plato was angry with his servant and he took up a
staff: one asked him what he would do: Marie, quod he, beat this
intemperate person, meaning himself that was so ouerseen by anger.

Cato 38. with patience and sufferaunce do thou thine enemy win.
And conquer him, not by force and violence.
For emonges all other virtues that here been.
Patience evermore has the pre-eminence.

Erasmus. It is one of the chiefest verities to suffer thine adversary, when
thou may overcome him, for emonges al virtues, that is one of the greatest.

Cato. 39. If thou with thy labor have gotten ought at al.
In spending thereof be not to prodigal.
But if that thou labor, to an euel entente.
Those gooddes so evil gotten must needs be evil spent.

Erasmus. It is good to labor and get to have wherewith no live honestly,
for he that truly so gets his living, (...) (...) (...) into necesserie,
but he that labors for the intent, that he would after live the more
prodigally, may sone be oppressed with poverty.

Cato. 40. when thou art welthie, make good chere.
But see unto thy self, that thou be most nere.

Erasmus. When thou art rich, spend some of thy riches upon thy friends, but
yet spend so, that thou lack nothing thy self another date, and be a friend
to thy friend, but yet see that thou most of al be thine own friend.

The end of the first book.
The second book of Cato.
Cato. 1. IF thou would learn how to til the ground.
Virgil will the teach, the feate of housbandrie.
The propretie of herbs, in Macer may be found.
Also the Romans wars Lucane does versifie.
And in declaring louc, Ouide bears the masterie.
But if thou list to learn wisdom and Sapience.
How to govern thy life well and virtuously.
Draw nere then and harken to my sentence.

Erasmus. Every diverse aucthour teaches diverse things, as Virgill in his
book of Georgikes, teaches the feacte of housbandrie. Macer the Poet writes
the propretie of al manner of herbs, Lucan writes of the evil wars betwixt,
Caesar and Pompeie. Ouide teaches of all matiers apperteinyng unto love with
her daliaunce. But if thou list to learn the craft or science how to live well
and verteouslie, then read this little book which teaches the no trifling
matiers, but the very way and means of verteous living and high perfection.

Cato. 2. Do good to strangers ever, by mine advise.
For in so doing, thy honesty shall arise.
For why: it is a far better thing. For to have friends, then to be a king.

Erasmus. We ought not only to do for our fre^des, but also sometime to
do for strangers, and to endeuer our selves to get their keneuolence, for
it is better to get the many friends, then to win a whole kingdom, as for
a kingdom a man may lose, but a friend will help a man in his necessite.
And surely those persons shall be more steadfast unto the, that thou winnest
with gentleness and beneuole^ce, then those which thou constreignest with
power and might.

Cato. 3. Let God alone with his secrets all.
Nor of the heaven, ensearche not the priuitie.
For sith thou art, but a man mortal:
Meddle with soche things, as mortal be.

Erasmus. As Socrates writes, that which is above us, belongs not unto us.
Wherefore this aucthour here wills that we should leave the high study of
natural Philosophy, and study those things, which belong unto our own
life, as to use good and verteous ways and to pourge our minds, from all evil
affectes.

Cato. 4. The fear of death, hardly let it pass.
For he may be called, well a very Ass.
That of his death, is afraied so sore.
That he can take no joy, in his life therefore.

Erasmus. The Same sentence is in the first book, he that is ever in sorrow
for thinking of his death, does foolishlie, for first by his fear he cannot
amend it, beside that he loses all the pleasure of his life in the mean
while.

Cato. 5. As long as thou art in thy angry mode.
Beware thou strive not, with no manner wight.
For in case thy wit be never so good.
In thy wrath, thou shall not see the right.

Erasmus. Pyrrhus wont to warn the young Soldiers, that they be not angry,
then much more ought they to avoid anger, that shall dispute any cause, for he
that is without anger, shall the better judge. And on the other side, anger
blinds the right judgment of the mind.

Cato. 6. Lay out thy moneie gladly, in the time of need.
For sometime thou must spend, if thou will speed.

Erasmus. That cost which must needs be dooen, do it with good will, seem not
for to grudge at it, for sometime a man must needs do some cost, as at
feasts, buriynges, or weddinges, and also upon thy friends.

Cato. 7. Flee ever from things, that be to high And be content with a mean
estate.
For surer are the ships, which in the rivers ligh.
Then they that be sailyng, in the Sea so great.

Erasmus. A mean fortune is surer, then is a high estate, like as the ships
be surer, that are in the small rivers, then they that be tossed up and down
in the maigne Sea.

Cato. 8. Beware to thy fellows, how thou dooest show.
Any of thy acts, that may put the to shame.
For that which no man, but thy self dooest know.
In disclosing thereof, let no man the blame.

Erasmus. If thou have dooen amiss, make no boast of it, and if thou do any
thing which thou would be ashamed to have it known, let no other see it
nor know thereof. But in thy doing any soche thing, look that thou be prudent
and secret therein.

Cato. 9. In thy mind, never think that those.
which be wicked shall ever escape free.
For though for a time, that it be kept close.
Yet at the last, it shall open be.

Erasmus. Think not that the wicked shall be unpunished, for they may well for
a time hide their wickedness; but at length it will be known, for time at the
last opens every thing.

Cato 10. Though that a man, of stature be but small.
Yet for all that, contemn him not at all.
For though a man, nature strength denighe.
Yet often does she help him, with wit and policy.

Erasmus. Despise not thine enemy, though he be but small of stature, for many
a time, he that is weak of strength, is of great wit and sapience. And
therefore we must not esteem a man according to the robustiounes of his
body, but according to the clearenesse of his understanding.

Cato. 11. Strive not with him that is above thy might.
But for the season, give him the masterie.
For he that sometime is overcome infight.
Another time again, gets the victory.

Erasmus. If thou perceive that thou have to do with him, that is stronger
the^ thy self, then give him over a while, and suffer him for a season, to
have the victory, for another time may come, when thou shall be even with
him again, for often it chances that he which before was overcome, may have
aftrewarde the upper hand, and sometime the weaker ouercometh the stronger.
But some be so stiff hearted, that either they will win al, or else lose all
at once.

Cato. 12. with words with thy friends strive not at all.
For great debate rises, of words that be small.

Erasmus. He taught thee the same lesson before, when he warned thee, that thou
should not strive with thy friends for sometime for a few words, they that
were fre^des fall at great discord

Cato. 13. Labor not to know, thy fortune or destiny:
By craft, or else by some Nicroma^cie
For look what thing, is ordained thee unto.
without thy counsel, God full well can it do.

Erasmus. Enquire not to know thy destenie neither by witchecraft, nor by
other unlawful acts, for GOD will not have a man, to know his secrets,
nor yet calls he thee to counsel, when he ordeineth any thing to thee. And
if his will were, that thou should know it, he would then have called thee
to counsel therein.

Cato. 14. Be not to pompious in thine estate.
To cause other to have envy thereat
For though envy, no harm to thee can do.
Yet thou wart as good, to have their love as no.

Erasmus. Go not to proudely, nor show not thy self to stately, to cause other
to have envy at thee, for though their envy cannot hurt thee, yet it is a
displeasure, to have the evil will of men, and it is a great coumforte to
have the good will of men, though there come no profit thereof.

Cato. 15. Be thou of mind, both constaunte and strong.
Though in thy cause, the judge do thee wrong.
For surely thy adversary, shall not long possess.
That which he wins, by soche unrighteousness.

Erasmus. Be not clean discomforted, if thy adversary overcome thee in the
law by unrighteous judgment, for surely, he shall not long enioie it, for god
shall reform soche wicked judgment

Cato. 16. All displeasures, before past and gone: Out of thy mind, se that
thou do cast For it is the condition of an evil one.
Old malice to remember, that is dooen and past.

Erasmus. If a concord and a loving end be ones made, thou ought to
forgette all the old debate, for when the cause is ones determined, then ought
also the malice to be finished, for he that does otherwise, is alwaie called
a man of a doggishe mind

Cato 17. Praise not thy self in any manner wise.
And to dispraise thy self, is as foul a vice.
For either of them, from reason are far wide.
And often to use them, is a sign of pride.

Erasmus. Neither praise, nor dispraise thy self for in dooyng of either of
them, is a sign of him that coueteth vainglory for he that does dispraise
him self, does it because he would have other men to praise him.

Cato. 18. Spend measurablie thy gooddes, that God has sent:
For that which was long in gettyng full sone will be spent.

Erasmus. When thou have substance, wast it not so sone, for a thing is ever
sooner spent then gotten.

Cato. 19. Set a side wisdom, when time requires.
For sometime to play the fool, is a poinct of wit it.

Erasmus. Sometime a man must set a side gravity, as in sportes and plays,
where sometime a man must give over wisdom, and play the fools part,
and specially among fools, a man must play the fool, and yet shall not be
afoole in deed, for it is an high poincte of wisdom, for a man to apply
himself, according to the time.

Cato. 20. Flee coueteousnesse, and also from prodigality.
For neither of them, agrees with honesty.

Erasmus. Prodigality and coueteousnesse be two vices, whereof either is
repugnaunt unto other, therefore, he that will have a good name, must eschew
them both, for the coueteous men be called nigardes, and the prodigal
spenders, be called unthrifts.

Cato. 21. Of thy credence hardely, be not to light when the toungues that
most babble, speak least of right.

Erasmus. Faith is not by and by, to be given unto those men, that bring
alwaie some news, and tell somewhat of other men's deeds. They are scarsly
to be believed, that babble of many things, for because that vanity was wont
to be coupled unto this vice.

Cato. 22. Pardone not thy self, when by drinking thou art an offender.
For the fault is not in the drink, but in the drinker.

Erasmus. The common sort of men is wont after this sort, to excuse their
faults. The wine was thoccasio^ or cause I said this, when I was well
whitled: But do thou impute it to thine own self, and not to the wine,
which fault was by thine own naughtiness, and not of it.

Cato. 23. If thou have any secret council:
Disclose it to thy fellow, that can keep it well.
If thy body need any remedy.
Commit that to a Physician that is trusty.

Erasmus. In things secret, and to be kept in silence, beware thou ask not
every man's counsel, but his only, whose trustiness in secret matiers
thou have right well approved, least he do not only help thee, but also
hinder and slander thee: Nor yet show thou the infirmities of thy body to
every one, but unto a Phisicio^ of an assured and known faiethfulnesse, which
may keep thy diseases privy and heal them.

Cato. 24. At the good chances of the unworthy, take no grief.
Fortune flattreth evil persons to do them some mischief.

Erasmus. Let not the prosperity of other grieve thee, which has often
chanced to the unworthy. For Fortune does not favor them, but lies in
wait, and ticleth them forward, that afterward, she may do them more
hurt and displeasure.

Cato. 25. Mark before what chances fall, that must be suffered.
For that hurts least, which thou have before considered.

Erasmus. Whatsoever may happen unto man pondre the same with thy self, before
it does chance, that it may not be sodein, if at any time it shall happen.
For those euilles do less trouble, which do not chance to a man unawares.

Cato. 26. In things aduersant and unlucky.
Despair not, nor be in heart heuie.
But have a good hope, for hope only, Does never for sake a man, until he die

Erasmus. When fortune wexeth cruel, strengthen thy self with a good courage,
and save thy self for things prosperous and luckie, and cast not away thy
hope which forsakes not a man eue^ diyng. For as long as there is life within
the body, there is hope. And in the box of Pa^dora only hope did cleave in
the brimme. And Ouide says.

I did see a man live by hope, whom death even now was ready to grope.
Cato. 27. A thing that thou know mete for thy purpose.
See in no case, thou dooest it lose.
Occasion in the forehead has hear
And the polle, balde and bare.

Erasmus. As often as fortune does offer the any commodity, which is meet
for the, streighte way take it: for occasion has an hearie foreheadde, so
that in that part, she may be holden fast, but if she ones turn her back,
behind in the polle, she is as bare as a ^oote, that a man may have no hand
fast in her. That is, opportunity when it chances, it may be holden and
kept, verily, it does not return, when thou would, if thou regardest it
not.

Cato. 28. Take heed what will follow her after:
And what hangs over thy head, do thou before ponder.
Follow the God, as nigh as thou may which had two faces, looking East and
west.

Erasmus. Surmise and gather of things present, what are to come. Take
counsel of things, either good or evil, past and goen, how thou may with
stand those that are to come. After thexample of that Romish God Ianus, who^
the antiques did feign to have had two foreheaddes or faces. For asmoche as
it behooves a wise man, to have yies in his forhead, and behind in his polle.
The Same thing truly does follow us, which is already past and goen.

Caio. 29. To keep in health that thou may be the more hable.
Sometime to thy self, be the more favorable.
To a man's pleasure, few things are required.
But in a man's health, many things are desired.

Erasmus. Diete the manner of thy living, rather after the mean and way of
health and good welfare, then of pleasure. For we must not only in disease and
sickness, beware of intemperauncie but also when we are in good health we
must use all things measurably, as sleep, drink, meat, the pleasure of the
body, play, least we fall into sickness. Although some thing is to be
given to pleasure, yet much more is to be given to health, which ones lost,
all pleasure perishes withal.

Cato. 30. The judgment of the people, do not thou despise only.
Least thou please no man, while thou will reprove many.

Erasmus. The best things do never please the common sort, yet it is
wisdom for a man alone, not to strive against al. For he is wise to no
purpose, which is alone, and to himself wise, where as he seems to all
others, to date and play the fool.

Cato. 31. Above all other things, see to thy welfare.
The chiefest poinct, is for health to care
Blame not the time, if thou diseased be.
where as thou thy self, art cause of thine infirmity.

Erasmus. Before all things have regard of thy health, least that if through
thine intemperauncie and evil diete, thou falling into any disease, afterward
for very shame, dooest put the blame in the vnwholesomenesse of thaire or
place, as the common sort of people is wont to do. For the most part of
sickness, do chance unto us, through the evil dietyng of our bodies.

Cato. 32 Of dreams and fantasies, no care take.
For what man's mind wishes while he does wake.
Trustyng his purpose to obtain.
Sees the same by dream, but in vain.

Erasmus. Some with ouermoche supersticion observe and mark their dremes, and
of them do judge of things to come Where as the dreams of them that sleep,
come of themselves, when they are wakyng. They do not signify what is to
come, but they do represo^t unto thee sleping, what thou have before thought.

The End of the.ii. book.
The.iij. book of Cato.
Cato. 1. THOU reader that desire to know this books meaning.
Here shalt thou have lessons, to good life best pleasyng.
Garnishe thy mind with them, and to learn do not swage.
For our life without learning, is but deaths own Image.
They shall be to thy great profit, but if thou do them reiecte.
Not me the writer, but thy self thou shall neglecte.

Erasmus. This is in the stead of a Proheme or Preface. Without the way and
reason how to live well and godly our life is no life, but the image and
picture of death. These verses do teach the, very profitable and necessary
rules, how to live vprightelie, if thou have any affection and will, to learn
and understand. But if thou regard them not, thou shall contemn and despise
thy self, and not the writer. For the matier pertains unto the, and not unto
him.

Cato. 2. while thou dooest live well, care not what evil men say.
For to us the tounges of all men will not obeie.

Erasmus. If that evil disposed persons speak not well of the, when thou
dooesh no hurt, hold thy self content, with the vprighte conscience of thy
good doings. For in the it lies, that thou do well: but in thy power it is
not, how and what, this, or that, men shall talk of the.

Cato. 3. Brought forth for a witness, saving their own honesty.
As nigh as thou can, keep thy friends fault privy.

Erasmus. If thou be called for a witness, in thy friends cause, thou shall to
thy power concele and hide his evil deed, but to that thou hurt not thine
own good name. And thou shall give asmoche scilence unto amity or
frendeshippe, as thy honesty, and thy oath of testimony and witness, will
suffer and bear with the.

Cato. 4. Remember to beware, of words glosed and faced.
The truth is whole, and nothing backed.

Erasmus. The communication of truth, is simple and plain. The fair and smoth
speaker, is full of deceipte. Therefore it ought of wise men always to be
suspected.

Cato. 5. Avoid sluggishenesse, and idleness refrain.
There is no greater enemy, then an idle brain.
For the idleness of mind brings the body out of course.
Eschew it therefore, for there is nothing wourse.

Erasmus. A slothful and an idle life, is to be abandoned. And the imperfectnes
of the mind, does also bring an vnlustinesse and feblenesse unto the body.
Also the exercise of the mind, does help much to the health of the body.

Cato. 6. Itermedle thy cares now and then, with pastime and sport.
That in all thy travails, thy mind may receive coumforte.

Erasmus. The mind weried with serious and earnest business, is sometime to
be solaced, with honesty and moderate pleasures and pastimes, so that the
spirit quickened and refreshed, it may be able to sustein al manner of labors

For that, that lacks now and then the quiet rest.
Is not able to endure al of the best.
Cato. 7. Another man's word or deed, do thou not check or mock:
Least in like manner, another do make the his gesting stock.

Erasmus. Whatsoever thou dooest to other, of other the same shall be dooen to the
again. If thou can gladly reprove other men's deeds or words, other will
use thine own example against thy self.

Cato. 8. whatsoever is given the, by any bequest.
Increase it, and use it, ever to the best.

Erasmus. Whatsoever does happen unto the, by the Testamente and bequest of
thy friends, that keep, least every man's mouth be full of the. For the
common people is wont to mutter against them that come sodeinlie by their
gooddes and possessions.

Cato. 9. If thou have riches, in thy old age plenty.
See thou live liberally, and to thy friends be not scantie.

Erasmus. This fault is peculiar to old men that the more nerer they be to
deaths door, the more catching and having they be. Therefore do thou then
give unto thy friends, that they may nourishe, and help the with their almose
deeds.

Cato. 10. Despise not (thou master) thy servants good counsel.
No, nor any others judgment, if they frame well.

Erasmus. For the baseness and vileness of the aucthour and geuer, good and
wholesome counsel, is not to be despised. Nor it is not to be regarded, who
speaks it, but what the thing is that is spoken.

Cato. 11. If thou had much, and after become poor.
Live according, and be thankful therefore.

Erasmus. Thy fortune or estate diminished and made less, thou may not use
like galauntnes as before. But thou shall be content with that kind of life,
that thy present fortune, and degree does give the. And thou shall take that
well a woorthe, that now is present.

Cato. 12. Beware thou marie not a wife for her dowries sake.
And if she be shrewish, soon her from the shake.

Erasmus. Take heed thou wed not a wife for the sake or cause of her dowry.
And if thou do marry one rich and well dowred, retain her not for the
respect of her dowry, if she be a shrewe but her dowry set a part, thou
shall forsake her. How be it among Christian men this precepte is not to be
followed, nor ought to be allowed.

Cato. 13. By the example of many learn whom to do after.
And what thou must fly: others life is thy master.

Erasmus. They that learn by their own pecilles and losses what is mete for
them: they pay bear for their learning. A wise man does take counsel of
another living how to live. This deed got him an evil name, I shall beware
least I do a like. This thing framed well with him, I will follow and do
after him.

Cato. 14. Assaie what thou art able, least being ouerburdened.
Thou be constrained to leave of things in vain attempted.

Erasmus. First prove what thy power and strength is, before thou set upon
any business, least aftrewardes being ouermastered with the difficulty and
hardenes thereof, thou shall forsake that to thy shame, which so unadvisedly
thou tokest upon the.

Cato. 15. That thou know to be dooen evil.
To tell it do thou nothing cease.
Least thou be thought, to have a will
Naughty compactes to follow, by holding thy peace.

Erasmus. Dissemble thou not, if thou know any thing not to be well done, for
thou shall be thought to allow it, when thou kepest it privy. For cloking
and scilence keeping does sometime seem to be consenting and agreing.

Cato. 16. Ask the judges help, if thou be wrongfullie judged.
Yea the laws themselves desires with right to be ministered.

Erasmus. If thou be oppressed with a wicked law, that is with a straight and
vnge^tle law. Fle to the justice of the judge. For this is not against the
laws, but is the mind and meaning of the laws, that they be reduced and
tempered by justice. It is an unjust law; when it is sued to the extremity.
As if a poor manne should be cast into prison because he does not find his
father, whereas the law says. Let the children maintain, and keep their
fathers and mothers, or else let them be committed to ward. Some time the law
is the streighter for to cast men into a fear. In these things the judge
(that is) the master or chief governor may help and be a mean.

Cato. 17. That thou dooest suffer woorthelie, remember there with to be
content.
And when thou find thy self guilty, thy self reprove by thine own
judgment.

Erasmus. A displeasure that chances unto the, through thine own fault,
thou shall impute it to none other then thy self. And when thou feel thy
self guilty, reprove thy self, and be thine own judge, and think thy self
worthy of that punishemente.

Cato. 18. Look thou read many things, they readde, read many more.
For things wounderous, although untrue, Poets does show.

Erasmus. Read thou many and sondrie things, but yet with a judgment. For all things are not true, the which thou dooest read in Poetry.

Cato. 19. Among gestes at the table be thou of speech sobre.
Least where thou would be taken manerlie, thou be called a chatter.

Erasmus. In the court of law is a place of eloquence, in the chamber of
scile^ce in feast and at meat, it is comely and meet to use moderate
communications one with the other, and they also pleasant and merry. Some me^
while they go about to be seen curious, be troublous to the other of the
geas^es with their babbling, to whom they do leave no space and time to
commune.

Cato 20. Fear not the words of thy wife being angry.
For while she weepeth, she woorketh some subtlety.

Erasmus. Women have their tears in a readiness. With them they ouermaster
their housbandes. Therefore he gives council that they be nothing moved with
soche manner weping and wailing. For they do often times feign them, that
they may deceive their housbandes. As women dessemble the^ selves to be
grieved with Ialousie, that they may cloak their own alnoutrie: or else when
they feign them selves to be angry with him, whom they entirely love.

Cato. 21. Use things gotten, but to misuse them, be thou not demed.
They that lack, seek other men's, when their own is consumed.

Erasmus. Use and occupy soche things as thou have gotten, and do not abuse
them, least when all thy gooddes are wasted and spent, thou be constrained
either to ask other men's shamefullie, either to live of another man's in
bondage, or else to steal other men's gooddes, not without thy great peril
and danger.

Cato. 22. Fear not death, come when it will.
For death ends al thine evil.

Erasmus. Death, and it be but for this thing only, is not to be feared,
forasmoche as she is the end of euilles of this life.

Cato. 23. Have patience with thy wife if her tongue walk.
Chiefelie if she be good, grudge not at her talk.

Erasmus. Little trifling faults, are to be borne withal in our friends, if
they be in other poinctes good. As in the wife if she be any thing talkatiue,
or of her tongue any thing saucie, it is to be suffered, if she be in other
conditions chaste and profitable (that is) doing the duty of a good houswife.
Specially for because the disease of the tongue is propre and natural to that
kind. He is a froward person, that cannot keep scilence, specially seeing it
is a light and easy thing for one to hold his peace, for by this means thy
wife shall cease to chat and prate, if thou geuest her never a word to
answer, as Socrates was wont to do.

Cato. 24. Toward thy father and mother let not thy love be slender.
Nor offend thy mother, if to thy father thou will be tender.

Erasmus. Mercy, love and reverence is due unto thy parents, thy countreie,
to God, and any that shall occupy the place of thy parents. There are some
that love their pare^tes as though the law constrained them thereto, but love
thou them dearly, and not fearefullie, that is constrainedlie or for veraie
shame, but chearefullie and with good heart. And if there fortune any strife
between thy parents, be thou so diligent to please the one that thou offend
not thothen, that thy gentleness may remove all griefs and troubles.

(...) The end of the third book.
The.iiij. book of Cato.
Cato. 1. THou whatsoever will lead a life upright and sure:
Set not thy mind on vice, the which hurts good nurture.
And these lessons to read be ever diligent.
That thou may be a master and come to gonernement.

Erasmus. This is the Proheme or preface to the.iiii. book. If thou will be
free and void from all vices, and wilt live guilty to thy self of no fault,
have thou these precepts always ready and at hand. In the which thou shall
find wherein thou may use thy self for a master and teacher, that is, how
thou thy self may rule and moderate thy self, being helped with these
precepts.

Cato. 2. Despise richesse, if thou will be in mind happy.
For they that make much of them be always crauyng and nedie.

Erasmus. He bids us not to cast away richesse, but not to make much of
the^. For they that do enhaunce them, that is, highly esteem and regard the^
while they dare not use, and occupy those gooddes that they have: And do
always heap up somewhat, yet do they always beg, that is, they be
pinchyng and crauyng.

Cato. 3. The commodity of nature, thee never fails.
If thou be content with that that need requires.

Erasmus. If thou dooest measure thine expe^ses, according to thy need, that
is, to thy necessity, and not to thy ambicio^ nor yet to wanton pleasure, the
commodities and pleasures of nature shall never fail thee, which nature is
content with few things, whereas carnal lusts and delites desire out of
measure.

Cato. 4. where thou castest no fear, neither rulest thy matier by reason.
Call not fortune blind (as she is not) for thine vndiscrecion.

Erasmus. If thy matiers come evil to pass by thine own negligence, do not
put the blame in fortune, that thou may call her blind, where as thou thy
self tookest but small head.

Cato. 5. Love money, but for the coigne do thou little crave.
For no verteous, nor honest manne does desire that to have.

Erasmus. To love money for man's use and need, is the poinct of a wiseman: To
love it, that the coigne thereof may feed and delight a man's yies, is the
sign of a coueteous and a mad man. All men would have money: evil men only
desire the coigne thereof.

Cato. 6. when thou art rich, provide for thy bodily wealth.
A sick man being rich, has money, but lacks health.

Erasmus. When thou art in ieopardie of the health of thy body, do not then
spare thy richesse and gooddes. For he that does not find a remedy for his
disease, least he should diminishe his money: Soche a one has, but he has not
himself, whereas he is sick and evil at ease. He had rather have his money
saved then himself, and to have the use and occupiyng of them, then of himself.

Cato. 7. If at Schole, stripes of thy master thou did suffer.
Much more thou must forbear thy father in his anger.

Erasmus. Thou werte beaten of thy Master when thou did go to schole. Much
more it becomes thee to suffer, when thy father does chide the with words.
Thou did take well a worth the tirannie of thy Teacher, being much more
cruel: Forbear the rule or Emperie of thy father, who although he be angry,
yet he woeth refrain from fightyng.

Cato. 8. Do things that profit, to eschew remember again.
Fro^thinges of error, without hope of gain certain.

Erasmus. Of what things thou art in doubt do them not, do those things
of whom thou dooest trust for a gain, in those things by whom thou may be
deceived, and is in doubt whether they will do good or evil, with the^ do
thou not meddle.

Cato. 9. what thou may give, give freely to the asker.
For what thou dooest to good men is thine own lucre.

Erasmus. Give willingly if thou may give any thing. For it is gains, and
no loss what thou dooest best owe upon good men. And he in bestowyng takes a
good turn, which gives to one deseruyng it. For it comes again with an
overplus the which thou bestowest upon good men.

Cato. 10. That thou dooest suspect, what it is discuss by and by.
For things not regarded, are wont to hurt chiefly.

Erasmus. Soche things as have any suspicion of evil, those set thou not light
of, but straight way examine them, and search them out what manner things
they are. For in the beginning thou shall easily find remedy, if there be
any evil: but a thing not regarded, does wexe more and more, and does
afterward most hurt of all. As if thou suspecte thy friend to be of a strange
mind toward thee, set not thou light of it, what it should mean, but try
out whereof this thing did first arise. And if there be any soche things, by
and by stop the displeasure while it is yet in growyng.

Cato. 11. when damnable lusts thy flesh do occupy.
Give not thy self to gluttony friend to the belly.

Erasmus. Beware thou double not thy grief for one may somewhat be suffered,
two at ones cannot be borne. To live fleshely is a damnable thing, and
damnable is gluttony. That if at ones thou be troubled with both euilles, it
remains that thou be brought straighte ways to poverty. He calls
gluttony, the study and affeccio^ of deintie meats, and the same he calls
the friend of the belly, for by her the belly is fatted, and the substance
and good name diminished.

Cato. 12. when naturally thou think all wild beasts to be feared.
I tell thee, manne only is most to be dreaded.

Erasmus. Forasmoche as thou dooest think in thine own mind, all wild
beasts to be feared, by my counsel thou shalt chiefly fear one beast
(that is) a man. For no wild beast does more hurt and displeasure, then
one man another.

Cato. 13. where as thou haste in thy body strength mighty.
wexe wise withal, and so may thou be coumpted manly.

Erasmus. It that nature has given the strength of body, thou shall not be a
strong man by and by, except thou ioigne thereunto wit and discrecion, that
is wise dome, by the which thou may use well the strength of thy body.

Cato. 14. Ask counsel of thine acquaintance if any thing thee offend.
For there is not a better Physician then a trusty friend.

Erasmus. Thou dooest open unto the Phisicio^, the diseases of the bodies, show
unto a faiethfull friend the griefs of the mind. That man that is the
Physician does heal with medicines, and this manne (that is thy friend) with
words: or else if any sickness happen rather call thy friend then a physician

Cato. 15. where thou art in thine own conscience guilty.
why does Sacrifice for thee die.
It is foolishness by another slaughter.
Health and forgiveness to hope after.

Erasmus. The people of old time did believe a mischeuous deed, to be purged
with killyng of a beast, the which had done no fault. And an innocent creature
was ponished for another offense, when he rather ought to have been slain
which did offend, then the beast offered up in Sacrifice. Truly they did
foolishly hope and trust that another death should be their health, whereas
every man ought to ponishe his own misdeedes of himself.

Cato. 16. when thou dooest seek unto thee a friend to be trusted.
Not the fortune of the person, but the good life is to be desired.

Erasmus. A friend whom thou would take unto thy familiar acquaintance, is
not to be esteemed by his substance, but of his good manners. The Same must be
dooen in chosyng wives.

Cato. 17. If thou have gotten gooddes, beware of nigardie.
For what do they avail thee, if thou live in beggerie.

Erasmus. Thou haste gotten thy gooddes in vain and to no purpose, that dare
not use and occupy them, and among great substance and treasure, thou
live bare and nedie. For it avails the nothing to have, if those things
which thou have, do profit thee never a deal the more, then those which
thou have not.

Cato. 18. If unto honesty thy mind be bente and set.
Eschew vain pleasure, least they do thee let.

Erasmus. If thou be willing to save upright thy honest and good name, love not
thou dishonest, and filthy desires and pleasures, as gluttony, lechery, and
soche other like.

Cato. 19. Mock not old age, if thou be wise.
For it is propre unto age to be a child twice.

Erasmus. When according unto thy age, thy wit and policy of mind is quick
and pregnant, scorn not old age, the which is not so ripe and ready in wit
and understanding, for every old man does dote, and return to his childishe
foolishenesse. Therefore, the fault of old age is to be borne withal and not to
be mocked and skorned.

Cato. 20. Desire to be learned whatsoever thee betide.
For cunnyng remains when richesse cannot abide:

Erasmus. Some chance or other, does many times pluck away richesse from a
man, as by fire, theft, war, shipwreck: but cunnyng cannot be taken away.
Therefore, that is the surest possession, the which may alwaie and every
where maintein thee.

Cato. 21. Mark privily all things what every man does say.
For speech declares men's manners and also them bewraie.

Erasmus. Nothing does more show and declare the life and disposicion of man
then his communicacio^. That is the sure and ready glass of the mind.
Therefore if thou will know a man what manner of fellow he is, ponder with thy
self what his talk is. The speech does open the manners of the man, if he
speak hartly. And the same does hide and cover them, if either he hold his
peace, or speak faintly.

Cato. 22. Exercise thy study, although thou have learned a science.
As diligence does help thy wit so does the hand experience.

Erasmus. As discipline and learning does vanishe away, except thou confirm
the^ by experience, so a craft must be stablished by practice lest it be
forgotten.

Cato. 23. Regard not much the times to come of thy destiny.
He fears not death, which does his life defy.

Erasmus. If thou will be from the fear of death, learn not to make much of
thy life. And as Aristotle does clerkely teach, the fruicion and having of
nothing is not pleasant, except that after a sort thou have despised the
same already.

Cato. 24. Be diligent to learn of them that have learning.
And be ready to teach them, that lack teaching.
For like as learning is a thing most excellent.
So to teach the same is very expedient.

Erasmus. Learn not of every body, but of them that can teach thee. Also
what soever of other thou do learn, the same to other teach thou again.
The knowelege of good and profitable things, is not to be kept in
huggermugger, but is to be delivered.

Cato. 25. Drink as thou may if thou will live well at case.
Many times a man's pleasure, is cause of an evil disease.

Erasmus. So that short pleasure, and felicity of this bolling and bibbing
does often times get unto a man a grievous and a long disease.

Cato. 26. whenever any thing thou dooest openly either praise or commend.
See that the same by any fault of lightness, thou dooest not reprehende.

Erasmus. Thou shall be thought light and inconstant, if that thou have praised
before many, the same that afterward thou dooest reprove. Therefore if thou
have changed thy mind, see thou hold thy tongue.

Cato. 27. In prosperity, beware of things aduersaunte.
Again in aduersite trust to have the time more pleasant.

Erasmus. Be thou not without al fear, and care when fortune is good and
luckie but take heed of a storm to come. Again when fortune is cruel, faint
not, but be of good heart, upon hope of a better chance to come. In things
prosperous and luckie, adversity is to be feared, least a man should be
careless. In aduersite, things more pleasant are to be trusted for.

Cato. 28. Cease not to learn, for by diligence, and head wisdom does
augmente.
By long use and time is given prudence excellent.

Erasmus. According to the same mind of Solon we must were older, always
learning one thing, or other, for singular and excellent wisdom does
chance to a man by long use, that is by long experience of age or years.
Howbeit it pleases me better, that this be the meaning or understanding.
Learn always, for by study wisdom increases, for there are few that
prove wise by experience of things, either because it does happen few to
live long, or else for that, that very few extirpe, and put of their
foolishness by this way of experience. The most surest and readiest way to
wisdom is learning and knowelege.

Cato. 29. Seldom praise any manne, for who^ thou dooest often commend:
In a day it wilappeare, how well he is thy friend.

Erasmus. Praise not thy friend ouermoche of whom thou have made no proof, for
he being often times praised of the, in one day or other, he shall show
himself to have been another manner of fellow, then thou have praised him for.

Cato. 30. Shame not to learn, and desire to be taught.
But be ashamed of ignorance, for that is naught.

Erasmus. Some of a certain foolish shame had rather always to be ignoraunte
then ones to learn any thing. Whereas to know, is a fair thing, and a shame
to will to learn nothing. Therefore it is an honest poincte to desire knowelege.

Cato. 31. with lechery and dronkenesse, strife and pleasure be tangled.
what coumforteth the mind that take, let striffe be avoided.

Erasmus. Pick out what is good, fly whatsoever is evil thereunto coupled,
drink and good chere makes a man merry, and puts away cares, use this
commodity. But again drunkenness provoke to brauling and chiding, that
beware. And lechery delights, but it has with it wrangling and quareling
Love therefore without strife and debate.

Cato. 32. Beware of him that is solemn, and sits like a sleper.
For where the floode is calmest, the water is the deper.

Erasmus. Eschew these solemn and still fellows, for they seem to compass
some great thing. Like as the flood is to be avoided in that part, where it is
most calm. For that is wont to be depest. So Caesar did more fear Brute and
Cassy being pale and still, then dronke^ Anthony.

Cato. 33. If fortune happen, to yield the displeasure.
with another man's chance, do thy self measure.

Erasmus. As often as thou art werie of thy state and condition, match it with
other men's fortunes, and thou shall perceive thy self, never a deal the
wourse, that is more unhappy then many other.

Cato. 34. Desire rather, by the shalow shore to row:
Then to hoise up the sail, into the deep flow.

Erasmus. Set upon, and go about sure matiers, rather then great. For it is
more safegarde and surety to row by the shore, and to use oars, then with
broad sails to be in ieoperdie in maigne seas. Nor truly the winds of
good chance and fortune does favor every manne.

Cato. 35. Against a good and just manne, be thou no quareller.
For of all soche, God is the auenger.

Erasmus. Strive not peruerslie, that is, maliciously and frowardlie with a
just manne, for God does never leave that vnauenged.

Cato. 36. weep not, neither wail, if thou have loss.
But rather rejoice, and be content with thy cross.

Erasmus. If riches do happen unto the, be glad thereof, if they be taken from
the, be not thou vexed and troubled, but then use wisdom and discretion.
Truly they have not so much goodness, that they need greatly to be
sorowed, if they be lost, nor again so much evil, that they be not to be
received, if peradventure, they happen to the.

Cato. 37. That loss which happens by negligence:
Is to the loser, a great offense.
But some losses happen very crokedly.
which yet with thy friend see thou bear pacientlie.

Erasmus. If a friend be displeased with speaking a word, it is to be suffered,
but the damages and losses of things, few can suffer pacie^tlie. Therefore in
soche a case, it is to be taken head of, least we hurt our friend.

Cato. 38 Promise not thy self long time of living:
Death follows at the heels, thy body ever shadowing.

Erasmus. No man can promise himself long life, seeing that death does
follow a man, whersoeuer he goes none otherwise, then the shadow follows the
body.

Cato. 39. Please God with incense, and let the caulfe for the plough increase:
And think not by killing of beasts Gods wrath to cease.

Erasmus. God reioiseth not in the slaughtee beasts, therefore Sacrifice is to
be done unto him with frankencens, that is, with a thing that offends not,
and is of little cost. But now a days, the most part of Christien men,
although the manner of offering beasts be take away from among them, yet they
think God and his saints, in manner to be bound unto them, if their hang
up before them precious stones, gold, silver, and silks, either only to
show, or else to be turned into the riote of a few, remembering not these
things always, of holy men to have been despised, and if peradventure any
soche things did chance, straight way they would bestow them to the use,
and behoufe of the poor and needy.

Cato. 40. If thou be afflicted, by one that is rich Either be vexed, by a man of might To suffer it quietly, think not much.
For often by suffering, men come to their right.

Erasmus. He that has to do with great men, forasmoche as they may do
a man pleasure many ways, it is necessary that sometime he hushe injuries
done unto him: that is, that he suffer the^ pacientlie, making no word. For
some time men of authority do displeasure, and use to deal truly. Hear
therefore, a wise man shall give place unto him, that aftrewarde he may profit
him. For if by his wrasteling with them, he make them his enemies, she shall be
able to do good, neither to himself, nor to any of his.

Cato. 41. Correct thy self when thou dooest offend.
For sharp correction will thy life amend.

Erasmus. Whereas thou dooest perceive thy self to have dooen amiss, by and
by punish thy self, and forgive not thy self. Chide thy self, and join thy
self in penance to do some labor. For in curing and healing wounds, one
grief is healed by another grief, so least the wooundes should ache, thou
pourest in sharp and bitter things which do gnawe and bite. So thy
reproving and rebuking, although it be bitter and grievous, yet it does heal
the vice of the mind.

Cato. 42. Thy friend that has been of long continuance:
Though he change, or his manners do altre.
Cast him not of, but have in remembrance:
His first frendshippe, and not that chanced after.

Erasmus. With whom thou have had long familiar acquaintance, perchance he is
wexen another manner of fellow, and has changed his old condiciones, thou
shall attribute that to the necessity that thou have been in, in times past
least thou rebuke him, although he be not worthy to be beloved.

Cato. 43. That thou may be the better beloved:
For thy benefits and good tournes bestowed.
Be no chorle, but kind and amiable:
And unto al men gentle, and favorable.

Erasmus. That thou may be acceptable to al men, be thou kind and
thankeful in offices, that is, in benefits and good tournes. For the name of a
churl is hated with all men. For so men call him, upon who^ a good turn
bestowed is lost. Surely nothing is so evil lost, as that which is bestowed
upon a^ unkind person.

Cato. 44. Beware thou be not suspicious and ever mistrusting:
Least thou be a wretch, al thy days living.
For to persons fearful, and always suspecting:
Death of al things is best agreing.

Erasmus. He which does imagine and surmise, some peril toward him, he
lives all the days of his life a wretch. Nothing therefore is more meter for
him, then death, for asmoche as he can not live a merry day.

Cato. 45. where thou buiest slaves to thine own use.
Remember they are men, and do them not abuse.

Erasmus. So use and handle thy servants although they be bought, that thou
have in mind, that they are men, and no beasts. That they be bought, it
was through chance and fortune, that they be men, in this poincte they be
thy equalles and fellows.

Cato. 46. Furthwith take the first occasion profred.
Lest thou desire again, that thou before refused.

Erasmus. Oportunite and occasion, whom before Cato said, to have an hearie
fore head, is straight way to be snatched up, least it withdraw it self, and
thou dooest aftrewarde to no purpose seek for that, which before thou did
not regard, or pass of.

Cato. 47. In the sodein death of sinners, have no felicity.
Happy is their death, whose life is without iniquite.

Erasmus. If evil livers and vicious persons die sodeinlie, it is a thing
rather to be lamented and forowed, then to be laughed, and reioised at. We
ought sooner to be glad, and merry in the death of good men, whose death is
happy and fortunate.

Cato. 48. To the that art married, this I say.
If after thou fortune, for to decaie. Brag not of friends great nor small.
But utterly forgette them, as thou had none at al.

Erasmus. If thou being a poor man, have a wife, of whom men speak shreudely
suppose the name of a rich friend, to be avoided as enemy to thy good fame
and honesty. For thou shalt seem under this cloak, to set out thy wife to
play the harlot, for some lucre and gains. And by this means do rich men
allure unto them the wives of poor men.

Cato. 49. If thou by study, have learned any thing.
Learn more still, that thou lack not understanding.

Erasmus. The more things thou have learned, be so much the more studious,
to learn and know mo things, lest thou seem unapt to be taught any thing.

Cato. 50. Maruaill not, that in few words my verses I write.
For in short sentences, my purpose was to endite.

Erasmus. A sentence or understanding of a thing, is to be expouned with plain
words. For we do better carry away in our remembrance, those things that
be brief and short. Therefore it pleased the aucthour, to comprehend one
precept, in every two verses, in plain words, that it might be the more open
and brief.

The end of the precepts of Cato.
To his loving friend, Robert Burrant, William wright sends greting.
WHen I had read the Prudent work of aunciente Cato, with the annotacions of
the great Clerk Erasmus upon the same, (my loving Burra^t) which into our
maternall and English toungue, by you translated of late, you sent me, and
which ye have with no less labor, then politic profit, set forth and
caused to be diuulgate, whereby many take not only pleasure in the readyng
thereof, but also learning, wisdom, and ferther understanding yet they may
not only learn, how to teach other: but also how to frame and order
themselves in every condition: I thought it mete or rather necessary, to move
you to set your ferther industry and diligence, to communicate therwithal, the
sage saynges of the seven wisemen, which if they he in like sort set forth,
in our vulgar toungue, they shall not only stir men (for the great
poinctes of wisdom therein contained) to like wisdom, knowelege, and good
manners: but also to instruct them in diverse feactes of worldely policies,
whereby they may avoid daiely, diverse and sondrie dangers, as these wise
men have proved, which had long experience of the same.

In consideracion whereof, when I had pondered this with the commodity of
Philosophy, which in their sayings, is full plenty: and perceived how that
in all troubles, it is a present remedy: and an inward lively coumfort, to
have the posies and dicties of wisdom, before men's yies, as that excellent
Philosopher Aristotle in his pollitiques does testify, saying: if a man
desire by himself to be coumforted, let him seek that remedy from none other
where, then of Philosophy. And how that these precepts of wisdom and good
nurture (as Faustus and other do testify) was brought by Socrates first unto
light among men, whereby men be brought from carnal and sensual affeccions to
a humain and honest trade of living: I thought it my part to signify unto you,
of these.vii. wisemen, their country, nature, and behavior, to the intent you
should be more willing to ioigne them with your former book, which thing I
do not so largely amplify and set forth in length, as I might do, or as
hereafter (if it shall be thought expedient) may be dooen, for because that it
might be thought of some other, not so necessary, or else to tedious.

But to speak of our.vii. wisemen, whose names after the common sort and
acceptacion be these, Thales Milesius, Solon Salaminius, Chilon Lacedemonius,
Pittacus Mitileneus, Bias Prienensis, Cleobulus Lindius, Peria^der corinthius.
These be the.vii. wisemen, that commonly be so named, although that some
writers (as Hirnippus in his book de Sapientibus) does adiotgne unto these
aforesaied, Epimenidem, Anacharsim, and other mo. So likewise Hippobotus in his
descripcio^ of philosophers, does number and accou^pt, Orpheus, Linus,
Epicharmus, and Pithagoras with other mo, among these seven. Nevertheless
these seven first named have gotten the garlande, and are as chief allowed and
received.

Thales named Milesius, was called the first wiseman (as Plato does testify)
as before the other, and has his surname of Miletus, a City in Greece, from
whence the most precious woulles and felles do come: being of a noble family
and stock, called familia Theledaru^, he was after a Citezen of Miletus, a
City in the borders of Ionia in Greece. This Thales, after long experience, had
in the affairs of the city, gave himself to the study and contemplacion, of
natural things, a man excelle^tly learned in Philosophy and Astronomy,
which wroughte of the progression and mocion of the sun. etc. And the
Equinoctiu^, the first among the^ that searched out the secrets of Astrology
(as some do write) which was the first likewise, that comparing the Moon
and her substance to the sun affirmed the Moon to be the seven C.xx. part
of the Sun. The first also esteemed of them, that discribed the triangle: the
first that found out the course and time of the year, diuidyng it into.iii. C.
lxv. days, as some do affirm and say, with other things mo. This Thales
affirmed himself much bound to fortune for.iii. things. First, that he was
borne a man, and not a beast: the second, a man and not a woman: the third a
Greek and a free man, and not a Barbarous or bond man. He flourished about the
seven.C.xl. year before the birthe of Christ. And in long experience of worldly
wisdom, and knowelege of natural things exercised, after died being of the
age of.xc. years as Socrates does write.

Solo^ called Salaminius of Salaminia an Isla^de in the sea called Euboice, of
the which Virgill in the first two verses of the.vi. book of Aeneidos,
makes mention, directly almost against Athens. This Solon ordered most holy
and godly laws among the Atheniens, and most abhorred tirannie, and decreed
that they that did not coumforte and feed their pare^tes, should be takenfor
castawaies likewise those that sold their lands and patrimony: And that the
children of all soche, as did die and perish in battaill for the common
wealth, should of the communes be brought up and nourished: whereby men were
wonderfully animated and couraged to fight for their countries. He flourished
about.vii. C. xiiii. years, before Christ's birthe, and was a while Prince of
Athens: At which time he gave and ordered certain Laws among the^ full of
wisdom. He lived lxxx. years, and died in Cipres, an Islelande of great
fame, set in the sea, between Cilicia and Siria about iiii. C. xxvii. miles
in compass, commaundyng his folks (as Diogenes does testify of him) to
carry his bones into Salaminia his own country, there to burn them to Ashes,
and to cast them abroad therein.

Chilon called Lacedemonius, of a town in Peloponest, made very good
Precepts, whose counsel ye shall read herafter. He was brief in speaking
and sentencious, and so of him came the Proverb, Chilonia Breuitas, he was
about seven hundred and xiiii years before Christ.

Pittacus called Mytileneus, of Mitilene, a city in the Islelande of Lesbos,
of which city now the whole country of Lesbos is called Mitilene after that
city. He was ordained of them of Mitilene his city, the chief governor
thereof, which when he had governed.x. years, he gave it over freely. When his
soonne Tirrhous by chance, sat in a Barbours shop at Cumes, and by an axe
cast at him was slain: the party so taken and bound for a murderer, was
brought to this Pittacus his father for judgment: which lo(...) him and let
him go, saying, pity is to be preferred before ve^geaunce: showing in this and
other like, great clemency and pity, to be showed in factes ignorauntly
dooen. He was seven.C. years and mo before Christ, and lived the full age of.
lxx and so died, and at Lesbos is buried.

Bias called Prienes of Priene, a water town, sometime upon the sea side
situate. This Bias of some is preferred for wisdom before the other. This Bias
wrought for the defense of his country and city this feacte. when that his
country was besieged of one Aliaet, he caused two Mules to be thoroughly fed,
and so presented the^ to Aliaet the king, which wondered that they had yet
beasts left among them so fat, whereby he was minded to leave his besiegyng
thereof And sent a spy into the city, to view their state and condition,
which, when Bias perceived a spieto come among them, he caused great heaps
of gravel, to be covered with wheat, and showed them to the kings
messenger. Then the king thereupon entered with them, and concluded together a
peace, and so by his policy the city was saved. He was a very earnest Orator,
and meddled but in good causes he died in the lap of his nephewe, whom the
City honorably buried: whose counsailles are many and full of wit and
prudence. He was in the time of the other aforesaied.

Cleobulus an Asia^, borne in the city of Lindus in Caria, a Region of the
lesser, Asia, betwixt Lisia and Ionia, being in the midst of the Sea. As in
his own Epistle directed to Solon (as in Diogenes ye may read) he plainly
declares. He was a clean person of strength and comeliness, he wrote (as
Diogenes testifies) iii. C. verses and sentences of wise doine. He lived
seventy years, full of experience and humain wisdom, leauyng many monumentes
and testimonies of his wisdom behind.

Periander Corinthius, borne at Corinthus a city of Achaia in the East. There
were three of the name (as Apollidorus does write) the first in Thessalia: The
second in Epiro now called Albania, and sometime Me lossa: the third in
Elide, nobilitated greatly by the Epistles of S. Paul directed to the men
thereof, a city sometime of great fame and richesse This Periander of great
fame among them, wrote two hundred verses and sentences of prudence, a man of
great power. He lived (after some writers) four skore years, and then
deceassed whose diverse sentences Diogenes does ferther at large describe and
gather.

Thus partly I have opened the condition of these seven wisemen: to you rests
only their prudent counsels, to be diuulgate, wherein if you take peines,
as you have dooen with prudent Cato, you shall not only get your self a name
immortal: But deserve of God merit, and of learned and unlearned worthy
thanks, for so commune and public a benefit.

Thus fare you well, from Chepyng Wichambe the first day of March, by your
old lover William Wright.


The sage and prudent sayings of the seven wisemen, and first of Periander.
Periander. 1. Profit from honesty, does never disseuer.
These two from each other, do never differ.

Burrant. As who would say, they are to be supposed and coumpted no true
gotten gooddes, that are not gotten by honest means and ways. And their use
and possession to be unprofitable for asinoche as their winnyng was dishonest.
Whereof ye may learn, that nothing is profitable, except the same also be
honest.

Periander. 2. The richer a man is in substance. Of cares the more is his
abundance.

Burrant. That is, the more richesse and substance, a man has in his
possession the more head and care he takes, how he may bestow them, to his
best advantage and lucre, or else how he may the same saufly keep from thieves
and other dangers.

Periander. 3. To wish to die, is an evil propretie. And to fear death, is
more misery.

Burrant. I coumpt that person a desperate wretch, who for any trouble and
misery in this world, be it never so great or painful, will wish willingly
his death, as though the grace of God, were not hable to deliver him, if it so
pleased his godhed. But yet of both he is the more wretch, which is always
in fear of death, and does not willingly depart from the filthy carcass,
when his end and destiny is come.

Periander. 4. Gladly and willingly do not refuse.
Any thing to do, if thou can none other choose.

burrant. It is a world to see, the froward condition of some churlishe and
crooked persons, who although they see none other remedy, but that they must
needs do the thing put to their charge, yet will they with a shreude look and a
peruerfe answer do the same and that also to no purpose, when it should turn
more to their comme^dacion and profit, to do it willingly.

Periander. 5. If thou be terrible to many men.
Then of many beware again.

Burrant. He that is in authority and power, and by cruelty and tirannie
causes many, which are his subjects, to dread and fear him, soche a one
has good cause to fear and take heed, least some or other of these many, or
else al they together conspire his destruction

Periander. 6. If fortune help the, be thou not haultie.
If fortune harm the be thou not heuie

Burrant. None other thing in this is meant, but that in things prosperous and
luckie we should be never a deal the prouder, then if they had not chanced so
happily. And again when our matiers and businesses frame not as we would have
them, we ought not to be discomfeited. But to take a good heart unto us, and
to hope that the world will amend with us, and were better.

Bias. 1. I Praiethe, what is the chiefest of al goodness?
A mind that always knoweledgeth vprightenes.

Burrant. This is asmoche to say, as that if a man would demand of me what
thing were best and most principal to be desired of God, whereby he might be
counted happy in this life. An answer I may well and discretly make him, an
upright and true dealing conscience.

Bias. 2. what is to manne his greatest destruction?
Only another manne, his daielie companion.

Burrant. A, see here how an Heathen has left in writing the greatest
mischief that reigns among us Christians, that is lack of Charity, through
whose defaulte by backbiting, slaundering, false accusacion, extorcion, and by
oppressing of the poor simple people, one manne seems to devour another like
rauing woulues.

Bias. 3. who is rich? He that nothing coueteth.
who is poor? He that ever desires.

Burrant. What a poor world is this then that we are in now, in whom all
degrees of men are wholly set in couetuousnesse, no one holding him self
content with his state and condition but ever hinching and pinching, catching,
and craving of the filthy mucke of this world, not perceiving that the true
treasure and riches stands in the good disposition of the same, and not in the
unlawful possession of it, and that he is only rich, which can
tha^kefullie walk in the vocation whereunto Christ has called him.

Bias. 4. Of a woman what is the fairest dowry?
To have led her life in chastity.

Burrant. If this be true (as it is in deed) then how shamefullie are they
deceived, who think themselves to have had a rich marriage in wedding an old
shrifolde trotte with.ii. or.iii. C. pounds, having many a leude condition
and quality and not without many a sour look and crooked word. And shall I
think any less of him which for like lucre, will not stick to taste of those
vessels the which another has broched to his hand already? But that wife
seems to me well endowed, who is loving and obedient to her housebande, well
mannered, and in like wise chaste and continent.

Bias. 5. whom shall I deem to live in chastity? Of whom fame is afraied to
make a lie.

Burrant. If thou will know how the markette goes, thou must learn that of
them that bought and sold in the market. So in likemaner if thou will know
the qualities and conuersacio^ of a woman, ask of her neighbors that dwell
about her, or of her familiars that are daielie contiersaunte with her, for
that woman is shreudelie to be suspected which of many is evil reported.

Bias. 6. what is the work of a wise man?
Not ones to will to dooc hurt when he can.
what is a fools guise and propretie?
To wish to do hurt, not hable to do any.

Burrant. How necessary is it then that discretion and wisdom be in a
prince and ruler having authority and power. For asmoche as in soche degree
he is of might and habilite to avenge his own quarrel upon whom he list, and
to hurt and displease whom he list, if reason and wisdom would not otherwise
rule him. For what would a malicious and a foolish catiefe do if he had might
and power, which when he has none, will wish all the displeasure that he can to
a man?

Pittacus. i. HE to speak well shall be nothing conning.
That will not know to leave his babbling.

Burrant. I do think it no less, yea rather more conning in charming of a
man's toungue, in being ouermoche liberal and talkatiue, then in farmyng of
the same to speak in place and time convenient.

Pittacus. 2. I had rather of one good manne to be praised.
Then of many evil men to be commended.

Burrant. It pitieth me to see the vain glory of some foolish persons, who be
ready to fly straight into heaven, because they are of many praised and
commended, when peradventure they are but idiotes themselves that praise them.
Therefore regard is not to be had how many give praise, but what persons,
whether they be wise or foolish, good or bad. For it is a great reproach for
an honest manne to be praised of unthrifts.

Pittacus. 3. He is a mad manne that will have envy.
At any proud persons prosperity.

Burrant. I count him not only foolish, but a very mad man, and a
brainsicke fellow in deed, that will any thing at al be vexed or moved with
the good success and chance of leude persons. For a wise man may well
understand that if there were any goodness in soche happiness (if I may so call
it) evil disposed persons would not so earnestly desire it, for good things
they always abandon and reiecte, and evil things as treasures they enhaunce
and magnify.

Pittacus. 4. Mad is he that takes any pleasure At another grief or dolor.

Burrant. Should I not count him as mad, and as foolish that reioiseth at
another man's misfortune, when he knows that it may as well fall to his lotte
to be in the same danger? As if one being in the sea, saw another in
ieoperdie of drouning, Were it not a madness for him to laughe at the others
dooinges, he being in the same sea, and nigh the same peril? We have more need
to lamente forasmoche as we have deserved far greater displeasures, then they
which are fallen into them already. And again misfortunes are not so rare now
a days, that they should cause any laughter, for the multitude of them does
cause many a sore weping yie.

Pittacus. 5. To obeie that law, be not agreued. which upon other men, thou
have decreed.

Burrant. There is nothing that gives as more ready occasion to break any
law or ordinance, then for the law maker himself the same first to violate.
For if it were reasonable and just, why should he stick to do it for the good
ensample of other? If it be unjust, and unreasonable, then does he not the
office and duty of a good governor ordained by God, to rule in all equite his
people.

Pittacus. 6. Many friends shall thou get in thy prosperity.
Few friends shall thou find in thine adversity.

Burrant. It is a thing by daielie experience proved, than while we have of al
things plenty, and things frame well with us, every manne wilke ready to
show us pleasure, every manne will be our friend, and call us cousins. But if it
happen otherwise then well with us they fly away from us, as from their
enemies, and look straungelie on us, as though they never had been acquainted
with us. Wherefore let a man esteem him for a perfeicte and trusty friend,
that will in soche case stick by him. Ouide co^paueth soche flattering friends
unto Pigions, who as long as the doufehouse is fresh and new, they abide and
haunt there, but if it begin ones to were old and rotten, they witflie a
way from it to another.

Cleobulus. 1. HOW much the more thou art of ability.
So much the more restrain thy liberty.

Burrart. I would that all that are set in power and authority, would
daielie have before their yies, yea rather in their hearts and minds, this
saying written, for every little fault is soon spied in them, and that to the
great example of other inferior persons to do evil. He is worthy to be a
governor, who can withdraw his own desire, and rule his affection, when he
has most liberty to do naught.

Cleobulus. 2. It is imputed to fortunes hatred. when a good manne is in
trouble undeserved.

Burrant. It is a commune thing among men when a poor honest manne has
suffered any wrong or displeasure at the mightiers hand, to say, soche was his
fortune and chance. They might rather say, soche was the unmercifulness of
the mighty.

Cleobulus. 3. He that is made happy by any crime
His happiness he enioieth no long time.

Burrant. How long does the thief enioie his robbery? What long pleasure
has tha fornicatour and adulterar? the perjured person, does he long
prospere? what say ye to the glutton and dronkarde, is not their delights
soon enbed, when they are with some great disease molested, or with sodein
death choked? Take what kind of sin ye will, and see whether the felicity
and joy thereof is not sodeiulie, and with a trice finished.

Cleobulus. 4. Forgive other to the often offending.
But they self forgive not in any evil dooinge.

Burrant. In deed so should we Christians do, but we rather do the
contrary, revenging all that we can our neighbor offe^ding against us, not
displeased a whit with our own faults. And we can quickelie epsy a little
offense dooen by another, but our own trespassed, be their never so heinous
and abominable, we will wink at them, cloak the^, and be nothing hasty to
amend the^.

Cleobulus. 5. whosoever will good men favor.
Of evil persons, he will be a persecutour

Burrant. Look whatsoever thing a man entirely loves, he will the same saflie
keep, and defend from soche things as may destroy and hurt it. As if (...)
man love gaie appearel, he will provide a medicine for mothes. If he set by
moueie, he will make it sure from thieves, and do all that he can to hang
them. If he love the truth of Gods word, and the professors of Godly
doctrine, he will be an earnest persecutour of Idolatours, Papists, Heretics,
and schismatikes. For he truly and unfeignedly favors good men, who take
away that which most offends them, that is evil disposed persons.

Cleobulus. 6. For thy fathers merits, no man will the commend.
But for thy fathers evil deeds, they will the reprehende.

Burrant. If thy father and mother were good and honest, and thou thy self art
a leude person and an unthrift: Here the goodness of thy parents does
nothing commend the, and no man will set the more store by the for that cause.
But if thy father were a cockolde, or thy mother a cockequeane, perchance some
would not stick to call thebastard or whoresoonne, casting in thy teethe thy
pare^ties fault, when thou could do nothing therewithal.

Chilon 1. I will not the lesser to fear me in any wise.
Nor the greater me for to despise.

Burrant. Great head is to be taken in whatsoever state and condition a man is
conuersau^t, how he may so order and moderate his fashion of living, that he
by his tirannie and cruel dealing do not alien from him the hearts of his
subjects. And again that he displease not the higher powers, whereby he may
bring him self in an hatred and disdeine, and also be had in little reputation
which will cause a man to wish himself out of his life.

Chilon,. 2 Live always, death so remembering.
That of thy health thou may not be forgetting.

Burrant. How careless are we now a days whom no plage, no pestilence, no
mur^en, no kind of death at al being never so frequent and often before our
yies, can cause us to remember our sinful life? Me wholly forget our health,
seking after our continual death and everlasting misery. I would every
Christian would so forsake sin, asthough he should die within an hour, and
so to apply his earnest study to earnest occupacions, as though he should
always live.

Chilon. 3. Either with a merry heart overcome all heaviness.
Or with a faithful friend riddeal carfulness.

Burrant. If a great burden were laid upon my back, that must needs be
carried, were it not more to praise, either to desire some other to help to
bear with me, or else with all the might I have strongly to go through with it,
then like a wretch to lie done under it? Even so in like case, better it were
and more wisdom for a man, that is in sorrow and care, either with the
familiarity and company of his friend, through his counsel to ease the same,
or with a cherefull heart to bear it out, and make light of it, then like a
mecoke to shrink, or be in any despair.

Chilon. 4. If thou have dooen a benefit.
To rehearse the same it is not mete.

Burrant. This lesson is good for all churles who will be sure to do to no
man a good turn, but either they be with like or better required, either else
they to whom they have dooen good, shall be sure to hear of it. Me have like
almose men, whose left hand does not only know what the right hand does,
but as seldom as he does it, all the world knows it, or else how should
they be cou^pted gods men.

Chilon. 5. when old age is like youth frolike and lusty.
Then is it pleasant and loving.
when youth is like old age, froward and crabbie.
Then is it dumpishe and lowryng.

Burrant. And hereby he does show that old men being merry and cherefull,
are more to be esteemed, then a young man testie and froward. For much bigger
and longer is the heart of a young oak, then of an old beche. And so sharper
and sourer are the lokes of a young manne, then of an old, and longer does
the ire of the one endure, then of the other.

Solon. 1. THen I coumpt our life blessed and happy.
when we have ended our fate and destenie.

Burrant. Wonderful it is to see with what study and labor many a foolish
person goes about to make himself happy in this transitory life, and
think to get a quiet place and time to rest. And when they have toiled and
labored all that they may, the greatest happiness that may possible in this
life be atteined to, is very misery, and the quietest rest most troublesome
pein and vexacion, in comparison of that they shall have after their death if
they die well and like christians.

Solon. 2. Marry a wife that is thine equal. The unequal does at variaunce
fall

Burrant. If thou mariest a wife richer then thy self, remember that she will
vpbraied thee of beggerie, and auaunce her ability. If thou mariest a poorer,
she will anon be cockyng with thee, and be ready to be master over thine
own gooddes. And will not stick to say that although she had no substance,
yet her good qualities deserved a better then thou art. But one poincte for thy
learning in this case take of the Ploughman, which yoketh his oxen by like
couples, least one should be a let unto the other by inequality. The
perfeictest and the surest love and friendship that is, comes together by
equal matches.

Solon. 3. Honors ought never to come by chance
But by virtues own procuraunce.

Burrant. Many a one comes to promocion and dignity, eue^ by very chance of
the world. As some by false disyng come to riches, some by flattryng to honor
and dignity, some by marriage of an old rich widow, to great substance: But
how many come to any good estimacion by good feactes and qualities, by godly
living and wholesome doctrine? For the true honor ought to be the reward of
virtue and not of fortune, who oftimes extolleth, and magnifieth the most
lewdest persons.

Solon. 4. Rebuke thy neighbor privily.
And the same do thou praise openly.

Burrant. May not we christians be ashamed to have the writings of Gentiles
and Heathens reprouyng, and condemnyng the spiteful slanders, and envious
backbitynges of one neighbor of another, and how seldom it is seen one to say
well by another, or one to praise another: and can be imputed to none other
cause, then the lack and want of Charity, and the great abundaunce of
plentifulnesse of malice and envy.

Solon. 5. It is a Godlier thing nobility to win.
Then to be borne of a noble kin.

Burrant. The unlearned people when they see a man of base birthe, and low
degree to come to any promocion and dignity. Their saying is, behold, a new
found gentleman now of late promoted and exalted, how is he come a lofte, and
had in great estimacion, and gladly enterteined both with lords and ladies,
whose father being a poor sely soulle, full many a time has rid into the
field in a doung carte, and there labored full sore for his living, carpyng
and caryng night and day to bring him up. But if they had any upright or good
judgment, they would rather more rejoice in them, who by their manifold and
singular virtues, and honest qualities, have so attained and come to soche
promocion and high authority, from so low and base degree, then soche, who
nature only by succession in enheritaunce, and birtheright, has brought
forth a gentleman. But they endued and garnished with like qualities, and
virtues do double their nobility, for then they are not only gentlemen
borne, but also through verteous and good behauiors, procure unto a higher
estate then their ancestors ever had.

Solon. 6. If fortune have this or that so decreed,
Then to beware, or take heed what shall it need.
But if all things (as they are) be uncertain.
Then to fear, and dread it is but in vain.

Burrant. If thou might know precisely and certainly that thou should be
hanged or drouned (but let us refer that to the secrets of God to be
determinable with him only) it were but folly then for the to seek any ways
and means to save thy self from soche danger. But forasmoche as thou art
uncertain what thy destiny shall be, it were a foolish thing to be in fear
and care of thy end: and so by this a christian may learn to give himself
wholly to the mercy of God, and to put a perfeicte trust and hope in him, that
he will dispose the end to his soulles best health.

Thales. 1. Fear thy self, although without witness.
Thou art so bold, to commit uncleanness.

Burrant. As in the play of tiktacke, if the table men stand upon a single
poinct he is in danger of lesyng: Even so every person disposed and being not
a feared to do sin and naughtiness while he is alone, the devil will be
busy to tempt him, and put him in danger of lesyng of his soulle. Where as
in doubling of his poinct, that is, in taking some honest and godly co^panio^
with him, he shall save his man that is to say, his soulle, from deadly sin,
into the which he had been ready to fall, if the witness had not been with
him.

Thales. 2. The life of man does sone perish.
But the glory of his death does never diminishe.

Burrant. Some compare the life of man to a bubble, some to the lightness of a
fether, some other to the gliding of a shadow. And again, other there are that
feineth it to hang by a hear, or a twined threde. But let them compare it to
what brittle thing soever they will, very short it is in deed and sone gone.
Therefore, if a man will by his godly co^uersacion of life, and by his good
deeds procure to himself an honest fame and good name, he may live long by the
glory of his good deeds among men here in earth, and through Christ's
demerites reign with God everlastingly.

Thales. 3. If thou entendest to do any secret thing.
Keep it to thy self and be not thereof bablyng.

Burrant. The nature of man is now adays so subtle, the study of every man
is for his own profit so great, and so rare a thing it is to find a true and
a trusty friend, that it is to hard to trust any body, yea, the wisest poinct
of al is, for a man entendyng any serious and secret business which shall
turn him to any profit, to keep it close to himself, and to make no man of
his counsel, least he be prevented by him, to whom he trusted best, and so
be beguiled of his purpose.

Thales. 4. It is a torment that thing to be dreaded which by no means can be
avoided.

Burrant. A thief being upon the gallows, and perceiuyng that there is no way
but one, and that there is no other reme die, but that he must hang and swinge
in an halter, if he fear in this case, he does none other but make to him
self a new pair of galous while he hangs, his mind being in doubt and
fear of that thing that cannot be remedied, and so hangs himself twice,
doubling his sorrow and grief.

Thales. 5. when thou dooest chide earnestly.
Thou dooest little help an enemy.

Burrant. As who would say, it is better for a man, to have a good cuffe of
the ear of his foe, then the flattryng kiss of his feigned friend: for the
open war and debate, that I have with mine enemy, is a good help and
means, how to learn to beware of him, and how to keep my self, that I come
not into his reach. And so ca^ I not of my dissemblyng friend, which like a
venomous serpent, stingeth privily.

Thales. 6. Any thing to little, is not sufficient. But all is to little, if thou
be not content

Burrant. A mean in all things is good and commendable. For if the thing be
ouermoche and superfluous, then is it not sufficient, forasmoche as it cannot
serve our turn, and the abundaunce of it, does rather hinder us then
ferther. Of the contrary, if the thing should be over scant and little, then
are we new to seek. So that if the thing had been mean, between ouermoche
and to little, it had fitted us very well.

The end of the sayings of the seven wisemen of Greece.
The sayings of Publius.
Publius. 1. THat pertains to the nothing. which chau^ceth by wishyng.

Erasmus. The meaning of this saying is this. That which is gotten by our
own labor and industry, it is truly ours: but that is none of ours which
chances unto us by wishyng, forasmuch as every mischau^ce may pluck it
from us again.

Publius. 2. Look what thou have dooen to other.
The Same be content, again to suffer.

Erasmus. Like as thou art unto other, soche shall other be toward thee.

Publius. 3. He that has wit, a danger to suspect Has knowelege enough, his
own matter to correct.

Erasmus. He that understands and perceives peril and danger, he also
knows how to beware of the same. For foolish hardiness, truly does
dau^gerously go about affairs and businesses. The cause is, she knows not
how to cast any peril.

Publius. 4. That which is small and slender.
By concord is made strenger.

Erasmus. Concord and unity, does make things strong, yea, even those
things that be very weak and slender: of the contrary, discord and debate
does diminishe very great richesse and substance.

Publius. 5. Love by the judgment of the mind is taken.
But by the same, it is not so sone forsaken.

Erasmus. It is in our power, not to begin to love, but when a man has ones
begone, then he is as a bondsman, unto it, for he cannot shake it of, when he
would.

Publius. 6. Extreme is the love or hatred of a woman.
A third thing to be mean, to find no man can.

Erasmus. A woman is over vehement of both parts, as a beast always subject
and under the rule of affeccions. How be it, a man may find men of soche
condition, and of them not a few, which are of both sides, out of measure
extreme.

Publius. 7. They that be in poverty and misery. Be always suspected of
iniquity.

Erasmus. They that are poor and nedie, be in the more suspicion.

Publius. 8. Love thy father, being gentle and kind. If he be not so, obeie
with heart and mind.

Erasmus. Love thy father and mother, being good and loving: and suffer them
if they are any thing hard and sharp, yea, and it be but for this cause
only: that they are thy parents.

Publius. 9. Consider before, and take good head:
That thou lose by nothing, that is thy deed.

Erasmus. Look what thou will not to be lost the same save and keep. For
truly the forecast of the, is the best sauer and keeper of a thing that may
be.

Publius. 10. If thou suffrest the faults of thy friend:
Then thou thyselfe dooest offend.

Erasmus. It shall be imputed to the, whatsoever thy friend does otherwise then
well, whereas thou geuest him no warning thereof.

Publius. 11. It is death to a free nature and courage:
To live in another man's bondage.

Erasmus. It were an hard and a straung case to him, to be a bond servant,
and gage to other, which is a free manne borne, and was wont to be a Master
over other.

Publius. 12. He does a man absent harm: That contendeth with a dronken
man.

Erasmus. For the right wits of a dronken person are not present; with the
which a man may common. Therefore it fares as though he were nor there
himself.

Publius. 13. A lover that is moved and angry.
Does with himself, many things fantasy.

Erasmus. For he does purpose many things in his mind, which he does not
afterward. Burrant: As that lover Phedria did, which spoke bloody words,
as though he would never have returned to his lover again, saying: Shall I love
her? That loves not me? which loves soche a one? which shut me out of the
doors? which would not let me in? let her go to the Devil, I had rather die,
then love her again: she shall perceive what a fellow I am. And yet afterward,
he was as far in a fools paradise, as ever he was before.

Publius. 14. The coueteous person, that is always nedie:
Is himself cause of his own misery.

Erasmus. For it comes of himself, and that willingly, that he is poor and
needy Burrant: Soche ever lacks and want in great abundance, who knows
not, how to use well their substance.

Publius. 15. A lover does see, what thing to covet:
But that which is wisdom, he sees no whit.

Erasmus. A fond lover does desire without judgment, neither pondreth nor
co^adereth, whether it be profitable or hurtful, which he coueteth to have.

Publius. 16. A lover what he surmiseth in his brain.
The same waking dreameth in vain.

Erasmus. They which are in the trance of love, do of themselves imagine
fantasies and dreams, and flattereth themselves with vain hope. Burrant.
Supposing that for their loving hearts, they are loved again entirely, when
peradventure they are hated extremely.

Publius. 17. If any thing chance, otherwise then well:
Every manne is ready the same to tell.

Erasmus. Sorowefull and heavy tidinges are soon spread abroad among
theco^mon people. Those things which are good and honest, with much a do
are believed.

Publius. 18. Love sodenlie cannot be put away:
But by little and little it may decaie.

Erasmus. Sodeinlie and with fear, love can not be expulsed, but it may by
leisure slide and slip away.

Publius. 19. with a few tears of a lover:
Thou may sone redeem his anger.

Erasmus. A lover displeased and angry, is soon pacified by putting thy
finger in thine yie.

Publius. 20. Only a good woman thou may know:
when she does openly play the shrewe.

Erasmus. A woman is a wily and a subtle beast, and for this cause she can
do but little harm, when she is most shrewest and cursed ope^lie. Herin he
declares none at all to be good.

Publius. 21. Thou may soon perceive a person auaricious:
If thou thy self be not coueteous.

Erasmus. One coueteous person cannot abide an other. Or else thus: thou
shall not lightelie deceive a coueteous person: except thou be the same that
he is, that is, a coueteous person thy self.

Publius. 22. To be wise, and also to love:
Is scant given to God above.

Erasmus. It lies not in ones power, to love and to be wise at one time. As
though a man would be mad with reason. Burrant: For as long as a man is
in that foles paradise of love, his wits are wholly ravished, his reason
blinded and fares like a man that is frantique and lunatique.

Publius. 23. A coueteous person does nothing well.
Until he pass, either to heaven or hell.

Erasmus. For when he dies, then at length he suffers other, to occupy his
riches.

Publius. 24. Age, be it hid never so privy:
Yet at length it does it self discrie

Erasmus. Old age cannot be hid, for time does show and open al things.

Publius. 25. A coueteous manne, if he lose any thing:
Does much more stir then one that has understanding.

Erasmus. A wise man is not disquieted with the loss of gooddes, but he which
estemeth and sets much by moneie.

Publius. 26. To the coueteous manne what evil would thou desire?
Only that he might be a long liver.

Erasmus. Forasinoche as he lives very wretchedlie. Therefore he wishes to a
coueteous person, a shreude turn in deed: who would him long life. For the
longer he lives, the more are his troubles and cares.

Publius. 27. Trust not, nor have any belief,
In thy mind, when it is in peine and grief.

Erasmus. As long as thou art in anguishe and sorrow, have no confidence in thy
self. For grief and peine can in no thing give vprighte, and indifferente
counsel. Pause until the sorrow be slaked, then purpose and decree with thy
self, what thou intendest to speak or do.

Publius. 28. we delight best, with that that is others:
And that pleases them, which is ours.

Erasmus. Every manne is weary of his own state and condition. He estemeth
wou^derfullie that which belongs to an other manne, and that in words
only. But if it should come to the deed dooyng, few would willingly chaung
with other.

Publius. 29. For a young manne to love, it is pleasure and pastime:
And for an old man, it is a foul fault and crime.

Erasmus. Love in a young manne is a pleasure, so it be honest and godly. And
in an aged person, it is an heinous vice and no pleasure at al. Burrant. For
it is one of the three things, that the wise man hates in his soulle: An old
manne to be lecherous.

Publius. 30. An old woman, when she does leap and dance:
Unto death she makes mirth and daliaunce.

Erasmus. Skipping and daunsing becomes not an old woman, being at deaths
door, for she does seem that sh would give death a fit of mirthe.

Publius. 31. That which is the cause of a lovers wound:
The Same again, does make it whole and sound.

Erasmus. The wound and grief of a man's hearts desire, the very same person
does heal, that made it, if he suffer himself to be won, alluding to the
tale of Telephus. Burrant; who being wounded in the thigh, with the darte of
Achilles, was by a medicine made of the rustinesse of the same darte, cured and
healed again.

Publius. 32. He does soon himself repent:
which gives quick and light judgment.

Erasmus. Give not sentence and judgment straight out of hand. For a man
does often times repent, and is sorry for his rash and hasty judgment.

Publius. 33. Prosperity does get unto the a friend:
And aduersite tries who is unkind.

Erasmus. Prosperity does procure and get a man friends, adversity does
try and search out, whether they are feigned, or true hearted friends.

Publius. 34. The desire in his heart, how much he is the cunninger:
In his demeaner, so much he is the leuder.

Erasmus. In an evil thing, how much the more thou dooest excel and pass,
so much the more unthrift thou art. As a soldier, the more feactes of war
he has, so much the more rediar he is to do mischief.

Publius. 35. A bow is destroyed with ouermoche bending:
And a man's mind with ouermoche slacking.

Erasmus. A Bow is soon broken, if thou give him much bent. The spirits of
the mind are quickened, by exercise of good things, and by idleness they are
confounded and dulled.

Publius. 36. That thing is twice welcome in deed:
which is voluntarily proffered in time of need.

Erasmus. A good turn with much prayer, and suite extorted, and hardly
obtained, has lost a great many of thanks. That which is proffered
willingly, and by a man's own accord, is twice welcome.

Publius. 37. He unjustly does a good turn desire:
That knows not to do good for other.

Erasmus. He ought not to have the use of others benefits, which does good
to no man himself.

Publius. 38. It is good by another man's misery:
To learn what is best for us to fly.

Erasmus. Plautus in like manner says. He is wise happily, which learneth
wit by another mischaunce and danger. What thou ought for to fly, that
learn not of thine own hurtes and harms, but take an example of another
displeasure.

Publius. 39. He of his own liberty, sale does make:
which of another a good turn does take.

Erasmus. It is more happiness for a man to give, then to take. For he leeseth
his liberty, whosoever has the use and occupiyng of another man's good turn.

Publius. 40. There comes to no man, so good an hour:
But it is to one or other, cause of doloure.

Erasmus. No man has any chance so luckie and fortunate, which does not
happen to some others hurt and displeasure.

Publius. 41. That kind of death is doubled.
which by another is adjudged.

Erasmus. Men do somewhat with a willing and glad heart, suffer natural
death, but when they are compelled to die, that death they suffer grudgyngly
and heavily.

Publius. 42. Good tournes he takes many me.
That knows a good turn to bestow.

Erasmus. No man does any more to them, whom he has found to be churles.
But whom we have tried and proved kind and loving, upon them we bestow
greater benefits.

Publius. 43. Thou do a double sin and iniquity
when thy service to an offendour, thou dooest apply.

Erasmus. For thou dooest both help him, and also make thy self guilty of
the same fault.

Publius. 44. A good heart, if it be displeased. It is much more grievously
offended.

Erasmus. A gentle and meke stomache, when it is moved and wexeth angry, it is
more earnestly agreued (Burra^t) then a cursed heart, to whom all displeasures
natural, are as a nourishemente and a pleasure. For asmoche as soche an heart,
of nature works and wills all displeasure.

Publius. 45. That death is good and to be wished.
By the which all evil is extinguished

Erasmus. Unto wretches and miserable persons, death is even to be desired and
wished for, as that which does make an end of al their miseries together

Publius. 46. He does receive a good turn by geuyng.
which does bestow it upon one deseruyng.

Erasmus. Let him think himself well requited, which does give or bestow a
good turn upon him which has deserved it. For that is never lost which is
bestowed upon an honest good fellow, in somoche as he will requite thee with a
like, or deserved a better.

Publius. 47. The love of a woman is sweet and pleasant.
won with fair means, and not by constraint.

Erasmus. It is a gaie and pleasant thing, when a man is loved again heartily,
and not when a womannes good will is obtained, by long and hard woyng.

Publius. 48. A good disposed mind, does never himself give,
To their service that in sin does live.

Erasmus. He that is an upright liver, does never condesce^de, and agree to
him that is an unthrift. Burrant. And a good cause why: for their conditions
and qualities are repugnaunte, and their studies are not like.

Publius. 49. To have done a good turn, he that himself reports.
The Same to be done again, he shamefully asks.

Erasmus. The remembrance and puttyng in mind of a benefit given, is the
condition of him that asks or looks for God have mercies. Burrant. Yea, and
the rehearsal of a good turn, is an vpbraidyng of a man of his unkindness,
in geuyng no thanks for his good turn received, and so it is worthy no God
have mercies at all.

Publius. 50. There is the nerest and greatest kindred where.ii. faithful
minds are coupled.

Erasmus. The mutual benevolence and kindness of men, does often bind their
hearts nerer together, then any affinity of blood.

Publius 51. Often times to give a benefit.
Is to teach how the same to requite.

Erasmus He that does many good tournes to many one, does with a continuance
of dooyng good, provoke the same to kindness.

Publius. 52 To counterfact the words of goodness
Is to be taken of much more lewdness.

Erasmus. He that is evil of conversation, and in words Pope holy, he is
more then a leude person. (Burrant.) For he is a very hipocrite and Pharisie.

Publius. 53. A good name to a man is more sure.
Then any worldly richesse or treasure.

Erasmus. It is much more saufegard, to have an honest good name, then
worldely substance. Burrant. Of the which two, the one forsakes not a man
when he is dead, the other is shaken of with every light blast of fortune.

Publius. 54. Goodness although it be for the time suppressed.
Yet it is not for ever extinguished.

Erasmus. Truth and Justice, may for a time, be kept under, but it does
appear at length. Burrant. As the true preaching of Gods word, has often
times been kept in hugger mugger, and the true preachers thereof put to
silence, yet it has come to light again and other true Prophets have risen
when the old has been by Papists and Pharisees persecuted and slain.

Publius. 55. He has a double victory.
who ouercometh himself and his enemy

Erasmus. He that does soberly use his victory, is twice a conqueror:
first of his enemy, and then of himself.

Burrant. And this last victory is the more honorable and manly, for there is
no harder thing nor better, then the subduyng of a man's own sensual will.

Publius. 56. He that is free hearted and liberal.
Seeks an occasion to be beneficial.

Erasmus That man that is liberal, does not look to be desired: but
willingly and of his own accord, seeks an occasion to give. Burrant. And
bestows his Charity. But soche liberality now a days, is turned into
nigardie or prodigality.

Publius. 57. He is twice slain and murdered. which with his own weapon is
killed

Erasmus. That grief is much grievous unto us, whereof we our selves have
ministered the occasion. As if a man should promote one to an office, or high
dignity, and might of the same afterward be destroyed.

Publius. 58. He slepeth quietly and at rest. who feleth not how evil is his
nest.

Erasmus. Where all felyng and perseverance of evil is away, nothing there is
evil, or found a miss. As if a man be fallen into a sound sleep, he feleth
not the hardness, or other in (...) commodity of his cabon or couchet

Publius. 59. That an honest man is in wretchedness
The fault thereof is in his own goodness.

Erasmus. If he be in wretched case and misery, which lives well and
uprightly, this thing is to be imputed, and adjudged to his verteous living,
to whom (men say) that evil fortune and mischaunce, is always aduersau^t
and against. Or eis on this wife in these verses following.

Publius. 60. It is to good men, a great dishonestie:
To see an honest man live in misery.

Erasmus. When an honest and vprighte man does need of things necessary, to
the sustentacion and maintenau^ce of his life, this tourneth to the reproach
and rebuke of good men, who have no better regard unto virtue and good
living.

Publius. 61. A good name, although it be unknown and in darkness.
Yet it keeps still, his own clear light and brightness.

Erasmus. The praise and good report of good deeds cannot be hid. For it
appears in the heart it self, although it likes or pleases no thing at all
the opinion and judgment of the common people.

Publius. 62. Good thoughts, if they fall out of memory.
Yet they perish not, nor utterly die.

Erasmus. Whatsoever good thing thou have purposed and determined in thy mind,
although for the time it be forgotten, yet it does not for ever perish.

Publius. 63. He well and wisely leseth his money when he gives it to a Judge,
being guilty.

Erasmus. He which corrupts a judge with money, where as he is guilty of
the matier, he leseth the same, but yet to his own advantage. Therefore it is
well lost.

Publius. 64. Good men he does both hurt and grieve:
whosoever does evil men pardone and forgive.

Erasmus. Great injury and wrong is done unto good men, when evil men art of
their faults forgeuen, and perdoned. For we shall have fewer good, if it be
lawful thus for unthrifts and naughtipackes, to escape scotfree and unpunished.

Publius. 65. Next to the virtue of justice and equity Is cruel dealyng, and
severity.

Erasmus. For severity and hard dealyng, is somewhat sharper and streighter
then Justice, leanyng to inclemencie, and unmercifulness.

Publius. 66. A good man's anger and fury, A man may sone alaie and pacify.

Erasmus. With malicious and envious perfones, wrath does very slowely wear
away, but with good men, (...) ^s sone out of mind and forgotten.

Publius. 67. That is an honest and good shame. That shows us to avoid blame.

Erasmus. It is better for a man to be ashamed to do a fault, then after it
is dooen to loath the same, and to be sorry for it. That same is profitable by
the which we are restrained from those things, which we have daungerously
dooen.

Publius. 68. For a man to have mercy and pity. Is to himself a good help
and remedy

Erasmus. He that is merciful toward other does deserve that other be
faudurable toward him again, if any thing shall chance unto him, other wise
then well.

Publius 69. Soche things as men have by them daiely. Be little esteemed, and
little set by.

Erasmus. That is of little reputacion and naught set by, which begins to
be common. Nothing ought to be more precious and better regarded, then good
things. And that truly is esteemed, which is rare and scarce. Burrant And
this causes men to make so much of good wives, and servants, they are so
seldom and hard to find.

Publius 69. when thou art to the worthy beneficial
Bythy goodness, to the, thou bindest al

Erasmus. A good turn is given to the virtue of the person, and not to the
person himself. And a good man does use and occupy thy benefit, to the
commodity of all other.

Publius. 70. It is coumpted for a very cruelty.
To chide a man in adversity.

Erasmus. Our friend fallen into any great poverty, or having any mischaunce,
is to be comforted and cherished, and not to be chidden and brauled withal.

Publius. 71. To whom thou have ever given, and dooest now him deem.
Thou commaundest him to take from thee violently.

Erasmus. He which was wont to take rewards and gifts, thinks that as due
debt unto him, which is given, in so much that if thou deny him, he is to
ready to pluck it from the by force. This pertains proprely to catchepolles.

Publius. 72. The pacientes evil diete and intemperauncie.
Makes the Phisicio^ to handle him more vngentlie.

The evil rule of the pacient, does cause that the Physician can none other
chouse, but to go unto sharper remedies, as cuttyng, searyng, and soche like.

Publius. 73. His life to his friends is odious.
who of his death are desirous.

Erasmus. His life must needs be hateful and spited, whose death, his own
friends desire and wish after. Burra^t. As many an unnatural son wills
the spedie death of his father, for because he might come by his lands. And
many an vnlouyng housbande, the death of his wife which is old and crabbed,
that he might have a younger in her place

Publius 74. No man does sone come again into favor.
with his enemy, that waits him a displeasure.

Erasmus. An enemy is not by and by to be trusted. The benevolence and
frendeshippe of men is soon set aparte, but it is not so lightelie made at
one again. And anger of all other things does most slowelis wear away.

Publius. 75. A man comes the sooner into an hasarde.
when of the same he has no regard.

Erasmus. A mischaunce does rather hurts and harm them, who does little
regard it, then those who take heed, and be thereof ware.

Publius. 76. Of her housbande, a chaste wife and continent:
Does obtain her purpose, being obedient.

Erasmus. A chaste wife does obtain this by he gentleness, that look
whatsoever she wo^uld her housbande to do, he does it. Burrant: And she
does sooner obtain, when she is obedient, then when she requires or
demands, being in obediente.

Publius. 78. The proud man's pomp and glory:
Is soon turned into shame and ignomie.

Erasmus. An evil report and name does always ensue and follow,
stateliness and pride, and he that insolentlie and proudelie does use his
renoume and praise, the same does stumble and fall into shame and rebuke.

Publius. 79. Thou shall more win by good counsailing:
Then thou shall by brauling and chiding.

Erasmus. Anger is ever hasty and hedlong: wisdom and good aduisemente, is
peaceable and cold. By her thou shall sooner work thy will, then by
rashenesse and furiousness.

Publius. 80. Sufferaunce and patience:
Is to every grief a defense.

Erasmus. Every anguishe and peine, is eased by patience. Diseases have some
one remedy, and some another. But patience is the common easement of al
euilles.

Publius. 81. whereas vice with ungraciousness avails.
There he that does well, offends.

Erasmus. Whereas it is necessary for men to play the knaves, there it
would hinder them, to show themselves honest men. And where unthriftiness is
rewarded, there goodness is punished.

Publius. 82. It is easier to be displeased for goodness:
Then to be beaten for foolishness.

Erasmus. Better it is for a man to be displeased for virtue and honeslie,
then to do any foolish poincte: for the one he suffers unjustly, and for
the other he is punished woorthelie.

Publius. 83. A merry companion, that can talk and clatter:
Upon the high way is instead of a horselitter.

Erasmus. A iocant and a merry talker does cause that a man does not feel
the werinesse of the way, euer^ as though he were carried in an horseliter, or
chariot.

Publius. 84. The welfare of a wicked person:
Soon comes to confusion.

Erasmus. The felicity and prosperous estate of evil persons dureth no long
time.

Publius. 84. He to life lays a fault and blame:
which by death would be rid of the same.

Erasmus. He seems to blame his life, which desires to die. Burrant.
Howbeit, the fault is not to be laid unto life, but to our selves, which
live so wretchedlie, that we be weary of our life, and desire rather to be
quick under the earth, then to live in soche misery, which we have
righteouslie deserved, for our iniquity and sin.

Publius. 86. He that above the law has might will borowe a little more then
right.

Erasmus. To whom is suffered more then right and law, he takes more upon him,
then either he ought or has need so to do. This may be well applied to
tirauntes and wives. Burrant. For the more that a Tiraunte is suffered, and not
withstand, the more cruel he is. So of a shreude wife, the longer her tongue
is vncharmed, and her foolish passions not suppressed, the more shre wish and
cursed she is. Wherefore, happy and also wise is he, that can take her up in
her wedding shoes, least afterward, she taking a little heart of grace, be
without al hope of amendment.

Publius. 87. The day that comes next after:
Is to the day before as a scholar.

Erasmus. By daielie experience of things, we be made every day wiser and
wiser. Burrant: For look what we did amiss this day, we may learn how to
amend the same the next day.

Publius. 88. To chide a man, when he is in adversity:
Is to hurt him, when he has need of remedy.

Erasmus. When our friend is in trouble, and needs help, then to chide and
braule with him, is no help, but harm unto him. First he is to be quieted
out of his trouble, and aftrewarde to be rebuked, that through his own folly
he fell into soche business.

Publius. 89. Battle is to be prepared leasurlie:
That thou may the sooner overcome thine enemy.

Erasmus. They, who in attempting affairs and business, make ouermoche haste,
do sometime very slowite bring to pass their matiers, whereas leisure in a
provision, is no less, but quickelie and with speed to conclude the matier.

Publius. 90. To call a man a churl, who so does enterprise:
Does call him all the evil words that he can devise.

Erasmus. Unkindnesse does contain in it self al kinds of vices. Therefore
there cannot be spoken, a more shameful check. Burrant: then to call a man
(...) churl, or a snoudge.

Publius. 91. Do not speak evil of thine enemi(...) Howsoever thou thi^kest
of him priueli(...)

Erasmus. If thou think to do thine ennemie a pleasure, beware of evil
communication, for that is the thing that he would have. It is a very
foolishnes therefore, to speak evil of any man. For if he be thy friend,
thou dooest not well, but if he be thy fooe, thou shall the less hurt him.

Publius. 92. Upon things profitable, take good aduisemente:
Leisure and respite, are the best assuremente.

Erasmus. The best way is, that thy counsailles be soberlie and leasurelie
taken. For rashenesse and heddines, without aduisemente, be often times
vnluekie.

Publius. 93. Grief and sorrow does then cease:
when thou dooest nothing, them to increase.

Erasmus. When an evil or mischief comes to the wourst, then it must needs
amend. Burrant. Except it keep at the poincte of extreme naughtiness still,
and yet then there is good hope of amendment, forasmoche as there remains
no ferther matier, or occasion to make it wourse.

Publius. 94. I had as leave thou toldest me a very leasing.
As to say that a woman shall forgette her weping.

Erasmus. And that is no more to say, then that she shall never forget it.
Burrant. This passion is so natural in them, that if thou will teach her to
forget it, thou must first learn to make her forgette that she is a woman,
but remember this one thing, that thou then must least believe her, when she
shereth her tears most ple^tifullie. For if she should forget weping, she
should forgette to cloak and hide her subtletie.

Publius. 95. By debate and striving:
Frendshippe is made more loving.

Erasmus. Thee falling out of lovers, is the renewing of love. Burra^t. Yea,
they are most commonly the perfeictest friends and lovers, which before were
very extreme enemies: and it is often seen.

They afterward to be manne and wife,
Which heretofore have been at great debate and strife.
Publius. 96. Upon that thing take thou respite, and leisure:
which if thou ones promise, must ever endure.

Erasmus. Of whatsoever thing thou can but ones for all determine and purpose
upon, as of Matrimony and Priestehode, of the same thou must take long
deliberation, before thou set upon it.

Publius. 97. A man ought to be hard of hearing:
Only to another man's co^plaining.

Erasmus. Do thou not by and by, give credence to him that accuses any man.
Burrant; For by this means many an innocente has been falselie condemned. And
many a true heir has been wrongfullie disherited.

Publius. 98. when our life is most delectable:
Then the state of death is most acceptable.

Erasmus. Then is the best time of all to die when it is yet pleasant to live.

Publius. 99. That is to be called hurt and displeasure:
which with an evil name is gain and lucre.

Erasmus. Lucre and vantage, with the loss of a man's good name, is an
hinderaunce, and no gains.

Publius. 100. The strength and manhood of the soldier:
Is the good counsel of his Capitain and governor.

Erasmus. Soldiers are mighty and strong to no purpose, except they be
ruled by the wisdom, and policy of their Capiteine.

Publius. 101. Fear, least what to the is given this day:
Another day will come and take it away.

Erasmus. That which does chance sodeinly, fortune does sodeinlie take
away again. Burrant. As this day to atteine to great riches and promocion,
and tomorowe of the same to be sodeinlie and with a trice, deprived and
benumbed.

Publius. 102. That which without knowledge is diminished:
Is for no loss to be supposed.

Erasmus. That is no hurt or loss, which a man feleth not. Burrant. The
knowelege and remembrance of any losses does cause a man's heart to sorrow
although it be but a trifle, whereas if it had never come to his knowelege, he
would never have missed it, or passed upon it.

Publius. 103. A very innocent being in tormente and peine.
Is constrained to lie and feine.

Erasmus. In tormente very innocents do often times lie, being constrained
thereunto by punishment and extreme pain. Burrant. Alas who is of so bold and
hard heart, but when he is laid in the rack, and his ioinctes extracted and,
stretched forth, but will for very pein and anguishe, say whatsoever he
thinks may please, although it were never dooen or thought, which he does
then speak.

Publius. 104. In very sin and naughtiness.
It is mete to perform faiethfulnesse.

Erasmus. Faieth and truth is after soche sorre to be kept, that it is in very
evil things sometime to be performed. Burrant: Ah see an Heathen, how
greatly he esteemed in evil things the observing of that, which we in the
best things that be, despise to perform: for that do we soonest of al
neglecte that we do most faithfully promise.

Publius. 105. About that thing which we desire to get.
The most speed that may be, is a stay and let.

Erasmus. To one that is desirous, or would fain obtain a thing, yea, all the
have possible, is tariaunce unto him.

Publius. 106. In that man is wisdom and happiness
which his own fault by another can redress.

Erasmus. A wiseman does gather by another faults and offenses, what he
himself ought to beware of.

Publius. 107. Men in misery are of wit very scant And of the same they are
also abu^da^t.

Erasmus. Wit is scant, forasinoche as they see not how to remedy, and
redress their misfortunes. And wit is abundante, for they now understand and
perceive, what they should have been ware of.

Publius. 108. what a man knows and has in memory:
the same to forget is sometime necessary

Erasmus. Some things are of soche sort, that they are to be forgotten, and
unlearned again.

Publius. 109. Desire of lucre and very coueteousnesse
Made fortune an heavenly goddess.

Erasmus. The study and desire of worldly lutre does cause, that men think
fortune to be a goddess in deed, which favors and helps them.

Publius. 110. He that does coueteousnesse avoid and fly.
Conquereth an whole country.

Erasmus. To subdue coueteousnesse or anger, is more then winnyng of an whole
realine and kingdom.

Publius. 111. He that has no house wherein to put his head.
Is as one without a grave when he is dead.

Erasmus. That is to say, a banished man which has no where a dwelling
place, is like one that is dead and unburied and lies without a cophine or
grave For banishement is a civil death. For none of them for the most part
(and specially in those days) returned to their country, during their life.

Publius. 112. Even they that do wrong and injury
Do hate the same in another extremely

Erasmus. No, not so much as they themselves that do injury or wrong to other
mo^ will have the same to be done unto the^

Publius. 113. To take away a weapon it is meter.
Then to an angry person the same to deliver.

Erasmus. An occasion to hurt or displease, is not to be given to an angry
person, but it is rather to be taken away and avoided.

Publius. 114. A man, his own country to deny:
Is asmoche, as to suffer banishement willingly.

Erasmus. He that hides his head in an hole, and is not occupied in the
affairs of the commune wealth, is a banished man wilfully.

Publius. 115. Even one very small hear:
His shadow with him does bear

Erasmus. There is nothing so small and little, which serves not for some use
or other. Burrant. As the very little heates of the brows and yie liddes, do
shadow and defend the yies from dust, and other inconvenience.

Publius. 116. Alas, it is a very wretched thing.
To wexe elder by fear and trembling

Erasmus. It is a miserable case to be sore broken, and stricken in age, by the
fear of mischaunce, which has not yet happened.

Publius. 117. He is rightful even unto his enemy,
which takes counsel of fidelity.

Erasmus. He that follows after that thing which faith, and not grief and
sorrow does appoinct him, he shall be vprighte and indifferente, even unto his
very enemies.

Publius. 118. A misfortune does hurt them very lightly.
which be promoted to high dignity.

Erasmus. Like to them that fall from an high place, their fall is more
dangerous and the sooner taken. So with more peril and ieoperdie a man himself
castetly down from an high fortune or dignity

Publius. 119. he that has lost his crede^ce and fidelity what has he left
to save his honesty.

Erasmus. He which leseth his money, has somewhat yet left to trust to, but
he which has broken his promise and lost his credence, has no yearthly
thing to take to.

Publius. 120. when fortune is favorable and flattryng Then will she be pollyng
and shauyng.

Erasmus. Fortune when she is pleasant then she works subtleties. So that
then she is chiefly to be mistrusted, when she is most gaie and florishyng.

Publius. 121. Thou may fortune, sooner to find and obtein.
Then thou may the same keep and detein.

Erasmus. It is a very difficult and has thing to retain fortune, least she be
changed or altered. And it is a greater virtue saufly to keep and defend soche
things as we have gotten, then those same to get and win.

Publius. 122. A fair face and beautiful phisnomie.
Is a domme praise and commendacion privy.

Erasmus. Favor is showed unto them that be fair and beautiful, although
they say nothing. Burrant. And for this gift we do see a very strumpet to
be commended, although in all other things she ought daiely to be hated.

Publius. 123. we do in vain ask his charity:
which cannot find in his heart to have mercy.

Erasmus. He that cannot be entreated by fair prayer, what boteth it to desire
his help. (Burrante.) For uncharitable persons are like unto a block or a
stock, which have the similitude and proporcion of a man, yet have no mocion,
or sensual understanding in the^

Publius. 124. It is deceit to take that away.
which thou art not hable to repaie

Erasmus. It is very guile and deceipte, to take a benefit of any man, to whom
thou art not hable to restore asmoche, or a like good turn.

Publius. 125. Look whom fortune does favor and nourishe.
The Same she does make to proud and foolish.

Erasmus. Foolishness and pride be the waityng servants of great riches and
substance. Burrant. For the great possessors of worldly gooddes are so
ravished with the abundaunce of them, that eue^ like very fools and idiotes
they are ready to hold their fingers in an hole, if their riches so willed the^.

Publius. 126. He, the fault openly does knowledge.
which refuses to abide a Judge.

Erasmus He which refuses to come to be iudeged, does show, that he
mistrusteth himself to be guilty. Burrant. For truth yet was never afraied to
show her face, and to abide the trial of justice.

Publius. 127. Unthrifts and naughty packes (...) be happy.
Is to a good man great calamity.

Erasmus. As often as good luck and fortune does favor and help leude
persons, it is to the extreme calamity and high displeasure of good men.

Publius. 128. That is to be suffered and not to be blamed.
which can by no means be avoided.

Erasmus. That which cannot be altered or changed, is privily in a man's
mind to be pacie^tly suffered, and not to be blamed.

Publius. 129. Euilles which are yet to come resist not so stiffly.
But that a man of them may have the victory.

Erasmus. Mischaunces and dangers yet to come, do not so importunately and
busily set upon and invade us, but that they may by wisdom and policy be
overcome and avoided.

Publius. 130. very patience that is both meke and soft
Into a fury is turned, being grieved often.

Erasmus. These soft persons when they are many times provoked and stirred to
anger, at length being moved in deed are far angrier then other men, for
asmoche as they are very seldom, and that to earnestly vexed.

Publius. 131. Things counterfaicted with paintynges and colors.
Do sone return again to their own natures.

Erasmus. Counterfaicted and feined things dure no long season, according to
the saying of Flaccus.

Although nature with a forke thou dooest expel.
Yet will she return to her place where she did dwell.
Publius. 132. He that has lost his faith and fidelity.
Has nothing else that is in icopardie.

Erasmus. He has lost all that he has, which has lost his credence.
(Burrant). As who would say, the lesyng of a man's credence is more then the
loss of all other things beside, for it is the only protector and keeper of
all the treasure that manne does possess. So that when it is lost, it is
even as good to lose all that we have.

Publius. 133. The minds facility and lightenesse.
Does draw toward some part of foolishenesse.

Erasmus. He is lightly enticed to vice and unthriftiness, who is of alight
wit and brain. As that fellow Mitio, of who^ Terence writes, who being.lx.
years of age, was now become a new married man.

Publius. 134. Faith, as life, from whence it departs thither afterward it
never retourneth

Erasmus. As our life ones goen and lost, is never returned, so likewise is
our faith, according to the commune saying. He which is ones become an
unthrift, will scase at any time after prove a good housbande.

Publius. 135. No man ever loses faith.
But he which the same never has

Erasmus. No man leseth money, but he which had it. But he is said to have
lost faith, which never had it, that is to say, he was ever an untrue and
untrusty ka^tife. Burrant. He leseth it for lack of grace to use it. As he
leseth his time which will not apply him self to occupy it while, it is yet
present

Publius. 136. Fortune is not satisfied or contented. Any man but ones to have
offended

Erasmus. No evil and mischief does come or chance to any man, but the same
has another streighte ways following by the neck.

Publius. 137. There is both thunder and lightnyng where anger with power is
inhabityng

Erasmus. A man of power and authority who^ he is moved to anger, he seems
to lighten and thunder, rather then to be angry. Burrant. For as the
lightenyng goes before thunder. So in a man of power, after braulyng and
angry words, follow hard and uncharitable dealings.

Publius. 138. They which are now old men.
Do in vain desire to be young children.

Erasmus. We can by no manner of means possible were young again. Therefore an
old man must be content to do and handle soche things as pertein to an old
man.

Publius. 139. A check or a rebuke given falsely.
Is a malicious and envious lie.

Erasmus. He which rebukes or checketh, and that falsely, does spitefully
and maliciously feign and lie.

Publius. 140. All men do utterly despair.
To keep a woman in rule and fear

Erasmus. There is no man but does despair that he is hable to rule and
govern the nature and disposicion of a woman. Burra^t. This beast is so
unruly, that there are some which have had the matier somewhat in practice
that will undertake sooner to subdue and tame the fierceness of a Lion, or the
churlishe nature of a bear, then the shre, wish and froward affeccio^ of a
woman.

Publius. 141. Hard things do thou manly suffer
That thou may bear light things the easier.

Erasmus. Exercise and custom thy self in things that are some what hard and
weighty, that thou may be hable to sustein other things that are light
and easy.

Publius. 142. Fortune cannot prevail so much to any manne.
As right and judgment and good counsailcan.

Erasmus. Good counsel and aduisemente does far better then good luck and
fortune. Burrant. For good counsel may make a man always happy. And so
cannot prosperity, and luckie chance.

Publius. 143. Britle fortune when she does glitter:
Like a piece of glass is soon broken a sunder.

Erasmus. Glass when it glittereth and shines most gaie, then it is soonest
broken in pieces. So in like manner the fairest and most goodly fortune is not
of any continuance.

Publius. 144. Suffer that which is dammigeable:
That thou may sustain that which is profitable.

Erasmus. That thou may obtain a profeicte suffer a despite. Burrant. And
that thou may have a pleasure, suffer a peine. And to get and win stick
not to spend, and to put thyself in hasarde and danger.

Publius. 145. Fortune does make him well-beloved to be.
whom fortunate no man does behold and see.

Erasmus. Fortune does make a man to be envied, except she keep herself
close. She is therefore to be dissembled with. Burrant. So that I count those
not unwise in this poincte, which will go in an old torn cote, that will
seace harbor a louse, and feed upon a piece of bread and chese, and a gaclike
head, and yet are not without three or four hundredth pou^des in a bag.

Publius. 146. Although it is a good name to be called frugal.
Yet there is some misery ioigned withal.

Erasmus. To be frugal and play the good housbande, although it be an honest
name and a good report, yet it is thought miserable. And it is little
commended among the people, whom prodigality and waste does more delight and
please.

Publius. 147. That foreiudgemente is sore and vehemente.
which has not an after judgment.

Erasmus. Grievous and dreadful is that fore judgment, whom a ferther sentence
does not follow, but the same stands for a determinate and final
judgment. As if a prince should bear a grudging mind toward any one,
there is no judge that dare otherwise to pronounce and give sentence.

Publius. 148. There cannot be a displeasure higher:
Then to have a good man's anger.

Erasmus. A good manne, as he is not so soon angry and offended, so he is the
sorer moved, if his goodness be overcome and patience ones broken.

Publius. 149. Of the mind it is an hard punishemente:
whom to have dooen amiss it does repent.

Erasmus. He has sore punished himself whom it repents of his evil deed
dooen. Burrant. And this is the best token of the conversion of a sinner to
perfeicte Christianity.

Publius. 150. A mind that is constant and stable:
Has not a judgment variable.

Erasmus. A sad and constant manne has certain and sure counsailles.
Burrant. And he determines and adiudgeth nothing, but soche as is right and
equity.

Publius. 151. Grievous is that evil to be supposed which under a good pretense
is glosed.

Erasmus. That evil and mischief is incurable, which is contrefaicted under
the pretense of a good hope and coumforte.

Publius. 152. That hurts more greuouslie.
which chances to a man unadvisedly.

Erasmus. New and strange griefs and displeasures do grue a man the
more. Burrant. Forasmoche as he has not prepared the mind pacientlie to
suffer them, nor yet knows how to shifte them.

Publius. 153. That is the extremest enemy. which woorketh in the heart
privily.

Erasmus. A naughty and a cankarde affection or stomach does chiefelie
hurt a man. But that so hid in the heart can not be tried or searched out.

Publius. 154. The greuoust rule and kingdom, Is that which is confirmed by
custom

Erasmus. Custom does plainly obtain a certain tyranny in the world,
in so much that the most foolish things, if they have ones grown into a
custom, they cannot be plucked back or called in again. Burrant. As, how
great a do is it to withdraw the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome and to
redress his naughty laws and tradicions, which were only by custom
confirmed. And the only refuge and defense of his fautours is custom, saying.
So have our fathers used. So they believed. And (except the more mercy of God)
so they are damned.

Publius. 155. A great rebuke although it be spoken merely.
Yet many times it hurts greuouslie.

Erasmus. As among Englishemen, if a man call one or other traitor but in
sport he is in danger of a blow, or some worse displeasure, the trespass
is so heinous.

Publius. 156. Alas how hard is the custody,
Of renoume and glory.

Erasmus. An honest name and fame is lightly defiled and contaminate. And it
is a more hard and busy thing to defend and keep the same, then to get it.

Publius. 157. A man is beside his body:
when he is furious and angry.

Erasmus. He is beside himself, and not his own man, whosoever is angry and
thoroughly vexed. According to this saying before. He speaks to one that is
absente, that communeth with an angry person.

Publius. 158. Alas how greatly is he to be feared.
To whom death is nothing dreaded.

Erasmus. He that passes not upon death soche a one is greatly to be feared.
Forasmoche as he is lord and ruler of another man's life, which does little
set by his own. Burrant: As who would say, he little passes to kill and slay,
who cares not for the lesing of his own life.

Publius. 159. Upon a wretched person, he that has pity:
Of himself he has memory.

Erasmus. For soche a one does understand that the same wretchedness may
chance unto him, whereupon he should need of soche help.

Publius. 160. That is a shame not without honesty
In a rightful cause for to die.

Erasmus. That evil name and reproach is praiseful, for a man to lose his
life in the way of right. Burrant. As to be hanged is a villainous death, yet
is it glory to him which is hanged giltelesse, or is taken prisoner and so
put to soche kind of execution among his enemies.

Publius. 161. He has help in adversity:
who lends his help in prosperity

Erasmus. Who when he is well at ease, and welthie, does help other, other
do help the same again in his adversity. Burrant. But forasmoche as few
do observe this lesson, therefore the less pity men have of them when
they are fallen in soche necessite and need.

Publius. 162. Of him to be harmed alas what misery is it.
Of whom thou can not complain or requite:

Erasmus. It is an hard case for a man to be endomaged or displeased, either
of his friend or else of a great manne. For as of the one it is little
honesty to complain, so of the other it is not the surest. And so he should
bring himself into a shreude picle, if either of them would go about to
requite him with like displeasures.

Publius. 163. Extreme need and wretched pouerte.
Causes a man to adventure in great ieopardie.

Erasmus. Poverty is witty and full of innencion, and a finder out of craft
and subteltie, and evil and naughty things do many times stir and move a
man's brain, according to the saying of Naso. Burrant. As in some Idolatry,
in some theft, in some other lechery, and so all kinds of vices, poverty
does cause to be attempted and approved.

Publius. 164. Alas how miserable is that peine:
which in tormente may not complain.

Erasmus. The truth is tried out in torments and punishementes. But some be
so tormented, that they dare not tell the truth, knowing what he would have
kept privy and nor to be vttred, that does tormente and punish them.

Publius. 165. Alas in long life how many does chance.
That causes a man to take great repentance.

Erasmus. Many things do happen by living long which thou would not to
happen by thy will. Burrant: Forasmoche as the life of man is never without
misery and wretchedness, and ever in subjection to the hasardes and dangers
of fortune.

Publius. 166. Pleasant and sweet communication:
Has his veneme and poison.

Erasmus. Fair speech is full of subteltie and deceipte, and a sweet honied
poison. Burrant: Whose taste is pleasant and delectable, and yet the operacion
and woorking of the same is most noisos and deadly.

Publius. 167. So often times a man dies.
How often as he his friends leseth.

Erasmus. Death is a certain bunumming, or lack of a man's best iuelles. As
his wife and children, his father and mother, or any other of his familiers, or
whom he derely loves.

Publius. 168. A man always bears one thing in himself privily:
And thinks toward another clean contrary.

Erasmus. Every manne is a dissembler. Burrant; There is not the perfeictest
friend and lover, but he will dissemble and gloss, and whereas he does bear
him self out wardelie to be a friend yet he thinks otherwise in his heart.

Publius. 169. A good report of a man's honesty: Is another inheritance and
patrimome.

Erasmus. A good name and honest report is almost asmoche worth as any
gooddes or lands that a man has by his enheritaunce. Burrant. Yea whosoever
has a good name, has purchased to himself a more ample and sure state of
enheritaunce then can by any gift or natural dissent, or by any other
earthelie thing be obtained.

Publius. 170. A man perceives not any grief or peine.
As long as by good fortune he does gain.

Erasmus. That peine and grief is not felt nor perceived, wherewith any
commodite or profeict is gorten. Burrant. For the swetenes and pleasure of the
one, does alaie the bitterness and peine of the other.

Publius. 171. He with much honesty serves. That to time always obeieth.

Erasmus. It is an honesty for a man to serve and apply himself according
to the time, and to give place to fortune for a space. Burrant: For she is not
so continually cruel, but that she will change her self into a better mode.

Publius. 172. Man is lent but for a time to live: For ever this life God did
not him give.

Erasmus. Life is given but for a season, in so much that he which gave it
may require it lawefully, and as his of right whenever it shall please him.

Publius. 173. It is better to know thine own heir.
Then for thine enheritaunce to seek a stranger.

Erasmus. It is more profit for thee to have children of thine own, to who^
thou may leave thy lands and gooddes, then to look and seek for strangers
children, to whom thou may leave thine enheritaunce.

Publius. 174. At his fathers death, the heirs weeping.
Is but a very counterfeict laughyng

Erasmus. The weping of the heir is but a feined and a dissembled laughter:
for he reioiseth and his glad, although he, put his anger in the yie.
(Burrant.) And this is the propretie of an unnatural soonne, who loves more
the enheritau^ce, then the life of his father, and a very little time (God
wotte) he weth enioie the same.

Publius. 175. A woman that does often marie, Has for the most part an
infamy

Erasmus. The common people does think and judge full shreudely of that woman
that-dooeth mary many housebandes. (Burrant.) For some with Paul will think
her incontinent, and other will judge her coueteous, or else very foolish.

Publius. 176. The inferior and subject abhors, In whatsoever the superior
offends.

Erasmus. Whatsoever thing the princes and governors do amiss, the same
falls to the mischief and destruction of the commons. Burra^t. As if Princes
fall at contencion, and so move battaill, the commo^s buieth the bergain and
smart therefore in the mean time and many a man leseth his life before he has
deserved to die.

Publius. 177. To avenge thine enemy after long strief Is the beginning of a
new life.

Erasmus. The pleasantest thing in the world is to be avenged of a man's
enemies and it is as a new kind and manner of living. First, he does defend
his own life, and moreover he reioiseth of his querell avenged.

Publius. 178 So upright always, let be thy dooyng.
That no man hate thee, for thy own deseruyng.

Erasmus. We cannot avoid, but we must be hated and envied of one or other,
but we may take heed and beware, least any man hate us worthelie, according
to our deserts.

Publius. 179. who^ thou kepest i^ whether he will or no. Thou prouokest the
same abroad to go.

Erasmus. He which is not willing to tarry, the more thou dooest hold him
back, the more destrous he is to depart.

Burrant. And Terence does note this propretie, to be in a young man
specially. And my opinion is, that it is given to women naturally, their wills
and thoughts are ever so (...)owarde, and contrary to their housebandes
commandments.

Publius 180. Thou dooest dishonor thy dignity. while thou dooest ask of the
unworthy

Erasmus. It is a villainy and a very slavery to become a suitor to an
unworthy person. Therefore his worship is disgraced. Burrant. Whosoever
being of nobility, is a peticioner to a slave or a villain.

Publius. 181. The coueteous man is toward no man beneficial.
and toward himself, he is worst of al

Erasmus. A coueteous person does good to no man, as long as he lives, and
most specially himself, he does both vex and trouble, by the careful
keeping of gooddes.

Publius. 182. He gives twice to the nedie. which gives speedily.

Erasmus. A good turn is twice welcome, which is given by and by, and out of
hand, to him that has need of it. Burra^t. For it serves his turn, saves
his credence, and keeps his honesty.

Publius. 183. Coueteousnesse in much plenty. Is a well furnished poverty.

Erasmus. To couete when thou have plenty, is as a certain nedines and
penutie, no^ free and simple, but well furnished and stored, and as who would
say, a rich poverty.

Publius. 184. who at a fault winketh.
To do another he provoke.

Erasmus. He which dissembleth a fault, does provoke and allure to do
another offense. Burra^t. As the master to suffer the scholar ones to be
negligent, he will be the more bolder to be negligent another time. No
forgiveness ought to be in sin, in whom there is no hope of grace or
amendment.

Publius. 185. Gentle blood or nobility.
Can take no reproach or villainy.

Erasmus. Either, because it is the condition and propretie of a gentle and
noble heart to set naught by, or little to regard a rebuke or check. Or else
forasmoche as an haughty courage cannot abide to be checked or reproved.

Publius. 186. He that seldom is an offendour.
Deserves to have the more favor

Erasmus. As the more frequent and often a fault is done, the more straight
correccion ought to be ministered and given. So the more seldom a man does
offend the more favor should be showed.

Publius. 187. One persons churlishenesse and leude demeaner.
Does make many a poor wretch to fare the worser.

Erasmus. The unkindness of one person does cause, that they that be loving
and kind, be not helped, although they have never so great need.

Publius. 188. In evils to trust and hope for ame^dment
No man is wont to do, but an innocent

Erasmus. A good and upright conscience does cause, that in evil things we do
hope and trust, that God will be our help and succor. Burra^t. And a naughty
and corrupt conscience, is wont in this case to despair, for that he has no
remorse of his iniquity. And the greatness of his sin, does so croke his
uprightness, that it causes him to have mistruste of the goodness of God.

Publius. 188. In auenging of thine enemy.
It is blamed to be to hasty.

Erasmus. Be thou not hasty and rash, either to aue^ge thy querell, either
else in geuyng of Judgment. (Burrant.) For both these two requires good
aduisement and leisure: for the one is not so lightly corrected, and the other
is not so easily redressed.

Publius. 189. Of learning and wit, he that has the grace,
will fear his enemy, be he never so base.

Erasmus. It is the poinct of a wiseman, not to set light of his enemy, be he
never so vile and poor: for he may by some occasion or other wait him a
displeasure Burrant. As the Scarabie or Bitell, who being at co^tencion with
the Egle, and of the same for his litlenesse nothing dreaded. In thabsence of
the Egle he crepeth into her nest, and tu^bleth her eggs out of the same.

Publius. 190. To a miserable and awretched creature
Scoffyng is an high displeasure.

Erasmus. The sely and miserable creatures be offended and displeased, with
laughyng and iestyng. And they who are in a wretched case and misery, do wrest
words spoken by very chance and unadvisedly, to the suspicion of some hurt
or evil meant toward them although a man never so thought.

Publius. 191. The Judge of his corrupt conscience, is condemned.
when the guilty from his fault is pourged.

Erasmus When the guilty is acquitted, then the judge must needs be no
innocent. (Burrant.) For it is a shreude token, that the judge is corrupted or
bribed when he that has deserved the punishment of the law, is by the same
clered and acquitted.

Publius. 192. To forgive, it is good humanity.
when the party is ashamed of his iniquity.

Erasmus. No forgiveness at all ought to be but where the party repents
himself of his deed done. Burrant. For in soche a case thamendement of his
life shall be more pleasure unto us, then his death. By his death we shall
win nothing, and by his life he may recompense us for our goodness showed
in soche distress and exigent.

Publius. 193. In things doubtful and full of ieopardie Much avails boldness
and audacitie

Erasmus. When a matier is in a hasard of winning or losyng, audacitie and the
bearyng of a good face thereupon, helps greatly. Burrant. The commune saying
is, spare speech, and spare speed For many one, through a little dastardness
of heart and bloushyng, leseth many a good chance and fortune, which they
might have had if they had put themselves forward.

Publius. 194. A sinner the same day himself condemns,
In the which, by any means he offends.

Erasmus Whosoever does a mischeuous deed, is straight way condemned to
himself, his own conscience being judge, although no other Judge give
Sentence. Burrant. I would to God that every manne would consider this
judgment, and put his naughty life to execucion, and strangle his sin, with
a strong halter of repentance, never willing to come to that judgment again.

Publius. 195. To rebuke him that is an evil liver It is coumpted for no
slander.

Erasmus. It seems no slander, which thou say against an evil and an
unhappy person. Barra^t. For those reports that thou make of him are true,
and thou lie never a deal upon him. And if thou should say otherwise,
thou should not say truth.

Publius. 196. Few things do want unto poverty, And all things do lack
unto avarice

Erasmus. Many things there are, which a poor man does need, to the
necessity of his life, but a coueteous man does need many things mo, which
has not so much as that, which he has in his possession.

Publius. 197. Toward thy friend, behave thy self so, that thou thi^kest that
he may be thy fo

Erasmus. So love, as thou may conveniently hate. So far trust thy friend,
that if he be made thine enemy, he may be hable to do thee little harm.
Burrant For there are many false flattryng friends, who, when they have cropen
into a man's bosom, and known all his secrets, they work much villainy
and mischief against him.

Publius 198. No man can better abide envy.
Then a strong man, or an happy.

Erasmus Fortunate and luckie persons do set naught by envy, and a strong
and hardy man does utterly de^^e it. Bur. The One is hable to withstand malice
with his substance, having good luck on his side, and the other is hable to
fight it out with clean strength.

Publius. 199. Grief and anger, among them that be loving.
was ever yet found glosyng, and dissemblyng.

Erasmus. And this is commonly seen in woyng for where the parties love one
another entierly, yet will they often times fall out and be at de^iaunce, whereas
all the world is not hable to sunder the^

Publius. 200. Envy is moved priuelie:
And for a thing of naught it is angry

Erasmus. An envious person is not without anger, but yet dissembled and
close, for a triflyng matier scarce worth three skippes of an old Dog.
Burrant. Soche persons that be envious and melancholious will be angry and
frette within theimselues, for their na(...) pared a wrie.

Publius. 201. An angry person thou may avoid lightly.
But hatred thou can not, till thou shiftest thine enemy.

Erasmus. Anger does cool anon, but hatred and malice does dure long, he
verily does hate, whosoever is an enemy. Take heed of him therefore a long
time, yea, always. The very same thing does the wiseman of the Hebrews put in
knowelege, saying.

To an enemy reconciled and received Into favor again, take thou great head
Publius. 202. Of a displeasure and injury.
Forgetfulness is the next remedy.

Erasmus. Auengement does not help and remedy injuries dooen unto thee, but
forgetfulness and the puttyng them out of mind, can do it very well.
Burrant. For by auengemente, we may work our selves more displeasure, but
when we have put them quite out of our memory, our minds are quiet. And
this shall move our enemies hearts, to be sorry for dooyng of soche injuries.

Publius. 203. who upon his anger, has the victory.
He has subdued a sturdie enemy.

Erasmus. It is an evident sign, and most perfeicte token of a right
valiaunte champion, when a man ouercometh his angry passion. This could not
the same victorious and most valiaunte Alexander, the most mighty and great
conqueror of the whole world do. Burrant. And no more can any other manne
now in this our time do, and yet they think themselves mannelie and hardy
capitaines, mete to be set over a great number of men, not being able to
subdue a little sensual will in themselves.

Publius. 204. To thy friend, have soche faieth and credit.
That he may have no occasion to be thine enemy.

Erasmus. A like saying to this, is there before rehearsed, where he gives like
counsel, for a man so to behave himself toward his friend, that he take no
vantage of him, to do him a displeasure, if he chance at any time, to fall at
debate with him.

Publius. 205. An angry person thinks it an heinous thing:
To have good counsel, or a gentle warning.

Erasmus. A wrinishe and curste hearted fellow thinks himself to be shreudlie
hurt of him, who gives him good counsel. Burrant: And soche fellows that be
so self willed, be it never so much for their commodity and profeicte, that
a man counsaileth them, yet will they follow their own sensual appetites and
froward wills.

Publius. 206. He wickedlie god blames and accuses
who the second time shippewracke suffers.

Erasmus. He that has been ones in ieoperdie, and does adventure himself in
like danger again, he does shamefullie blame fortune. Burrant: If any thing
go amiss with him: As they which have ones escaped drouning, will put
themselves in the same hasarde again. It were great wickedness for them, to
lay the fault in GOD, who has given them a fair warning before, to be ware
and take heed.

Publius. 207. It is a reproach and an ignominy:
For an unworthy person to be in dignity.

Erasmus. Honor and promocion given to the unworthy, does not make him an
earnest man, but does much more dishonest and shame him. Burrant. For whereas
before his unworthiness was but of a few known, now it is lift up in the
sight of the wide world to be seen of al men. And by this means he gets
to him, more shame then dignity.

Publius. 208. where new praise does spring and grow:
There the old praise is allowed also.

Erasmus. If thou shall happen to do well the second time, thou shall cause
that men will the better believe the good report that went of the before.

Publius. 209. He is well eased of his own grief.
who has dooen his enemy like mischief.

Erasmus. He less feleth his own hurt and displeasure, who is hable to
requite and avenge his enemy, with a like shreude turn. Burrant. As if one
have taken a broken headde, that the blood run about his ears, yet if he be
hable to do asmoche again, he will count him self cured of his woounde.

Publius. 210. Fortune is both light and wavering:
That she has once geue^n, quickelie again craving.

Erasmus. Inconstant and unstable fortune does by and by fetch again, and
take away, if she have given any thing.

Publius. 211. This law is to all men universal.
which bids us to be borne and die.

Erasmus. The necessity to be borne and to his, does touch al men in
general Burrant: And where there is no law of necessity, the same must needs
be obesed, for there is no ways to avoid or correct it.

Publius. 212. Every man's advantage or further aunce:
Cannot be without another hinderaunce.

Brasmus. The lucre and winninges of one manne, is the loss and disprofite of
another. But not like in things of the mind. Burrant If the buier have a
great peniewoorth in his merchaundise, the seller must needs sustein loss.
And so likewise in all other worldly things. But in virtue and cunning it is
not so. For in them, that which one win neth and gains, is no hinderaunce
to another, of whom he gets soche virtues or qualities:

Publius. 213. wantonness and commendacion:
Could never yet agree as on.

Erasmus. Intemperauncie and unchaste living is always subject to an evil
manne. Burrant: For whereas other kinds of vices, although heinous, yet they
are many times borne withal, but riotous living and carnal delights no good
manne can allow or commend.

Publius. 214. The guilty person, fears the danger of the law:
And the unguilty, of fortune stands in awe.

Erasmus. The innocente and giltles, although he stand in no droade of the
laws, as the offendour or guilty does, yet he fears fortune, which many
times does oppress and wrong the just and upright liver. Burrant. For she
has no respect of persons, but as well the good as the evil, she does
honor and dishonor, and make high and low at her will.

Publius. 215. To the riotous manne many things do want:
And to the niggarde, all things are scant.

Erasmus. The prodigal and wastful spender does need many things, and the
coueteouse person does lack at things. He has need of many things,
which spends much, to the other there is nothing enough, forasmoche as he
is insaciable and never satisfied.

Publius. 216. Churles and unthankful persons most of al,
Do teach a man, to be hard and vnliberal.

Erasmus. Unthankeful persons do cause that they which have been kind and
beneficial, do now withdraw their liberality, and to give more seldom then
they have dooen heretofore.

Publius. 217. He who does to one manne an injury.
Does threaten to do the same to many.

Erasmus. Every manne does look to have a shreude turn or injury at his
hand which has dooen the same to one alredie. Burrant. Little is his
conscience to be trusted, but that he will in like case do wrong to all
men, if he may have like advantage of them, if he stick not to do one
man displeasure wrongfullie.

Publius. 218. Leisure in all things we hare and despise.
But yet it is that, which does make us wise.

Erasmus. Troublous and grievous is tariaunce in every matier, yet the same
does make us wise and wary, least we do any thing rash and unadvisedly.
Burrant: And here upon is a true saying among the commune people. Hasty men
never lack woe.

Publius. 219. That is an evil cause to be judged.
For the which mercy is required.

Erasmus. Innocence and uprightness of lining needs no favor or mercy,
but desires the judge to be indifferent and righteouse. But whereas all the
trust and hope of the matier rests in the mercy of the Judge, the cause is
very evil.

Publius. 220. His death is to be thought more happy:
which dies, before he does desire to die:

Erasmus. He dies then happily, who dies while his life is yet pleasant
unto him. And does not as yet, through the werinesse of the same, wish to
die. Burrant. Like sentence has he before where he rekeneth no death so happy
as that which takes a man in his best ruff, and when he most desires and
delights to live.

Publius 221. To be constrained to hold thy tou^gue, it is misery.
when thou would utter thy mind willingly.

Erasmus. It is an hard case, when it is not lawefull for the to speak what
thou would. For there thou shall have liberty, much less to do what
thou desire, if it be not lawefull for the to speak thy mind freely.

Publius. 222. The chance is most miserable and vnluckic.
which does want alspite and envy

Erasmus. Happiness does stir and provoke hatred and malice. Therefore,
whom no man does hate, must needs be most wretched of al other.

Publius. 223. Him full evil may I call:
who for his own profeicte is beneficial.

Erasmus. He that does a good turn for his gains sake, he does evil.
Burrant. As many a man would be coumpted, great and special good friends,
for lending their neighbor in his necessity a sum of moneie, when they
receive it with an overplus, and to their most advantage. I may rather call
them Usurers, then friends: for if they should have no gains, they would le^de
no moneie, nor do any other deed of charity, and after this sort it is no
charitable deed to be supposed.

Publius. 224. A leude person, when he does countrefaicte goodness:
Then he is disposed, to most unthriftiness.

Erasmus. A dissembled and a cloked malice and mischief, is wourst of all
other. Burrant. For soche are like unto serpents and Adders, that sting
privily who in their outward behauiours, are as meek as lambs, and in their
harres ravening Wolves and subtle Foxes, then most purposing michiefe and
naughtiness, when they pretend most holiness.

Publius. 225. When that fear upon manne does come:
Then shall he sleep but very seldom

Erasmus. Fear does drive away sleep. Or else a man ought not to sleep,
when he is in danger. Burrant. Like rest takes he, which is besieged with
his enemies, or that is tossed in the middle of the Sea, among the storms and
te^pestes, where is but a thin board between him and his death.

Publius. 226. Death of necessity, no man can refuse:
But to die when thou would not thou shall not choose.

Erasmus. Sometime men wish to die, when they cannot die, and they would
never so feign. And ones we be sure to die for all together. For there is no
power given us, to rise from death to life at our pleasure. This is spoken
against those persons, which as often as there chances any grief or
displeasure in their life, by and by they wish them selves raked under the
earth, as though they might relieve when they would.

Publius. 227. That is evil dooen and vncertainlie: whatsoever is dooen upon
fortunes fidelity.

Erasmus. Whatsoever does hang of Fortune, that is nothing steadfast and
sure. Burrant. Let not a man have to much confidence in fortune, for she will
sodeinlie unawares deceive him. It is no wisdom to set all upon six and
seven, and to stand at hasarde, whether to win, or lose all. Sooner
chances seven then six, there come more after losses, then gains. Wherefore
let thy doing stand upon the will of God, and good counsel, lest otherwise
thou wrappe thy self into daungier.

Publius 228. who to the dedde does any gift give:
Gives him nothing and himself does bereuc.

Erasmus. In the old time they were wont to do sacrifice to the deadde. This
is lost and does perish from the living and the deadde does receive no
parts thereof. Burrant. The custom among the Panimes, was to shed wine upon the
graves and burialles of their friends being dedde, which thing the very
Heathen did abhor and esteem for a supersticion, and a thing that profited
neither the living nor the dedde.

Publius. 229. That master is worse then his servant. whom to displease he
dares scant:

Erasmus. He is subject and inferior to his servants, that fears the^, for
because he knows himself guilty and an offendour. Burrant. As that Master,
who has made his servant privy to his whoredom or theft, or soche another
vice, dares not put away his servant, or displease him in any wise, least
he bewraie his unthrifty living. In this case the master is become the
servants bondsman or slave and is at his servants beck and commandment.

Publius. 230. More faithful is the heir of thy body begettyng.
Then anystraunger, that thou shals assign by writing.

Erasmus. Thy child is borne shine heir, but the stranger can be but thy
bastard heir. This makes against the^, which disenherite their own
children or right successors (whom very nature has bound them unto) for any
trespass or offense done by the^ and transpose and give the same title of
their gooddes and possessions to strangers.

Publius. 231. In geuyng a shreude word, or an evil council.
The women their housebandes, do far excel.

Erasmus. In evil things, the women have far passing wits above me^.
Burrant. Yea, no man's reason or cunnyng, is hable to mitigate or search out
the crafty inuo^cions and shifts that women have prompt and ready, in
excusing and mainteinyng of their wickedness. And that the devil sone espied.
For the feacte to defraude man of his blessed state of perfeicte felicity, was
wrought by a wily and subtle beast (a woman).

Publius. 232. It is an evil pleasure and felicity. Another strange thing to
occupy.

Erasmus. Another manues meat is sweet and pleasant, but that pleasure is
naught for a man to frequente and accustom himself to strange things
whatsouer they be. Burrant. As for one always to thruste his legs under
another man's table, and to be ever beggyng and borowyng this or that and
never to recover himself out of another danger, there can be no more
displeasure wished to him truly for it is a very bondage.

Publius. 233. That is kept with much peril and ieopardy.
which delights and pleases many.

Erasmus. It is hard to save and keep that which many men desire, as money and
a fair wife. Burrant. For these two are as buttes and pricks, at whom every
man's yie does shote. And I would they did so well provide for the remedy
of the one, as of the other. They lock up their money in their chestes, so I
would they should keep their wives out of their Shoppes, where they sit as
stales, and allure men's yies passing by. In Denice and other tounes beyond
the Sea, single women and queanes, do after soche sort sit in windows and
Shoppes, and chaste Matrones and wives, keep them secret in their halles and
parlours.

Publius. 234. That medicine is very evil. which does nature destroy and
spill.

Erasmus. The medicine that hurts nature is hard, as that which takes away
any membre or limme of the body.

Burrant. As I have known a Physician, which did minister a medicine to heal
a man's yie, and utterly perished his sight by the same. Likewise a Surgion,
who took upon him the cure of legs, and now the party is not hable to set a
foot upon the ground

Publius. 235. He that is of an evil disposicion. Needs no leude instruccion.

Erasmus. To naughtiness, yea, without any teacher, we are apt and ready, but
virtue must have a Scholemaster.

Burrant. Or else it will not at all be learned. And when it is with much
trauaill gootten and obtained, it is with one evil vice or quality polluted
and destled.

Publius. 236. To know no part of misery.
Is to live without all icopardie.

Erasmus. He who lives without danger has an happy life. A sure life and a
quiet although poor and bare, is the most pleasant and happy life. Burrant.
Appliyng to the tale of Esope, of the Mouse of the country, that was led into
the city, by the Town Mouse, and of the same Mouse feasted, and when they
were in their chief banquetyng, one rushyng at the lock of the door, made
the^ both seek their heles Whereupon the country Mouse said. I had rather have
my poor chere at home, in saufegard and quietness, then to have all these
delicate dishes and sumpteous cates with soche fear.

Publius. 237. They live full vnthriftely.
who thinks to live continually.

Erasmus. For soche fellows prolong always until to morrow, as long as there
is any pleasure or good thing. Burrant These little re^me^bre what night
brings with him, which dare promise themselves to morrow day. So did the
foolish richeman in the Gospel promise his Soulle many years of worldly
felicity, and yet the devil fet his soulle the same night following.

Publius. 238 By expounyng of a word slanderous.
Thou shall many times make it wours

Erasmus. Some go about to excuse an evil word spoken, by qualifiyng or by
interpretyng of the same, and so make more debate. Burrant. For a foolish
interpretacion bredeth a ferther matier, and cause of contencion.

Publius. 239. He is not like long time to prospere.
who makes a Physician his heir.

Erasmus. For he does provoke and entice him to kill him out of hand.
Burrant He were as good to deliver his sword into his enemies hand, and bid
him stea him, and I think his enemies would have more compassion upon him: for
he were like to win nothing by his death.

Publius. 240. He is not long deceived.
who is quickly deneied.

Erasmus. He hops the less while in vain, that is quickly denighed and
misseth of his purpose. Burra^t There are some that will promise a man many
good morowes, and that they will do the best, when they think far
otherwise But I take him to be a plain dealer, who will tell ane whereunto I shall
trust

Publius. 241. A man's goodness is changed.
If with a displeasure he be grieved.

Erasmus. Good men be shrewes, if they be a little moved. Burra^t. We call and
judge many good men, which be yet unknown unto us, with whom, when we be
thoroughly acquainted, and then they a little displeased, we shall find as
cursed as the best.

Publius. 242. A woman when she sits alone musing.
She is ever some mischief or other imaginyng.

Erasmus. A woman that sits musyng and studiyng by her self, casts some
unthriftiness or other, in her mind. Burra^t For shame refraineth that kind,
which shame, when they are in solitariness, and alone by themselves, is away
clean and nothing at al remembered.

Publius. 243. He that is willing to work mischief and confusion:
Of every trifle, he takes an occasion.

Erasmus. To evil disposed persons, there never wants an occasion to do
mischief. Burra^t. As he who is disposed to fight, and is ready to draw his
dagger at one froward or crooked word, but many of the^ buieth often times,
their hastiness full dear.

Publius. 244. A mischeuous person and evil disposed
Is always with his own nature delited.

Erasmus. Although he have no vauntage or reward of his mischief, yet a wicked
person delights in his own unthriftiness, and is evil unto them that are
loving and kind.

Publius. 245. He must needs many fear.
Toward who^, many dread do bear.

Erasmus. Who^ many do fear and dread, him few do love and bear favor
to. Therefore, he again of necessity must fear them, of whom he is dreaded.
Burrant. For the heart of man is so free, that he will seek all the means
possible, to be rid of fear, and bears a privy grudge toward him, whom
he fears, and sercheth how to displease him.

Publius. 246. By rulyng and reignyng wickedly.
Many times is lost a great empery.

Erasmus. It is a great dominion and a mighty Empire, to rule well: and
co^trart wise the same is lost by evil governance. Or else this. There is no
kingdom so mighty and full of power, which is not lost, if thou reign by
tirannie.

Publius. 247. That woman which many does mary
The same again pleases not many.

Erasmus. They have an evil report among the people, which chau^geth many
housbandes. Either they be unhappy or inconvenient, or inconstant or very
shrewes, for whatsoever she be that marieth the second houseband, surely she
did some unhappiness to the first, who^ they forsook. Burrant. And this also
may be well applied to the^ who when they have buried the third the fowerth,
yea, the fifth housebande will be nothing ashamed, bethei never so old trottes,
to take another houseband, either for incontinencie, or else for avarice.

Publius. 248. That is an evil counsel taken.
which cannot be changed nor forsake

Erasmus. Never wrappe thy self in soche a ba^d that thou can not wind thy
self out again. Burrant. Like unto them that upon light cou^saill, without
castyng the weightinesse of the matier, do make theimselues to be Priests,
or marie a wife.

Publius. 249. It is best for the unfortunate and unhappy,
In no manner of matiers, themself to occupy.

Erasmus. Who has no luck in dooyng of business, it is best for him to be
quiet and at rest. Burrant. For the more he medleth, the more mischaunces come
unto him, and into the ferther danger he runs: wherefore, to have a do in
no matier, is most ease for an unfortunate person.

Publius. 250. The yies can offend in nothing.
If a good mind have them in rulyng.

Erasmus. Me blame our yies, as though they ministered an occasion of evil
lusts and desires. But the mind is in the fault which bears no rule over
the yies.

Publius. 252. Coumpt not that unto thee as proper. which fortune may change
and alter

Erasmus. Suppose nothing to be truly thine and everlasting, which may be
taken away. Burrant. And so we can take no yearthly thing as our own, but
heavenly things we may trust to be ours for ever. If we have the grace of
God, ones to obtein them.

Publius. 253. They which fear to take good head Do not so sone fall and
slide:

Erasmus. That is to say, he is not so quickly oppressed with a misfortune
which weth take heed and beware of the same. And he is not lightly enco^bred
with any ieopardie, who weth observe and mark the danger thereof.

Publius. 253. Thou know not what to wish, or what to fly.
The course of time does so alter and dally.

Erasmus. The time and course of fortune weth in soche sort dalie, that often
times those things, which thou think best, thou shall perceive to hurt
chiefly, and so of the contrary.

Publius. 254. He that will a danger fly.
Must put himself in ieoperdie.

Erasmus. Thou must by some means or other adventure, if thou couette to
avoid danger. For he that fears al things, shall never rid himself out of
all ieopardie.

Publius. 255. There is no fortune so good and certain Of the which thou can
not complain.

Erasmus. Some displeasure or other, is always coupled to happiness. Burra^t
As there is no man so healthful, but he has a disease, yea, he should not
perceive whether there were any pleasure, without he had felt sour pein or
mischaunce withal. As Philippe King of Macedonie, coumpted him self
unfortunate, because he felt no calamity among all his luckie successes of
fortune.

Publius. 256. we men, do no where die better.
Then where to live, we have most desire

Erasmus. There is best diyng, where we liuermoste pleasantly. Burrant. For
there shall a man be best put in remembrance what his pleasures were,
wherein he delighted most, how vain his felicities were, and how shortly they
are ended.

Publius. 257. Cause and occasion to denighe.
In a coueteous person is always ready.

Erasmus. They, who give not willingly, do always find some occasion, or
other, why they might not give. Burra^t. As if their poor neighbor come and
ask their almose, they answer: We are charged with a great householde. The
Kings moneie must be paid. Al things are dear. As though they were well
excused before God, in that they have not releued their poor neighbor, in
soche need and scarcity.

Publius. 258. By oucrmoche babbling and alteracion.
The truth leseth his solucion.

Erasmus. By sober disputing and reasoning the truth is boulted out, but it is
lost by immoderate faining, the which thing does chance to some Sophistical
and brauling disputers.

Publius. 259. He always, his damnacion with him does bear:
who is in continual dread and fear.

Erasmus. He, who knowelegeth himself in his own conscience to be an offender
does always fear punishemente, and is always as a man damned. Burrant.
As a thief fearing the galous looks every hour, when he shall go to hanging,
as though he coumpteth himself half hanged already.

Publius. 260. The more and greater evil alwaie.
Is the longer and later day.

Erasmus. Our life and age wears wourse and wourse, that is to say, the
manners and conditions of men do daielie more and more degenerate, and go
from all kind of virtues and goodness.

Publius. 261. It were very foolishenesse for the unguilty.
To lose and hurt his own innocence.

Erasmus. It is foolishness after soche a sort to hate sin, that thou thy
self do sin: as if a man for the unchastity of his wife does poison
an adulterer, and so punish adultery, that he himself may be made a
poisoner.

Publius. 262. It is part of a good turn, fetelie to denighe,
That which is asked earnestly.

Erasmus. Some do so hardly and churlishe lie give, that they lose the
thanks of their benefeicte. Some do denighe so fetelie and gently, that
they seem in a manner to have given.

Publius. 263. It is foolishenesse that of the to be feared.
which by no means can be avoided.

Erasmus. As death or other incommodities appoincted to a man by destiny.
Burrant; For fear in soche case does nothing, but double the sorrow or
grief: whereas a good heart and coumforte taken, would cause the thing, that
seems hard to be easy.

Publius. 264. He that is fearful, says he does beware.
And the nigarde says he does spare.

Erasmus. Every manne flattereth his own sins and offenses, and does
extenuate and make less the same, by countrefeicting the names. Burrant. And
this we see so put in commune practice, that a detestable swerer and
blasphemer is called a lusty blood, and a r^oteouse person and a whoremonger
is stained a good fellow. And so vice is maintained by very flattery.

Publius. 265. In suffering an old displeasure.
Thou dooest a new provoke and allure.

Erasmus. If thou suffer a sin unpunished, thou seem to allow that it
were laweful for him to offend again. Burrant. Euilles are always to be
remedied in the beginning, for if they ones take rote, it is hard to remove
them.

Publius. 266. The coueteouse does lack as well that he has got:
As that thing which he has not.

Erasmus. The niggarde does no more use his own gooddes, then a strangers.
Therefore, he lacks as well the one as the other. Burrant. For although he has
plenty, in that he lays it up in hugger mugger, and dares not use it, yet
he seems very poor and nedie.

Publius. 267. O how long is the life of him in misery?
And how short is the time of the happy?

Erasmus. Unhappy and miserable persons, be thoroughly weary of their lives.
To the fortunate and wealthy person, death does seem to come before her
day, for because he feels no werinesse of life.

FINIS,
quod Burrant.
LONDINI, IN OFFICINA RICHARDI GRAFtoni, Typographi Regii excusum.

ANNO. M. D. LIII. Mense Iulii.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


