THE FIRM FOUNDATION OF CATHOLIC RELIGION, AGAINST THE BOTTOMLESS PIT OF
HERESIES: wherein is showed that only Catholics shall be saved, and that all
heretics of what sect so ever are excluded from the kingdom of heaven.

Compyled by JOHN CAVMONT of Champany: And translated out of French into
English, by JOHN PAVNCEFOTE the elder Esquyre, in the time of his banishement.

Hoc habet authoritas matris Ecclesiae, hoc fundatus veritatis canon: contra
hoc robur, contra hunc inexpugnabilem murum quisquis arietat. ipse confringitur.

S. August. de verb. Apost. sermon. 15. Imprinted at Antwerpe by Arnold Coninx,
M. D. LXXXXI.

Cum Gratia and Priuileg. Reg. May.

HIS Catholic Majesty has granted and given licens to Arnold Coninx, that he
may print the book named The firm foundation of the Catholic Religion
against the bottomless pit of heresy, Translated out of the french into
Inglish by John Paunsfote Esquyer, where in defense is made to all printers,
for to print the same for the space of three years, without license of the
said Arnold Coninx.

Given the 15. of Nouembre 1591. Subsigned Io. de Buschere

THE PREFACE OF THE translator.
AS it has been often a great greef unto me to consider how many of you (my
deer friends and good country men) not al of malice but some of blyndnes, some
other of a folyshe fear, others also for lak of instructions and true
informatio^ of the holy Catholic Church the true spouse of Christ, do daily
err and live in scisme and heresy, dividing yor selves by that means from
Christ his mystical body, and hazarding your souls to perish eternally:
Even so of late I did not a little rejoice when I hitt by chance on a little
french treatise, which does lyuelie express, and as it wear in a table
set forth such sufficient, true, and infallible tokens of Christ his Church,
that none can be ignorant that is vvilling to learn, nor no man left in
blyndnes that vvil open his eyes to see. And albeit my skylin the french tongue
is but small, yet the love which I bear to you my dear friends has supplied
that want, and gives me courage to attempt something above my strength in
translating the said treates as well as I could, which I have put to the
print, that you may be partakers of it, trusting that you vvil accept the same
as a token of my good will. And if it shall please God to send my labeur so
good success, as that any of you all receive benefit thereby: after due thanks
to him that is author of all goodness, I pray you remember me in your devout
prayers, who have not been unmindful of you here in this my poor
banishement. And so hoping you will excuse or amend such faults as you may
find either in the translation or printyng. I beseech God send you so much
light, as to find the way home again to the Catholic Church. Fare you well.

Your loving frinde. I. P.

HE WHO GATHERS NOT WITH ME, SCATTERS ABROAD. Matthew. 12.
THE FIRST principal and most necessary ground of all 1. Cor. 13.
work agreeable to GOD, is, that it be done in charity, in union of
Christians, and in the Catholic church: Johan. 1. 1. Johan. 2.
and all that man does in the spirit of the Catholic church, is well liked
before God: for that it is as it were dipped in the blood of his well-beloved
son JESUS Christ, in whom he takes his good pleasure: of whose grace and
unction all those that be Catholics be partakers, flowing from him upon them
as from the head upon the members. Yea it is JESUS Christ him self which
lives, which breaths, which 1. Cor. 15. Galat. 2. S. August. in Psalm. 85.
and ser. 4. de sanct. Steph.
prays, and which sturreth in all those that be Catholics and members of the
body of his Church. He prays (says S. Augustine) for us, he prays in us,
and he is prayed to of us, As Vnus ipse saluator corporis sui Dominus noster
Jesus Christus filius Dei orat pro nobis, orat in nobis, and orarur a nobis: vt
Sacerdos noster, orat pro nobis, vt caput nostrum orat in nobis, vt Deus noster
oratur a nobis.
our Priest, be prays for us: as our head, he prays in us: and as our God,
is prayed to of us. This is the glory, the joy, and assurance of a Catholic
man, that Jesus Christ is in him the chief agent, the which for his reverence
is heard of God in him: and this is the true firmament of the Catholics, more
firm then the heaven it self. It is not so in heretics, all that which is of
heretics, is accursed and abomination before God: their faith, their
preaching, their prayers, their fastings, their alms, S. Ignat. ep. ad Heron.
S. Io. Chrysostom. ho. 65. in Joan.
al acts of religion coming from them are nothing else but cursed sacrilege
and pollution. If they should raise up the dead: if they should be more wise
then Angels: If they should have their faith so great as to move mountains: if
they should distribute S. Cypr. lib. 2. de vni. Eccles. S. August. lib. de
siide ad Pe.
all their goods to the cherishing of the poor: if they should keep heroically
continual virginity: if they should deliver their bodies to be burned: if they
should shine with an Angelical holiness: all this serves them for nothing being
divided from the body of the Church: all this would not any thing appease the
rigor of the eternal ire of God upon them. Core, Dathan, and Abiron, did
sacrifice to the same God that Nuus. 16.
Moses did, yea to the only true and almighty God but for that it was done in
division from the body of the Church, the earth did open and swalow them up
alive, with their wives, their children, their hows holds, their Tabernacles,
and all their substance: and more over, the fire of God did consume 250. of the
chief that were assotiated with them, and 14700. of the people, for that they
murmured at that justice: And the fury of Gods wrath had consumed all the
people wholly, but for the vehement intercession and meditation of the
Priesthood of Aaron which did appease the same. God does not receive sacrifice
but of his Priests whom he has ordained for that purpose, and there is no
service what so ever agreeable to God but that of the children of his Church.

Let not the heretic flatter him self with the holy scriptures, as perverse
men do abuse all the gifts of God, employing them otherwise then they be
ordained by his providence: so do they abuse the holy sctiptures them selves.
That has been always the cloak of impiety of heretics, they carry against
Jesus Christ, the sign of Jesus Christ, says S. Augustine, S. Aug. ep. 16.
Contra Christum portant signu^ Christ and co^tra Eua^gelium, de ipso Euangelio
gloria^tur.
and take hold of the Gospel to make engines to fight against it. The Arrians
would not agree to any one point, if it were not expressly in the scripture. The
Mahometanes pretend the gospel to make for them, and allege the same for their
sovereign authority. The devil him self has cyted the scripture against our
savior, and thereof it is that he prepares snares and cords to strangle such
as harken to him, making that which should bring them life, to be deadly unto
them, and converting bread in to poison. It is certain that the scripture is
given us of God for our salvation: and this principle can not be shaken. When
the holy scripture speaks, it is the majesty of God which does show his truth
and his will unto men, unto the which every man must bear inviolable reverence,
and yield unto it as to the assured and infallible verditt of God his truth,
submitting all his understanding to the yoke and obedience of faith: in such
sort, that it is treason to God his majesty and damnable sacrilege for the
boldness of human understanding to gaynsay the same, yea or only to be so
bold as to think it: for if any one gainsay the same, he cutteth him self
from God, and makes him self a companion of the devil: he is an heretic,
accursed and reprobate, and never shall have part with God. For the holy
scripture is the key which does open us Paradise: it is the way which does
guide us, the rule which does teach us, the lamp which does ligten us in the
midst often he darkness of this world: it is the looking glass where in we
behold the face of God, the royal scepter by the which he does Govern his
people, the witness of his good will toward us, and the instrument of his
aliance: to the which who so does not bow down his understanding, he does
oppose him self against God, with an ingratitude and deuelish presumption. Now
all the heretics of the world have made show to agree to this principle, and
have whyted their ruinouse walls with no other colors than those, nor have no
other thing in their mouths but the texts of the scriptures. What shall the
simple man then do, hearing the word of the majesty of God in the mouth of
Catholics and of heretics? This is it whereof I would inform such as have
care of their salvation, and teach them how they shall never be deceived. S.
Gregor Nazianzene says that In Orat. ad Athanas.
the scripture is like unto certain painted Images, which what way so ever you
turn you, you think their eye follows you; yet notwithstanding, the right
look does consist (...).
in some one point to the workman intended, and those that are cunnyng in that
art know it very well. Likewise the holy scripture is to be taken in many
senses, and far more then the scriptures of men: for so much as the
scriptures do participate of the nature of the author. But so it is that God
him self is the author of the holy scriptures: whose understanding being
infinite, the sense of his scriptures may be also infinite. Notwithstanding
there is one proper sense, certain, and assured in the scriptures, which the
holy Ghost has vouchsafed to reveal unto men, which is the sense of the
Gospel, that is to say, the right, true, and natural sense of the voice of the
Prophets and the Apostles, which is in effect the gospel. For properly the
Gospel does not consist in figures of letters and dead characters of the
writing of the Eua^gelists: Those things be but as an Image of the sense of
the Gospel. But will you know what is properly the gospel? It is the solemn
publication of the son of God descended from the bosom of his father, and
showed in fleash for to deliver mankind from the state of perdition in which he
was, and to reconcile him to God: giving power to the children of Adam, which
believe in his name, to be made children of God, renewing them in him self, and
regenerating them to God by divine Sacraments, by the which he has made them
partakers of his justice, of his life, and of his glory, and has lifted them
up with him from changeable time to the eternitye of his father. S. Paul does
define the Gospel, to be the mighty power Romans 1.
of God to salvation, to al those that believe: that is to say, a virtue
supernatural, divinely infused, ennobling man's nature above it self, and
eleuating it to a divine estate, the which of his own force and faculty he
could never attain unto, no not only conceive the same: Lab. de prapa. Euang.
it is says Eusebius, that Gospel which does show the revelation of goods,
not these earthly, perishable, and which do decay, but of the true, sovereign,
divine, everlasting, and incorruptible goods promised from the beginning of the
world, and foretold of all the Prophets, and that which does give the means
to get them. To be short, the Gospel is a new resurrection of the world, and
as it is said in the Godspel it self, it is the seed of eternity. All the
matter is to know who be the true sovvers, and dispensators of the mysteries
of the Gospel, that be sent and avouched of God. For God does not auouche all
those which thrust them selves into this divine embassage, he has said to the
wicked: who gave the charge to rehearse my justices and take my testament in
thy mouth? And he complayneth him self in Ezechiel, of false Prophets which
run without Psalm. 49. Ezech. 13.
sendinge. They run says he, and I sent them not, they say the lord has
said it, and I said no such word. Our savior him self by his Matthew. 7.
holy mouth does advertise us saying: Take heed of false Prophets which come
to you in sheeps clothing, but within they are ravening wolves. Now if in the
traficke of this world, we fear to meddle with a false merchant, how much more
owght we to fear in the traficke of everlasting salvation. If then we vvil
not be deceived, Saint Paul therein does give us a true mean, when he
says: How shall they believe in him whom Romans 10.
they have not heard? And how shall they hear without preaching? And how shall
they preach if they be not sent? There need not so much disputing, nor so much
making of books, to confound the heretics. Men do in a manner defile them
selves when they examine their doctrine: there is no doubt but that God is
greatly offended with the overmuch regard that is given unto them, and those
which would that men should hear them reason, have not the spirit of the fear
of God. An heretic, before all other things should be asked not what he
says, but of whom he is sent, and the mark of his sending. And so without any
more disputing he shall be confounded and put to silence. For never heretic was
sent of God, they are al of the spirit of the devil, and al condemned of God,
what allegation so ever they make of the holy scriptures. The Samaritanes were
heretics, and did fortify them selves with the text of the law of Moses.
Our savior has condemned them with his own mouth, when being asked of the
Samaritane whether God should be worshipped in Jerusalem or in Samaria, he
answered: you worship that you know not, we worshipp that Johan. 4.
we know: the salvation is of the Jews. For it is as if he had said you
Samaritanes which be distracted from the Jews, you shall have nothing in the
treasure of salvation, and you can not but err. This only voice thundering
from heaven, you worshipp that you know not, is a sufficient flash of
lightening to overthrow all that these divided fellows from the Curch can
imagine to have, either holy or godly. Let no man be ouertake^ by the devil
through ignorance of this doctrine. S. Augustine teaches us clearly: that
although heretics S. August. in Enchrid. ad Lauren.
do preach the name of Jesus Christ, yet that name is not their seur ground as
it is to Catholics, but remains proper to the Church only: for if one
consider aduysedly that which belongs to Jesus Christ; he shall not find it
amongst heretics what so ever, but in title and show only: the effect of the
virtue shall not be there: they sound out with full mouth, that they hold the
son of God for the redeemer of the world, but notwithstanding after they
have pronounced those words, because they spoil him of his virtue and
dignity, that which S. Paul says Collos. 2.
is truly proper unto them: that they keep not the head, whereof the whole
body (which is the Church) by joints and bands being compacted, grows to
the increase of God. And according to this, Optatus properly says that the
buylding Opt. li. 3. and 6.
of heretykes is but only a wall which has no corner stone nor couerture above,
in such sort that if they make a gate, he that enters in, is always without,
subject to wyndes, rain, tempest, thieves, and to wild beasts. But the
Catholic Church is an entier house in the which God does dwell, and he dwells
not in any other. All that which is enclosed therein, is couerd, well assured,
and out of danger: of the incommodytyes of the air, of thieves, and of all
external harm. Furthermore he compares heresy to artificial trees, which
fowlers fashion in likeness of a natural tree, having the show of a true tree,
but full of snares and of glue, where the brides searching their life, find
their death: whereas the Church is a true tree in deed, full of good fruits,
without snares and fraud. But above al. S. Cyprian has very well said that
heresy and idolatry be in Lib. de unit. Eccles.
the same damnation, as daughters of the same father: when (says he) by the
coming of Jesus Christ, the light being revealed unto the gentiles, and the
son of salvation shyning to the face of al people, the darkness of idolatry
was chased out of the world, Satan seeing his seats and temples desolate, and
his Idols forsaken of al people on te earth, which did run unto the Churches
of Jesus Christ, he found a new craft under the self same name of Christian, to
entangle them that were not well advised, and to make them fall from the grace of
Jesus Christ: that is, he has sturred up heresies, with the which he has
subverted the faith, corrupted the truth, and broken the unite of concord: in
such sort that those whom he can not longer hold in the ancient way of
blyndnes, he has deceived by the error of a new way: and so spoyleth men even
within the Church, deceauing them with an other kind of darkness, to the end
that not contynewing in the unity of the Church, they may yet call them selves
Christians, and walking in darkens, they may persuade them selves to have the
light: making them blind without perceauing their blyndes, yea then when they
think them selves most sure of the light. For as he is a cunnyng woorkeman to
transform him self often into an Angel of light, he leads them in to
likelihoodes of truth, that he may so deceive them in the truth: affirmyng the
night for day, death for life, infidelitye for faith, Antichrist under the name
of Jesus Christ. And there is not any absurditye how monstrous and foul so ever
it be, that he does not make them receive, and that very greedelye, and having
once bleared them with his iugling tricks, he holds their judgments so fast
tied and hampered, that they can not see the very open and manifest truth: so
that having now no more root in God, they be cast into a reprobate sense,
turnyng to their own destruction all that is presented unto them, and stick
not now to stand and fight against God him self. Now, to them which suffer them
selves to be deceived, it happens (says S. Cyprian) for not searching the
truth of faith by the right way, according to the direction of our heavenly
Master, who does send us to the chayer of S. Peter, which of his proper
authority by prerogatyue he has ordained to be head, and as the fountain and
root of his Church. And this was a great benefit of God, that he has given a
certain seat to his Church, as auncyently was the chair of Moses, to the end
that in the doubtful points of faith, men might have a place to resort unto,
as to a certain University, to receive their judgment and resolution, and so
to keep the unity of faith among so many diverse nations that were to enter in
to the Church.

This is certainly the point whereby all heretics in the world have perished,
do perish now, and shall always perish: for that they like not, not savor
not the Sacrament of the unity of faith in the universal brotherhood of the
Church, nor acknowledge that there is one certain Church, the only mother of all the children of God, which is only holy, Catholic, and Apostolic: unto whom
Jesus Christ her spouse and head has given the character of the order of his
eternal Priesthood, the keys of the realm of heaven, and all authority
over his howshould: unto whom he has promised assistance of his holy spirit
until the end of the world: in whom is the will of God, the forgiveness of
sins, and the distribution of graces: who only has the word of God in
keeping, the pure doctrine of the Gospel, the true use of Sacraments: to whom
only therefore does appertain to judge of the true sense of the holy
scriptures, and to decyde the controversies of faith that rise among men: whose
judgments in earth be ratified in heaven: which Church, being but one and
undivided in faith, yet extending it self in her communion as the beams of the
sun, as long and as wide as the whole world, encreasinge and multiplyinge
daily without end or lymit, continues inseparably united to her head, as the
beams to the body of the sun, not living but of his grace, not breathing
but of his spirit, and not seeing but of his light: and who so ever keeps not
this unity, he keeps not the law of God, he has no faith, and he can neither
have the life nor the salvation of Jesus Christ. It is S. Paul him Ephesians. 4.
self that teaches this Sacrament of the unity of faith in the universality
of the Church: as there is not (says he) but one sole God, lord and father of
all, so there is but one faith, one hope, one trust, one body, one spirit: the
head of which body, is the son of God Jesus Christ, who being him self the
spring of life everlasting, does inspire life to all the body, and does
furnish it daily with strength by his holy spirit. Whosoever is not a member of
that body, can not take life of the spirit of Jesus Christ: he is a stranger:
he is profaned: he is an enemy, he is dead, dry and wythered without
moisture of all divine grace, and that no part of the promises and rewards of
Jesus Christ: he is the branch Johan. 11.
cut from the true stock, appointed to the fire to be burned. If any of those
which were out of the Arcke of Noe were saved, those also shall be saved which
are found out of the Arc of the Church. If the river cut from his spring
dries not up: if the branch divided from the tree can bear fruit: if the
member cut from the body can take life of the same body: then also the man
that is divided and cut from the Church, shall live of Jesus Christ. He can not
have God for his father, which will not have the Church for his mother: and he
can not be united with God, which is not united with the Church. At the same
instant that man does separat him self from the Church, he dies from Jesus
Christ, and leeseth the grace of the holy Ghost. For even as the universal
sensible light is tied to the body of the sun which does spread and
distribute it to all the world, in the absence whereof, there is nothing but
darkness: even so al grace of reconciliation to God, was annexed to the body of
Jesus Christ: yea to this body of his which daily grows by increase of the
chosen, preordinate to life everlasting, which is the body of the Church,
which he does gather together, taking out from the heap of mankind al men of
good will, which have been, are, and shall be, to the end of the world: out of
which body there is but the wrath and malediction of God. Search where you
will: out of this Church, you shall find nothing but death. To be short, he
which is not in the Church has no God: he has his own proper judgment, his
fantasy, and his own presumption for his God: he makes him self an Idol,
and does worship only his own imagination in place of God. If such a man
calls him self a Christian, that is as the devil often says he is Christ:
and if he be killed for his heresy, that is no martirdom, bur the reward of
his heresy, which is not yet al purged by his own death. Dying he goes to
yield and join him self eternally to the darkness, which he has worshipped; and
to his head which is the devil. There is no martirdom nor death precious before
God but in the catholic Church: in the which only is the grace of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ: the which only she does preach in sincerity and truth, and
without any hazard or possibility to err: because she takes her direction of
the holy Ghost, and of the tradition of the Apostles, and of the holy
scriptures together: which be the three grounds set down by the holy scripture
it self: the which does show that not she only buyldeth up the Church, but is
also helped of the traditions of the lively voice of the Apostles, to the which
she often times refers men. Keep (says S. Paul) the traditions 2 Thessalonians.
2. Tenete traditiones quas didicistis, sieve per sermone^, sieve per epistola^
nostra^. Act. 15. and 16
which you have learned of me, be it by word or by our epistle: and it is
written in the Acts of the Apostles that in all places whear S. Paul passed
by, he recommended to the Churches, to keep the ordinances of the Apostles and
of the elders, which were things not written. When the Apostles had planted the
Gospel, they did not say al things at one time, nor in one hour: nor wrote all that they said: but according as occasion was given, they planted their
doctrine: so that the holy scripture which we have of the Apostles and of the
Evangelists, is not so much a full doctrine of faith, as a witness of the faith
that they preached. Now if we will go higher: the law of Moses co^sisted no
less in tradition than in writting: and not only the sense but the letter and
text thereof was to be learned by tradition. For they had the scriptures in
manner but by half: the pointing being not yet put to the hebrew text. But the
holy Ghost always has in formed the Church of the true traditions and the
true sense of the scripture, in such sort as the Church and the holy scripture
are so linked together, that they both be as an indissoluble cheyne of gold.
The Church is not above the scripture, but the authority of the Church does
show the true scripture. And when the Church has need of wholesome information,
she does go to the scriprure: and if there be any darkness in the scripture,
the holy Ghost is given to the Church for to interpret the same. Even so in
the old law in all difficulties, that rose, the law of Moses ordained that
they should go to the high priest for the time being, and that they Deuteronomy. 17.
Malach. 2.
should follow his verdit, not turnyng either to the right side or the left,
upon pain of death. The Prophets also sent them thither, and in the Gospel it
self our savior commands, that if any obey not the Church, Matt. 18.
he be degraded from the name of Christian, and holden for an Eathnike: let no
man now seek excuses in a corner. God has appointed at al times the priests
of the Church present, to judge the present controversies: and wills that men
should repair unto them: his holy spirit assisteth them to that end. He has
not promised us in them more then in other men, example of holiness: but he has
promised us by them the Oracles of his truth. Oh that al those that do err in
faith did know the virtue of the name Catholic, and the horror of the name
heretic: how the Catholic in his faith, does renounce his own reason, his
own judgment, his understanding, his will, and all his senses, for to hearken
simply and absolutely unto that that the Church does teach: how on the
contrary side, the heretic does ground and build his faith upon his own
judgment. They should know that the name Catholic, is a name of repose in
God: a name utterly denying him self, to the end he may be overwhelmed in
God: and that to lean and stay upon the Church, is to lean and stay upon
God him self: and that contrary wise to stay upon him self, that is to say
upon his own judgment, is to stay him self upon the devil: they should
know that the Church teaches the people faithfully, and that she is assisted
of the holy Ghost: that she has the true traditions of the Apostles: and
does take the scripture in the Euangelical sense; says nothing of her self,
puts nothing of nevve, does not make any article of faith: but only gives
witness of the Euangelical sense, and discerns the good from the evil
pasture, even as the holy Ghost does reveal to her in common. And
contrariwise that the heretic is not stirred but of his own particular
spirit: has not any tradition but of his own proper making: takes the
scripture in a sense by him self invented: handling the same as if him self
were the author: making him self a prophet to him self, and judge of God: and
somtymes sets him self above all that which is God: in some much that he does
judge by his own private sense, the eternal word of God: in such sort as al
heresy makes a new paradox, and puts a new sense, never Euangelized, not
of the holy Ghost, but inverted of Satan, by the mouth of one particular man.
The spirit of God is not particular, but common: and the same is in common to
the Church, to whom has been given the assurance of the holy Ghost, to show
unto her al truth: in such sort, that, as it is certain that the holy Ghost
is author of the scripture: so is it certain that the holy Ghost is the soul
and life of the Church, by whose direction she can never err, for which cause
S. Paul does call her the pillar and ground of truth. And 1. Tim. 3.
this is it that S. Augustine did confess, o lord S. August. lib. 12. co^fess.
c. 25
(says he) thy truth is not mine, nor this man's, or that man's: but it is
every man's, whom thou publikly Veritas tua est domine no^mea, nec illius, aut
illius; sed omnium nostru^, quos ad co^muniomem public vocas, terribiliter
admones ne priuatam veritate^ habeamus ne priuemut ea. Joan. 8.
calleste to the communion thereof, warnyng us terribly that we take great heed
to challenge that in private, lest so we be utterly deprived of it. For he
which speaks of his own tells a lie. And as many particular opinions as
are in the world, so many banners are there displayed by the devil. A true
catholic does estrange him self as much as he can from all particular
opinions, and from al attributing to him self, his being, his living, his power
and knowledge, and never does use these terms: I am: I can, I will, as for me,
this is my opinion, and such like speches, which be terms of deuelish
arrogancy. He dares not so much as to say of him self that he is a part of
Christendom, standing as it wear by him self alone: but holds this for a
principle that he can not so much as think any thing, that good is without the
continual dependence of God, and instruction of the Church: unto whom in all
simplicity, and in deep humlitie, he leaves him self to be edified and
instructed, even as a little child of his mother: so that it is in a manner
easier to pluck a sterre out of the element, than to pluck a true catholic
out of the bosom of the Church. Little Jacob when Rebecca his mother commanded
him to faigne him self to his father that he was Esau, to get thereby his
blessing, he answered like a child, that he feared lest the deceit being
discoueced, he should procure him self malediction in stead of benediction: but
then his mother said to him, that maledictio^ Genes. 27.
(my son) be upon me: only obey thou my voice in that I command the: which
he did, and was blessed: even so it is in our obedience to the Church. If the
Church should deceive us, then upon her be the maledictio^, to us does
apperteyn the glory of obedience, with the which we be very well assured to
obteyn the everlasting benediction. But now the Church can not deceive us, yea
I say further, that the iniquite of him that is in the Church, is better, that
is to say, is less damnable then the good works of him which is in heresy.
For if one of the howshold of the Church have sinned, he has but committed
that sin wherein he is fallen: the which is blotted out by penance in the
Church, and he may obtein the promises of the kingdom of heaven: but he
which is fallen out of the Church, sins always, and in all that he does: for all that which is not of faith, is sin, as S. Paul says. Yea although he do
penna^ce yet ca^ he obtein no pardon, because in the society where he is,
there is no remission of sins: there is no good work meritorius, no
penance, no virtue to be rewarded with life everlasting where faith is not:
and that person does not fruitfully fulfill any commandment of God which does
not fulfill the same in the Church. The pretended good works of those which be
out of the Church, be like a swyft running out of the way, and like great
pains taken for a matter of nothing, where no reward is to be gotten. He which
runs out of the listes, shall never carry away the price: he must be first
with in the barriers of the Church, seeing that the course of good works shall
be crowned according to the merits of the righteousness of each one: I mean
according as every one shall show himself valiant and courageous in christian
spirit, and according as the new regenerat man in him has brought forth due
fruits, and effects of his regeneration. There is no good without the soueraign
good. The soueraign good, is God. God, Jesus Christ, and the Church, are three
things coherent and fast united together. There is no access to God, but by
Jesus Christ: and there is no access to Jesus Christ, but by the Church: let
no man (says S. Ambrose) accept good woorks, done before faith. Faith is the
soul of good works, without the which they be dead, and be not to be
rewarded with life everlasting: faith is the soul of our soul, the substance
of man, in such sort as man without faith is without substance. True it is
that an heretyke renouncing his heresy is straight ways clean, and
incorporated again to the Church, and as a member, partaker of the prayers of
all the universal Church, he is made worthy of the body of Jesus Christ, after
he has purelie and entierlie renounced his heresy: in which case a Ioh. Clim.
grad. 15.
fornicator repenting has need of tears and of time to be thoroughly cleansed,
and to extinguish utterly the concupiscence which has occupied the soul, and
defiled the body, the relics of the one being harder to be healed, then of
the other: but if the one and the other die in their sin, the heretic shall
carry a more rigorous judgment than the fornicator. This point then is without
contradiction that in all the universal world, there is but one only Church,
which does administer eternal life: which has the keys of the kingdom of
heaven: in which good deeds be revvarded with life everlasting: which
dravving out of the holy Scriptures the right line of interpretation both
prophetical and Apostolical according to the sense that has been preached and
taught, gives her children assured certentie of the good pasture, and
knowledge of the evil: who^ who so obeys not, shall never see God. For this
cause S. Paul according to the care which he had more then fatherly of the
salvation of men, does exhort very earnestly to be careful, to keep the
unity of spirit: which is to hold them selves, joint, firm, and locked in the
bosom of the Church: knowing that every where out of the same dwells
death, and that every particular assembly out of the same is the Synagog of
Satan. All divinity out of the Church is vain, false, basterdly, co^fuse,
full of deceit and impiety. When the heretic alleges words of the Gospel
that is now no more (says S. Hierom) the Gospel of God. The Gospel in their
mouth becomes the word of man, and the word of the devil: the truth is
poisoned by their leaven, in such sort that it is altogether unlike to it
self: wherein they fare as the false and lewd counseilors of a prince or state,
who in giving counceil redounding to there own particular profit, and not of
the Prince or commonwealth, do betray the Prince and the common welthe: even
so, the heretics be traitors to God and to the holy scriptures. And let no man
be deceived if sometimes they seem to teach the same doctrine that the
catholics do: between the true and the false there is but a hears difference.
But now suppose they preached in all and throughout, the self same doctrine of
faith and Sacraments, as the catholics do: that they be also otherwise
irreprehensible of their life in external honesty: yea finally though they
spend their blood for the name of Jesus Christ: all this notvvithsta^ding, fith
S. Aug. lib. de fide ad petro.
they make a body apart, and hold not the unity of the catholic Church they
be in state of perdition. The use of the Sacraments, the woorks of mercy, and
the gloriouse confession of the name of Jesus Christ can not profit but unto
him which is in the unity of the catholic Church. Which unity who holds
not, he divides the body of Jesus Christ, which is one and indivisible: and
his Church has not two bodies. Jesus Christ is not divided (says S. Paul) and
that point is of so great importance as the creed of the faith, which is daily
song in the Church does expressly show that there is but one Church to the
end that all men might know that out of the same there is no salvation.

Such as come near the brinke of a deep pit, or of any dovvneright pitche,
conceiving the horror of temporal death, all trembling they retier far of, for
fear to fall therein: but there is not any deep pit or dovvneright pitche or
peril what so ever in this world wherein a man should conceive so much fear
to fall as into heresy. For in all heresy dwells the horror of eternal
death: And to fall from the assured firmament of the Church in to heresy, is
to fall from cleaning to God to the bottomless pit of him self: which is as the
fall of Satan, when he was headlonge thrown down from heaven to hell. Let
us then take heed God Christian people of separating of our selves, how little
so ever it be, from the catholic Church, no, not in one only little thought:
let us yield universally to all that the Church does teach, without reserving
any thing, what soever it be, to our particular judgment, against the
judgment of the Church. Look how much any man reserueth to his own
resolution, upon his own proper sense, in matters of faith: so nigh he is to
the loss of his life, so far is he in darkness of error, so near is he to
death, so much divided from God, so fast cleaves he to the devil. Far from
all those which have care of their own everlasting salvation be that deadly
presumption, which would share his faith with the Church: that is, would
make a choice and particular separation of the points which it pleases him to
believe, or not to believe with the Church: as if that side whereunto, by our
own direction, we resolve to lean, were to us a better evidence, and
cleeret testimony than the universal Church. This is, in very deed to
censure the Church and to make our selves judges of the Church, and of the holy
Ghost also, which teaches her. This is to be too too much ignorant of our own
ignorance, weakness, and mesure of our own state and condition. The judgment
of one particular man, how wise so ever he may be, is but as a little candle
in the darkness of the night, the which gives light scant four or five pases
in circumference, but is incontinent obscured and environed with the exceeding
force of universal darkness. Where the Church, (which, as S. John says, is
clothed with the sun, having the moon Apoc. 12.
under her feet) does cast her beams upon the face of the whole earth,
taking her brightness from above, and drawing her light out of the sea of the
Intelligence divine. Away (say I) with this presumption: far be it from all
our friends: far from the chosen and elect of God: far from al those, who
have an earnest desire of their own salvation, and would willingly forsake
this world, to see God eternally, and to attain unto the glory of eternal
felicity. Away with this rashenes of particularities in opinions severed
from the Church. This is the very cockle of wicked spirits. This is the way
to fall in to the hands of the devil: who being not able to wound a man to
death, by making him to forsake the Church absolutely, does yet vvound and
disfigure the integrity, and sincere pureness of a Christian, in this point at
least, that now he is not sound, and sincere, nor such a one as the beauty
and state of a christian requires. Deformed is that member (says S. Augustine)
which is not conformable to the whole. Raither suffer the soul to be divided
August. Turpis est omnis pars vniuerso suo non congruens.
from the body, with all the torments in the world, than to be divided from
the Church, or to dissent from the Church in any one jot only, or in any one
sole little point. He that would agree with the Church in all, except one only
point, is not a catholic. Faith is more indivisible than the beams of the
sun: it is not to be holden by halues: it is a gift of God, and a grace
infused: and the gifts of God are perfect. For concerning faith, who so ever
fails in one article is culpable in all. And he is no less drouned, which is
but two fingars over head in water, than he which is an hundred fathoms dieper.
A man's faith, eye, and honor, are three things that can not endure to be hurt
or impared, how little soever it be. Many of them which have yet some lively
root in the Church, and hate heresy, do give to them selfs some times
liberty to blame or contemn certain obseruances and ceremonies of the Church,
as in their opinions unprofitable.

These lo do dangerously err, besides that they show herein their
beastlines, and ignorance: for nothing universally received in the Church is
of small consequence, or importance. And unworthy are they to have any place
in the Church, and to be partakers of the Sacraments of everlasting life, which
do disagree with her in the least point that a man can think of. Men ought
with more reverence to judge of such things as are approved and allowed of the
universal Church. When men debate of humain matters, let then humain reason
take place: but in the doctrine of faith, the only authority of the Church
ought to rule. It is not for us to take upon us to confirm, and establish that
whereunto we must obey. We must in all submit our selves wholly to her
judgment, without exception of any thing, what soever it be: For so soon as
faith is severed from the Sanctuary of the Church, she is out of her natural
element: she has no more vital spirit. The Church has secret motives, and
considerations tending to the utility and preservation of her universal
family, incomprehensible to any one private person: yet notwithstanding they
have their foundacions and grounds very firm and sure. The most excellent
Philosophy that ever was in the world, is that of Abraham, which Philo
describes. Abraham. Philo.
He reduced all the effects of the second causes to the first cause
immediately: he did not attribute to the sun, the light of the day: nor to
clouds the rain: nor to eyes the sight: nor to ears the hearing: nor to other
next instruments of sense the cause of their faculty, not to the feet force to
go: not breathing to the lunges: not concoction to the stomak: not to trees
and seeds their yerelie fruits: but he reduced all things immediately to him
only which spreads abroad his benignity, and benevolence largely,
frankly, and freely in all places: he bends all his forces to him alone,
hoping by him only to be aided: and staying him self upon him only: neither
trusting upon heaven, nor upon earth, air, beasts, plants or roots, with
intent to love them as causes. And (as a man may say) he trauersed through all
the ranks and troops of the host of all second and instrumental causes
apperteining to the OEconomie or general disposition of the universal nature,
for to approach unto the soueraign head: the Creator of substances: the giver
of forms: the first mouer: first cause, and cause of causes: to the end to
love him only, and to give him only thanks for all benefits received. And this
Philosophy of Abraham was as a shining beam of the innocence of nature before
sin: which innocence consisted in cleaning wholly to God, and depending upon
God in all things: not resting upon him self, nor upon any creature: whereupon
also God loved him more, and was more revealed to him, than to those that love
the second causes, and search deeply in to them, not satisfied otherwise with
the first. In like manner in matters of faith, those which do rest altogether
upon the Church shall rather be illuminated of the holy Ghost, than those which
do not give credit to her, but upon a caution or condition of some natural
reason. If any would know the way how to render a reason of his faith, and of
all obseruances of the Church S. Peter thereunto does exhort him. And in 1.
Petr. 3.
deed the study of such a science is the most noble and most worthy that is
in the world: only let him be humble, and hold this for a principle or maxim:
though he understands not the reason of any obseruances: yet notwithstanding
the same is grounded upon some just reason above his capacity. And when he
has laid for his ground this humility, and coming afterward to search the
motives and reasons of the Church: then the knowleige of the general
disposition, and government of the Church shall teach him considerations more
deep, more excellent, more ample, more confortable, and shall replenish his
mind with a cleerer light than the knowleige of al Naturs works: and therein
he shall take more pleasure, than if he had in his head the collectio^s and
gatherings of all the knowleige in the world fast sowed one to an other, and
could give a reason of the whole disposition of natural things in all parts of
the whole frame of this world.

In the primative Church, Sinesius the great Sinesius.
philosopher called by Christians to the state if a Bishop, would not accept
the same, but with reservation of some opinions of the ethnical philosophy.
The fathers condescended to his desire, assuring them selves, that so excellent
a wit would easily cast of al those reseruations of his philosophical folly,
by conference with wise and learned men of the Church. And in deed this learned
man being made Bishop, did soon cast away al reseruations of his several
opinions: and conformed him self in all points to the Church, co^demning him
self, and deriding his own vanity, proceeding rather from the root of folly
and pride of a philosopher, than of malice. And truly to addict him self
obstinatlie to some particularities of opinions against the universality,
Genes. 27.
it is the part of one that is ignorant of the first elements and principles of
Christianity: and a token of a short and feeble iudgemen, that has a very
shmal beam of brightness, and is so poor of understanding, as he is not hable
to conceive that the river which he dwells next unto, is much less than the
Ocean sea: and that the sterres be much greater the^ they appear to his eyes:
esteming the greatest things that he knows to be the most that God can do in
that kind: and considers but one thing only, where he ought to consider an
hundred thousand, persuading him self evermore to have in the compass of his
brain, all that God is hable to do, or will do, mesuring all things by his own
capacity, and sufficiency: which is not only an extreme folly, but also
very dangerous. for such folk upon the least motion of the devil will throw
them selves from the high pinnacle of the temple down to the ground: I mean from
the firmament of the Church, to the bottomless pit of heresy. Will we then be
assured never to err, and to have our spirit quiets, peacible among all the
wherl wyndes and tempests of heresies? this is the only mean: he that walks
in the spirit of the Church, is in the high way: he goes not in darkness: he
goes by day, and setteh sure footing. The church is to him a bulwark of
quietness: a wall of brass: a stay more sure then the firmament of heaven:
yea, I say truly, more sure than the firmament of heaven. For rather the
heaven shall fall in pieces, and all the whole frame of the world shall fall
into confusion, and nature shall err, rather than the Church shall come to
error in that doctrine of the salvation, which she does teach her children.
And good reason: for her understanding his higher than the understanding of all
nature: for it is the uncreated understanding, the holy Ghost, God him self,
which does govern the same immediately. And for the Churches sake, heaven,
earth, and all Nature have been made, and do consist: without whose prayers,
the fra^e of the whole world could not stand one moment. The Angels them
selves (as S. Paul says) are all Hebr. 10
to minister to them which receive the inheritance of salvation, which are the
children of the church.

But I will no forther open the priuileiges of Grace, the heavenly and lively
comforts which the children of the catholic Church have. The catholic Church
is the only fortress impregnable; the wiseman to her will have his recourse,
and shall be saved.

She is the strong fort of the city of God, founded upon the rock, which can
not be undermined: Genes. 27.
fortified by the invincible force of the holy Ghost, guarded by heavenly
armies, which are camped round about, compassed of all sides with the favor
of the almighty. She is the true earthly Paradise, where the tree of life is
planted, which all of her house may freely use, and thereby receive
nourishment of life everlasting. She is the true house of God, where he does
dispose his graces, and all his goods and the souueraign felicity. And who
ever can taist of the fruit of the name Catholic: he shall find hem self
happy, and shall perceive in that he is a Catholic, he is as it were weeded
out of him self to be transplanted in God: and being lostin him self, he shall
find him self grafted, and rooted in God, in whom he shall stand more surely,
more lively, more happily, and be more his own man, thau standing in him
self: where upon his soul shall be filled with true, sound, parfite,
soueraign, divine, and everlasting joy.

I do not call in question whether the catholic Church be visible, nor where
she is being a society, not of Angels, or of souls separated from the body,
but of men. She must necessarily be visible, that one may say, there is the
Church, pointing to her with the fingar, and showing her to the eye: otherwise
(says S. August.) Aug. tract. 1. and 2. in 10.
no man could be assured of the unity, in the which men must necessarily
enter, and hold them selfs, to the end they may be joined to the head and
communicate with all the other members thereof. And our lord should in vain
have bidden men resort to the Church, and obey it, if it were invisible to the
face of the whole world, so that she can not by any manner of ways be hidden,
nor darckned in the earth, no more than the son in heaven. Yea (says S John
Chrisostom) S. Chrysostom. ho. 4. in cap. 6. Efa.
it were more easy to put out the light of the son, than to darcken the
Church. And those which say that the Church which was planted of the Apostles,
and did lighten the Gentiles, is no more extant, and that she is lost many a
day ago; and that straight after the Apstoles she was eclipsed of her light,
and became an Apostata, in such sort as the world is entered in to darkness as
before: and those which do compare her to the Sinagogue in the time of Eli:
those (I say) are very impudent, and their impudency can not be heard with
out indignation, for that it is contumeliouse to the son of God: as if the
son of God (which said, that he is the light of the world, and that he came
to renew all, to destroy the works of the devil, and to dispossess him of
his reign) had not done that which he promised, nor that which he came for:
and as if his light had been as a flash of lightening vanishing away, and not
as a son rising, to chase out effectually the darkness of the world. This is
a most vile and shameful abasing of Christ's honor and estimation: this is to
take from him the deserved inheritance of all Nations, which GOD the father
promised unto him: this is (as it were) to spoil him of his dignity and the
royal scepter, and to pluck him down from his throne, and to take from him
his royal Diadem, which the father gave him, and to make, that GOD has not
kept his promise. They which use thies words are not in the Church them
selves says S. Augustine. Aug. in psalm. 101.
Thou say: that the Church is not extant, because thou art not in her. Look
well to the matter: thou art not in deed in her: but she is and shall be
extant, though thou art not. All that the scripture does teach Numer. 20. 3.
Reg. 8. Math. 18. Acto. 15. 18. and 20.
feighteth against this impudent saying. It has been foretold that the glory
of the secound house of GOD shall be greater then the glory of the first: that
she shall reach from one sea to an other: from the Orient 1, Tim. 3. Psalm. 1^.
Esa, 2, Dan. 2. Mich. 4. Math. 7.
to the Occident: that she shall fill Asia, Africa, Greece, Italy, all tounges,
all nations, and the Isles far of: and that the savior shall make as it were
new heavens, and new earth: so that the Sinagogue in comparison of the Church
is no more then one star in comparison of the Son, and had but fevv little
spartles of that light whre of the full brightness is spread upon the Church.
Origin says, that the first sign Iud. 6.
given to Gedeon of the flyse only devved from heaven, the earth round about
remaining all dry, did prefigure the Sinagogue: and the secound sign of all
the earth bedevved, the flyse contynevving dry did prefigurat the Church. In
Daniel also, the Church was prefigured by the Dan. 2.
little stone cut from the mountain without hand of man, the which having
broken the Image of Gold, of Silver, of brass, of Iron, and of clay, which
did represent the Empires of the world, became a great mountain, and did fill
the whole earth, where upon sanct Augustine does argue against the heretics:
If the Ievyes be said to be blind for not having seen the stone being but
little, what blindness is that in them which can not see the same being a
mountain? so those (says he) which deny the Church dispersed throwgh the
world, do not stumble against de little stone but against the mountain. Esaie
expressly fortold, that the Church Esa. 2. 54. 66.
shall be as a mountain manifestly, lifted up above the mountains whereunto all
nations Matt. 5.
shall resort: which our Savior him self confirmed, saying that his Church
is a city set on a montaine which can not be hidden, what shall I say more
(says S. Augustine)? the Church, is she not manifest? do not we show it with
our fingar? and those that do not see so great a mountain, be they not blind
which against the shining candle, put in a candelsticke do shut their eyes? S.
Bernard writes elega^tly hereof against the heretics of his time: the stone
cut without the hand is becomme the mountain filling the world; and think
you (says he) that it is within your dens? this is to calu^niat all the
universal world. Thou may easily see the city set upon a mountain, the
Church catholic which can not be hidden: Moreover S. Augustine says, that by
Gods providence, it Aug. in psalm. 101.
has been so disposed, that the testimonies of Jesus Christ are obscure in the
old prophets, but those of the church are manifest, to the end that men should
have recourse to the Church for cou^seil, to learn of her their salvation. And
he says forther that the Church since the Apostles time has not only not
lost any part of her light, but also has always augmented the same, still
proceeding and encreasyng, as the new moon from small light to a greater. If
any one (says he) do not perceive the moon in the first point of her
increasing, one might excuse the weakness of his eyes: but he that does not
perceive the same in her fulness, that man is stark blind. From the time of
the Apostles, when the Church did not show as yet very much her face upon the
arth, simple men were deceived by false teachers, saying, here is the Church,
here is Christ, wounding (as it were in the dark of the moon) simple and
plain meaning folk: but now how blind is he that erreth in the full moon?
Pope Leo the S. Leo.
first, S. Hilaire, and other ancients, which lived in the mayn course of
mighty heresies S. Hilarie.
do witness, that the Church was never darkenid since the Apostles, by the
infectio^ of heresies. The Church (say they) may be diminished in the Globe of
multitude of children, but not in light and clearnes: much less by the
persecutions of tyrannes: for (as says Tertullian) the blood of Christians is
the seed of the Church, and every martyr is as the grain of wheat falling on
the earth, which brings forth many. Poor Cicero Cic. l. 2. q. Ac.
searching the sovereign God, complains, saying, by the dissension of
philosophers we are constrained to be ignorant of our Lord, and can not know
which is he that we ought to worship for Lord and gouerner of the world. This
can not besayd of the Church; the contradictions which heretics do make
against her, do not darken her, but make her rather better known. and (as
Vincentius Lyrinensis says) Vinc. Lyr.
do scour her and make her brighter, giving occasion to catholics to
understand cleerlie and fervently that which before they believed covertly and
coldly. And it is certei^ that the Church had more knowleige of God, in some
certain articles in the time of S. Augustine, then in other times before; and in
the time of S. Bernard, then in the time of S. Augustine: and at this day more
then she had since the time of the Apostles: so that there is now none that
sees not clearly in the light of the Church, except those whose eyes satan
has put out, and which are willingly blind: since all now do know where is
the cheire of S. Peter, the Church Catholic, Apostolic and Romain; which
has the name of Catholic, the succession of Bishops since S. Peter to
this day; the consent of people, and nations, and many other well known marks,
which do distingwishe the same from all false religion, of panims, of Jews,
and of heretics, and does make it sufficiently evident, that none can be
excused, neither those which refuse to join unto her, nor those that do depart
from her. I will not here set down all the marks of the true Church, as if
this present treatice were to that end, but I shall touch only some few.

TWELVE MARCKES OF the true Church.
Catholic, which although all heretics would pretend to be theirs, yet never
could they obthain thus much, (says S. Augustine) S. August. lib. cont. epi.
fund. c. 4.
that if a Panime demanded of an heretic the place where the Catholics do
assemble them selves, he durst not show his own Sinagogue. And S. Ciril says,
if thou go in a Cyril. cat. 18.
city, do not ask where is the Church, nor where the house of GOD is: for
the heretics say that they have the Church, and the house of god: but ask
where is the Catholic Church, for that name Catholic is proper to the holy
Church, mother of us all, that are of right belief: and an heretyke would be
mocked and laughed at to show his Church for the catholic. Pacianus has
treated of this point expressly where he says: Christian is my name,
Catholic is my surname: that does name me, this makes me known: the name
catholic is not derived of any one man: it does not sound any thing of an
heretic: it is not referred to any particullar Author; it agrees to the
principal head and body of that tree, whose branches being cut of, are the
sects of heretics: but the tree it self lives, maintained by his root: and
co^tineweth always the same, which is all one whole body, and called
Catholic: but every heresy takes the name of some one which is the author
thereof: where upon S. Athanasius ^than. sermon. ^^^nt. Arria.
against the Arrians says: Christian people never took their names of their
Bishop: no, we are christians, and so named, not of the Apostles them selves,
but of our lord in whom we have believed by the voice of Bishops and
Apostles, Those which have taken their faith of others are by good right
surnamed from the chief of their heresy. Lactantius says, the only Catholic
^ct. li. 4. c. 3.
Church is that which keeps the true worship; of God: this is the fountein
of truth, the house of faith, the temple of God: in whom if any do not enter,
or from whom if any does depart, he cutteth him self of from hope of life, and
of everlasting salvation: but every sect of heretics does pretend that the
catholic Church is on there side: how be it bearing the names of Marcionites or
Arrians, they are no more Christians; they have lost their name christian in
taking strange names of men. Likewise Iustine the martyr: S. Ireneus S. John
S. Chrysostom. h^. 33 in act. Apost. Just. mar. contriph. S. Ir^n. lib. 1. ca. 20.
Chrysostom, The sects (say they) be called of the name of the arche
heretic, but to us, no man has given a name: faith it self which is
catholic surnameth us so: and S. Jerome; If thou S. Hieron. cont. Luciferanos.
hear those which are called Christians, to bear a name: not of our lord
Jesus Christ, but of some other, (as Marcionites, Valentinians) know ye
certainly that they are not the Church of Jesus Christ, but a Sinagoge of
Antichrist.

Now you poor abused Lutherans and Caluinists, be hold the horroure of your
bothomlesse pit; you are no more Christians; and you have no part in the
salvation by Jesus Christ. All aucient Fathers do witness with one consent,
that the only Catholic is in the Church of Jesus Christ; and all that bear the
name of one particular man be heretics, and excluded from the kingdom of
Jesus Christ. Those witnesses can not be reproved: and this is one marvelous
judgment of God against heretics, and a comfort for the Catholics: by the
Creed of the Apostles, it is a necessary consequens, that any Church (if it be
a true) must needs be catholic: but there is not a societe in the world,
which does possess the name Catholic, save only the Romain Church. All others
will call them selves, Arrians, Lutherans, Caluinists, the reformed Church,
Gospellers, Protestants, and such other kinds of special names as they have:
but Catholics do not so, for in all parts of the world (where the name
Catholic Church does sound) it is intended and understood, to be the Romain
Church, yea by the heretics them selves. A man that passes by Geneua being
asked what he is, if he answer, I am a Catholic, is taken of no man there for
a Caluinist. Seek not here to blind your selves against so manifest a trueh:
but forsake both the sect, and also the name of these wicked deceivers, the
Archeheretikes of this time, which will draw you with them selves in to their,
bottomless pit of everlasting damnation, if you do not enter again in to the
Church and mount up in to the firmament of Catholics.

succession of Bishops since S. Peter, to this day, which never has been
interrupted; the which succession the fathers have always objected against
heretics of their time as an invincible argument, for even as to the
propagation of mankind, marriage is necessary: so to the procreation of the
children of God according to the spirit, the order of preisthood is instituted,
which can not be continewed perpetually, but by spiritual propagation from
those priests whom Jesus Christ did first institute. It is not so of kings, as
it is of preistes, for if all the kings of the earth should fail at once: the
people might create new. But if all the priests of the world should happen to
fail: it is not in the power of all mankind to make new. Their institution is
divine, and not humain. Jesus Christ him self must come again in person in to
this world for to institute some new. S. Ireneus Iran. li. 3, c. 3.
says, that by this succession all heretics be confounded: for never heretic
could show his next predecessor in communion of doctrine. And to prove that the
Romain Church is the true Church, he rekeneth the Bishops of Rome from S.
Peter, unto S. Eluther the Pope of his time, which was the twelveth.
Tertullianus, Eusebius, Prosper, S. Hieronimus, S. Augustine, Epiphanius,
Optatus, and all the ancient fathers have used this argument against
heretics. Tertullian says, show the Tertul. lib. de praescr.
begin^ing of your churches, and the orderly succession of your Bishops
derived by succession from some one of the Apostles, as we do show the
orderly succession in the Romain Church, from S. Peter. Account (says 8.
Aug. epist. 165. in psalm.
S. Augustine) the priests since the state of S. Peter: and look in to that
order of fathers which have succeeded one an other: and you shall find that the
Romain Church is the same stone, that the proud gates of hell can not vanquish.
And he says further, that the Aug. cont. ep. fundam.
succession of priests in the romain Church by one continual line holds him
in that Church. Likerwise, Optatus, Show (says he) the first beginning of your
chayer, you which will Optatus lib, 2.
challenge the holy Church unto your selves. And Epiphanius having orderly
recited the names of all the Bishops from S. Peter, unto Siricius then Bishop,
which was the thirty eight, Epiph. har. 27.
he adds: Let no man meruail if we be so exact in this recital, for by thies
things the evident truth of the Church does alvvayes show it self. If then
those ancient fathers have so greatly esteemed that continuation of twelve,
twenty, or forty souerain bishops, successors of S. Peter: how much stronger
is that argument at this day for us which show the continuacion of more than
two hundred thirty three, without exception. This argument is insoluble: and
all the heretics of the world ca^ not answer the same, for the Church can not
be without priests, nor without Bishops and pastors. There must needs be (as
S. Paul says) some for the edefying of the body of Jesus Christ, Ephe. 4.
until he come to judge the world. And (as S. Hierome says) the Church which
is without priests is not a Church: and none S. Hierom.
can be priest, if he be not ordained by a Bischop, being successor of the
apostolic priesthode. This mark is not only most certain, and most evident,
but forcible to know Con. Laud. con; 12, do. 61. c.
the true Church. for where the succession of priesthode is, there is the
succession of doctrine: Moses, the prophets, our savior him self in the
Gospel does affirm the same. Deuteronomy. 17. Math. 2.
Now then, we show the succession of priesthode of the soueraign Bishop of this
time, by ascending from predecessor to predecessor upward, until we arrive at
S. Peter, and enter as it were in to the side of Jesus. Your Calvin seeing him
self by this argument so entangled Calvin.
that he could not slip away, he strives, he wringeth him self, he tourneth
and tosseth, he broyleth with so great rage, as he speweth out a whole flud of
iniures against Popes, priests, and Bishops. Oh the mad dog, seeing cleerlie
that succession is a very certain sign of the true Church, to which he could
not answer, whereby he is proved to be a deceiuer sent of the devil: he casts
from the poysonful pit of his heart, iniureis sufficient to darken the heaven.
O ye Lutherans, and Caluinists, if you be capable of reason; if you may be
taught by the holy Ghost, if you be touched with the desire of your salvation:
then examine you without passion this argument: hearken to that which your own
consciences shall teach you, and be ye not enemies to your own salvation. For
sithins that you have not the order of priesthood from any Bishop, successor to
the Apostles: you are out of the communion of the Church of JESUS Christ; you
be without Church, without priesthood, and without any mediation toward God:
for that you have not any priest of the order of the Mediator. Your ministers
be those that S. Ciprian speaks of, who without lawful S. Ciprian lib. 4. ep.
9.
calling, without gods ordinance, without ecclesiastical order, do appoint
them selves to be head over rash men, take to them selfs titles of Bishops: and
like apes, they resemble men's actions; and them selves being not in in the
Church counterfeit the face of the Church; arrogating to them selves her
authority, and truth; blessing others, being them selves cursed of God:
promising life, being the^ selves dead: calling upon God, being blasphemers:
administering priesthood, being the^ selves profane: presenting the^ selves to
the altar as intercessors to God, being the^ selves sacrilegiouse, and
prouokers of gods wrath: their preaching is not preaching, but preuarication of
the word of God: their priesthood is not priesthood, but a service of the
devil, and ministry of Antichriste. for Apes be always Apes, and never shall
be men: and heretics always heretics, how so ever they do counterfeit, and
never shall be Catholics, except they enter again in to the bosom of the
Church, where the lauful succession of priesthood of the Apostles does remain.

Antiquity: for even as the good seed was sown in the field by the house
houlder, before the cockle by the enemy: so it is certain, that the true
church is more ancient than the false. Now, that the catholic, Apostolic,
and Romain Church is the same that JESUS Christ him self has instituted, and
more ancient then all the sects of heretics, this argument will forse them to
confess.

In all notable chaunges of religion six things are to be marked: the Author:
the new opinion: the time when it began: the place where it began: the
Impugners that it had: the small number of folowers when the same began to make
her separation of communion from the religion that it did forsake. first, we
know that the Author of the heresy of Arria^s was a priest of Alexandria named
Arrius: of Nestorians a Bishop of Constantinople named Nestorius: of Lutherans
a monk of the order of S. Augustine named Luther. Secondly we know that the new
doctrine of Arrius imported, that the sun of God was a creature: Of
Nestorius, that there was two persons in Jesus Christ: Of Luther, that the
Eucharist is not a sacrifice, and that man is Justified by that only special
faith which he has of his own justification. Thirdly we know that the sect of
Arrius did begin the year of our Lord 324. that of Nestorius, the year of
431. that of Luther, the year 1517. Fowertlie we know that the Arrianisme did
begin in Aegipte: the heresy of Nestorius in Thrace: that of Luther in
Saxony. Fiftlie we know that the Arrians were Impugned by Pope Syluester, by
the Council of Nice, by S. Athanasius' by S. Hilarie, and many others: the
Nestorians by Pope Celestin, by the Council of Ephesus, by S. Ciril, and many
others: the Lutherans by Pope Leo the tenth: by the Council of Trent, by all
universities catholics, and by many Doctors. Finally, we know that in the
beginning when all those archeheretikes did separate them selves from the
communion of catholics, they were small in number, an that even then the
catholics were dispersed throughout the world in infinite numbers. None of all
those things can be objected by the Lutherans and Caluinists against the
catholics. First they have never objected us, the author of our faith contrary
to theirs: neither have they named us after any particular man, which they
would very willingly have done if they could. Secondly they do not show the
beginning of any our new doctrine, if they ascend not up to the Apostles
whose nouelty is ours, and is our antiquity against all heresies. They are
not also hable to show any time certain of our faling from the Church: nor the
place, neither where it should have begun; nor those which did impugn the
same, as new: nor that any councels have been celebrated against her: nor
finally that this our Church catholic, Apostolic, and Romain, did separate it
self from some greater, that was before, in such sort as those which did
communicate with the Roman Church were few in member, and that the rest of
Christians were far more greater. For it appears by the epistles of S.
Gregory, the Pope which he did write to the Bishops of the East, of Afrike,
of Spain, of France, of Italy, that almost all the Christians of the world
did communicate with him. Now it is a thousand years past since S. Greg:
and the doctrine of faith which he did teach, is the same that the Church
does teach at this day.

continewance without being interrupted. It is foretold in Daniel, Dan. 9.
that the reign of the church shall never be dispersed: and in sanct Paul,
that heresies 2. Tim, 3.
can not long stand: the Church being like the brightness of the firmament
which shines in perpetual eternity: Heresy is as a Comet conceived of the
vapors of the earth, whereof the flame cease so sone as his earthly
norishement does fail. The Church in an other sort is as a continual flud
which can not dry. Heresy is as a flud of tempest which presently does
fail: whereof S. Augustine says: Be not you (says he) amassed to see the fluds
swellinge and roaringe In illud psa. 97 Ad nihilum d^u^n^ent tanquam aqua
de^urrens.
for a time. It is a violence of water which runs down, and shall cease
very sone: for the same can not long continue. many heresies be alredie dead*
they have run in their channel as long as they could; they be slydden away:
the roots be dry: and hardly shall one find the marcke where they were. It
is very certain that the Church catholic, Apostolic and Romain has
co^continued since the Apostles in her visible brightness unto this day: which
thing if heretics do not fully grant, yet do they confess that those
things which they blame in the same, were alredie brought in before a
thousand, or twelve hundred years. But what heresy has ever lasted any thing
near that time? yet I vvil confound them by this argument: Before that Luther
did start up, besides the Roman Church, there was not in the world but these
religions, Paganism, Iudaisme, Machometisme, and the relikes of Nestorianisme
in Greece. But it is certain by the confession of Lutherans and Caluists them
selves, that the Church of JESUS Christ was not in any one of thies sects;
whereof it follows that she was in the Roman Church, or else quyte
extinguised in all the vvhorld, which can not be. Truly this mark of the true
church is famous: for sythens Theobutes and Simon Magus the first
Archeheretikes until Luther, two hundred diverse heresies have had their course,
whereof some were vpholden by very mighty Patrones: by Emperors, by kings,
by learned men, making innumerable books, out of the which a man vvoulde have
said that they could never be blotted. And notwithstanding, by the wonderful
providence of God they be so weeded out of the earth, that there remains
nothing at all, nether of the followers, nor of their books, nor of their
doctrine, nor any sign at all, but that which is found in the books of
catholics; who if they had not written their names in their books, we had not
known that such heresies had ever been in the world: and there is no doubt
but the floods of heresies of these times vvil also slide away shortly.

largenes of the reign. And this mark is very evident in the Catholic
Church, the which does fructify throughout the universal world in both the
hemispheres; And the sun does not streache his beams further then she. I
know well that she has not the temporal regiment of external Justice
throughout the whole world: but she has every where obedient children. So
that there is no tongue, nor people, nor climat of country inhabited, where
(if perhaps the most part be not carholikes) yet at the least there are some.
I say some notable number; which assamble them selves in the Church and
communicate Catholiklie in the Sacraments of the Church: among the Turks,
among the Persians, among the Tartarians, among the Panymes, throughout the
compass of the earth: for the carholike Church is not restreined within the
bonds of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, England, Polland, Rome, Hungary,
Greece, Siria, Armenia, Ethiope, Egypt, and other countries vvherof the names
are well known unto us, and where the Catholics be in infinite number: but
she does spread her self in to the new world, and in all those four parts of
that new world, where she has many Churches, without mingling of heresies:
of the East side in the Indians: of the west side in America: toward the
north in Iapon, toward the south in Brasilia: what heresy is that, that ever
had such largenes? As for the sects of Lutherans and Caluinists, they have not
passed in Asia, nor into Africa, nor in to Greece, nor into many provinces of
Europe. Yea even in the very springs of mischief in the North, where heresies
have most might, there are not two towns neighbors possessed of one self
sect. All heresy is as a serpent. A serpent never S. August. lib. de pasto.
ca. 8. and lib. de vtil. credendi cap. 14. and 17.
departs far of from his den. And S. Augustine says very well that the
Church is every where, heresy also every where: But the Church is one and the
self same every where, where as heresies be not the same every where: but be
of great diversity, the one not knowinge the other. Whereof it does appear
(says he) that none of those is the Catholic Church. And he compares
heresies to boughs cut from the vine which abide in the place where they fall
without fructifying: where as the Church is the lively stock, which does
bring fruit in all her branches throughout whereso ever she does extend her
self.

conquest of the world by efficacy of doctrine, which is the doctrine of the
true Church, being lively, mighty, more pearsing then any two edged sword
and co^uerting effectually the souls to God. The Philosophers (says S.
Athanasius) with loftines of learning, and magnificence of speech could never
persuade any one city to take their laws of them, for that (says he) their
doctrine was dead and without force; and their speech did not proceed of the
spirit of God, but of the spirit of man. Neither did any man ever read that the
heretics converted Idolators or Jews to the faith. Their care (says
Tertullian) is not to convert strangers to Jesus Christ, but to pervert his
domesticals, Tert. lib. de presc. har.
and those which he already gotten to him* not to give life to the dead, but to
give deadly poison to the living: not to lift them up which be on the
ground, but to make them fall that stand upright. The efficacy of their
doctrine is not to edify; it serves but to distroy, and this mark does show
it self very openly in thies our days. Here is now the very large harvest of
the new world in ripenes. It behooves to send workmen: but from whence does
the Lord of the harvest take them? The Church catholic, and heresy making
both profession to be of Jesus Christ, their duties are, to increase the
howsehold of Jesus Christ as much as they can, by converting the infidels to the
faith. This notwithstanding because JESUS CHRIST vvil not be planted in the
hearts of strangers by other hands then of his dear spouse, therefore the
catholics only are they which preach the Gospel to Idolators, and gain them
to Jesus Christ. The heretics have never drawn the least province from
Paganism to Christianity. when we have converted the^ to Jesus Christ: the
heretics come afterward to deceive them. But men see that God does not
permit the work of converting them, to any other then to his true Church: as
we being those Soc. l. 4. c. 27. Soz. l. 6. ^. 37. Theod. l. 4.
only which be the fishers of men; those alone which draw the souls of men
from the sea of infidelity, to the shore of Christianity. The heretics never
throw their nets in sea, but after that we have put the fish upon the shore,
then they put all their gloire to rob and carry away some little fish, as
thieves and not as fishers. Even so the Goths being already made Catholic,
demanding Catholic Bishops for to govern their churches; Valence sent them
Arrians for to subvert them. The cause why the heretics can not convert the
infidels to the faith is, for that propounding the scripture, they do not
propound the true sense which is properly the svvoard of the spirit. The
words of the scriptures are but as the sheath which holds the sword of the
spirit. They then fighting, not with the sword, but with the sheath only,
it is no merueil if they do not pearse the hearts of Infideles. Besides that
the heretics and Idolaters belong all to one self master: But in the Romain
church, not only at the beginning, but even at all times this efficacy has
been found. This is the Romain Church which did first convert the English men
to the faith in the time of S. Gregory the Pope: This is the Romain Church
which did convert the Saxons and the whole country of Almains, in the times
of Pope Conon, and of Pope Zachary: This is the self same Church that
converted the Vandales, Bulgarians, Sclauonians, Polonians, Danes, Norwaies,
Hungarians, Morauians, with infinite kings and people. And it is not past
two hundred years ago syns rhat one only mounke S. Vincent of the order of S.
Dominike did convert to the faith 25000. as well Jews as sararins. It is in
our time that the new world received the faith of the Roman Church. And it
is not many years ago syns that some Turks and some Jews were baptized at
Rome and other places in the Romain Church. The Lutherans and Caluinists can
not boaste them selves to have converted to their sect neither Panimes nor
Turks, nor Jews, whereupon it does appear that they be of the spirit of the
devil, since that all their force is no manner of way to get the Infidels,
but only to distroy the Christians.

conformity of doctrine with the Primitive Church. Now that the ancient
fathers did teach the same doctrine that we do at this day, and condemned for
heretical that which we condemn, their books bear witness thereof; of the
which I will say further, that who so ever reads them shall necessarelie frame
to him self a catholic spirit, and shall never after drink the venim of any
heresy. For all thies fathers, as they were well instructed upon what states
the holy Ghost does rest him self: so do they breathe out nothing but
humility, abatement of presumption, abnegation or denial of them selves, a
sovereign reverence to the Church, a perpetual flame of charity, and a care
of spiritual unity, and as a man might say, an indiuisibilitie with the
Church.

holiness of doctrine; (that is to say) when the profession of doctrine does
not contein any falsehood concerning matter of faith; nor injustice concerning
manners: by the which mark, it is convicted that there is no true Church in
the world but the catholic Church. For there is not a sect in the world be
it of the Panimes, Jews, Turks, or of heretics as well old as new, but it
does contein in her doctrine some manifest impiety, or some injustice directly
contrary to reason* as the sect of Calvin does make God author of sin: and
as much the cause of the treason of Judas, as of the conversion of S. Peter:
and does teach that the christian can not do any good work. Besyds that, al
their writings be impugnours of chastity, of virginity, of Religion:
inveihing against fasting, against vows, against all orderly devotion in the
church: establishing all vice: provoking to despair: and laboring to
extingwishe the seed of immortality in the hearts of men. But the Church
catholic is perfaictlie holy and immaculate in her doctrine: she does teach
many things in her mysteries above reason, but nothing against reason: she does
teach to avoid sin; she does correct transgressors; she does comfort the
penitentes: she does exhort all her children to walk holilie, justly,
religiously in all their ways; and to have their very thoughts holy,
purging, illuminating, and making them perfect for to present them holy to
God. Come (says S. Augustine) to our Churches; there is nothing set forth to
see, or to follow which is impossible; nothing unjust, nothing impure: there be
insinuated the comandementes of the true God, or his marueilles declared, or
his gifts praised, or his graces demanded. And there is no perfect joy nor
true consolation in the world but there: for that there is not any remission
of sins in the world but there.

holiness of life, as well in priests as in the people. I know that this mark
although many do cauil at it, yet is it forceible: and more notorius in
catholics, tha^ in all the sectaries of the world. S. Chrysostom says, that
all the kinds of Justice that the servants of God have in truth, the servants
of the devil may have the same in dissimulation. The devil (says he) has his
meek men, and his humble men: he has his chaste men, his alms giuers: his
fasters, and all kind of goodness that god has created for the salvation of
men. The devil has brought in the same kind for to deceive them: to the end
that between the true good and the good feigned there should be a confusion, by
the which the simple not being easelie hable to discern the true good from the
good feigned, whiles they searching the men of God, they light upon men of the
devil: and there is not any thing but only charity, that the unclean spirit
can not counterfeit. All appearance of Justice is found in deceivers except
only charity, which is not found but in the only servants of God: The holy
Ghost has reserved to him self only this virtue of charity, in such sort,
that by no other action of Justice a man may so well discern where the holy
ghost is, as by the virtue of charity.

All heresies at te beginning come masked with a superficial holiness, which
for that it is not of the spirit of God, can not soundly be there settled. And
as the ape learned by art to hold the candle after he has stood some small
while in stead of a candelstik, at the sight of a nut cast before him leaves
all for to run after it: even so they can not long time endure without
manifesting the spirit whereof they be. And as their father was a morderer from
the beginning, so they be come straight ways thieves, kindlers of Ioh. 8.
discention, worse then Panimes and Barbarians, and above all other vices,
Pride is to them peculiar. whereof S. Augustine says: Insundrie places there be
sundry heresies, but one Aug. l. de past*
only mother pride has engendered them all, as also our only mother the
Catholic Church has brought forth all faithful Christians dispersed
throughout the world.

And all these heresies do spring by accident of some evil occasion. Egesippus
speaking Egesipp. apud Eus. lib. 4. hist. cap. 22.
of the first heretic, says thus. then the church was called a virgin, not
being yet corrupted by adulterous doctrine, but one Theobutes for that
Theobutes.
he was denied a bishoprike; did begin to trowble and corrupt all things. It
apeareth in the ecclesiastical Act. 8. Tert. con. Vale^. Epiph. he ^4. Theod.
l. 3. 5
history that Simo^ Magus, Valentin, Marrian, Arrius, and all those old
monsters did spring out from the^se: for disdeining that others were preferred
before them, they made a sect for to revenge them selves, Apoc. 16. I. Coch.
in actis Luth. 15 17. Luth. in ep. ad Argen. l. con. Aug. and l. de missa sing.
being eloquent and of great wit, and of those that S. John calls false
Prophets issued out of the throat of the dragon: unclean and deuelish
spirits, practicing the kings of the earth. Luther witnessed his own motive
in the first disputation aginst Ecchius, crying out, this cause is not begun
for the love of God: Him self has written that willingly he would have denied
the presens of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, if the scripture had not been so
clear; for that thereby (says he) he did see that he might do much heart to the
Papacy. He boasts him self, that kings, Princes, and Popes were not worthy
to untie the latche of his shoes: he said that he would that they should hold
him for a holy man whether men would or no: that he did not esteem much a
thousand Ciprians, a thousand Augustins: And for to show more plainly that his
father is the king over all the children of pride, he says, that the devil did
teach him that the mass was an evil thing, and that persuaded by the Conrae.
Gesn. in Bibl. Luth.
reasons of the devil he did abolishe the mass. His own followers them
selves, have described him to be a man full of a malicious spirit and without
charity, Erasmus says, that he was a manifest deceiuer; and that he Eras. ad
vultu.
did never see one of those which have followed him that did a mend them selves,
but many impaired. One of his own ministers whriteth in this manner, to the
end that all the world may know that they be not Papists, and that they do not
trust any whit at all in good works, they do none at all: and having
changed the spirit of humility into arrogancy, and redoubling their first
dissolutions without fasting, without alms, (...) Luth. in (...) ^up ^uan^.
call that kind of life an euangelical (...) Luther him self has acknowleged
that his own disciples gave them selves to be more reuengeful, more covetous,
proud, unmerciful, unruly, and much worse then they had been, then when
they where Papists. Which thing the principal Lutherans perceiving, and that
their corruption was cheeflie caused for that they had taken away auriculer
confession, they where desirous to restore the same again by way of policy:
and for to constrain the people there to, they did present a request to the
Emperor Charles the fifte, who refused to hear, them, except they would unite
them selves again to the Church. His disciples Calvin and Beza Soto in 4.
libr. sent. vbi de c^fess. auric.
did not so much as cover them selves with sheep skins, but being very
noon-deuils DEMONIA MERIDIANA have painted out them selves as Apostatas of
nature, publishing their sins like Sodom, and not hiding the same; hell it
self could not cast forth more filth then the school of those abominable
Pentapolitaines or Gomorits. They have dug out of the earth the books of
impiety and ethnical corruptions which our forefathers had buried. They have
thereof made commentaries, and put them in french for to infecte therewith the
world: An horrible thing, that they have not been ashamed to call the^ selves
waldins: to write that they help them Beza imag.
selves with empoisoning; with witch craft, with Magic, and with the
deuelishe art for to dispatch them selves of their evil willers. I would never
have believed that Satan had been so impudent, if I had not seen the same in
their books. They do revile all ancient fathers with shameful iniureis,
exalting the old heretics so far, that they call S. Herome a perverse
spirit, Call. in har. eua^.
and wicked: and IOVINIAN which was an heretic they call an holy man: and
say, that S. Hierom and S. Augustine in that, that they did gainsey IOVINIAN
were the^ selves heretics. And it is a wonderful doltish folly in them whom
they have bewitched, that they do not recover any space of time, for to
consider their illusions: and whereof it comes that in their writings do
appear so many iniureis, such false accusations, and lies, and not any light
of Charity, or grief of scandel of their neighbors, turning al accidents of
disorder in to mockery or matter of detraction, in their behauiours. The
fabulouse goddess Ate in Homer, did never make so many calamities as they have
made where they have passed by. If their sectaries seeing their steps did cast
there eyes toward the^, for to consider by the motion of what spirit they
have burned our Churches, martired, cruelly our priests, destroyed our
howses, and committed a million of in humanities, they should see that such
things be not the marks of the true church. The spirit of God is not in a
tempest of wind overthrowing the monteignes and breaking the stones; it is not
in a thundering commotion; it is not in in fire which does distroy where it
passes: it is in a sound of a spirit, calm, and gentle, woorking no harm nor
ruin, but creating a new and reviving in such sort, as the scripture says
that he did manifest him self to Elias. As for the Catholic people, it is too
true that there be many wicked, yet there are also many that fear God, love
their neighbor, and endeavor to keep them selves undefiled of this world: which
had rather lose their goods and their lives then the grace of God. The
catholic people is as the grau^ge of a laborer full of sheaues of corn,
whereof their does not appear to the eyes but the chafe: Yet if one come to
threshe the sheaues and put the grain bare apart, there will be found a good
heap. I know men see not the good people go to gether in troops, but that
the flud of corruption which has swaie, has overthrown many, and that it
seems, (as says the Prophet) that Satan does reap the field and gather the
vines, and that God does not but gleane or leaze after him. But yet I say
there be a good number which do set them selves against the evil, and continue
still standing upright, holding them selves fastened to GOD and will be raither
crushed to pieces then to separate them selves from him: Who if they fall
sometime by infirmity, yet they rise again quickly, mainteining their custom
of weldoing, and praying unto God incessantly that he will fortify them: and
when they must resolve them selves, will forsake all the respects of the world
for the honor of God.

As for our priests it can not be dissembled, but that there be dreedfull
scandals, and all good people have their hearts wounded to see the disorders
that be in them: those men that deserve high punishment have there the highest
honors, and the minds of the comen people, which are moved more by by
exemple, than by reason, do fall by to much marking the manners of many
prelates. But what so ever confusion there be, yet are there some found not
unworthy, dispersed here and there, doing their charge with reverence. The
grief is that the greater part does surmount the better; and there are not to
furnishe every where. It is our part to pray that when the Iudasses and
traitors shall be gone into their places, GOD will give us Mathiasses. for to
supply their romthes again. In the mean time, good or bad as we have them we
honor them, as ministers and dispensers of the ministeries of God. We know that
we must always make distinction between the vocation and the person. In mines
of gold and silver, one shall not find the gold all pure: there is but one
little vein upon a grain of the earth: Yet men let not for that, to take that
vein and leave the earth. Now the gold and the silver be the Sacraments and
the word of God: the earth is the corrupted manners. The holiness of the church
consists not in the persons, but in the Sacraments says Optatus. The
priests for the reverence of their priesthood ought Optatus.
to be as Melchisedech without father, without mother, without genealogy,
Hebr. 7.
kings of peace and of Justice: that is to say, all spiritual, al pure, all
holy, without fleashelie affection, as if they were descended from heaven,
not subject to the passions of men: if they be not such, if they preach the
good and do the evil, they be like the carpenters of the ark of Noah, which
taking no care to save them selves did not enter therein: or like the candle
which gives light to others and consumes it self; or as the marks which
show the way and stir not from their place. Noe did not cast him self in to
the water because of the uncleanness of the beasts which wear in the arc: so
we must not depart from the Church for the vices of men. If a sike man should
refuse the remedy of a Physician, for that the physician him self is subict to
the like disease, he were misaduised. The grace of the Sacraments is not of
less force for the evil life of a priest: and the divinity can not be
impeached by the corruption of persons. If the beams of the sun do not
defile them selves passing by unclean places; much less do the Sacraments
of god, which be remedies purging al co^tagions. A man must never ground his
religion upon the perfection of creatures: for that were idolatry. It is upon
the word of God that he must make his foundation. And I will say more, that
it was expedient for us, to have for our pastors, men taken from among men,
which be of fles he and blood as we are, weak and imperfect as we, and can
have compssion on us, for to distribute the Sacraments according as our weakness
does require. If God had given us Angels for pastors, they would have required
too great perfections of us. God has given to priests the ministry of his
gifts. It is of priests that our Savior does say, as thou have sent me to
the world, sol I have sent them into the world. I have given them thy word,
and I do not pray only for them, but for those which shall believe in me by
their word. How contemptible so ever the person of the priest be, I consider
God in him, and not the man: and honoring the contemptible man, in that he is
the vicar of God, I honor God more, than if I honored a holy man which were
perfect: because I do it not for any other respect than for the love of God:
where as in holy men, it is the holiness of life and the prerogative of virtues
which makes them venerable. To be short, we must not only receive Jesus
Christ in his own person, but we also must receive the holy Ghost in his
Church: As Jesus Christ is the head, so the holy Ghost is the soul of the
Church; and the chair of Jesus Christ shall not have less priuileige than
that of Moises. From Moises unto the Messiah, the Sinagogue always taught the
truth: so the chair of Messiah shall teach the truth, to the end of the world.
The grace of the chair is of that force, that the same does constrain those
to say well which do not well: but many in that chair do the one and the other.
For conclusion of this mark: Among Catholics there be good people, and all
may be such: but among heretics there be none good, nor none can be.

the gloire of mirakles, which be divine operations surmounting Exodus 4. Math.
10. Ioh. 15. Mar. vlt. Haebr. 2. Aug. li. de vti. ^red. and 22. de c^uit. Dei
c. 8. Tert. l. de praes.
the ability of all creatures, as to raise the dead, to make the blind to
see, to help the lame, and to cure diseases which are naturalie incurable. And
this mark is necessary for to persuade a new faith, or an extraordinary
sending, even according as the scripture and all the fathers do teach. But
never were there true miracles in the world but among the Jews and the
Catholics: The Jews have not had any, since Jesus Christ. The Mahometists
have never made any: and Mahomet says in the Alcoran, that the miracles have
been given to Jesus Christ, and the sword to him. The Panimes also never
wrought any true miracles. Those which they report touching an ox and an Image
which did speak, water carried in a sieve by a vestal virgin, a rasor that did
cut a whetstone, and Tit. Liuius. Cicero. Val. Max.
such like, be al light toys tending not to the vinification or bettering of
any creature, but be secret tricks which the devils might easily do for to
amaze and to maintein the folies of Paganism. But true and lively miracles
bringing sound counfort to men, never Satan nor his angels, nor the false
prophets, nor the Panimes, nor the heretics Suetonius. Corn. Tacitus.
have ever done any. Those that SVETONIVS and TACITUS have written of
Vespasian, that he did make one that was blind to see with his spitle, and
heal one that was lame, and an other that had a dry hand, those be the
miracles of Jesus christ, which those profane persons would rob him of, for to
attribute them to their Empereur: and they them selves discover their theft by
their own writtings. TACITUS does write that the said blind man said to
Vespasian, that he had in revelation of the God Serapis, to come to him. Now
the Panimes, which had not yet heard then of JESUS Christ, did think that the
Christians did worship Serapis, as it does appear an epistle of the Empereur
Adrian to Seruianus consul, as apeareth in Vopiscus where he says: that in the
town of Alexandria they that worship Serapis were Christians. whereby one
may see that the Author of the healing of that blind, was the God of the
christians. The cause of the error in the name Serapis, comes of that, that
the^ throughout all the world, men talked of the miracles that Jesus Christ and
his Apostles had done in Jury, and the countres round about: and did not
declare them according to the pure truth, as co^monlie things which be done in
countries fer of, be disguised and altered by them which report them: and the
Panimes at al times have been rash and folishe to judge of things to them
unknown, giving for history that which they did imagine, according to their
darkness, as it appears even by the scripture it self. Even so the Siria^s
being overcome by the Jews, said that the God of the Jews was the God of
Mountanes, and 3. Reg. 20. 4. Reg. 18.
that they must intrappe him in the valleis. Even so Rapsaces did judge that
Ezechias had destroyed the aultars of the God of the Jews, when he destroyed
the idols. Likerwise the Licaonians did call Barnabas Jupiter, and S. Paul,
Mercury, for that he was the cheef speaker. In like manner the Panimes in the
time of Act. 14.
the Apostles understanding that the Christians did worship Jesus Christ in
the Eucharist, said that they did vvoorshippe Ceres and Bacchus. And above all the Panimes, Tacitus by his writings does show him self to be a manifest
sclanderer of matters Tac. l. 4. hist.
both Christian and Iudaical. But yet to take the history, as if there were
no error in the name of Serapis, and that the deed were auerred in the person
of Vespasian: it was not a blind man in deed, nor a lame man indeed which
were healed by Vespasian. For Tacitus does write that the Phisiciens assembled
did say, that the disease of those two were curable: that in the one the
faculty of sight was not lost; and that the same might come again, if they did
take from him the impediments: As to the other, he said that it was easy to
help his legs. Therefore if the diseases which naturalie might be healed,
have been cured by the craft of the devil: that is not a true miracle. And it
is credible which Tertullian says, that those diseases whereof the devil,
which Tert. in Apol.
did hinder in the one the use of the eye, and in the other the use of the
legs, to the end that he might seem to heal, when he did cease to hurt, and
to the end that he might darken the true miracles of Jesus Christ, and of the
Apostles. The true, certain, evident, and vnforged miracles have never been but
in the Catholic Church, in the which, at all times according to necessary
occasion God has wrought them, in the beginning in infinite number: but
since, that heavenly plant having cast his roots throughout the earth, and
having no more need of such watering; they have been less frequented. for
that it is not for the benefit of the Church to have so often miracles. And
yet not witstanding for the space of these thousand years there has no age
passed without miraclcs in the Catholic Church authentiklie witnessed, and
with out gainsaying: as the miracles done by Tharasius, S. Malachie, S.
Bernard, S. Frauncis, S. Dominike, and others, which have made the blind to
see, restored hearing to the Antonin. part. hist. cap. 23.
deaf, helped the lame, and raised the dead. And it is not much more then a
hundred years from S. Vincent, he which did convert 25. thousand Jews and
Sarasins, of whom 38. dead men wear reised from death to life. Anthoninus
which was of his time has written the same. And all the people, Christians,
Jews, and Turks did see the same. Of our time it has been written from the
Indiens newly discovered, that Francis Xauier priest, a Jesuit has healed
some of the palsy, some deaf, some domme, some blind: and raised one dead,
and has done other miracles, witnessing that he was of the spirit of the
Apostles: And all those holy persons were Catholics. Many have written that
Calvin and other new heretics have suborned poor people for to counterfeit
them selves to be dead, to the end that they might raise them again in the
assemble of people, for to authorize their impiety: the which counterfaiting
to be dead, have dyed indeed in the act of their feyning, to the confusion of
the deceivers. In conclusion, the mark of the true miracles is not found in
any place of the world, but in the Catholic Church.

chastisementes. But we see ordinarily that God does show him self so good a
father, and so favorable toward those which be couragiouse to defend his
Church, that over and above the most happy eternity, which is assured unto
them, he does reward them also temporallie: and strikes with ignominy and
calamities, those which be enemies to him. Among the Archeheretiks, Simon
Magus carried by the devil in the air, at the prayer of S. Peter did fall down
and all bruised died shamefullie: Manicheus was flaine a live by the king of
Persia. Montanus did hang him self: Arrius being about to go into the Church,
sodeinlie died of an horrible death casting out his intrailes: Nestorius was
eaten of vermin. Luther died sodenlie the same night that at sopper he had
tippled square, gossiped, and made all the company to laugh. Zvvinglius was
slain in war against the Catholics: Corolstadius slain of a devil by the
testimony of his own disciples. Calvin died yet more miserably. Among princes,
Julian the Apostata was slain from heaven, and his body without buryenge
was swalowed up of the earth, Valens burned a live of the Arrian Goths whom
he had favored. Anastasius was stricken with thunder: Hunerick king of Vandals
eaten with vermin: The 3. Herod's, as also Nero, Domitian, Maximin and all the
other persecutors of Christians be miserably dead, either be killing them
selves, or being cruelly killed by their own men. Contrariwise all the
Emperors and Catholic kings which have defended the church, have been
glorious in the world: God has made the^ triu^phe over their enemies, and
has given them their desires. The examples of Constantin, of Theodosius the
elder and younger, of Honorius and of others, does prove the same. So long as
Heraclius was a good catholic, he prospered against the Persians: after that
he bekame an heretic, he was unhappy and died miserably: Likewise
Justinian. And to be, short, since that the Emperors of the east, did
withdraw them selves from the Romain Church, they grew from day to day in
decaie, vvaxing weakar and weakar till they lost the Empire. It is apparent
that the Emperors of the west have floris head more or less, according as
their devotion was more or less to the church: As for France we can not
deny that ever it has been in greater glory and more redowted to the world,
than when it was a refuge to Popes; and has never declined so much as when
it has been against them. And of our kings, those which have done most for the
Romain Church, have been the most happy, most beloved of the people, and most
dreadful to their enemies. In our time, in the year 1531. the Catholic
Suissers had five battles against the heretik Suissers, and in them all the
Catholics did vanquishe the heretics: and making finalie a peace, in the
first article, the heretics did write this clause: that from thense forth they
would leave in peace their confederates concerning the point of their true
indoubted and catholic faith. And the catholics this clause: that they would
leave their confederates in peace touching the point of their faith, without
adding this words true, indoubted, Catholic. In Germany 1547. Charles the
fifte with a small number had a marvelous victoire of the Lutherans, which
had an army of more then threescore thousand men. In France the Catholics
have always for the most part overcome the heretics, as at the battle of
dreuz, of Ierna, of Mountcounter, and seldom or never have the heretics in
just battle overcome the catholics, neither in France, nor in flaunders, nor
in Almaine, nor else where: and we shall see doubtless (with the grace of God)
that those which at this day put them selves in force to defend the Church,
God shall croune them with honor and glory, and shall heap unto them goods,
prosperities, and temporal blessings, and shall cause his wrath and all
maledictions and shames to reign upon the persecutors, and upon the secret
traitors which do favor heresy.

The twelueth mark, is the union of the members with their sovereign head,
which is the successor of S. Peter, in the government of the universal
Church. Our Savior being desirous to give us suer and setteled center in the
sphere of his church, from the which all the lines of the doctrine of
salvation should be drawn to the circumference of the world, did chose the
chair of S. Peter, that is to say, the place consecrated by the seat and
martirdom of S. Peter, the which by prerogative of honor he did appoint to be
head of the unity of his Church, making him, not his successor (for it is
JESUS CHRIST him self, which is always the only true head of his Church,
remaining immovable and immortal, and which never shall have successor, making
it fruitful alwais him self only, by his holy spirit.) But making him his
depute, liftenant, and vice gerent in earth, in the outward ministry and
sovereign jurisdiction of his Church, and after him all his successors in the
same sort: So that the sovereign Bishops be vicars of JESUS CHRIST, and not
successors: and successors of S. Peter not his vicars. who so ever will take
from the church, that Monarchy called the vicareige of JESUS Christ, he would
have a floke without a pastor: an army without a leader: a body without a
head: a building without foundation: and the stars without their son;
that is to save, he would have the dispersio^ of the flock, the discomforture
of the Army, the death of the body, the overthrow of the building, the
darkning of the stars; he would have a confused chaos, disordered and void of
all proportion, and an Anarchie or government, more horrible, more confused
and more disordered, than the bottomless pit it self; he deserves not to be
heard. God which is the author of order and not of confusion, which has
appointed an order among the Angels, will not that we go mingle mangle in the
society of this world. We know well as touching the power of the order, which
concerns the real body of the person of Jesus Christ, all priests be equal
to S. Peter, and to the sovereign bishop in the priesthood: But as touching
the Jurisdiction which does concern the body mystical of the church, there
it is where there are different degrees, and where one sovereign head of all
priests is requisite, which may hold the principality over all the Ckurch. Who
so ever dissembleth to Thirty two prerogatives of S, Peter.
see in the text of the gospel the principality of S. Peter, and of his
successors, he is a rebel to light, and flees the truth, of set purpose, and
does show that he is stirred by the wickedness of a poisoned heart: for these
prerogatives of S. Peter, which are witnessed in the gospel are to be
considered. First that S. Matthew manifestly and expresselie has Matthew. 10.
given to S. Peter the title of chief of the Apostles, And all the
Evangelists, making mention of the holy college of the Apostles, do give
always the first place to S. Peter. That S. Peter is only he among the
Apostles to whom our savior has changed the name, and has given him one of
his own names, most famous, wherbie he is often signified, noted, or designed
in the scriptures (that is to say) the rock: for in those two that were
surnamed sons of thunder, the name was not changed, they had only the gift
of vehemency. Now God did never put new name, but when he made some great new
benefit in the world, giving with the name the efficacy of the which it
does signify: as naming Abraham he gave him to be made a father of many
nations: even so naming Peter, he gave him the firmnes of the rock and of
stone, for to ground upon him some great new building. Let it be also
considered that S. Peter is only he among the Apostles: to whom the father
everlasting did reveal, that Jesus was Christ, the son of the living God.
For all the other holding their peace, and suffering the ignorant opino^ of the
common people to prevail which had so base an imagination of JESUS Christ,
that they did esteem him only, for either Elias, for the zeal of the law; or
Hieremie for the holiness of life: or Ihon Baptist by reason of his baptizing:
or some prophet for to reueile the things to come: S. Peter only put him self
forward not having respect to the substance of fleashe and blood; but passing
on beyond those corporal and humain things, by revelation of the sovereign
father he did see with the eyes of the mind the son of the living God; and
confessed the gloire of his deity, pronouncing with heart and mouth these
words, or rather that sound of the divinity and humanity of JESUS Christ:
Thou art Christ the son of the living God: as if he had said, thou art not
Elias, which was taken up into heaven, thou art Jesus Christ which art
descended from heaven for to lift up man from the earth: thou art not Hieremie,
or Ihon baptist sanctified in the woumbes of their mothers, But Jesus Christ
sanctifying the world: thou art not a prophet to whom are revealed the things
to come, but Jesus Christ which have present in thy sight all eternity. Those
words, be very high, but the sense understood by S. Peter, is yet much
higher: And it was necessary that it should so be, that he which ought to hold
the chair of Jesus Christ, for to teach all the world the true religion,
should have that loftines of faith, that greatenes of knowleige, that fervor
of love, and confess the same, by the which his confession, as Jesus Christ,
had made him to know God: so S. Peter had made Jesus Christ to be known:
Whereupon Jesus Christ has therefore loved him above all the other, has
therefore declared him very happy and has given him that great participarion
of his name, rock. And to the end that that name should not be void and idle,
he promised him rhat upon that stone, he would build his Church, and that the
gates of hell should never prevail against the same: that he would give him
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and that all that he should bind and
unbind in earth should be bound and unbound in heaven: he has not spoken of
giving the keys to the other Apostles. So the church is builded upon the faith
and confession of S. Peter: And the faith which is the seed of our regeneration
is called the faith of S. Peter: Let that also be considered which is spoken of
in S. Luke, that the people pressing Luc. 5.
on our savior for to hear the word of God: our Savior seeing near the lake
two ships, went up into the one which belonged Luc. 5. Io. 21.
to S. Peter, where being set, he did teach the people. And those that sailed
in the other ship transported them selves into that of S. Peter, with Jesus
Christ. for whom only he paid tribute: for whom only in particular he prayed
to his father, to the end his faith should not fail: to whom only he gave
charge to confirm the faith of his brethere^: of whom, as head of others, he
did require more love then of others. whose feet he did first wash accordng
to S. Augustine: to whom he did first appear after his resurrection: to whom
only he foretold his death and death on the cross: to whom only he said
three times feed and govern my sheep, meaning his Church: more preciselie
than others he commanded to follow him: who only, when the disciples were
scandalized at the words of our savior, saying that he would give his body
to eat, answered for all the Apostles, and said: Lord thou have the words of
life euerlastlng, and we believe the same: whom only among all the disciples
our savior did baptize with his own hands. First Euodius immediate successor
of S. Peter in the Bishopryke of Euodius in lib.
Anthioche has written, that our savior (...).
did baptize only the virgin his mother among women; and S. Peter only among
men, and that S. Peter did baptize S. Andrew S. James, S. Ihon, and the others:
That S. Perer also as head of the Apostles, after the ascension of our savior
did assemble the church for to choose an Apostle in the place of Judas: Act. 1.
did the first miracle on the lame man, which was at the gate of the temple.
That he as sovereign judge did condemn the fraud and hypocrisy of Ananias
and Saphira, whom he did kill with his word: That he knew and did condemn the
first notable Archeheretike Simon Magus: Act. 1^.
gentiles; Act. 15.
which is not said of any of the others. Creed of the Apostles did begin
first, by that high word Credo, thereby making the christian religion, a
religion of faith, for whose sake S. Paul says that he went up expresselie
into Jerusalem; world, to the Queen of cities, the chief city of the Romain
Empire; to the end, that the law of truth which did reuele, it self for the
salvation of all people, might sprede it self abroode more easily from the
head to all the body of the world: and where the world had the head of his
Empire, there the prince of the Apostles has had his seat: in the city of
Rome: in the which (having first given order to the affairs of the East) he
comes him self to make his aboade, for to form and set in order the affairs
of the west, and of all the world: where having ended his course before the
time of his death 2. Pet. 1.
Jesus Christ made unto him yet one prerogative more, by appearing unto him,
and saying to him, that he would be glorified by his martyrdom within the
city of Rome: Let it be further considered that the Churches founded by S.
Peter, (that is to say Antioche, and Alexandria) have been named the chief In
Con. Calced.
Patriarchal Churches, and did go before all the others in the Councels.
Optatus lib. 2,
that in the primative Church, in the testimonial letters that they gave to
those that went in to far countries, and did change their habitations, to
the end they might be received where they went to the communion, Sidon Apol. l.
7. ep. 2.
there was put down in subscription after the first letters of the names of
the father, of the son and of the holy ghost, the first letter of the name
of S. Peter, for witness, that such a one was Catholic. Finally let it be
considered that the Church has made a feast, or holy dare of the chair of S.
Peter, fos to praise God for the soueraign benefit that he has done to his
Church, to give him a chair eminent above the others which should alwais be
certain, unto whom all the world may have recourse, and of whom all the world
ought to be instructed as says Optatus: the which feast is very ancient. Forbid and S. Augustine, make mention thereof. Optat. li. 2. Bed. in Thetl. Aug.
ser. 15. de sanct.
But in none of the other Apostles are the prerogatives found to be called of
our savior into the feloushippe of his name, and of his office and pastoral
care: and even of his death: to be the mouth, of the other Apostles in all
occurrent affairs, nor the other prerogatives, the which have been attributed
of all the aucients, to the supremacy and principality of S. Peter: which
being evident in S. Peter, it is superfluous to speak of them in his
successors. For it is well known that our savior giving a head to his Church
has not intended to give only the same for the time of S. Peter; as if the
Church had had no need thereof after him. But it is the custom of GOD to make
the first forms of things as moulds, and afterward to let the same be
continewed by succession: and propagation according to their nature.

TESTIMONIES OF THE fathers, and of Councels, for the supremacy of S. Peter.
IT should not be need full to proceed here any farther. But because heretics
be so impudent liars, as to sey that the ancient fathers have never given to
S. Peter nor to his successors Bishops of Rome, those names of Prince, of
Head, or of Sovereign, I will bring forth some testimonies for to confound
them.

S. Irene, being nere to the time, of the Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
Apostles, said. That it must necessarily be, that all the universal Church,
that is to say, all the faithful which be in all the world should resort to
the Romain Church for her most high principality, and does add, that in this
Church, the true traditions of the Apostles, and the faith which gives life,
has always been kept.

S. Ciprian, he which forsakes the Chair of saint Peter upon the which the
Cyp. l. de v^ita. eccl. and ep. 55. 69.
Church is founded, does he think to be in the Church? Moreover he does call S.
Peter the head, the fountain the Root, and the matrice of the Church: He does
attribute to him the supremacy of the Apostles in pre-eminence of excellent
grace, he says that unfaithfulness can not have access to the chair of S.
Peter, and that the cause of all heresies proceeds of this, that men be not
obedient to one only Bishop, vicar of Jesus Christ.

S. Hierome: Among the twelve Apostles, one is chosen head for to take away all
occasions Hieron. cont. Io^^a. 71.
of schism, And being in the holy place of our lords nativity in Jury, he
did write to Rome to Pope Damasus in these terms: Lo here the faith which I
have learned Hieron. ad Damas. pap.
in the Catholic Church: If I do err in any manner of fassion as Ignorant, or
as misaduised: I desire that you correct me, since that you have the seat
and the faith of S. Peter. And if you allow my confession, I protest then
bouldelie against whosoever shall reprove me: that I am not ignorant, and that
he is wicked or an heretic. Your city of Rome is happy, where the faith of
the fathers keeps it self uncorrupted. Here the evil children have consumed
their Patrimony. Here the good grain is degenerate into cockle, whereas your
Rome being always fertile with divine seed, watered with heavenly graces,
fructified in one self same purity. Now in the west, the son of Justice
does rise: Here in the East, that Lucifer which did fall from heaven, has set
his throne: I pray you therefore to teach me that which I ought to keep secret
or utter, concerning the faith, I shun every heretic, I follow you only,
I am the sheep which demands succor of the Pastor, I speak to the
successor of the fisher, to the disciple of the Cross, I hold me to your
holiness, that is to say, to the chair of S. Peter. I know that upon this Rock
the Church is gronded, that whosoever out of this house does eat the Lamb,
he is profaned, he is not of Jesus Christ: he is of Antechrist. Moreover he
calls the Romain Church a very pure fountain, which does not receive
Illusions against the faith: which has never norished heresy: which has
always continued immaculate, Ruffinus Ruffin. in sym.
said also that never heresy took beginning at Rome.

S. Augustine: who knows not the principality of the Apostleship of S. Peter
is Aug. tract. 55. and 124. Ep. 164. lib. de Bapt.
to be preferred before any Bishoprike? The Principality of the Apostolic
chair, has always had force in the Romain Church: S. Peter as concerning
his person, by nature, was but a man, by grace a Christian; But by more
abundant grace, that on and self same man, is the cheef Apostle: and for the
supremacy of his Apostleship does represent the universal Church. And
speaking of the Repentance of S. Peter: Our Lord (says he) has healed the
disease of all the body in the head: and in the very top of Aug. ser. 144.
de paen. Pet.
the Church. And praying for S. Peter he has prayed for all; for that the
benefit of the head does redounde to the people. He does moreover call the Pope
father of the Christian Aug. in q. vet. and nou. Test. q. 75. Amb. ser. 47.
people.

S. Ambrose says, our Lord ascending into the only ship of the Church,
whereof S. Peter is the governor, that ship does so swim in the high See of
the world, that the world perishing, she shall keep safe: (as did the Ark of Noah in the shipwrake of the world) those whom she shall have received. And as
the flud being passed, the dove brought into the Arc the sign of peace: even
so after the burning of the world, to those whom the Arc of the Church shall
represent, Jesus Christ shall bring the sign of his peace and of his Joy. He
says further, that Peter is the vicar of the Love of Jesus Christ toward us:
that he is the stone of Churches, which, as an immovable Rock, contains the
heap and Ioining together of all Christian building: That, not S. Andrew but
S. Peter has had the primacie and care of Churches. Optatus among the marks,
of the true church puts the chair Optat. li. 2.
of S. Peter for the first, and chief. There is (says he) but one only
chair, which has been set at Rome, where the head of the Apostles, S. Peter
has been president: in whom the unity of the chair is kept of all, and he
should be a Schismatike, and wicked man who against that singular chair; would
set up an other.

S. Leo. Of all the world only S. Peter Leo ser. 3.
is chosen president for the vocation of the gentiles, and for all the fathers
of the church: And allthough there be many priests and many pastors, among
the people of God: Yet S. Peter does govern them all: And it was so ordained by
great providence, that in every place there should be one head: in the great
towns other superior heads having more ample Jurisdiction; by whose means
the care of the universal Church should come to the seat of S. Peter: and that
nothing should be disagreing with his sovereign head.

Prosper. Rome is the seat of S. Peter: A Hatchet of heresies: the head of all
the Prosp. lib. de Ingratis.
world: That which she can not possess by Arms, she does hold the same by
religion.

S. Gregory: It is most clear unto al those that know the Gospel, that the
care and principality of the whole Church has been given to S, Peter, Prince
of all the Apostles, by the voice of our Lord him self.

S. Bid. S. Peter has specially had the keys Bed. in vigil. S. Andr.
of the kingdom of heaven, and the principality of Judicial power, to the end
that, all the faithful which are in the world, might understand, that whosoever
does separat him self from the unity of the faith, and of the society of S.
Peter, he can not be absolved from the bands of his sins, nor be brought in
at the gate of the kingdom of heaven.

S. Bernard, A man doubtless very holy, and very far of from al flattery,
observing every where the severity of brotherly correction, used these terms
to Pope Innocent: we must Ber. ep. 190.
bring to your Apostleship all the perils and scandals which rise in the
Church, being a thing mete that the detriments of the faith may be restored in
that place, where the faith ca^ not receive detrime^t: for this is the
prerogative of that seat. And to Pope Eugen. Thou Bernar. l. 2. de consider.
art the great priest, the soueraign Bishop, Prince of Bishops, Inheretour of
the Apostles: In Primacie Abel: In Patriarchie Abraham: Moises in authority:
S. Peter in power: Jesus christ in vnctio^. The others have every one flokes
assigned a part: to the all flocks are committed, and thou art not only
Pastor of Sheep, but Pastor of Pastors.

Among the Greeks, Origin says that the government of the Church has been
given to S. Peter: that S. Peter is the chief or head of the Apostles, having
more power and perfection then others.

S. Greg. Nazianz. The disciples of Jesus Christ, all great and excellent, and
wourthie to be heads, have never the less been very well content, to be put
behind S. Peter upon whose faith the church has her foundation.

Io. Chrisost. Our lord has shed his blood Chrysostom. lib. 2. de sacerd.
for to get together the sheep of who^ he has given the charge to S. Pe. and
to his successors. Hieremie was father to one nation, but Jesus Christ has
set S. Peter over all the world.

S. Basil: Jesus christ him self is truly the Basil. de paenit.
immouable Rock, S. Peter is so by Reason of that Rock: Jesus christ giving
him his dignities, does not spoil him self of them, nor has any thing less.
Theoph. in illae verba Confirma frat^es tuos.
Theoph. brings in our savior speaking to S. Pet. Thou who^ I have made
Prince of the disciples; who after thou hadest denied me, have again received
the Primacie of all, the pre-eminence of the whole world, who art after me the
stone, and the foundation of the Church, confirm the others, and be to them a
good example of repentance.

S. Thomas cites out of S. Cirill these words, As Jesus Christ has received
of the father the scepter of the Gentiles; eue^ so has he plainly committed
it to S. Peter and to his successors; and has not given that which is his own
to any other but unto S. Peter.

Epiphaneus: Oecumenius: Euthymius: and all the rest of the ancient Greeks,
do speak of this matter conformably to the Latins: And Origin, and S. Hierome
have applied that place of S. Paul to the Romans, (your faith is preached
through the universal world:) in the sense of the principality of the Romain
Church: As if S. Paul should give thancks to GOD for the conversion of that
place, which should be the oracle of the universal Church, and whereof depends
the conversion of the whole whorld.

Ephrem the Syrian says, that, as Moises was head of the society of the
Hebrews; even so was S. Peter of the Church of Christians: And as the one was
Prince of the old Testament: so the other is likewise head of the new.

One Eritrianus in the time of Emperor Emmanuel; It does appear manifestly by
evidence of the thing it self, that our savior has appointed S. Peter Prince
and head for ever, not only of the Latins and of Greeks, but of Armenians,
of Arabians, of Jews, of Madianites, of all the people of the East, and of the
West, of the South, and of the North.

The General Councels, which be as it were, the chief, seat of the holy
Ghost, do testify the Primacie of the chair of S. Peter, as it does appear
in the first Council of Nice, where it is said that the Romain Council. Nice.
Church is the Rule of the others.

In the Council of Calcedon, where Pope Leo is caled Bishop of the universal
Church, Chncil. Call. 1. Act. 16.
to whom the keeping of Gods vineyarde was committed, by our savior.

In the Council of Constantinople, where Menas the Patriarche was president, it
is said: Council. Constable.
we follow the Sea Apostolic, and it we obey, with them which communicate with
it, we communicate: those which are condemned by it, we condemn also.

In the seventh Synod of Carthage the seat of S. Peter has primacie through all the world, being head of all the Churches of God.

In the Council of Laterane: where the Greeks and the Latins were. In the
general Council of Lions, and in the Council of Florence, Conci. Lat. c. 5.
by consent of the Greeks and of the Latins, it is said and defined, that the
holy Apostolic Seat and Bishopric of Rome, does hold the Primacie over all
the universal world, that the Pope is the true vicar of Jesus Christ, father
and doctor of all the Christians and head of all the Church.

He should make a great volume, which would gather together all the testimonies
of the supremacy of S. Peter, and of his successors over the Church. This
point was so clear in the primitive church, that certain heretics, Theod.
lib. 5. c. 14. act. coll. Carthag.
for to procure authority to their sect, did faigne to have communion with the
Romain Church, so far forth, that the Donatistes did suborn a Bishop of their
sect, whom they caused to remain at Rome secretly, that they might say that
they had that mark of the true church, which is of the chair of S. Pet. And
they suborned an other, which did practice Optat. lib. 2.
with some rascal fugitives of the city of Rome coming from thense. for to
prove by the^ that he was bishop of Rome and successor of S. Peter, but these
companions being convicted of this falsehood were confounded and made ridiculous.

The Emperors the^ selves have acknowleged the bishop of Rome to be head of
the universal Church: and they have called him, Pastor of Pastors, father of
fathers, and the top of the crown of the Clergy. And that so publicly, as
the Paymin Authors make mention thereof, as it appears in Amianus Mancellinus.
which named Pope Liberius souerain Bishop of the Christian law, and the
Emperor Constance caused S. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria to be sent to the
same Pope, of purpose to cause him to be condemned by him which has the
soueraign authority over the Christians.

Thus by these testimonies as well of the Gospel, as of the ancient fathers, and
Councels, and by the practice of the Church it self, since the Apostles to
this day, it is manifest that there has been one souerai^ head in the
ministry of the Church, vicar of the souerain head essential, Jesus Christ,
and successor of S. Peter, in that vicareige: to whom al Catholics which are
dispersed throughout the world, are joined as members to their head.

Lo here 12. marks, of the true church, That is to say, 1. The possession and
property of the name Catholic 2. The succession of the Apostolic priesthood,
3. Antiquity, 4. The long continuance without interruptio^. 5. The largenes of
the kingdom: 6. The victory of the whole world, by efficacy of doctrine, 7.
The conformity in doctrine with the primitive Church, 8. The holiness of
doctrine, 9. The holiness of life of the possessours: 10. The gloire of
miracles: 11. The Infelicitie of the impugners, and prosperity of the
Protectours: 12. And the union of the members with their head, the successor
of S. Peter. These are comprised in four words of the Creed, that is to say,
in that she is one, Holy: Catholic. and Apostolic. I do not enter here into
the grounds of the doctrine of the Catholic Church; The principal scope of
this present treatise, was only to show that out of the Catholic Church, man
can not be saved whatsoever thing he does, whereunto I have added these
outeward, marks, the which without farther disputation may be sufficient to
every Christian man, to resolve him self, touching all difficulties
whatsoever, for all the controversies which have been, are, and ever shall be,
in the faith, do rest therein: and are reduced to that only head, to find
the true Church. Which being ones found, a man is out of all hazard and peril
of error. For all agree upon this principle, that there is but one Church: and
that the same can not err, being (as says S. Paul) The pillar and seur
ground of truth. And therefore, whosoever shall doubt of any thing, (as of
Sacraments, of the Invocation of saints, of praying for the dead, or of any
other point of lerning) he must only mark that which the Church does teach
thereof, and then, thereupon to resolve him self more assuredly, then if an
Angel of heaven were descended expressly, to inform him of the same. And
every other congregation which shall call it self the church teaching the
contrary, must needs be convinced of falsehood, of being sent from satan, of
heresy, and of impiety.

All the marks of the Catholic Church are euidenly found in the Romain
Church: The respect of the name Romain, is not to the town of Rome but the to
chair of S. Peter, which has that highness of glory, to have been cheefely and
especially priuileged by the prayer and promise of our savior, who prayed for
S. Peter, to that end that his faith might not fail: and founding upon him
his Church, has promised unto him that the proud gates of hell shall never
preuail against her, as in fact we see that satan has overcome the Churches
of the other Apostles, and overthrown their chair, In Jerusalem, in
Alexandria, in Ephesus, and else where: But not the chair wherewith S. Peter
has innobled the city of Rome, This Church is only, invincible,
insupplantable, immouable from her foundation: It is she that has born away
the victory of the whole world. She has destroyed Paganism, overthrown
Idolatry, expelled al heresies, tamid kingdoms and Empires, overcome the
Philosophers, driven away the darkness of the world, and has gained to god all
men of good will. She has trodden down, and always shall tread down the head of
satan: She has been ever sithe^s S. Peter, an object unto the world very
apparent, as a mou^tain of understanding, A burning light not to be quenched,
and an infallible Pole star, directing the way of God. To her only in the
troublesome and tempestous sea of variable opinions of men, we must have
regard. She is the quickening plant that God has planted in earth, having her
Root in heaven: Yt is not possible for men to root her out, no more than it is
to throw down God from his heavenly seat, upon whom she is founded. All the
heresies of the world have bent them selves against that Church: Titans,
Hypocrites, and euel Christians have assaulted her, but she remains
victorious, over all her enemies, not by the merits of men, but by the
efficacy of that prayer which our savior made to his father for the faith of
S. Peter, and to make his promise effectual; The promises of the truth it
self can not be vain. Jesus Christ said of the temple of Jerusalem, that
there should not one stone remain upon an other: and so it came to pass, The
Jews edeuonred them selves with might and maine to build the same again, but
fire came from heaven and placed it self in the foundations, for to hinder
their intreprise. He said of his church, that it should endure as long as the
world shall remain, And men do see that hither to she remaneth as long as the
world has endured: heaven and earth shall pass, but the words of our
Savior shall not pass; Let these wicked Spirits, heretics. Schismatikes,
Hypocrites, and deuelishe men, lay their embushes, conspire, make war, and
do all they can against that Church, yet shall they get nothing. They fight
against the prayer and promise of our Savior: they do fight against GOD him
self. The devils have not gotten the victory in heaven against the Angels,
neitheir shall they get it in earth against the Church: Many Angels did fall,
many members of the Church do fall daily: But as the kingdom of Angels was
never wholly overthrown, so the whole Church shall never be vanquished. Hell
may shake the earth, but not the heavens. The Church is not an earthly
building, a building of Adam, a building of no other foundation then natural:
It is an heavenly building, wholly supernatural and divine, whereof, not man,
but God him self is the foundation, and founder: and the holy Ghost is the
Architect which has gathered together the lively stones: This building is not
made of men borne by nature, as the children of Adam; but of men made
heavenly, regenerate by grace, as the children of God. Faith which is the bond
of the body of that Church, is above the heaven, the object of that faith,
which is JESUS: Christ, Author of that regeneration, does appertain more to
heaven by his divine person, then to earth by that humain nature. Therefore a
thousand hels shall never be able to prevail against that church whosoever thou
art therefore which have separated thy self from that Church, what so ever thing
thou do, thou art not apparteining to JESUS Christ: thou art a member of
satan and a pray of everlasting damnation. Go about the earth and the sea,
trott up and down the world, and go where thou will searching the truth, thou
shall not find the same out of this Church. The Church Catholic, Apostolic
and Romain is the same of whom does spring and rise as from a center, all the
droctrine of Christianity; the chair of S. Peter is the chair of Jesus
Christ, and of the truth it self, al other chaires are the chaires of
pestilence. Take away from before thy eyes those clouds of evil opinions heaped
together and thickened by false reports against ecclesiastical persons, and
do hinder the to see the truth, if there be any spots in those persons which
be set in the chair of S. Peter, it must needs be that all the true children
of God find them selves thereby inwardly wounded, and pray to God to make them
clean. But in the mean time what so ever they be in their manners, those are
particular matters personal, and separated from the chair, which is a
dignity, authority and matter universal. I know that in many there is not a
cromme of the holiness of S. Peter; and that they be scandelouslie gone a straie
from the life Apostolic, but they teach the faith of S. Peter and the
Apostolic doctrine. Look not then upon the faults of the persons: have
regard to the promise and to the prayer of our savior. If the defectes of the
ministers be of more force with the or bear more swaie with the, for to
alienate the from the church, than the reverence of the prayer and promise of
our savior, to keep the there; thou art unworthy of any other prayer and
promise of our savior. The chair of S. Peter is the maistresse of the faith:
I would that she were also the example of holy life. But what so ever scandal
there has been in some, thou shall find others in the priesthood and people,
that better know the faults wherein they are, then they self: more learned also,
and less reprocheable in their manners, and in all points less imperfect then
they self: and are in joy and in peace of their conscience in this Church.
There they receive the sacraments of life everlasting they exercise the works
of charity, and there attend the judgment of God. Do not say apart to thy
self that thou do worship Jesus Christ; that thou do believe the
Gospel; and that thou do resolve thy self according to the express word of
God; even so said Arrius, Manicheus, Pelagius, and all the ancient heretics:
Thou do not worship Jesus: It is thy imagination and thy particular fancy
(whereof thou do make an Idol) which thou do worshipe: Thou do bow thy
self down before the word of the deceiuer that has seduced the; and not
before the word of God: That which the Church does teach, is the express
word of God: That which the heretic does teach, is the express word of the
devil, which does vsurp the judgment of the express word of God, and does
use the same for a bait, to make the swallow up the hook of error. This now
is the very greatest of al sins, for whereas all that a man may say of the
formalitie of sin, it is no other thing but the turning away and going far
of from God, There is no crime which seperateth more from God, than heresy:
and there is not a sinner that Jesus Christ does hate so much, as the heretic.
The sins of works, Adultery, Meslanghter, covetousness and other, do
deprive men of the grace of God, but they do not drive a man from the Church,
neither do they cut away the root of life which is the faith by the which a
man may find the way to enter again into grace: but heresy does not only
take away grace, but does also cut away the root of life, and does deprive men
of the participatio^ of all good things that be in the church. The scripture
says: that faith is the substance of things to hoped for: that without faith,
it is impossible to please God: that the just of God do live by faith: that is
to say breflie, that faith is the foundation of all Christian building. Now
heresy does take away from us faith; then only heresy is a sufficient cause
why the heretic can never well ground his hope, can never do work agreeable to
God, nor can never have the life of the just of God. The other sins be as a
tyle taken from the couerture, or as a stone drawn from the wall, which does
much hurt to the building: But heresy is as it were the undermining of the
foundation, which does destroy the whole building. To be short, this kind of
argument is plain and very true, that no man can save him self without the
Sacraments of the Church: The Sacraments be not administered but by the priest,
the priests be not made but by the Bishops, Bishops be not made but in the
Romain Church, then what so ever thing that man does, it is impossible by all
impossibility to save him self out of the Catholic, Apostolic and Romain
Church. Do not resist thees arguments: the more thou do enforce they self
to avoid them by euasions, so many more halters do thou put about thine
own neck, and smitest the axe in to thine own foot: And what so ever thy
tongue does speak to the contrary, thy soul does fight against the: and thy
conscience shall never be in rest, as long as thou shall be in heresy.

And S. Hierom upon those words of S. Paul; Hier. in epi. ad Tit. c. 3.
that an heretic is subverted and condemned by his own proper judgment, says
very well thus, the fornicator, the adulterer, the manslaer and other evil
doers, be driven out of the Church against their wills by the priests: But
the heretics of them selves, without constraint do deprive them selves of the
Sacraments of salvation, and of all the good things which be in the Church,
damning them selves wittinglie, and throwing them selves down hedlonge from
their proper fredome, in to the bottomless pit of everlasting perdition.

For conclusion I will exhort the, as the Angels of God did exhort the
handmaide Agar, that was departed with her son from the house of Abraham,
whom to bring home again, finding her in the wilderness taking the way toward
Aegipt, he said to her: poor il advised Agar, servant of Sara, from whence
come thou? and whether go thou? turn again to thy maistres, and humble
thy self under her hand: as if he would say, think on thy estate, that thou
come from a noble house, rich, full of the blessings of God: that thou go
to cast thy self as a strayed sheep into the throat of the woolf, in the land
of malediction: And all these things well thought on, turn again to thy
maistres: and humbling thy self under her hand, thou shall be happy in that
house. Even so will I say to every heretic, think that thou come from the
house of the living God, which is the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman
Church, in the which only is the grace of Jesus Christ and the remission of
sins, and all blessings of God: and thou go in to the sect of a deceiuer,
which is one particular man, by whose mouth satan having divided the from the
body of the only Church, it must neds follow that thou fall in to the
bottomless pit of heresy, which is the bottomless pit of death and
everlasting damnation.

Take then the exhortation of the Angel, comforter of Agar, if not, thou shall
soon mete an other Angel which shall be thy destroyer. 1. Cor. 10. Heb. 9.
If thou have erred until this time, cut the threde of thy errors: renounce
heresy, and all newnes of opinion; be the disciple, not of any particular man
what so ever he may be, were he more holy and more eloquent then an Angel, but
only of the Catholic Church, the which can never err; for so much as she is
governed by the holy Ghost; and that JESUS Christ is her head, which is the
seur ground of the Catholics: unto the which I pray God give us the grace to
cleave, and continue firm and sure, and that we be found lyuelie members of
his body, when we shal-be judged.

SO BE IT.
Libellum hunc, Gallice intitulatum Du firmament des Catholics contre
l'Abisme des heretics fideliter e Gallico in Anglicanum idioma, per nobilem
virum Joannem Pauncefote translatum, ac per eximium Dominum Dom. Thomam
Stapletonium Anglum, S. Theologiae professorem examinatum ac manu eius propria
approbatum) Ac postremo ex primaria copia (manu dicti D. Stapletoni subsignata)
fideliter (test venerabili Domino D. wilhelmo Clederow Prefbytero Anglo)
transscriptum tuto posse imprimi, ac prelo committi praesentium tenore attestor
ego infrascriptus. Antwerpiae 9. October. Anno 1590.

Michael Hetsroey Bruegelius S. Theologiae Licentiatus Canonicus Cathedralis
Ecclesiae B. Mariae Antwerpiensis, librorum Censor.


