A TREASVRIE OR STORE-HOVSE of Similies: Both pleasant, delightful, and
profitable, for all estates of men in general.

Newly collected into Heads and Common places: By Robert Cawdray.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Creed, dwelling in the Old Change, at the Sign of
the Eagle and Child, near Old Fish-streete. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, and his singular benefactors, Sir John Harington
Knight, as also to the Worshipful James Harington Esquire, his brother: R. C.
wishes in this life, the abundant increase of all spiritual graces, and in
the world to come life everlasting, through Christ Jesus our alone Savior.
THis Book (Right Worshipfulls) contains certain very pleasant,
delightful, and profitable Similies: that is, when two things or more then two,
are so compared, resembled, and conferred together, that they in some one
property seem like: Wherein not only sundry, and very many, most horrible
and foul vices, and dangerous sins of all sorts, are so familiarly, and so
plainly laid open, ripped up, and displayed in their kinds, and so pointed at
with the finger of God, in his sacred and holy Scriptures, to signify his
wrath and indignation belonging unto them, that such as are Christians in deed,
being seasoned and endued with the spirit of grace, and having God before their
eyes, will be very fearful, even in love that they bear to God, to pollute
and defile, their hearts, their minds, their mouths, or hands, with any such
forbidden things; as also many very notable virtues, with their due
commendations, so lively, and truly expressed, according to the plain meaning
of the word of God: that the godly Reader, (being of a Christian inclination)
will be mightily inflamed with an earnest liking, and a love unto them. Over
and besides, it contains the explayning, and plain opening of many grounds
and principles of Christian Religion, so manifestly decyphered out, that every
one (even the very simplest and ignorantest Reader) may easily and plainly
understand the true and right meaning thereof, as may be for the increase of
knowledge and godliness, even in all degrees of men, and for their better
understanding therein. For many times that thing, which cannont be perceived
or understood of Readers of Books, and hearers of Sermons, by a simple
precept, may yet by a Similitude or plain example; be attained unto. So that
if any be desirous to compare a thing from the less to the greater:
Similitudes will help him greatly in this behalf, etc.

And that there is a necessary and profitable use of Similies, we may easily
gather, for that the holy Ghost has so often used them, both in the old and
new Testament, as amongst many, these few quotations do show. 2. Sam. 12.1, 2,
3, 4. and 14.6. etc. and 23.4, Judge. 9.8. etc. Psalm. 103.12. and 123.2. Job.
15.33. Prou. 27.8, 9, 10, 21. Esaias. 5.7, 24. and 55.10, 11. and 61.10, 11.
Iere. 2.26. and 33.22. Math. 13.4. etc. and 18.23. etc. Mark. 4.29. etc. Luke
15.4. etc. and 17.7. etc. Ioh. 3.14. and 15.1. etc. Romans 5.12, 18, 19. and 6.4.
and 7.2. etc. 1. Cor. 12.12. and 14.11, 12. and 15.40, 41, 47. 2. Cor. 11.3.
Gal. 4.1. Ephe. 5.25.

So that this work, in my simple opinion, for the choice of the Argument,
rarietie of the matter, and profit of the circumstance, deserves to be
advisedly read, attentively considered, effectually ruminated, and perfectly
digested, because that it will breed and increase in all degrees, no small
skill in knowledge, wisdom, and virtue. For I know no estate of men for whom
this Book is not necessary; for Princes it is pretty, for Preachers
profitable, for sage Counselors it is singular, meet for Magistrates,
lawdable for Lawyers, a Jewel for Gentlemen, a staff to lean on for
students, good to further godliness, and therefore apt and profitable for all
men.

The Prophets of God were moved (as their writings do manifestly prove) to
fetch from plants, herbs, and other natural things, many right apt and fine
Similitudes, and proper comparisons, to adorn their Sermons, and garnish their
speeches withal, to make the same by such familiar means the easier to be
conceived, and the readier to be believed.

And although in every other kind of learning, human discipline, and
Phylosophie, there be many singular ornaments, and peculiar garnishments,
effectually to delight the mind, and to draw it by example, and imitation, to
virtue and honesty; yet for the true and perfect attaining, and fuller
bringing to pass of these things, there be none of greater, nor yet of like
force and efficacy, to those that are used by the holy Prophets in their
divine writings and prophesies: So that to him that is any whit reasonably
seen, either in the works of nature, or in heavenly contemplations, it may
easily appear, how that their writings and prophesies are not barren, rude,
ignorant, and vnartificiall; but profitable, fruitful, learned, and eloquent.
For the holy Scripture being given by inspiration from God, fully and
sufficiently instructs the mind, and furnishes the conscience and soul,
with most sweet food, and wholesome nourishment. Which thing the writings both
of the Prophets in the old Testament, and also of the Evangelists and Apostles
in the new Testament, do plentifully declare.

Now for that there be very fit Similitudes, borrowed from many kinds, and
sundry natural things, both in the old and new Testament, diligently noted
and found out, as well by ordinary practice and course of life, as also by
observing of the nature, effect, and virtue of things. I have thought good at
this time to take some pains, and to bestow some labor in this Book to set
down the same, with others, unto the view and consideration of the diligent and
studious Reader: Whereby he may see what a rich treasure of knowledge and
wisdom, there is laid up in the holy Scriptures: which affoordeth unto the
industrious and painful Christian, store enough of matter, both pleasurable
and profitable, delightful, wholesome, and comfortable. Neither is it possible
for a man to reap any the like benefit of plentiful knowledge, and store of
learning, nor to taste such plenty of necessary food, both for soul and
conscience, out of any works written by Philosophers, Orators, or Poets, as
he may out of the plentiful storehouse, and aye lasting fountain of
Divinity, and out of those Books, which were indighted and penned by the holy
Ghost, and written by heavenly inspiration. So that whosoever shall advisedly
consider, and attentively discuss, the deep mysteries and profound knowledge
laid up in the Scriptures, and therewithal also, what surpassing wisdom
lodged in their minds, which left behind them such divine instructions and
wholesome documents, cannot choose but most plainly perceive, by how many
degrees, divine learning, and sacred studies, do incomperably surmount all
profane skill, and humane knowledge, and how far things heavenly and
eternal, do excel things earthly and transitory.

That the holy Prophets were not only most exactly seen in the peerless
skill of Divinity, but most exquisitely also furnished with the entire
knowledge of all things natural: and not ignorant of any kind of learning or
discipline: may by the discourse in this Book be sufficiently proved, and
manifestly gathered, for that in their writings, they use many Similitudes, and
make so many comparisons of things, fetched off, and from the very secrets and
bowels of nature: as namely, from wild and tame beasts, fowls, worms,
creeping and swimming creatures; Herbs, Trees, the Elements, fire, water,
earth, air, rivers, brooks, wells, Cesternes, Seas, stars, pearls, stones,
lightning, thunder, rain, deaw, heat, drowth, cold, winds, blasts, hail,
snow, frost, ice, Corn, seed, salt, leven, nets, snares, and likewise from
the humors in a man's body, as blood, milk, women in travail, in child birth,
dross, Iron, Gold, Silver, and innumerable other things, wherewith they
learnedly beautify their matter, and (as it were) bravely garnish and deck
out their terms, words, and sentences, with tropes, and figurative phrases,
Metaphors, Translations, Parables, Comparisons, Collations, Examples, Shemes,
and other ornaments of speech, giving thereby unto their matter, a certain
kind of lively gesture, and so consequently, attyring it with light,
perspicuitie, easiness, estimation, and dignity, stirring up thereby, men's
drowsy minds, and awaking slothful, negligent, careless, sluggish and
retchlesse people, to the consideration and acknowledgement of the truth; and
to the following and embracing of virtue and godliness.

Hereby as they do labor to deter and withdraw the wicked from their wicked
ways, by laying down before them Similitudes, tending to such purpose: So do
they no less stir them up to virtue, to true happiness, to perfect
felicity, to sound assurance, to the fear of God, and trust in his mercy.
Finally, they each way seek to win them to the knowledge of God, and of
themselves; and leave no way unattempted, to allure and bring them to the
truth, and perfect blessedness.

And as touching the godly, which fear the Lord, and frame their lives
accordingly, they cease not to encourage, confirm, strengthen, and establish
them in their virtuous doings; by earnest exhortations to persist in their well
begun exercise. They do (as the Apostle Saint Paul also wills) Admonish
such as walk inordinately; and live out of course, being intractable, and
unruly, 2. These. 3.11. 1. These. 5.11.
to remember their duty, and to acknowledge their fault, they gently reprove
them, and mildly seek to recover them: they comfort the weak, and cheer up
the mourneful; they strengthen the feeble and broken hearted, they revive the
sorrowful and heavy spirited, they raise up them that are thrown down: they
use lenity, mildness, and compassion toward all men in general: they are
slow to anger, slow to revenge and violence: they heal the broken and bruised
consciences, they preach deliverance to the captives, sight to the blind,
liberty to the imprisoned, comfort to the afflicted, joy to the distressed,
health to the sick, recovery to the diseased; and to the miserable
releasement from the thraldom and tyranny of the Devil: all these and many
other, they notably, and elegantly, set forth in their writings, by most apt
Parables, forcible Comparisons, and effectuous Similitudes.

Christ in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Mat.
13.3
(says the Evangelist) spoke all these things to the multitude by Parables,
and without a Parable spoke he nothing unto them, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophet, who said: I will open my mouth in Parables,
etc. To the which Tertullian in his fourth Book against Marcion, does very
fitly agree, saying: Neither is the form of Christ's speech new, when he
obiecteth Similitudes. Also Origin, cap. in Math. 13. writes, that Christ
spoke nothing to the companies of common people, without Parables (which are a
kind of Similies) but to his Disciples, to whom it was given to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, he did not so. Therefore a Similie is most
fit for a Preacher, because it reasons from things confessed, and very
manifestly, and wonderfully lays the matter even before the eyes. So that the
use of a Similie reaches very far: for it is used for ornament, for delight,
for plainness, and for gravity. Nothing brings more grace, pleasure or
dignity. Neither is it to be covered in silence, that Chrysostom and the
ancient Church men, did commonly begin with a Similie agreeing to their
argument. And the same in their Exordiums, yea in all parts of their speeches
and writings, did the Princes of wise eloquence, and eloquent wisdom use: as
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Nazianzen, Basil, John Chrysostom, Hierom,
Ambrose, Augustine. But of the great use of Similituds, we may read more largely
in the Homely of Io. Chrysostom, upon the 33. of Ioh. and his Homely upon
Gene. 13. And in Origens Homely upon Leuit. 10. And in Augustine, in the very
beginning of his second Book, concerning Christian doctrine. And D. Gregory
in the 36. cap. of his third Book of Morals. And to conclude, in Agrigola his
first Book of Logical invention. cap. 25.

Seeing therefore each one of the Prophets (among whom, many were Kings, and
descended of royal blood) have discoursed of these things, and inserted and
spoken of the same in their writings: seeing likewise our Savior Jesus Christ
and his Apostles have practiced the same, and showed forth the like kind of
doctrine; as also the learned writers have done: I thought my labor should be
well employed and bestowed, if I should in this Treatise, plainly show what
store of excellent learning, profound wisdom, hidden knowledge, and exact
skill of nature: what zeal likewise of advancing true Religion, and of
banishing all Idolatry and superstition there rested in those men, that by
divine inspiration have left and delivered unto us such worthy and wholesome
matters, in such surpassing knowledge, by drawing into their Books (for the
greater ornament and setting out of their speech) the whole store and furniture
of nature.

Now calling to mind (Right Worshipfulls) not only the manifold courtesies and
benefits, which I found and received, now more then thirty years ago, (when
I taught the Grammar School at Okeham in Rutland, and sundry times since) of
the Religious and virtuous Lady, Lucie Harington your Worships Mother, and my
especial friend in the Lord: but also the great kindness and favorable good
will (during my long trouble, and since) by both your Worshippes, toward me
extended. In consideration whereof, least I should seem altogether unthankful
(which compriseth and contains in it self all vices, both toward God, and
men) I am therefore even provoked in some small measure of duty, to show my
self some ways thankful unto you. And whereas at this time, every grateful
person does not only in word, but also in deeds, with their presents and
gifts, show some sign and token of this their thankfulness: Even so I also,
out of my simple Garden, have chosen and gleaned a handful of Flowers, as it
were a Nosegay (the best present I have) to Dedicate and offer unto you.

Thus humbly desiring your Worships to accept this my simple present, most
earnestly beseeching the Lord in mercy to bless you both, and all yours, with
his holy spirit, with increase of long life, and much faith in him, to his
glory, and the benefit of this our Country, and in the world to come, of his
unspeakable mercy, to crown you with everlasting glory. I most humbly take
my leave.

Your Worships in the Lord much bounden, and in him to be commanded. Robert
Cawdray.

(...) great benefit and comfort by this work, if, (after his return home
from the hearing of any godly Lecture or Sermon, where he has either heard any
principle of God his Religion, handled and spoken off: Or else any virtue
commended, or vice condemned) he shall turn to that point, and first search it
out in the Table, and so then to Read all such Similies in the Book, as he
shall there find, touching the same point and matter.

R. C.

A TREASVRIE or Storehouse of Similies, both pleasant, delightful, and
profitable. etc.
A
Accusation.
AS fire cast into the water, is quickly quenched; so a false Accusation
against an honest life, is soon extinguished.

Adversity.
As a wise Pirate and governor of a ship, will in a calm and fair weather
look for a storm: even so every wise man, in time of peace and prosperity,
will prepare his mind for Adversity. Psalm. 69.2.


2 As a man or beast that suddenly falls into a deep quagmire, whereof he
can find no bottom, must needs perish, except there be some at hand to draw
him out: so he that falls into extreme Adversity, except God do help him
out, must needs be therein overthrown and perish.

3 Even as in Winter, when it is exceeding cold, and in Summer, when too much
heat inflameth all things, great thunder and lightnings are seldom heard and
seen, but in the springtime and harvest when the air is clear and calm,
then chiefly they burn and strike where they light: So great calamities and
bitter troubles, do lie in wait for prosperity: they seek not after them
which in a low and mean estate do labor and take pains in heat and cold, and
all storms else, but those do they most suddenly wound, overthrow and consume,
as it were with fire, which in a calm springtime, and harvest of prosperity,
are drunken with pride, and too too insolent with vain glory of the world, and
are set upon the top of vanity it self.

4 As the seed is more fruitful that has been covered with snow: and the fire
burns faster, that has been pressed down with the wind: So are the
hearts and souls of true Christians bettered by Adversity.

5 As Mariners, who if they be once in the haven, are the greatest drunkards,
blasphemers, whore-maisters and licentious persons that may be: but if they be
upon the sea in any peril and danger of their lives, there was never Hermit,
no not Paul nor Hilarion so holy in words, so austere in life, and devout in
prayers, as they are. Iona. 1.4, 5: Even so we in like manner, are never so
humble and lowly minded in prosperity, as we are in Adversity: for if we be
well and at our ease, we think of nothing but of sporting and playing: we
spend the time in carding and dicing, in dancing and making merry: we study
in the morning, what new pastime we may have all the day following: and we are
never so much afraid of any thing, as that we should want time and health;
never thinking upon the shortness of our days, and the small time we have to
live here, so long as we are in health and iollitie.

The chief cause of Atheism.
AS there is small hope to be conceived of that Patient which being grievously
sick, will neither feel his disease, nor believe that he is distempered, nor
abide to hear of physic, or Physicians, nor accept of any counsel that
should be offered, nor admit any talk or consultation about his curing: So
likewise those men, that inordinately love the world, which brings them to
hate God, and to conceive enmity against him; are in more dangerous estate
then any other, for that they know not their own danger; but persuading
themselves to be more wise then their neighbors, do remove from their
cogitations all things whereby their health and salvation may be procured. 1.
John 2.15, 16.

Gods Anger.
1 AS the course of a stream being stopped, it gathers a great damme, and
being let suddenly go, it overthrows all in his way: Even so Gods anger,
being stayed a time, the windows in heaven being opened, it will (shortly it
is to be feared) power down on our heads plentifully, for the manifold sins
that reign in every estate, throughout our whole Land.

2 As the wette wood, although it be long in burning, yet will burn faster at
the last: So the Anger of God, although it be long in coming, yet it will come
the fiercer at the last. Psalm. 51.9. etc.

3 As Water is deepest, where it is the stillest: So where God is most silent
in threatening, and patient in sparing, there he is most inflamed with Anger,
and purpose of revenge: and therefore the fewer that the judgments be that are
powered forth upon the wicked in this life, the more are reserved in store for
them in the life to come.

4 Like as a man living in health, wealth, and all manner of pleasure, should
have this of a sudden made known unto him, that he is condemned of treason
committed against his Prince and Country, and that therefore he is forthwith
to be deprived of life, and of all those pleasures which he does enjoy, there
being no hope of pardon which cannot possibly be procured by himself or any
other, it depending wholly in the gracious favor and free inclination of the
Prince, who uses to be greatly inflamed with anger against all such offenders,
and not to spare one of a thousand of them: we cannot fully conceive in mind,
or express in word, the greatness of his grief, sorrow and fear. Even so,
much more grievous and fearful a thing it will be, to incur the displeasure
and Anger of God, the loss of eternal joy and happiness, together with those
endless pains which are prepared for the wicked.

Affliction.
1 LIke as if a sheep stray from his fellows, the shephard sets his dog
after it, not to devour it, but to bring it in again: even so our heavenly
shepherd, if any of us his sheep disobay him, he sets his dog of Affliction
after, not to hurt us, but to bring us home, to consideration of our duty
toward him: Now his dogs be Poverty, Banishment, Sickness, evil Rulers,
Dearth, Death, War, loss of Goods, or Friends. etc.

2 As a vessel when it is foul, must be scoured and cleansed before any good
liquour be put in it: or as he that would have his ground to be fruitful,
must first pull up the weeds before he sow good seed: even so the Lord our
good God does by Afflictions, as it were by sharp medicines, and
chastisements, purge our bodies, to the end, that our minds may bring forth
her due fruit in fear and reverence.

3. Like as the Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.12.
when there is a great weight laid on it, spreads and florisheth the broader:
or as a Camomell with treading and walking on it waxes thicker: even so a
faithful Christian, the more Afflliction and persecution he suffers for his
Christ, the more is his faith increased.

4. Like as the Schoolemaister corrects not his scholar, nor the father his
child, but for some fault, and for their amendment: even so no more does God
send his plagues and chastisements upon his children, but to put them in
remembrance of their disobedience toward him, and that they should turn to
him. But if the lewd scholar, or unthrifty son, do not regard the
correction laid upon him, nor consider the greatness of his fault, nor the
displeasure of his father, there is no goodness to be hoped for of him: Even
so is it with such as lightly, or else not at all, consider their lives past,
God his dealing with them, and how evil and untowardly things have prospered
with them, during the time that they have displeased God, and been afflicted.
Agge. 1.5.6. Pro. 16.7.17. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

5. As the ashes cast upon the fire put it not out, but is a mean to preserve
the same in the night against the morning, which otherwise would be consumed:
or as the barrenness of the trees in winter, are a mean to preserve the root
against summer, which then will ascend up his juice into the body and branches
thereof, whereby they are greatly enlarged, and made far more fruitful then
ever they were before: Even so are Afflictions unto the children of God, which
do not only keep them from the barrenness of sin, but also increase and
multiply them in the life and fruitefulnesse of Cods holy spirit, and
exercises them in patience and hope. Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

6. As Frankencense when it is put into the fire, gives the greater perfume:
or as Spice if it be pounned and beaten, smells the sweeter: as the Earth,
when it is torn up with the plough, becomes more fruitful: the Seed in the
ground, after Frost and Snow, and winter storms, springs the rancker: the
nigher the Vine is pruned to the stock, the greater grape it yields: the
Grape when it is most pressed and beaten, makes the sweetest Wine, etc. Linen
when it is buckt, and washed, and wroong, and beaten, is so made fairer and
whiter: Even so the children of God, receive great benefit by persecution; for
by it, God washes, and scowreth, schooleth and nourtereth them: that so
through many tribulations they may enter to their rest. Pro. 3.11.12. Reave.
3.19.

7. Like as they that go about to make Lions tame, do use to beat little
whelps before them, and to make them to couch, that so the Lions seeing, they
may do so also: Even so, oftentimes God chasteneth and corrects his dear
servants, that those that be stifnecked and rebellious, should by their
example, learn subjection and obedience.

8. Like as a Physician, who goes about to cure his sick Patient, does first
promise him health (by the assistance and help of God) whereby he puts him
in great hope and comfort: afterward he begins to purge, to cleanse and
strengthen, and such like things, which make to the recovering of his health:
Even so our good God also, when he has remitted and pardoned our sins, and
received us into the bosom of grace, and promised us life, which were before
sick to death in our sins, does lay on us Afflictions, and so does scour
and renew us from day to day, in the knowledge and love of him, until we become
safe, pure, and renewed, which then at the last comes to pass, when this
mortal body dies.

9. As the precious stone called Amianthon, being cast into the fire, is made
more clearer and purer: So the children of God, being cast in the fire of
troubles and Afflictions, do shine more clearer and beautiful.

10. As the Goldsmiths puts his Gold into the fire, not to mar it, but to
purge the dross out of it: or as the Husbandman, who when his corn is somewhat
too rank, either moweth it down, or else eats it with his sheep: and so he
does prune his Vines, not to destroy them, but to make them bring more
abundant fruit: Even so the Lord does try his children, by laying his cross
upon their necks, and purges them like Gold in the fire, he cutteth from them
many occasions of evil, that he may bring them to the bearing of greater and
more plentiful fruit. Ioh. 16.20. Act. 14.23. 2. Timo. 3.12. 1. Pet. 4.12.13.

11. It fares with Gods children, as it happens to the children of the
household. All the while they are young and little, they are as the Apostle
says, subject and under Tutors and Governors, and many times the servants
beat them, as though they were their masters, and that the children were
their subjects, because that the time is not yet come, that the Seigniorie of
the children ought to be manifested. But when the children are great, they
abide heirs of the house, and the varlets and servants depart, and all the
labor of the servants, and that which they have gotten, shall continue and
abide with them: Even so, we all the while we are in this world, are in this
state: for that it does not yet appear what we shall be. But it is with us
as it was with David, before the death of Saul. David was anointed and
ordained of God, King of Israel: yet nevertheless, he could not enjoy
peaceably his Kingdom, till after the death of Saul: but he was as the most
miserablest which was in Israel, chased and persecuted on every side: But yet
in the end, he reigned King, maugre his enemies: and all that which Saul and
his adherents did unto David, was turned to the good and profit of David. 1.
King. 2.1. etc. Psalm. 7.1. 1. Sam. 26.1. etc.

12. As a piece of Brass being stricken with a hammer upon the Anuile or
stythie, breaks, and withal, makes a sharp and irksome noise: So when an
Hypocrite comes betwixt the Anuile and the hammer of troubles and Affliction,
he breaks with impatiencie, he murmureth, cries out, and lamenteth in
blasphemies against God.

13. As a piece of Gold being smitten with the hammer on the stithie, sounds
sweetly, and is pliable, and may be beaten out in breadth and length as a man
would have it: Even so the child of God in time of persecution, gives him
thanks, and submits himself, laying out his own heart willingly under the
Lords hand that strikes him.

14. As the Sea if it were not tossed with the winds would stink: Even so the
godly man, if he were not exercised with troubles and Afflictions, would be
the worse.

15. As the Moss called Ros-solis, though the heat of the Sun lie upon it
all the day, yet the hotter the Sun is upon it, the moyster it is: So the
godly in Affliction, etc.

16. As the father does improperly punish his child for his fault, but
properly and chiefly he respects his amendment, and to have him to leave his
former leaude ways, and to take a better course hereafter: but the child for
his part, when he is beaten, must first consider his fault in saying: This
correction is for my lewd behavior: and so endeavor to amend, and to do
better afterward: Even so God, in correcting us, does not properly respect our
sins, but our reformation, but we our selves must find out a proper cause,
that is, our sins. For although that sin is the beginning, even of all
bodily diseases and chastisements, yet it does not follow, that God always
respects their sins, whom he most sharply punishes, as may appear by
the answer of Christ to his Disciples. etc. John 9.1, 2.

17 As a painful and careful Husbandman, looks diligently to all points of
his business, and bestows his industry and labor in each respect, as the
time and season affoordeth, and as the nature and quality of every grain
requires, in hope thereby, to receive a good increase and plentiful crop:
Even so God tries each way by Afflictions, to draw and bring al men of all
sorts and conditions in this Theater of the world, to acknowledgement of their
duties, and desire of their salvation.

18 Like as the Husbandman, after he has plowed up his land and sowed it,
does afterward harrow it, and break the hard clods thereof; and after this,
reapeth, thrasheth, fanneth, and searceth the chafe from the corn: and as he
cutteth, pruneth and loppeth his trees, and keeps them under, least they
should grow rugged, or spread their boughs too far out of course and order:
and finally, as he graffeth, planteth and teaches his young Sients to be
naturalized in another stock then their own: So likewise does God deal with
men in this world, punishing and afflicting, some with losses, hindrances, and
other tokens of his hidden judgment, for the better trial of their patience
and constancy; some (though evil and wicked persons) he tollerateth, spares,
and (as it were) winketh at, in hope of their conversion and amendment. Deuteronomy.
8.2, 3. Judge. 10.13, 15, 16. and 11.31.

Heb. 12 5 6 7, 8, 9, 10.
19 As children take patiently correction at their fathers hand, though sometime
it be preposterous and otherwise then it should be: Even so we ought to take
that cross and Affliction patiently, which God lays upon us, knowing that
he always does it for our good and comfort.

1. Pet. 4.12, 13.
20 As it is a common thing to try gold and silver by fire: Even so it should
not seem strange to the children of God to be tried by Afflictions.

21 Like as there is nothing in heaven that pleases God so well, as that
honorable obedience that his Saints do give him in heaven: So there is
nothing upon the earth so acceptable unto him, as when his Saints upon earth
are ready to suffer for his sake. Phil. 4.5. 2. Tim. 2.3.

Mar. 15.21.
22 As the Jews led our Savior Christ to be crucified, they met one Simon of
Cyren, the father of Alexander and Rufus, and upon him they laid the Cross: So
likewise if any Affliction be laid upon us for Jesus Christ his sake, we must
be well contented to carry the same, as Simon of Cyren was to bear the
Cross. Matthew 16.24.

Mat. 26 37, 38, 67. and 27.46.50. Job. 2.7, 8, 9.
23 As there were two Crosses prepared for our Savior Christ, the one of
passion, as that wooden and material Cross, whereon his body suffered
outwardly, the other of compassion, whereby his soul suffered inwardly: So
there is prepared a double cross for every faithful Christian, the one of
the soul, the other of the body.

24 As good Jesus was crucified by the bad Jews: so also has God decreed that
his children shall be afflicted in this world, least they should be damned with
this world. 1. Cor. 11.32.

25 As the Arc of Noah rose higher and higher by the swelling of the waters of
the flood: Genesis 7.17.
Even so the minds of the righteous are brought nearer and nearer to God by
persecution and Affliction.

26 As blowing seems to disperse the flames and trouble them, but yet makes
them burn more clear: Even so Affliction though it be grievous to the flesh,
yet it purges it of many sins, and makes the godly far more excellent.

27 As there is no comparison of one little water-drop, to the whole huge Sea,
or of one small grain of dust to the mountain Imaus: Even so the light and
short afflictions and troubles of this most short race, are not worthy to be
compared with the great and eternal glory of the life to come. 2. Cor.
4.17.18. Romans 8.18.

28 As in the fining pot, the goldsmith tries the silver: Pro. 17.3. and 27.21.
So likewise does God by troubles and affliction try the hearts of men.

29 As a servant woorking abroad in the hot Sun, Job. 7.2.
longs for, and is glad of the cool shade: So men in Affliction and
misery are glad of a little ease.

30 Like as if two children should fight, and a man coming by, should part
them, and after beat the one, and let the other go free; every man that sees
this will say, that that child which he beats is his own son: Even so when
God chastises us, Heb. 12.7.
he shows himself unto us as a father, if we submit our selves.

31 As great and mighty fishes, are not bred and fed in small rivers and
sweet waters, but in the salt and bitter waters of the Seas: So men that are
excellent and very famous by reason of the notable and manifold virtues
wherewith they be endued, are not delighted in the false and deceitful
pleasures of this world, but are nourished, and as it were, sweetly cherished
and brought up in Christ, with very sour sorrows, and bitter calamities,
which they endure, and most patiently bear for Gods sake.

32 As to a valiant Soldier, nothing is more noble and worthy praise, then to
carry the Armor and arms of his Prince: So a true Christian man, esteems
nothing of greater valor and more honorable, then to bear the arms and
badges of Christ his Captain; that is, to be thoroughly touched with great
crosses and many Afflictions, and to be well armed with godly patience. Gal.
6.17. 2. Tim. 3.12.

33 As a Phisitio^ does minister to his sick patients, sour and bitter potions
to drink, that some hurtful humor of their bodies may be expelled: So God our
heavenly father and Physician, willing to cure the maladies, and to salve the
sores of our souls, does reach unto us many times, the cup of Afflictions,
troubles and miseries, that (our sins and iniquities being taken away) we may
be restored to the former salvation of our souls.

34 As he that would mortify his greatest sins, must begin to do it with
small sins; which, when they are once reformed, a man shall be able more
easily to overcome his master sins: So likewise, he that would be able to
bear afflictions, and the cross of all crosses, namely, death it self, must
first of all, learn to bear small crosses, as sicknesses in body, and
troubles in mind, with losses of goods, and of friends, and of good name: which
may fitly be termed little deaths, and the beginnings of death it self; and
so he must first of all acquaint himself with these little deaths, before he
can well be able to bear the great Death of all.

35 Even as he that has a Son, which is in good and perfect health, and a
servant that is exceeding sick, deals more roughly and severely with his
son, then with his servant, not because he loves his servant more then his
son, but because he would (if it might be) restore his sick servant to his
former health: but his son whom he loves most dearly, he reproves,
checketh, taunteth, and corrects: Even so our loving God sometimes afflicts
his dear children, whom he most tenderly loves, Heb. 12.6, 7 Gal. 6.14. 2.
Tim. 3.12. Romans 5.3. Mat. 5.10.
and does suffer them to be exercised with wants, with hunger and cold, with
weepings and wailings, with sighs and sorrowful sobs, with nakedness and want
of harbor, with heaviness of heart, and vexation of soul, with sickness of
body, and want of liberty, and with a thousand other calamities and cares;
and in the mean time suffers the wicked and ungodly ones of the world, to
want nothing, he gives them health, wealth, and liberty, worldly honor and
dignity, and what not? meaning and purposing by these means (if the fault be
not in themselves) to bring them to know, to fear, to honor and to serve him,
by whose providence and appointment they have and enjoy all those good
blessings, and so be cured and healed of the sores and sickness of their
souls.

36 As the skillful pearl seller, and cunning lapidarie, does willingly suffer
the Indian diamond or adamant, to be smitten and strooken with great and
weighty blows, because he knows well, that the hammer and anuill will
sooner be bruised, then the diamond or adamant will be broken: So likewise our
most wise God, yea, only wisdom it self, suffers men of excellent
virtues, of unquenchable love and charity, and invincible constancy, to fall
into diverse temptations, and great afflictions, and to be plunged deep into
manifold miseries, because he will have their inward graces to break out and
so shine before men, that they seeing the constancy of his Saints, may
glorify God which is in heaven.

37 As a Mother that waines her child, lays wormwood or some other bitter
thing upon her breast to make the child loathe the milk: So likewise God
makes us often feel the miseries and crosses of this life, that our love and
liking might be turned from this world and fixed in heaven.

38 As raw flesh is loathsome to the stomach: so is every sinner and
unmortified man loathsome unto God, till the Lord by Afflictions mortify in
him the corruptions of his nature, and specially the love of this world.

39 As Horses that are headstrong, and either keep not their right pace, or
turn out of the way, be rained and kept in with the bridle: So the Lord
brings us back from our headiness by one Affliction, calamity or other. 1.
Cor. 11.32.2. Cor. 1.4.

40 Like as if any shrewde child purpose to fly from his schoole-maister, or
refuses to keep the school diligently, there are messengers straightway sent
for him to bring him back: So likewise God deals with us, who sends his
messengers, to wit, troubles, the pestilence, and other diseases, to bring us
back to himself. Heb. 12.6.

41 As a Master can in no wise be said to hate his scholar when he fetches
him into the school with his rod from playing the treuant: even so, no more
does God hate us, when he calls us back from our leaude ways by his
correction. Psalm. 5.4.5.

42 As in a house where there are many children the rod is necessary: or as in
a City subject to diverse diseases, and where there is an evil air,
Physicians are needful: So likewise in the house of God, where there are many
children inclined to evil, the rod of Affliction is many times more necessary
then bread. Psalm. 119.67.71.

43 As a mad man is angry with the Physician, chaseth him away, and throws
away the medicine: but a wise man that is sick of a corporal disease, sends
for the Physician, takes drink at his hand, thanketh him, yea and gives him
a reward: So when God the sovereign Physician of our souls, visits us with
Afflictions, and gives us wholesome medicines, we must not be like mad men,
rejecting the hand of God, but receiving the medicine, we must give him
thanks, and bless him, after the example of Job. Job. 1.21.22.

44 As corn that is shut up and closed in the husk, and the chafe comes
not forth if the ear be not beaten, and so tarrieth still in the chafe if it
be not fanned: Even so the like happens to the children of God, if they be not
beaten and fanned by tribulations, to be separated from the chafe of the
world, and the pleasures and impediments that be in it.

45 As the beasts that go by the way, and see on the side of them fair fields,
assaying to go to them, and running upon the hedges of thorns, if they feel
the sharp pricks, they go back and return into the way: So likewise, when
the children of God go out of the right way to heaven, to go to the fields of
this world and of the flesh, God makes them to come upon the thorns of
Afflictions, to the end, that by their prickings they may turn back again.
Hose. 2.6.

46 As gold, by fire is severed, and parted from dross: so singleness of
heart, and true Christian simplicity, is best seen, and made most evident, in
troubles and Afflictions: In prosperity every man will seem godly, but
Afflictions do draw out of the heart, whatsoever is there, whether it be good
or badde. Psalm. 26.2.

47 As the obedience of Christ in the cross was a grateful sacrifice to God:
So our obedience in all Afflictions and troubles, pleases God, not for it
self, but in respect of faith, whereby it is severed from the punishments of
the ungodly, is laid upon the altar of Christ, through touching of whom it is
sanctified, and accepted of God. Job. 19.25.

48 As myrrh, notwithstanding it be sharp and bitter, yet it heals wounds,
and preserves from putrefaction: So the cross and troubles of the Saints,
though it be irksome to the flesh, and grievous, yet it destroys not, but
heals rather.

49 Like as when a mother willing to weane her child, shall say unto him, night
and day: My child, it is time to weane thee, thou art grown great enough, and
I am with child, my milk is corrupt, it will make thee sick; yet he is so
fond of the breast, that he can not forsake it: but if the mother put wormwood
or mustard upon the breast, the child sucking it, and feeling the bitterness,
he quite forsakes it, without sucking any more: Even so, though Gods Preachers
preach unto us, and exhort us to forsake the corrupt milk of the world, and of
the flesh, yet we seem deaf still, and are always backward, until God put
upon these cursed teates, the mustard and worme-wood of afflictions to weane us.

50 Like as when we see the Carpenters strike with their axes upon pieces of
wood, to square it or plane it: and Masons to polish stones with the strokes of
an hammer: we gather that these are stones and timber, which the master would
employ to some building: Even so let us conclude of our selves, that if God
list up upon us the axes and hammers of Afflictions to polish us: it is a
manifest and sure testimony, that he has chosen us to put in the building of
his temple; and that so we are his children both well beloved and happy. Heb.
12.6. 1. Pet. 4.17.

51 As he that despises the word and Sacraments, despises them not only, but
the Lord, who is the author of them: Even so he that cannot away with
Afflictions and temptations, either of body or mind, but counts them
miserable, and not to be suffered, despises them not only, but the Lord
himself, who has appointed them as means to work in us that excellent virtue
of patience. Iam. 11.2.3.

52 As the Goldsmith knows how much dross he has, and how much clean and
fine gold, by the trying of it in the fire: Even so we shall know what portion
of faith the Lord has given to us by Afflictions and troubles, and what
dross and imperfections remain in us, as infidelity, which when we know
perfectly, we must learn by the word of God, and so heartily and earnestly pray
him to redress it.

53 As Myrrh does keep men's bodies from corrupting, and preserves them from
putrefaction, and rottenness: Even so it is most true in the children of God,
that Afflictions and calamities, taken and borne patiently, do profit and
prevail much to keep their souls from the corruption and canker of grievous
evils. John. 16.20.21. 2. Cor. 1.8. Reave. 7.14.

54 Even as a bitter potion, is not said to be unprofitable, nor without hope,
when health and soundnes does follow, although it be exceeding bitter to him
that takes it: so sharp and pinching Afflictions, troubles and calamities,
wherewith the Lord does exercise his children now and then, are not to be
counted idle and in vain, when some peace of conscience, and comfort unto our
souls do follow, that when the justice of God is seen, many may be amended,
and the faith and patience of many may be tried. For nothing is more available
for the advancing of the praise and commendation of true virtue, then calamity
it self, taken and borne patiently for Christ's sake.

55 As the entangled bird cannot escape out of the net that co^passeth her:
eue^ so no more can we wind our selves out of those Afflictions that God lays
upon us. Lament. 1.13.

56 Like as a man that has two sons, the one an earnest lover of virtue,
strong in body, and of a mighty courage: the other depraved, and of crooked
disposition, inclined to effeminate pleasures and wanton delights, weak in
body, and of little or no courage: the first he sends out to wars, and does
adventure him in perils and dangers of all sorts, that he may exercise and
acquaint him with the labors, troubles and toiles of the world: the other he
cockereth, and makes too much of him, he suffers him to have all things at
his will, he is kept at home, and (as it were) dandled upon his mothers lap:
but at the last, he that in all his affairs and dangerous adventures, did in
every point quite himself like a man of great valor and noble courage,
received together with great praise, and deserved honor, a most high and noble
reward: but he that was pampered and cockered at home, had neither praise,
reward, nor honor: Even so our heavenly father does lead men that are strong
and constant in faith, through diverse and sundry perils and dangers, and does
draw them as it were with his own hand, through bitter anguishes, great
perplexities, and narrow sleights of calamities, miseries, and temptations, and
does continually exercise them with fearful combats, against the enemies of
their souls, and through many and great labors, infinite sturdie storms and
bitter blasts does strengthen and confirm them, in virtue and godliness: but
the frail and wicked men of the world, and such as are mere natural, without
any delight or comfort in his word, and are no whit seasoned nor cheared with
the dewes of his grace, and his most blessed spirit, he permits them to be
in great prosperity, and to have all things at their will and pleasure,
without smarting, sighing, sobing, and groaning, for want or lack of any thing,
that their hearts can devise or desire: but at the length in the end of the
day, they that have striuen hard, and fought manfully, and have in battle
overcome the flesh, the world, and the devil, shall be received into endless
salvation, everlasting life, and eternal glory: and they which have laid down
their heads, and slept in the bosoms of worldly pleasures, and have slumbred
in foul and filthy idleness, never caring, nor thinking, what will follow,
nor remembering the dreadful day of judgment, when the wicked shall hear
their damnation denounced by Christ, they then shall be utterly condemned,
reprobated, and cast into everlasting and endless miseries. Then shall most
plainly be seen and felt, the loss that fleshly pleasures bring, and the
profit of Afflictions, and crosses carried and borne for our Savior Christ his
sake.

57 As Wheat or other corn and grain, laid up and kept in a garner, seller
or chamber, if it be not stirred and dressed with a shouel or fan, will be full
of corruption, lose the sweet savor, wax unwholesome for man's body, and will
be consumed of weeuelles: Or as apparel orgarments being laid close up in a
press, or other place, if they be not much shaken, beaten, and tossed, will
be eaten and spoiled with moathes: Even so Christians, if they be not tried
with temptatious, and throghly exercised with calamities and miseries, will be
very quickly mo^strously corrupted, and will grow to be so rotten in all manner
of sin and iniquity, that they will shrink and fall quite from the Lord: but
being well proved, canuased and throghly tried, with many crosses, afflictions,
and troubles, one following in the neck of an other, they become the firmer,
stronger, and more constant, in the faith, fear, and love of ^od, and so
manfully fighting, and courageously ouercomming the adversaries and enemies of
their souls, they shall at the length be crowned with an everlasting crown of
eternal glory. 2. Timo. 2.3.5. 1. Cor. 10.13.

58 As a father gives unto his son whom he loves dearly, a breast plate
or stomacher, very costly, and curiously wrought, of silk, silver, or gold,
to wear vndersome other garment, does suffer his uppermost garment, as doublet
or coat, to be pinkt and cut in diverse places, that the under costly work may
outwardly appear and be seen of all: Even so our heavenly Father, a God of
compassion and mercy, yea the God of all comfort, does sometimes suffer that
man whom he most dearly loves, to be wounded of the wicked, and to be smitten
with calamities and miseries, to the end that the precious and golden
breast plate of patience, wherewith the Lord has inwardly endued him, should
outwardly appear, and be seen of all. Reave. 3.19. Math. 5.10.11. Romans 3.4.5.

59. As the waters which were very bitter in Marah, after that the wood was
thrown thereinto, Exo. 15.25.
became sweet: So there can no cross or Affliction happen to the Saints of
God in this life, but it becomes most pleasant, if the wood of the cross of
Christ be added as asauce, but if that be taken away, the waters become bitter
and unsavory, that is, every trouble is very sower and intolerable, unless
it be tempered as it were with the Cross of Christ.

60 As the bush that Moses saw, Exodus 3.23.
was not consumed with fire: So neither do the weapons or cruelty of enemies
consume Christians, although they be mightily beset round about of the wicked.

61 Like as when trees be hewn down, much more impes do spring up, then the
boughs were that were cut off: So now after the slaughter of many godly men,
more did run unto the Gospel, and that day by day, then ever did; yea, and the
blood of the slain bodies was a certain watering of the new plants springing
up in the Church: So that a Martyr in suffering, does not suffer for himself
alone, but also for every man. For himself he suffers to be crowned: for
every man he suffers, to give them an example: for himself to his rest: for
every man to their welfare.

62 As the entangled foul can not escape or wind him self out of the net that
compasses him: Even so no more can we wind our selves out of those
Afflictions that God lays upon us. Lamen. 1.13.

63 As the fluttering of the snared bird holds her faster then before: So
likewise our struggling and murmuring against God in our Afflictions, avails
us nothing at all; but rather we must take patiently whatsoever he does lay
upon us, and seek unto him alone for release by earnest prayer, who only can
deliver us.

64 As the grapes can not fly from the treader of the wine press: Even so no
more can we escape Gods hand in punishing and afflicting of us. Lamen. 1.15,
16. because there is no place to fly from his presence. Psalm. 139.7, 8.

65 Like as salt preserves flesh that it do not putrify, and the drawing
plaster searches and purges that part of the body, which is sore, least
through corrupt matter it pine away: Or as the hot iron, being put thereunto,
burns out and consumes whatsoever should hinder the recovery thereof: So
likewise does Affliction and tribulation (least we should wax rotten in the
filthiness of sin) draw us back from the renewing of sin, takes away the
delight of resting in evil, quenches the fire of lust, and easily plucketh
out of a good heart, whatsoever is an impediment to the good health of the
mind.

Even as by long boiling of gold, which is thrown into the furnace, any other
corrupt thing mixed therewith, is tried out, and taken from it: Like so,
through affliction and adversity, both the delight we have in creatures, the
flattering we make of our selves, the confidence we have in men, and
whatsoever else is not pure, vanishes away, and is put from us: and the mind
thereby wholly bent upon God, of whom it wayteth to obtain a quietness.

66 As the courageous horse, shows by his prauncing, and all other tokens of
fierceness, how unwillingly he abides his rider, yea, he throws him off, if
he can, and yet nevertheless is brought under, will he or no: and as the
gentler horse, more quietly suffers his rider, turns what way soever he
appointes him, and lets himself be tamed: Even so the wicked, when God does
try them with affliction and misery, with pensiveness and with adversity,
they spurn against it, although they nothing prevail: and being impatient of
their misfortune, make resistance all that ever they can: but the godly sort
stoop to God, suffer them selves to be ruled, and with all humbleness of
mind, yield to the will of God: through which it comes to pass, that as the
one sort reapes no fruit through their impatience; so the other by their
sufferaunce, depart with exceeding great profit and commodity.

67 As one and the same Sun hardens mire, and yet melts wax: Even so in
a manner does Affliction make good men become the better, and evil men the
worse.

68 Like as the Musition straineth his strings, and yet he breaks none of
them, but makes thereby a sweeter melody and better concord: So God through
affliction and trouble, destroys not those which be his own, but makes them
better, and more pliable unto the fruition and enjoying of the life to come.

69 As the Mason heweth out stones, which he makes fit for building of his
house, graves them and squares them, before he lay and join them to the
building: Even so through Affliction, does God turn, try, exercise, and
prepare before hand, his elect, with whom, as with lively stones, he purposes
to build the habitation of God: he siftes them, as corn with a fan,
winnowes them from the chafe, and puts them aside into his chest, before he
lay them up in his heavenly barn.

70 As the seed of the harvest, which is covered with frost, increases more
fruitfully: and as the flame with blowing is kept under, to the intent it may
increase and be made greater: So does God through affliction, trouble, and
adversity, more vehemently ravish our minds, stirs them up, and increases
them, with a longing for him.

71 Like as if a sheep run from his fellows, the shepherd sets his dog
after it, not to devour it, or hurt it, but to bring it in again: So our
heavenly Shepherd, if any of us his sheep disobey him, he sets dis dog of
affliction after us, as poverty, sickness, evil rulers, dearth, death,
war, loss of goods, or friends, etc. not to hurt us, but to bring us home to
a right consideration of our duty toward this our heavenly father and most
kind Shepherd.

72 Even as Christ (whom in Baptism we put on) was baptized with the Cross:
So we also, as long as we remain in this world, must prepare our selves to
the cross and adversities.

73 Even as the conscience assenteth to the Law, reproving sin: So also by
the Cross, we are admonished to repent, that we may be saved.

74 As the goldsmith intending to make precious and excellent vessels fit for
the use of great Kings, does cast his gold into the fire, that so it may
become pure from all dross; So before that the faithful can be vessels of
honor, fit for the service of God in the Kingdom of heaven, they must be cast
into the furnace of Affliction, and there be weaned from the vain delights and
pleasures of sin, yea tried to be sound in the profession of the faith, and
corrected for their former misdemeanour.

75 As a tree which although it be removed out of one place unto another, yet
florisheth: so the Afflictions of the godly, turns to their profit.

Admonition or wholesome precepts.
1 AS unto him that is diseased with the Kings Evil, honey is unpleasant and
bitter, when as unto others the same is very sweet: So good and profitable
admonition and wholesome precepts to godly men are most delectable, whereas
unto those that are corrupted with affections, they be altogether sharp and
unsavory.

Anger.
1 AS continual shogging does much bruise and shake the body: So daily anger
does wound and mar the mind. Pro. 16.32.

2 As a child for want of experience, seeking with a sword to annoy others,
wounds himself: So Anger that intends to endammage others, is most hurtful
to it self.

3 Like as according to the mind of Hipocrates, that sickness is most
perilous, wherein the sick man alters his countenance and hew: So likewise
there is no disease of the mind more mischievous then Anger, for it alters
the voice and going of man, that he seems sometimes strange and unlike to
himself. Pro. 14.17. Ephe. 4.31. Col. 3.8.

4 As the Mariners perceiving tempest at hand, do with ankers fasten their
ship: So before the tempest of immoderate Anger do invade us, we ought with
reason to stablish and fasten our mind. 1. Cor. 13.5.

5 Like as if a man blow a spark, he does many times make a great
starre-fire; but contrariwise if he spitte on it, he quenches it clean out:
Even so if one speak proud boasting words to his enemy, he shall incense
and provoke him to wrath, but if he entreat him kindly with fair speeches,
he then shall pacify his Anger before it break out. Mat. 5.22. Romans 12.19.
Pro. 15.1, 18. Ephesians. 4.26, 26. Col. 3.8.

6 Like as if a man join fire to fire, he makes the flame the greater: Even
so if a man think to suppress another man's Anger by being angry himself,
he shall both loose his labor, and rather increase the other man's Anger.

7 As vinegar corrupts a vessel if it be long in it: So Anger does corrupt
the heart, if it continue in it.

8 Like as we abhor drunkards, for that so long as they are drunken, they are
without sense and understanding, differing nothing from bruit beasts, but in
shape and portraiture only: So in like manner for the same cause must we fly
this choleric passion of Anger, which like a hot and fervent fever so
troubles our minds, that so long as we are possessed therewith, we can not
understand, much less speak any thing that sauoureth of reason.

9 As we account him a mad and a furious man, that would set fire on his own
house: Even so may we think of him that sets his own heart on fire, and
burns himself through anger, malice, and revenge.

10 As vinegar spoyleth the vessel wherein it is kept: So does Anger and
choler mar him in whom it abounds.

11 As every one abhors a wrangling and contentious person: and as every one
looks carefully to fire for fear of harm: So likewise we should take heed
of this chollericke passion of Anger, which is as a dangerous flaming fire,
wasting and consuming whatsoever it touches, and cannot be quenched but with
great difficulty, being once but a little kindled.

12 As fire when it is covered with ashes, yet it is not quenched: Even so
Anger or choler, though it be dissembled, covered or retained in the heart a
while, yet it is not so quenched, but it hatcheth hatred, which by little and
little so conuerteth himself into his substance, as in short time it becomes
inseparable from his nature.

13 Like as if we have but one child, we are loath he should be governed by a
fool: So likewise we must consider that when we suffer our selves to be
transported by Anger and choler, we commit our selves as it were to be ruled
by a furious person.

14 Like as when our enemy inuadeth us, we seek to repulse and drive him
back by all means possible, least he should set footing in our territories
and land, and nestle himself near us; and if he be entered, we are careful so
to impeach and remove him, that he fortify not himself: Even so in like
manner we must make such bulwarks about our hearts, that Anger and choler
may no way enter: but if it happen that it once enters, and lies secretly in
the corners of our breasts, and that it surprise and set upon us on the sudden,
or makes way by force, we must forthwith devise all the ways we can to expel
it, as soon as we may.

15 If we have eaten poison, we seek forthwith to vomit it up again with all
speed, and if we be fallen into any disease, we use the means we can to
provide a remedy: So likewise when we feel any unruly motions of Anger or
choler, and the fiery flames thereof be once kindled in our hearts, we must
be careful to repress and cool them, as we would be to quench the fire in
our houses. Ephe. 4.26.

16 As wind in the body puffs it up and makes it to swell and seem great:
Even so Anger puffs up a man and makes him so proud and arrogant, that he
thinks no device so good as his own, neither will he take any counsel of
himself, during the heat of his fiery passion, nor yet receive any at other
men's hands.

17 As they who seeing their houses on fire, understand not what is said unto
them, by reason of the noise about the^, and the troublesome cogitations of
their own minds: Even so angry and peevish persons are so senseless and
void of reason, that they will not hearken to any good advice or counsel: so
that if one speak gently unto them, they do not regard it: if he reprove them
roughly, they are the more exasperated, and become more wilful.

18 As many medicines do little profit if they be not applied after the fit be
ended: So can we not comprehend any reason, if with the tumultuous and
troublesome motions of Anger, our minds be molested and vexed.

19 As we use to deal with fire, which with great earnest endeavor we seek to
quench, when as it first begins to kindle, not expecting or tarrying til it
has taken the beams and rafters of the house, or any solid matter, whereby
it may be increased and strengthened: So in like manner we must not stay til we
burn and flame with Anger, but as soon as ever we feel our selves disposed
thereunto, and that the pulse of our hearts begins to beat more quick then
is convenient, for a right and wholesome temperature.

20 As Plato having taken his man in a great fault, was of a sudden exceedingly
moved, and having gotten a cudgel as though he would have beaten him,
notwithstanding desisted, and used no further punishment: one of his friends
standing by him, and seeing this thing, demanded of him, why he had gotten such
a cudgel? to whom he answered, that he had provided it to correct and chastise
his own Anger, which seemed to rebel against him, and would no longer be
ruled by reason: In like manner should we do, when as we are troubled with this
passion of Anger, and get either a knife or a sword to cut the throat of it,
when it begins, and as it were in his infancy: for we may easily at the
first oppose our selves against it, as against a tyrant, and not permit it to
have rule over us, but if we suffer it to increase and to fortify it self,
it will by little and little ouerrule us, and at length become invincible.

21 As they who have the falling sickness, to the end that other should not
see them fall groueling, and lie foming at the mouth, showing a most strange
and gastfull countenance, do withdraw themselves from all company: Even so we
should get out selves out of all company, that so we might the more easily tame
this furious passion of Anger, that so at length we might attain such a
moderation and constancy of mind, that it can not be altered with any occasion
whatsoever.

22 Like as the Thebanes thought at the first that the Lacedaemonians were
invincible, and therefore durst not meddle with them, but after that they had
overcome them once or twice, the^ they thought they were able to conquer them,
and that in set battails: So in like manner if we once take heart and think
that we are able (being well armed with reason) to meet anger in the field and
overcome it, we shall not need to encounter this enemy twice, for he will not
be so hardy as appear the second time, or if he do, it will be to his utter
overthrow and confusion.

23 As the covetous man thinks, that if he once obteineth that he desires,
he will then rest contented: so we think and imagine, that if we have uttered
our Anger, our minds are satisfied: but as the desire of the one is nothing
assuaged by the possession and increase of riches which he desires, but rather
augmenteth more then it was before: So likewise the poisoned stomach of the
other, is nothing eased by outrageous and furious speeches, but rather they
become more froward and perverse.

24 As fine gold does suffer it self to be tried in the furnace six or seven
times, and yet the heat of the fire does never change his nature or color:
Or as good corn is first threshed with the staile, and then winnowed in the
wind, and yet is neither broken with the one, nor carried away with the other:
Even so we should suffer our selves to be tried by injuries, oppressions, and
other hard dealing, and yet not by impatiencie through Anger or Choler,
change our nature, or yet our color, or be carried away to any inconvenience.

25. As trees planted by running brooks, does endure both winter and summer,
whom the first hurts not by his frosts and cold, nor the second by his heat
and drought: Or as sheep that be thorn every year, and in the end be led to
the slaughter, and suffer their throats to be cut, without gainesaying: or as
incense does permit it self to be cast into the fire: Even so should we
through patience, being free from Anger, suffer our selves to be wrong and
hardly dealt withal, that so we may the more manifest the faith which God has
given us.

26. As the ship that is well made, and sufficiently trimmed, neither the
mighty winds, raging waves, or stormy tempests does make it to leake: Or as
the Palm tree, which though it be mightily laden, yet never bends: or as
our Savior Christ was whipped, mocked and crowned with thorns, yea and
crucified too, and yet prayed for his enemies, who did him all this harm: Even
so in like manner if we be once armed with this corslet of proof, (I mean
patience) not only words and injuries, which are but as the points of the
thorns, should not pierce us to be angry: but also the sharp arrows of
Satan, his Lances and Pikes should never be able to touch or move us to the
quick. Psalm. 129.2, 3, 4.

27 As in eschewing evil, we follow that which is good: and contrariwise in
running after vice, we slay from virtue: So likewise in ^straunging our selves
from pity and clemency, we by and by shake hands with Anger, which is
always attended on by spite and envy.

Ambition.
1 AS worms engender sooner in soft and tender wood, then in other that is
more hard and knottie: and likewise as moathes do breed sooner in fine wool
then in course flocks: Even so Ambition sooner assaulteth an excellent and rare
man in all kind of virtue, then an other which is not so virtuous. 3. John. 9.
Mar. 9.34. Math. 20.20. Judge. 9.5. Psalm. 30.6.7.

2 As those that tugge at the Ore in the Gallie, a man would judge them seeing
their manner of doing, and how they stretch their arms forward, that they would
go on and sail forthright, when with all their might they enforce themselves
to draw backwards: Even so some being Ambitious and vaineglorious, will yet
nevertheless persuade, that they have nothing in greater detestation then
Ambition and vaineglorie, when there is not any thing whereof they are more
desirous and greedy. Such in times past were the Pharisees; as are yet at this
day many that hunt for livings and preferments, who have their hearts swollen
and puffed up with Ambition, which they cloak and color under the vizard and
outward show of humility.

These may be fitly resembled to Antisthenes, who on a time walked in the
common place at Athens, with a cloak all torn and tattered, to the end that
every one beholding him so poorly apparelled, might judge that he did it
through humility, and not for lack of goods, because he was a man well
esteemed, and of good reputation.

But Socrates having discovered by the readiness of his good understanding and
judgment, the Hypocrisy of this Philosopher, said aloude, that he saw his
Ambition through the holes of his cloak. Diogenes also entering on a time into
Plato his chamber, and seeing his bed very finely made (because being of a
civil and Gentlemanlike nature, he was neat and hansome in his moueables,
apparel, and gestures; and to be short, in all his conversation) he went and
wallowed himself like a Swine upon it, saying that he trampled down Platoes
pride: but Plato answered readily, that this was done with greater pride. For
all is not gold that glistereth, as is commonly said.

3. As Icarus, who taking upon him to fly with wings made of wax, when he came
near the Sun his wings melted with the heat thereof, and so he fell into
the sea, which of his name is yet called the Icarian sea: Even so the
Ambitious, the higher they rise in glory, the more they approach the heat of
Gods wrath, and so do melt and fall into the gulf of eternal confusion. Act.
12.21. 1. Pet. 5.5.

4 As he that is condemned to be hanged, has no liking of the Ladder, because
he knows that the higher he climbeth, the nearer he is to his death, and
therefore could be content the ladder should be either broken or burned, if he
might have his desire: Even so ought we to detest Ambition and pride, and
endeavor to deny and mortify the same, as knowing that to desire greatness,
is to desire mishap, and that pride and arrogancy is the highest step
where-from man is cast headlong into utter ruin. Math. 23.12. 2. Sam. 18.9. 2.
King. 11.1.15.

5 As a man has no cause to boast of his wickedness and misery: So in his
virtues, does his Ambition and pride grow, take increase and nourishment,
causing him many times the more virtue he is endued with, the more to be proud.

6 As poison put into good and wholesome meat, makes it mortal: so Ambition
and pride taking occasion of Gods graces to boast it self, does by such
sacrilege, turn us unto destruction.

7 As the Peacocke so full of fair feathers, having only two foul feet,
standing proudly in the circle and contemplation of his bewtiful trains, so
soon as he sees his feet, which he thinks to be foul, straight humbles
himself, and abateth and seeks to hide his feathers: even so much more ought
every good Christian by the feeling sight, and apprehension of many his foul
sins and vices, and corrupt and perverse passions that reign in him, to
humble himself, and to abate his Ambition and pride, ingendered of a few
feathers, which have only some small beginning and appearance of beauty.

8 As the more directly that the Sun lies upon us, the less is the shadow
of our body, as at noone we may see by experience, and a little before and
after: Even so the less that we arrogate and ambitiously boast of our selves,
the greater gifts and graces of God are we endued withal. 1. Cor. 4.7.

9 Like as men would laugh at a poor man, if having precious garments lent him
to act and play the part of some honorable personage upon a stage, when the
play were at an end he should keep them as his own, and brag up and down
in them: Even so, such are they to whom God imparteth his gifts and graces,
when in lieu of yielding the praise and glory of the same to him that is the
author and giver of them, they ambitiously assume and take it to themselves.

10 As a tree the higher it is, the greater force the wind has of it, and
every little blast will be puffing at it, so that the sooner and greater is
the fall thereof: So the Ambitious man, the higher he climeth, the greater is
his fall.

Of sumptuousness and excess in Apparel.
1 AS those that build fair Sepulchers for their dead corpse, whereas it should
be a warning to them that they must die, and thereupon cause them to reject all
Ambition, pride and vanity, yet thereof they take occasion to vaunt and boast:
So likewise whereas our garments should be a continual memory of sin, to
humble us, yet we, as if we would even spite God do procure sumptuous and
gorgious Apparel, to testify our Ambition and pride.

2 As a Thief by law burned in the forehead for theft, ought so often as he
looks in a glass and perceives the skarre thereof, to think upon and
detest his inclination to that vice: So our garments being as the skarre in the
forehead of our first parents, and our selves for their Ambition, in that they
sought to be like unto God, should by the only sight of them, put us in mind
to renounce all pride and Ambition. Gene. 3.7.21. Esaias. 3.18.

3 As every seed brings forth herbs or fruit according to his kind: as
Lettice seed, Lettice: Thistle seed, Thistles: Even so, if the heart be humble
and modest, the garment for the body will be even so: but if the heart be proud
and Ambitious, it will show forth some kind of excess and pride in Apparel,
notwithstanding whatsoever laws to the contrary.

4 As the body being of more value then the garment, we will sell or pawn
forth the garment, for to feed the body: Even so ought we to leave all
affection to bewtifie our bodies, the better to tend to the adorning of our
souls. 1. Pet. 3.3.4.5. 1. Timo. 2.9.

5 Like as if we dwell in a borrowed house, looking weekly when we must
depart, we will never trouble our selves with any cost, or fitting of it, as we
would do if we were sure to remain in it all the days of our lives: Even so,
for so much as the body is but a house lent unto the soul, from whence it
looks daily to depart, there is no reason then why we should be so careful
to cloathe this body with brave and costly Apparel, which shortly must rot and
perish, and so to neglect the soul which is immortal.

6 As men commonly do care to be more honestly apparrelled, when they are to
meet at some banquet or marriage, or to come before some honorable personages,
then ordinarily when they company with inferiors: Even so in like manner we,
as concerning our bodies, do accompany with men like unto our selves: but as
concerning our soul, with God and his Angels, to whom it is lifted up now by
faith, but at death really: therefore, it is repugnant to all order and reason,
to care more for the bewtifying of the body with sumptuous Apparel, then
adorning of the soul.

7 Like as if a Tailor, when he has made a garment a great deal too long and
large, being reproved, shall have no excuse but that he had too much stuff:
but this shift will not be accepted, for they would tell him, that he should
have made the garment after the measure of the body, but not according to the
quantity of the stuff. Even so they that have plenty of goods, and do not
employ them after the measure of their vocation, and as beseems the
profession of a reformed Religion, but wastes them in superfluity and
excess, do expose and set themselves to the skorne and grievous reprehension
both of God and his Angels. Luke 16.1.2. Sopho. 1.8.

Application of Gods word.
1 AS Physicians do heal diverse diseases with diverse things as necessity
requires: So the word of God must be rightly applied according to the quality
of the sins of the people.

2 As a careful and skillful Surgion, who having Patients that are diseased
with sundry grievous wounds and sores, and having provided drawing Plasters
and Corasiues for the same, does not commit them to his Patients, that they
should lay and apply them to their sores and wounds, least they should
withdraw and keep back the same plasters from their sores and wounds, and so
seek to free themselves from the smart and grief which would ensue and follow
upon the laying to of the said plasters and corasiues to their festered sores
and wounds; and therefore he will not trust them therewith, but does himself
both lay and apply the same plasters and corasiues to their sores, and will
himself cut out the corrupt and rotten flesh that grows in their wounds:
Even so it is not enough that a Preacher should deliver unto his Auditors and
Parishioners, a general doctrine, and so leave the application thereof to
themselves, for (as it is commonly said) that that which is spoken to all, is
spoken to none: but he ought so to apply his doctrine, that every one of his
hearers may have his portion, and thereby well perceive, that it is spoken to
them. As the Prophets and Apostles have done. 2. Sam. 12.7. Act. 13.38.39. and
14.15. etc. and 26.19. etc.

3 As it is not possible that we can feed upon meat, except it be applied to
our mouths: Even so much less is it possible, that our souls can be fed
and nourished with the word of GOD, except it be skilfully applied thereto.

4 Like as if the food and meat be applied to any other part but to the
mouth, the Application serves not: Even so it is in spiritual things: if they
be not applied to the right parts, and to the right diseases, the Application
may do them more harm then good. 2. Tim. 2.15.

Armies or hosts of men.
AS a mighty tempest and storm of great hail stones, where they fall, do
beat down and destroy all the fruits of the earth: Even so, the Armies and
hosts of men, which God stirs up to plague any people withal, do bear
down and destroy all before them.

Allegories.
AS they are much deceived, which think that the stories in the Scripture do
signify no other thing but that which was done: So likewise they are too rash
and bold, that would draw all things to Allegories.

Adams disobedience.
1 AS a Physician being in good health, does know diseases only by
speculation, but when he is sick he does better know them, because he does
both know them and feel them: Even so Adam, although he knew before what
obedience and disobedience was, yet after the eating of the fruit, he did not
only know but also felt what ill came by disobedience, and therefore his tree
is called The tree of knowledge of good and evil: not because it gives such
knowledge of it self, but it is so called ab euentu, even as the tree of life
is called the tree of life ab effectu: that is (as some Divines write) that the
fruit of this tree did conserve the integrity of man's health, and the
radical moisture that he should never be stricken with age, with wrinckles,
with hoar hairs, nor with any corruption, but should have remained in
perpetual young age: Other there be, whose judgment is counted more true,
that it is called the tree of life, not because it gave life unto man wherewith
he was endued before, but that it should be a Symbol, and a memorial of life
taken of God.

Affliction is profitable.
1 AS the little Be gathers the most sweetest honey out of the most bitter
bloomes and flowers: Even so men of wisdom and understanding, receive much
utility and fruit of the present sorrow and Affliction. Genesis 37.39.41. Chapt.

2 Like as the holy Scripture attributes a certain reward unto our good
works, which works, notwithstanding it is not we that work them, but the
Lord, which uses us as instruments of his: Even so is the cross an
instrument of God, whereby he subdueth our flesh, keeps us in the school of
correction, and forces us, as it were by violence, from evil to goodness.

3 As all the rain that falls into the Sea, makes it not the fresher: So
all the afflictions that befall and happen the godly, makes them not worse but
better.

4 Even as a father, knowing that mere wine is not wholesome for his child,
mingleth it with water: So the Lord seeing that continual prosperity is not
good for us, mingleth it with affliction, crosses and adversity.

5 Like as they which are delighted with hawking, if they love any Hawke more
then the other, do as well hood and lease her, least she should fly away from
them, as feed her, that she may live: Even so the Lord, as he does bestow
blessings upon his children: so he does also lay affliction on them, least
they being puffed up with pride, should forsake him, and depart from him.

6 As lightning is a glory to the heaven, but hurts the earth: So
Afflictions are good for the divine and christian Soul, though they be very
troublesome to the body.

7 As little children accustomably do desire sweet meats which do annoy and hurt
them, and loathe and abhor bitter things that would do them good: Even so
some Christians and Gospellers (such is their weakness and foolishness) do
pursue and hunt after pleasure, ease, idleness, and prosperity: and shun
and fly from affliction, crosses, and persecutions, then the which nothing is
more requisite, necessary, and profitable for the confirmation of a Christian
life; for it is that sovereign tried Treacle, that quenches the deadly poison
of self-love, worldly pleasure, fleshly felicity, and carnal security.

8 As it is not only the property of the plough to root up all briars,
brambles, thystles, thorns and weeds out of the arrable land, but also to
prepare and make the same apt and fit to receive the pure seed into it, when
it shall be sown upon it: So likewise it is the nature and quality of
affliction, not only to root out of the earthly heart of man, all the weeds
of concupiscence, and worldly delights: but also to prepare and make ready his
heart and soul to receive the wholesome and most seasonable seed of Christ's
doctrine, when it is by his faithful Ministers preached.

9 As the hard hammer beats off the rotten and cankered rust from the iron:
So in like manner the cross and affliction, beats off the rotten rust of
covetousness, whoredom, drunkenness, extortion, uncleanness, licentiousness,
gluttony, wrath, strife, sedition, sects, malice, and such other like wa^ward
vices from the excellent anchor of a christian faith, preparing the same to all
good exercises, which other ways would consume away.

10 As the flaming furnace purifieth the good gold in burning and wasting away
all the dross thereof: So affliction burns and consumes the drowsy dross
of man's deceivable lusts: for by it the world is crucified unto us, and we
unto the world, and by it we are made like unto the image of the son of God.

11 As the proyning knife wherewith the rotten, dry, and withered branches are
cut away: Even so by affliction the putrified branches and vices of the tree
and vine of a christian life are done away, which by continuance would utterly
waste, and make the same unfruitful: so that by it our faith is increased, our
patience exercised, and our hope augmented.

12 As the sauorie salt consumes away the corruption from the unsavory meat:
Even so affliction consumes and purges away the corruption of Christians, in
seasoning their lives to all profitable uses, for by it we are known both
within and without, to our selves, and to other men.

13 Like as the Physician is necessary unto the sick: or the biting corasiue
unto the festered sore: or the sharp lancere unto the mollified matter: So
likewise without all comparison, the cross and Affliction is more necessary
unto a Christian; For by it the sickness of sin is removed, the fleshly
lusts cured, and the superfluous humors of earthly pleasures are cut away.

14 Even as no man ever saw the head go into a place one way, and the members
another way, unless they were divided and cut off: So in like manner Jesus
Christ our head, entered into the Kingdom of his father by ignominy,
reproof, shame, slander, railing, persecution, Affliction and the Cross, and
therefore we his members (if we continue the members of his body) must enter
in by the same way and none other. Matthew. 10.24.25. John. 15.18.19.20.

15 As the fiery bush that Moses saw in the mount Oreb, Exo. 3.2, 3.
which bush for all that it was on a flaming fire, yet did it not consume: Or
as the shining worm, that being cast into the fire, does not perish nor
consume, but contrariwise is thereby purged from filth, and more beautiful
then if it were washed with all the water of the world: Even so such Christians
as are cast into the fire of Affliction, are not consumed, but purged, tried,
and purified.

16 As the child is glad when the father smileth upon him, and speaks
comfortably unto him, although he beats him: So let us be glad and rejoice,
when our heavenly Father does smile upon us, in giving us the assurance of his
love, although he does afflict us.

17 As the Physician, or Surgion, binds him fast that is vexed with a
frenzy, stirs him up that is troubled with the disease of Lytharge, puts
them both to vexation, and yet loves them both: being not only desirous to
restore health unto them both, but also applies very diligently his whole Art
and study in curing of these things: Even so God, although he be sometime
sharp and severe in afflicting and punishing his, yet does he most lovingly,
by such means procure salvation unto his elect.

Adultery.
1 LIke as Tumblers seats are called tricks, but it may be by their sport (as
it sometimes falls out) they may break their necks: Even so Adultrie,
fornication, and such filthiness, howsoever it be counted a trick of youth:
yet it is such a trick as they may thereby (without repentance) condemn
themselves.

2 As a man before God kills his neighbor, if he hate him, yea if he do not
love him, and of love keep himself both from doing hurt, and also be ready
and prepared to help his brother at his need: Even so the consent of the
heart, with all other means that follow thereof, be as well Adultery before
God, as the deed it self. Matthew. 5.27.

Adams fall came not to pass without the decree and ordinance of God.
1 AS a man may give a little child some small stripe with a rod, without the
parents appointment, which notwithstanding they would peradventure dissemble and
wink at: but none dare undertake to cut him of the stone, or to cut off any
limb, without the fathers good will and authority: Even so, the greater that
the importance of Adams transgression was, in that it tended to destroy and
overthrow so excellent a work of God, namely, man, created to his image, the
more are we to believe, that it was never done without his counsel or decree.
1. Sam. 2.6. Amo. 3.6. Iere. Lam. 3.38. Psalm. 104. and 105. and. 106. and 107.
and 136. toto.

2 As a Sparrow falls not to the ground without the will of God: Mat. 10.29
Even so Adam, being so excellent a creature, created after the Image of God,
could not take so horrible a fall without his providence and decree. Act.
4.27.28. and 2.23.

Amendment of life necessary.
1 LIke as if a Merchant seems willing to trust an other that is ready to be
banquerout with all his goods, one warning will be enough to reclaim him, ye
shall not need to pray him to beware, or to allege many reasons to withhold
him, the only fear of apprehension of the loss of all his goods, will be a
reason and exhortation sufficient: Even so then, when Jesus Christ says; Be ye
better advised, that is amend: and note, that by offending God, and so taking
the way to hell, we endaunger our selves, yea we do even assure our selves to
loose both bodies and souls for ever: It is therefore mere madness and
ungrateful rage, to continue and not to be wiser and better advised, that we
may convert to God, and by amendment preserve our bodies and souls unto life
everlasting Math. 3.2. and 4.7.

2 As little children are nursed up, to the end they may grow great and wax
strong, and it were a wonder to see a child continue as little and weak as at
the birth: Even so, if we who being members of the Church of Christ, and
consequently, entered into the path that leads to the Kingdom of heaven, and
daily do receive the food of Gods word and Sacraments, should not increase in
faith, working in love, and Amendment of life, it were a great ingratitude and
inexcusable obstinacy, which should not escape unpunished, to stand still in
the way, and not to go forward.

Adversity ought to make us more faithful and godly.
1 LIke as the more one forces to take away a staff which I hold in my hand
while I am awake; so much more the faster I shut it in, and hold it the harder,
that it may not be taken away from me: Even so the more the devil
endeavors to take faith from us by tribulations, so much the more do we
meditate on the promises of God to hold it fast: and the more he thrusts at
us, to overcome us, so much the more strongly we lean upon the staff of
Faith, to overcome his assaults.

The Adversity of the faithful is not above their patience that God gives.
AS the Lord our most good and merciful father, does according to his infinite
wisdom and endless compassion, prepare his people unto himself, trying what
they will bear for his names sake: Even so he does not assay them above that
he makes them able to bear; but arms them beyond the thoughts of the heart
of man, till he send them full deliverance of all evil and troubles.

Adversity bridleth our wicked appetites, and makes us more obedient.
1 AS wild and fierce horses, are wont to be broken with the hardness of the
bridle, and sharpness of the bit: So our untamed lusts, and unbridled
appetites, are hampered, and brought within the compass of reason, with the
bridle of Adversity, troubles, sorrows, and afflictions.

2 Even as the Grape, that it may yield wine, is brought to the press, that it
may be thoroughly pressed: so man is brought to calamity, that being pressed
with sorrows, and exercised with afflictions, he may bring forth the sweet
and pleasant liquor of obedience and virtue, and so be advanced to true
Christianity, which is the greatest and highest dignity in the world.
Miseries, penuries, and tribulations, do for the most part, keep under and
stay our unruly lusts, and dangerous desires, and are means that we lift up
our hearts and minds unto God, and that we be strengthened and confirmed, in
true piety and unfeigned godliness: And on the other side, prosperity,
worldly wealth, dignity and honors, are oftentimes means to hinder us in
holy exercises, and to puff us up with pride and vainglory, and to draw us
to disloyalty and rebellion against God. Numb. 21.6.7. 2. Chro. 33.11.12.
Nehem. 9.27.

Adversity bettereth the godly, but makes the wicked worse.
1 EVen as full wheat in the ear, falls out with the least motion of the
sheafe: that which is somewhat shrunk more hardly leaves the husk: but that
which is altogether shrunk, will rather go to the Chafe, then go out of the
ear: So a sincere hearted Christian, with the least Affliction, leaves his
sin, and flies to God; the weaker Christian more hardly does the same: but
the Apostata will rather burn with unquenchable fire, then forsake his beloved
sin, that so he may turn to God.

How a man may be assured of his Adoption.
1 LIke as fire is known to be no painted, but a true fire, by two notes, by
heat, and by the flame: now if the case fall out that the fire want a flame,
it is still known to be fire by the heat: Eeen so there be two witnesses of
our Adoption, Gods spirit, and our spirit: now if it fall out that a man want
the principal, which is the spirit of Adoption, he must then have recourse to
the second witness, and search out in himself the signs and tokens of the
sanctification of his own spirit, by which he may certainly assure himself of
his Adoption, as he may know fire to be fire by the heat, though it want a
flame.

2 Like as when the Angel showed unto the Shepherds the nativity of Jesus
Christ, saying, I show unto you great joy, that this day is borne to you a
Savior in the City of David, which is Christ the Lord; he adds, you shall
have these signs, ye shall find the child wrapped in swaddling clothes, and
laid in a maunger: now if these Shepherds (being come to Bethelem) had
found the holy Virgin in an honorable Palace, and the Child in a
magnificall and royal cradle, they might have had just occasion to doubt of
the tidings of the Angel, this estate not agreeing with the sign that he had
given: but having found the Child in poor estate in a maunger, as the Angel
had foretold, they were confirmed to believe that it was the Messiah: Even so,
God having revealed unto us by his word, that he has chosen us to be his
children, having sealed it in us by the testimony and effects of the unction
of the holy Ghost, and having also given us the marks in this, that he has
made us the members of his Church: he has foretold, and has given one sign
more of our Adoption, that we shall be reproached and persecuted: if then the
world did make much of us, loved and honored us, we might after some sort,
doubt of the word of God, and of our election and Adoption: but seeing the
accomplishment of that, that was foretold us, we ought to be so much the more
confirmed in this assurance, that we are not of the world, but appertain unto
our good GOD. John. 15.19.

3 Like as if we ask the way to go to any place, and that one tell us (for a
sign of the right way) that it is at the beginning dyrtie, and afterward full
of hills, we will leave the other ways, which seem straight, dry, fair,
and easy: and finding in that way which we take, dyrt and hills foretold and
given us for a sign, we will be so much the more confirmed, that we are in
the right way: So the holy Ghost having foretold, that through many
tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and that the way
leading to eternal life is narrow and difficult: if we find the way of the
Gospel narrow and full of troubles, let us acknowledge that we are in the
right way to the Kingdom of heaven, and that we ought therefore to be so much
the more confirmed in assurance, that we are the Adopted children of God. Act.
14.22. Math. 7.13.

Of the inward marks of our Adoption.
1 AS to the blind and deaf the opening of their eyes and ears is needful,
clearly to see and hear the voice of him that speaks: Even so we being of
our own nature both blind and deaf as touching understanding, the holy
Spirit is he, that opens our eyes and ears to comprehend the revelation of
our Adoption, and to feel in our hearts the assurance of it, engendering in us
Faith, which is as it were the hand, by which we apprehend this great
benefit: whereof also the fruits and effects, as well of the holy Ghost
dwelling in us, as of the faith that is in us, are the principal and most
assured marks to give us knowledge of our Adoption. Romans 8.16. 1. John. 3.24.
and 4.13. Romans 5.1. Ephe. 1.13.

Baptism may not be denied to Infants.
Deuteronomy. 10.16 and 30.6. Iere. 4.4. Romans 2.28.29. and 4.11
1 AS Circumcision was a Sacrament of repentance, as Moses and the Prophets do
witness, and also a Sacrament of Faith, as the Apostle teaches, and yet God
did not debar Infantes from receiving of the same: Even so no more ought
Baptism to be denied to our little children.

Exo. 12.48 Nom. 9.14.
2 Like as in the old Law, when any stranger forsaking his Idolatry, would be
joined unto the people of God, and profess the same religion that they
professed, both he and all his men children were circumcised, were they never
so young: Even so in the Apostles time, and many years after, when any were
converted unto the faith of Christ, not only they, but al their whole
households, both old and young, were sealed up with Baptism, which is the seal
of the people of God. Act. 16.31.33. 1. Cor. 1.16.

Baptized but once.
1 AS the Israelites were but once circumcised: So we are but once Baptized
only, because we are but once borne only: As Circumcision was the first
beginning of Iudaisme: So Baptism is the first of beginning Christianity.

Baptizing by a Midwife.
1 AS a private man condemning or killing a murderer (because the lawful
Magistrate is not then at hand to do it) has himself murdered, and executed
no justice, because he had no calling thereunto: Even so the Midwife or any
other, which without all calling, do take in hand to Baptize children, do make
a profane washing, and so administer no Sacrament of the Lords.

2 Like as if the will of a Prince, do ordain one certain man to confirm
writings, that by his only Seal which he has appointed for that purpose, so
that although an other use an other Seal made without or against his will of
the same matter and fashion, and in all things like it, yet it is treason to
use it, and the same is none of his Seal: Even so by much more ought the will
of God, which is, that only those should minister the Sacrament, which have a
public calling thereunto, and have that authority given them from the Lord,
should minister the Sacrament, and none other, although an other do it in the
same order, and with the same instruments.

3 As by the Seal which the Prince has set apart to seal his Graunts and
Letters Pattents with, when it is stolen and set too by him that has no
authority, there grows no assurance unto the party that has it: So if it
were possible to be the Seal of God, which a woman should set too in Baptizing
Infants, yet for that she has stolen it, and put it too, not only without,
but contrary to the commandment of God: we see not how any can take any
assurance of the doing hereof. For as well, and as lawfully may she preach
publicly in the Church, and minister the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
openly, or otherwise; as to Baptize in time of necessity, etc.

4 As a Seal added to a Deed or Evidence, by such as has no authority to
put to the same, has no force to ratify or confirm the Covenants and Graunts
in the Writing; which kind of Seal has been always deemed no better then a
counterfeit and plain forgerie: Even so the outward seal of Baptism added by
women, has no force by Gods institution to confirm any in the promises of
salvation, because women have no warrant in the word to Baptize: for every
washing of the child in the name of the Trinity is not a Sacrament of
Baptism, neither can there be rendered any cause why the Lords Supper
ministered by them, should not be counted as good a Sacrament as their Baptism.

Baptism.
1 EVen as they which were in the Arc of Noah, were preserved from the flood:
So whosoever does earnestly stick to the covenant of their outward Baptism,
are delivered from the everlasting flood, (that is to say) from the pains and
torments of hell by Jesus Christ.

2 As the flood did preserve so many as were within the Arc, but sunk the
rest: So likewise is Baptism available, to so many as are Baptized into the
Church of Christ by faith; but helps the rest no more then it did Simo^ the
sorcerer. Act. 8.9.10. etc. Mar. 16.16. 1. Pet. 3.10.21.

3 As in the Flood both sin and sinners did perish: So also in the flood of
Baptism, sin sinketh, but the sinner is safe. Tit. 3.5. John. 3.5.

4 As the Purse of a true man in the hand of a thief, does not make or prove
him to be a true man: Even so Baptism though it be in the assemblies of the
Churches of Rome, yet it noth not prove them to be the Churches of God, neither
does it appertain unto them, but unto an other hidden Church of God, which he
has in all ages gathered forth of the midst of them.

5 As the graffe receives substance and nourishment of the root into which it
is graffed: So they that receive Baptism with such faith as they ought, do
truly feel the effectualnesse of the death of Christ, in the mortifying of
their flesh, and therewithal also they feel the effect of his resurrection,
in the quickening of the spirit. Romans 6.3. Col. 2.12.

Reading of Authors.
1 AS Ulysses stopping his ears with wax, escaped the danger of the Sirenes:
So ought we to avoid such things as are found filthy in Books, and Authors,
though they seem pleasant, if we will avoid the danger ensuing such things.

2 As the like pleasure is not to him that goes into a goodly garden garnished
with diverse kinds of herbs and flowers, and that there does no more but
behold them, of whom it may be said, that he went in for nothing but that he
would come out, and to him, which besides the corporal eye pleasure knows of
every one the name and property: So verily much difference is there in
reading of Authors, and in sundry sorts of men that do it, and much more
pleasure and profit has he which uses art and judgment, then the other,
which with great study indeed turns them over, but for lack of the
knowledge of precepts, wants also the fruit and delectation, that he more
amply might obtain.

Christ's Body is not enclosed or contained in the bread, under the bread, or
with the bread: neither the blood in the wine, under the wine, or with the wine.
1 AS the blood of our Savior Christ does cleanse us from all our sins, 1.
Ioh. 1.7.
and yet we need not to have it really present with us, for to be washed or
bathed in it: So Christ our Savior, according to his promise, does daily, or
whenever we do come worthily to his holy Supper, feed both our bodies and
souls, with the wholesome and heavenly food of his precious Body and blood,
and this does he by his eternal and almighty Spirit, so that he needs not
therefore to come down at the beck of every iugling popish Priest, and to be
really present in their wafer Cake, after that they have with gaping and
blowing, spoken four or five words upon it.

Receiving of the Sacrament.
John. 13.20 Luke 10.16. Math. 25.41. etc.
1 LIke as Christ does recover and impute that to be done unto him, which is
done to his Ministers, or poor needy members: So also does he recover and
impute that to be done unto his Body and blood, that is done unto the
Sacrament of the same. 1. Cor. 11.27.

2 Like as he that sins against a Minister or a poor man, sins against
Act. 9.4. Zach. 2.8.
Christ himself, although in the mean while he has not hurt Christ's person
in any point: Even so is he also guilty of the body and blood of Christ,
whosoever receives the Sacrament of the Body and blood of Christ unworthily,
although in the mean season, he has not received the very Body and blood of
the Lord.

3 Like as if a Rebel should tread under his feet the Seal, Letters, or
Coin of the Prince; although he touch not the Prince himself, nor tread him
under his feet: yet is he said to have trodden the Prince under his feet, and
is accused not for hurting the Seal, or defiling the Letters, or defacing his
Coin, but he is charged of treason, and accused for treading the Prince under
his feet: Or if one man should send a gift or token unto an other man, (as a
piece of bowed silver, a Nutmeg, or a Rasing of Ginger) if the party to whom
it were sent would not take it, but refuse it despitefully, or contemn it, the
man that sent it, might well think he had contemned and disdained him, and not
his gift or present: but what might he think if he should cast it into the
dyrt, and trample it under his feet? Therefore, if he did as he ought to do,
he should consider (when he received the token) the mind and good will of his
friend, that sent or gave it, and according thereunto, to esteem and receive
it: So likewise if we do as we ought to do, in being partakers of these holy
Mysteries, we should rather consider the mind and good will of our lover
Christ, then the Bread and Wine which we see: yea if we do not altogether
consider Christ's mind and purpose in this behalf, we deal unhonestly, and
strump^ like with him. For it is the property of Strumpets, to consider the
things given and sent them, rather then the good will and mind of the giver
and sender, whereof the true lovers do not consider in any point, the value of
the things given or sent, but the mind and good will of the party: So we, (if
we be true Lovers of Christ) must not consider barely the outward things, as
the Bread and Wine which we see, and our senses perceive, but rather
altogether we must view and consider the mind of Christ, and thereafter, and
according to it, to esteem and account of the same.

4 Like as if a wilful and rebellious subject should no more esteem or regard
his Princes seal, then other common wax, or have it in no greater reverence
then the seal of some private man, it might rightly be said, that he makes
no difference of his Princes person: that is to say, that he does no more
esteem him, then he does other men: yet it needs not that the Kings person
be there really present: So when we come to the Lords table, if we take
irreverently the mystical Bread and Wine, as other common meats appointed for
the belly, then make we no difference of the Lords Body: we do not esteem
the worthiness, price, and virtue of it, which in the holy Mysteries, is so
freely and so liberally offered unto us. And therefore if we receive this
Sacrament irreverently, not considering who is the Author of it, nor who it is
that offers himself so mercifully and lovingly unto us: it is no marvel
therefore, that the holy Apostle says, that we are guilty of the Body and
blood of the Lord; that is to say, that we are before the seat of Almighty
God, because of our unthankfulness, and vnreuerent handling of the holy
Mysteries, counted as guilty, as if we had slain the Body of the only
begotten son of GOD, and shead his most precious blood upon the Cross. Or it
is no marvel that in stead of grace, in stead of forgiuegesse of our sins
and of life everlasting, we do eat and drink our own damnation. And yet it
follows not that the Body and blood of Christ be really present there in the
Sacrament.

Christ's natural and immortal Body, can be but in one place at once, and not
in many places.
1 LIke as the Soul of man united to his Body, cannot be a Body because it is
a spirit: Even so the like is of the Body and of the Soul of Jesus Christ, and
of his divine and human nature, of the which every one of them holds so
continually his properties, that the one cannot be that the other is. For
albeit that they be united together by personal union, yet for all they
remain always distinct in their unity, according to their properties, and not
confused, in such sort, that the one cannot be the other: wherefore we may not
say at all, that the Divinity is the humanity, or that the humanity, is the
Divinity, nor that the one is converted into the other. For if there were such
a conversion, they should no more be that which they are, but should be
changed into other natures, which thing cannot be. For God can never be but
God. Wherefore he cannot be converted into man, but he may unite man to
himself, as he has done in the person of his Son Jesus Christ. Likewise man
cannot be converted into God, for so much as he is a creature, and that God
which is the Creator of all, cannot be created, but is without beginning, as
he is without end and infinite: the which thing cannot agree with any
creature. From whence it follows, that the Gods which are created are no Gods
at all, but are only creatures, or else vain illusions or imaginations. And
as the substance of GOD, cannot be converted into that of man, nor that of
man, into that of God: for otherwise, God should not be God, nor man should not
be man at all: Even so neither the one nor the other may be without his
convenient and natural properties belonging to the divine nature, it is no
more divine nature, but human. In like sort, if the Sacramental signs of
the Body and blood of Jesus Christ, have the natural properties which do
belong to the Bread and to the Wine, as they have indeed; if they have their
qualities and accidents, and these same effects, they are not then really and
substancially the Body and blood of him, but Bread and Wine remaining always
in their substance with their accidents.

2 As the body of the Sun, and light of it, are so jointly joined together,
that the one cannot be separated from the other, yet it follows not, that
wheresoever the light of the Sun is, there the body of the Sun must be
also. For as the Sun being still in the Element according to the order that
God has appointed among us his creatures, does wtth his light refresh,
comfort, and quicken all things here upon earth. So our Savior Christ Jesus
who is the true Son of righteousness, being still (until the time that God
has appointed) on the right hand of his Father touching his manhood, that is
to say, above in heaven in the place of beatitude, felicity and joy, reigning
there with the Father in equal glory and majesty, does continually assist,
aid and comfort his Church, by his holy spirit, being always present with his
elect and chosen, by his divine Majesty, providence, and invisible grace, whom
he does not cease through his almighty power, the spirit being the worker of
it, to feed still with the wholesome food of his most precious flesh and
blood. Now as it were most noisome and hurtful unto all the whole earth, if we
had here below the Body of the Sun: so is it not expedient, that the Church
and Congregation of the faithful, should have Christ still present here,
touching his humanity and manhood. For so he says. John. 16.7.

3 As no man can deny but that the eye and the sight of it, be so jointly and
inseperably joined together, that as long as the eye is whole and sound, the
one cannot be separated from the other: yet the eye is not in all places that
the sight does reach unto. As we know that severity and mercy are in God
so jointly joined together, that the one cannot be separated from the other,
and yet they that feel his severity, do not feel his mercy: that is to
say, those whom he does according to his righteous judgment punish
everlastingly in hell fire, them does he utterly banish and put away from his
bounteous goodness and mercy. Even so, although the Divinity and humanity
of Christ be so lincked and joined together, that wheresoever the one is, it
does not therefore follow that the other is there also. For the godhead of
Christ can be every where, and in more places then in one at once: but his
manhood cannot be every where, nor in more places then one at once.

Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper do no more change their substance nor
qualities, then the water in Baptism.
1 AS in the Sacrament of Baptism the substance of water remains still: So
likewise in the Lords Supper, remains the substance of Bread and Wine.

2 As in Baptism is given unto us the holy Ghost, and pardon of our sins,
which yet lie not lurking or enclosed in the water: so in the Lords Supper is
given unto us the Communion of Christ's body and blood, that is, grace,
forgiveness of sins, innocence, life, immortality, without any
transubstantiation, or including of the same in the Bread. Mar. 16.19. Luke
24.6.51. Act. 1.9.10. John. 12.8.26.

3 As by Baptism the old man is put off, and the new man put on, yea Gal. 3.27.
Christ is put on, but without transubstantiation or changing of the water:
Even so it is in the Lords Supper: we by faith spiritually in our souls do
feed on Christ's Body broken, do eat his flesh and drink his blood; do dwell
in him, and he in us; but without transubstantiation.

Books.
1 AS Thieves be loath to assault an house where they know to be good Armor,
and Artillery: so wheresoever the Books of the holy Scriptures be well
occupied and exercised, there neither the devil nor any of his angels dare
come near.

2 Like as Smithes, Masons, Carpenters, and other handie craftsmen, what need
soever they be in, or what shift soever they make, will not sell or lay to
pledge the tools of their occupation, for then they could not work or follow
their trade, and so get their living: So likewise every good Christian ought
to be like minded and affectioned toward the Books of the Prophets, Apostles,
and other holy writers, inspired by the holy Ghost, the instruments of their
salvation, and therefore not to sell or pawn them away.

3 As unto those precious stones, the greatest price is due, which not only
with their colors do delight the eyes, but also are of effect for medicines:
So unto those Books is the chiefest praise due, which in them do not only
contain pleasant speech and eloquent, but also that do deliver the mind from
all vice and corruption.

4 Like as one dish of meat well chewed and digested, will comfort nature more
then diverse delicates that lie raw and undigested in the stomach: Even so
one good Book often and thoroughly read, will do thy soul more good, then the
superficial sight and taste of a thousand.

5 Like as no wise man will receive a writing for the least plotte of ground
without the counsel of some learned Lawier: nor a medicine for his body
without the advice of some learned Physician: Even so much more ought a
Christian not to venture upon a Book, wherein may be some damnable error,
which may convey from him his heavenly inheritance, or some deadly poison which
may kill his soul, without the direction of some godly Divine.

6 As unto men of diverse complexions and affections, God has given choice of
meats, and variety of apparel: So likewise many Books to one end are
published and set forth by sundry men, in diverse fashions, and with a diverse
gift, order and facility: that he whom one Book sauoureth not, might yet
like the taste of an other.

Our second Birth.
LIke as we see the natural Body from the first Birth to receive diverse
members, and every member diverse offices and uses; as it is the use of the eye
to see good or evil; and of the hand to take unto it that which is good, and
to remove from the Body that which is evil: Even so in the second Birth we
receive new members, whereof every one has his diverse use and function, as
knowledge of the will of God, hope, love, faith, which is as it were, the hand
reaching unto us all the merciful promises of GOD in Christ, whereby we are so
surely joined in affection to the Lord, that by nothing we can be separated.

Cares of the world hurtful.
AS a Clock can never stand still from running, so long as the peases and
plummets do hang thereat: Even so a worldly man having infinite Cares,
cogitations, and anxieties hanging upon his mind, as waights upon the Clock,
can never have rest or quiet day or night, but is enforced to beat his brains
when other men sleep, for the compassing of those trifles wherewith he is
encombred.

Careless keepers of Gods commandments.
AS the Scribes and Pharisees that came from Jerusalem, picked a quarrel
against our Savior Christ, because his Disciples did eat with unwashed hands,
whereby they transgressed (as they said) the tradition of the Elders: Our
Savior Christ in defense of his Disciples, charge the Scribes and Pharisees,
which were so zealous to maintain their own ceremonies, that they were
careless to break the commandments of God: Even so it comes to pass
always, that they which are most earnest in upholding and defending traditions
and ceremonies invented by man, are most forgetful in keeping the
commandments of God: But this is the just judgment of GOD against those that
invent a new worship of their own brain: That first they loose their labor:
and secondly, that they are deprived of all-right understanding, because they
have presumed to be wiser then God. Whom the word of God condemns. Esa.
29.13. 14. and 6.9. Math. 13.14. Act. 28.26. Romans 11.8. John. 12.40.

Carnal minded men.
AS with a leaude and naughty Companion, if we, keep company we shall
learn no good, but rather be ready to be infected with his sin and vice:
Even so if we suffer our selves to be acquainted with the flesh, and use it as
a companion in all our dealings, and yield unto it, we shall then be sure to
learn no good of it, for the flesh provoke us to whordome, to drunkenness, to
wantonness, etc. Now if we shall acquaint our selves with the flesh, we shall
learn those things which tend to our destruction. Gal. 6.8. Romans 8.12, 13, 14,
15, 16. Tit. 2.12.

The Cause of Gods plagues are diligently to be searched out.
LIke as the Physician seeing in a glass by the water, the disease within the
body, by skill and learning searches out the cause of the disease, and
ministers good things for the same: Even so we, in looking into the glass of
Gods word, shall soon perceive the diseases and sins which are in us, and
the cause thereof, and so wholesomely minister some profitable and comfortable
remedies for the same.

Evil Company hurtful.
1 AS whole and sound eyes with beholding and looking on sore eyes, be annoyed
and hurt: so good and honest folks be oftentimes stained and hurt with the
Company of wicked men.

2 Like as a natural Father will not willingly suffer his child to come into
a place where he may be in danger to take hurt of his body, either by
infection of the plague, or otherwise: Even so much more a Christian Father is
bound in conscience to keep his child and the rest of his family from leaud
and wicked Company, where even their souls should be hurt and poisoned.

3 As it is a folly or madness to shut our doors against those who bring the
plague, which infecteth only our bodies: So likewise it is a much greater folly
and madness, to set open our doors to swearers, blasphemers, ribaldous
talkers, and ungodly livers, who infect both soul and body.

4 As sweet waters are corrupted and spoiled, when they run into waters which
are sault, bitter, or unwholesome: Even so that man which joins himself in
friendship, and does couple himself in familiarity with wicked and ungodly
men, becomes wicked and ungodly himself, and is stained and blemished with
their vices, although heretofore he had been inclined to virtue and
godliness. 1. Cor. 5.6.

5 Even as the River Hypanis, which is very famous, and much spoken of, because
of the clearenesse and sweetness of the water of the same, after that it
receives into it, the bitter and troubled waters of the Fountain Erampes, is
poisoned and made unprofitable. So likewise many men of great and excellent
wits, which did flow with the pure and pleasant waters of virtues, when they
have fallen into the society and familiarity of ungracious, leaude, and
godless men, have been poisoned with the lewdness of their lives, and the
looseness of their conditions.

6 As rotten Apples do corrupt those sound ones that do touch them, and lie
close to them: Even so the evil manners and bad conditions of the ungodly, do
infect those that keep them company. Psalm. 1.1. and 26.4, 5. Mar. 14.67. 1.
Cor. 15.33.

7 As a Looking Glass, though it be most clear and clean, with the foul
breath of those that blow upon it, is obscured and dimmed: Even so a man that
is honest, virtuous and godly, with continual custom, acquaintance and
familiarity, of dishonest, ungodly, and graceless men, is oftentimes
corrupted, infected, and blemished. Ecclesi. 13.1. Deu. 7.1, 2.

8 Like as if it do happen, that a Planet otherwise very beneuolent and
wholesome, shall be joined to other stars or Planets, which are maleuolent, and
of bad influence, it also will send forth influence that is evil and
unwholesome: Even so a man that is virtuously given, and well bent to godliness,
if he take and join unto him, profane, wicked and ungodly men, into much
acquaintance and familiarity, he also at length, will become profane, and
ungodly, as they be.

9 As one scabbed sheep infecteth many other: Or as a little poison spoileth a
great deal of meat and drink: Or as some few infected with the plague, may
infect a whole house, town or country: Even so the familiarity and company
of the wicked, infecteth and hurts the godly, because there can be no true
concord betwixt the sons of wisdom, and the sons of folly. 2. Cor. 6.14.
Pro. 29.27.

10 As men are wont in their own bodies, if so be any part thereof be
festered with an incurable disease, they cut off the same, not because they
neglect or hate their bodies, but that they may preserve their other parts from
infection: So also ought we to deal, we must cut and shake off wicked and
obstinate sinners from our society and company, that we be not infected by
them.

11 As some little creatures do bite us, but we scarcely seele it, but
afterward we shall well perceive that they have bitten us: So in like manner,
though we perceive not the hurt that comes by ill company at the first, yet
we shall find it afterward.

12 As in a general distemperature and corruption of the air, it is hard even
for him that has an healthful and strong constitution of body, to avoid
sickness: So likewise it is in evil Company, in corrupt ages, and places,
very hard to live unspotted of the world. Act. 2.40. Math. 24.12.

13 As one that walks in the sun, shall be sunburnt, though the end of his
walking in it be not to be sunburnt: So likewise will it be with those that
keep Company with the wicked. 2. Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Ephe. 5.11.

Catechizing.
1 LIke as a Child that learneth the A, B, C, when he has once learned his
Letters, is yet ready to learn the same again: Even so many Parishioners are
so forgetful, that when they are past one principle and point of Religion,
that they must yet be brought back again to the same. Hebr. 5.12, 13, 14.

2 As weak and young Infants must have milk given them, and not strong meat:
Even so many rude people must have the rudiments and first beginnings of
Religion rather taught them, then higher points which their capacity cannot
yet digest. 1. Cor. 3.2.

3 As there is little hope that a child that cannot abide to eat milk and
other liquid and nourishing meat, will live long, for he cannot then brook
stronger meat: Even so those people must needs perish, that will not, nor
cannot abide to learn the principles and least points of Christianity, much
less can they brook higher points.

4 As that Schoolemaister which still commands his scholars, saying learn
this, learn this, and yet never calls them to account how the same is
learned; may assure himself, that his scholars will have but a slender regard
to be perfect in that which he commands, because they think they shall never
be examined how they have profited: Even so falls it out with the Minister
toward his Parishioners, that although he be very diligent to Preach unto
them the principles of Christian Religion, yet if he be not careful to
Catechize and examine them particularly therein, there will come and appear
little profit or none at all by his labors; as experience proves the same.

Original Corruption.
1 AS children take of their Parents their original and natural qualities and
conditions: Even so they receive with the same, Original Corruption of nature,
which comes by Original sin.

2 Like as corn, although it be never so clean winnowed and purged from
chafe, yet when it is sown, the same seed will be full of chafe again,
until it be winnowed and made clean: Even so be children borne full of chafe
and Corruption of original sin, until that by Baptism in the blood of
Christ, through the wonderful operation of the holy Ghost, and be drawn from
the love of themselves, and of worldly things, unto the pure love of God, as
their Parents were.

A brief Comparison of the sins that reigned in the people in the time of
the Prophet Zephania, with the like sins in the people of our time.
1 AS in the time of the Prophet, there were many and foul finnes and vices
then reigning and ouerflowing amongst the people: Even so likewise are there
now many grievous sins and offenses amongst us.

2 As the people then presumed upon their blind and dead faith, and
counterfeit repentance, and hypocritical, and feigned prayers: So also the
common people now presume upon their idle faith, thinking themselves as good
Christians as the best, if so be that they can say by heart the Articles of
their Belief, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments: and think that
they repent very well, if they come to the Church on the Sabbath days and
other holy days, and say the Confession after their Minister, although they
be never touched with any remorse or feeling of any one sin; yet they
suppose they have repented sufficiently: and so likewise of Prayer.

3 Like as in the Prophets time, when the people were thus overwhelmed with
their blind faith, counterfeit repentance, and hypocritical Prayers, then the
Lord in mercy sent his Prophets vehemently and sharply to reprove them, and to
denounce the judgment of God against them: Even so the Lord of his unspeakable
goodness, has raised up many famous and zealous Preachers in our days, to
exclaim and cry out against the manifold wickedness now reigning amongst us,
and to threaten us with the vengeance of God for the same.

4 As there were always some good Prophets that would reprove sin and
iniquity in all estates, without respect of persons: so there was also some
false and fawning Prophets and Preachers, that would soothe up the people with
sweet and flattering words, and dawbe them up with untempered mortar, telling
them that there was peace, and all was well, and that they were in a very good
case, when indeed destruction was even at hand: Even so in like manner, as we
have many faithful Preachers that will boldly reprove sin in all estates:
so also we have many such clawbackes and flattering Ministers, who do soothe
up their Parishioners, making them believe that they are as good Christians as
the best, and that they may be partakers of the Lords Supper, if so be that
they can say the Lords prayer, the Articles of their Belief, and the ten
Commandments; yea and though they understand not what the Sacraments mean;
neither wherefore, nor yet to what end they were ordained, nor what profit they
should have by worthily receiving the same; and if so be that they come to the
Church at times appointed, and hear the Service read, although they return
home again as wise as they came, and have profited no more in knowledge, then
the seats that they sat on: yet these are good people (say they) and obedient
and dutiful subjects.

5 Even as in the Prophets time, the people then excused themselves for not
coming to hear their Sermons, because there were some Priests and false
Prophets that did bend and set themselves with all their force to contrary and
gainsay that doctrine which the true Prophets did deliver unto the people,
whereupon the people said, that they could not agree amongst themselves, and
therefore they would not hear them: So likewise a number of people do now say
after the like sort, go about to excuse themselves, saying, we will not hear
them, because they cannot agree among themselves: for one (say they) Preaches
of this thing to day, and an other against it the next day: some allow of one
thing to day; othersome disallow of the same: so that (say they) we cannot tell
which to follow, or whom to believe: but such as would be accounted good
Christians, ought to be grown to such knowledge and judgment in the word of
God, that they be able to discern and judge who preaches sound Doctrine, and
who teaches corrupt; and so to try the spirits, etc. 1. John. 4.1.

Christ Communicated to us by a spiritual manner.
1 AS we verily take and eat the bread and wine by a natural manner, the which
incontinent after by digestion, turns into our substance and nourishment of
our corporal life: So likewise as verily (although by a spiritual and
celestial manner, and not with mouth and teeth) is Jesus Christ himself, which
is now in heaven, on the right hand of his Father, communicated unto us, 1.
Cor. 10.16. that we may be flesh of his flesh: (Ephesians. 5.30) that is to say,
being knit and incorporated with him by faith. John. 17.21, 22, 23. our souls
and our bodies do attain to eternal life, Col. 2.12: yea even whilst we be
in this world, his spirit does sanctify and govern our bodies and souls, to
dedicate and sacrifice all our life to his service, and to the love of our
neighbors, for the love of him.

2 As no man will deny a man's wife to be with her husband one body and flesh,
although he be at London and she at York: So likewise it cannot truly be
denied, that the coupling of Christ's body and blood to the Sacrament, is a
spiritual thing, and therefore there needs not any such carnal presence as
the Papists do imagine.

Education of Children.
1 LIke as fruitful fields for lack of tillage wax barren: Or as trees
being neglected either bring forth no fruit, or else the same unsavory,
without the diligence of graffing and pruning: Or as dogs be unmeet to hunt
the horse, and Oxen unapt to the plough, except man's diligence be put thereto:
Even so Children would become wild and unprofitable, except by diligence and
in due time, they should be fashioned and brought in order by good bringing up.

2 Like as planting and carfulness has great power in all growing things:
Even so has Education greater virtue and strength; yea and better fruit in
the diligent bringing up of Children.

3 Like as Noblemen and Gentlemen are desirous to have a good and skillful
horsekeeper, that can keep their horses well, and they spare not to give great
stipends to such: Even so how much more ought Christian Parents be desirous to
have and maintain a good Schoolemaister that might godlily bring up their
children in virtue and wisdom.

4 Like as if a horse be not well broken, or have any evil quality, the owner
will be careful to see it remedied, and that he may be made gentle: So
likewise godly Parents, seeing their natural child evil brought up, ought to
be much more careful that he may be brought to some good order.

5 As there be some men, who can easily see and spy a spauine, a sprent, a
ringbone, or such other disease in a horse: Even so much more ought a good
Father be as ready to look that there be no faults in his Children, or in the
teacher unto whom he commits the charge to bring them up in learning and
good manners.

6 As a vessel will long retain and keep the savor of that wherewith it is
first seasoned: Even so if Children be taught good things whilst they be young
and tender, they will abide and stick the longer with them. Pro. 22.6. Deuteronomy.
4.9.14. and 32.46.

7 Even as a Plant will sooner take nourishment, and thrive better in the soil
where it first grew and sproong up, then in any other ground, because it
likes his own soil best: So likewise children will sooner take instruction
and good nurture from their Parents, whom they best like, and from whom they
had their first being, then from any other.

8 Like as our first Parent Adam, and so all other after him, have been a
mean of falling to all their posterity, in begetting Children in their own
image, which according to the law of creation should have been borne in Gods
image: So now in lieu of this, all Parents should lend their hands to their
children to lift them up again by good Education, and never cease until they
see in some measure the beauty of the first image, and the virtue of the
second Adam. Pro. 22.6. Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 11.18, 19.

9 As life and death is in the power of the tongue: So also we may well say,
life and death is in the Education of our children: for if they be well brought
up, it shall be life unto them; but if it be otherwise, they are trained up to
everlasting death. Pro. 18.21.

10 Even as a weed if it grow in a rank soil will wax out of measure
noisome: So children coming of honorable Parents, brought up in ease, and
pampered with the delights of gentry, they wax immeasurably vicious, whom
neither Laws, nor Magistrates, nor any other good mean, can hardly keep
under.

11 As the brute Ox and Ass would never endure their hard labor, except they
were held in by their yoke, but would stray every way: So unbridled man, if
he be not in his youth held in by the yoke of painful labor, and virtuous
education, he will never abide it when he is old, but will run out into every
path of destruction. Lament. of Iere. 3.26.

12 As Alexander the Great attained to have such a puissant Army, whereby he
conquered the world, by having children borne and brought up in his Camp,
whereby they became so well acquainted and exercised with weapons from their
swaddling clothes, that they looked for no other wealth or Country but to
fight: Even so if thou would have thy children either to do great matters,
or to live honestly by their own virtuous endeavors, and not to gape unjustly
for other men's goods, but to be content with the blessing of God upon their
labors, thou must acquaint them with pains taking in their youth, and so to
bring them up in the nourture and information of the Lord.

Eccle. 25.27.
13 As those which have experience in keeping and repairing of the Sea banks,
can easily tell us, that if the raging waves should be suffered to break over
but one tide, they should hardly in many days recover it again: Even so if
Parents suffer their Childrens affections (through want of good Education) to
have the full swing and course, yea but a small season, they shall hardly or
never again win this breach. Pro. 11.20. and 29.15.

14 Even as the fattest soil brings forth the ranckest weeds: So pampered
Children brought up without due government and discipline, thrust forth the
greatest and most ouergrowen vices.

15 As young Plants being straightned while they be tender, and trimmed with
pruning and other parts of husbandry, will grow very goodly to behold in their
greatness, which being neglected, are many times very crooked, and unfit for
diverse uses: So likewise do young men and women for the most part prove, as
they are nurtured in their youth.

Christ's second coming to judgment.
1 SO quickly as the lightning in the East is seen unto the West: Even so
suddenly shall Christ appear unto the whole world, at his second coming.

Mat. 24.43 44.
2 As a Thief (so near as he can) comes closely to rob an house, then when
men think least of him: So likewise upon a like sudden, when men least think
of it, shall Christ come again to judgment. 1 Thessalonians. 5.4. 2. Pet. 3.10.

3 Like as when the Sun is up, which is the most excellent light, although
the Moon and the Stars do remain still in the element, yet are they not
seen, but are even as though they were all fallen down from heaven: Even so
the coming of Christ to judgment, shall be so glorious and so bright, that in
comparison of it, the light of the Sun then, the Moon, and the Stars,
shall be as though they were not at all. Math. 24.29. Esa. 13.10. Ezech. 32.7.
Joel. 2.31. and 3.15.16.

4 Like as men wax cunning to foresee what weather will shortly happen by the
standing of the wind, by the gathering of the clouds, and by other tokens:
which as it did condemn the carelessness of them which lived in the time of
Christ, because they were not careful and diligent to mark the tokens whereby
they should have known the coming of Christ: So also it will condemn us, if
we mark not, neither observe the tokens of the second coming of Christ.

5 As a guilty man, whose conscience does accuse him, would never see the
Judge: and a traitor would never willingly be espied of his Prince, nor a
disloyal person of one that knows him: and on the other side, a true and
faithful subject, that has done dutiful service, desires the presence of
the Prince in hope to be well rewarded: So the wicked and ungodly ones of the
world, are grieved to hear of Christ's coming to judge the quick and the dead:
but they that have lived with good consciences, do groan for his coming.

Christ the only object of faith which justifies.
LIke as when the children of Israel were bidden of Moses, to look up to the
brazen Serpent, neither could the Serpent have helped them, except they had
looked up, nor yet their looking upward have profited them, unless they had
directed their eyes upon the said Serpent, as the only object set up to the
same purpose, for them to behold: So our faith in like case directed to the
body of Jesus Christ our Savior, is only the means whereby Christ's merits
are applied unto us, and we now justified before God. Romans 10.9.

Christ our Mediator.
1 LIke as Christ Jesus is our looking glass, in which we behold the invisible
and glorious God, to be our loving and merciful father, more ready to hear,
then we to pray: So the same our Savior Christ is also our feet, by which we
go to the father, our mouth by which we speak to the Father, and our hand by
which we offer our prayers, and all our service, yea our souls and bodies, as
a lively, reasonable, and acceptable sacrifice to his Majesty.

2 As no man is able to behold the bright Sun unless it be covered with a
cloud: Even so no man can abide the Majesty of God, but through the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Communion with Christ.
1 AS the head gives sense and motion to the members, and the members feel
themselves to have sense, and to move by the means of the head: Even so does
Christ Jesus receive and quicken every true member, and by his heavenly power
makes him to do the good which he does.

2 Like as from the stock, sap is derived to the graft, that it may live and
grow, and bring forth fruit in his kind: So likewise do all the faithful
that are grafted into Christ the true vine. Romans 6.4, 5. John. 15.1, 2. Ephe.
13.16.

3 And as the graft loses his wild nature, and is changed into the nature of
the stock, and brings forth good fruit: Even so in like manner it is with
them that are in Christ, who by little and little are wholly renewed from evil to
good. Act. 15.9.

Conscience touched.
1 LIke as they which have diseased bodies, are contented with no one
Physician, but do commit themselves to every man that will promise them help:
So also it fares oftentimes with them that have their consciences ou^^pressed
with the burden of their sins, that they can be content to yield themselves
to every heretic that will promise them liberty.

2 As after great storms the air is clear: so after the floods of repentant
tears, the Conscience is at quiet.

3 As a sick man that is pained diversely, complains of diverse places: even
so a man troubled in Conscience, uses many phrases according to the diversity
of afflictions. Psalm. 51.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Consideration and earnest meditation of our estate, needful.
1 LIke as a man that has a journey to make but from England to
Constantinople, although he had made the same once or twice before, yet would
he not pass it over without great and often Consideration; especially whether
he were right and in the way or no; what pace he held, how near he were to his
ways end, and the like: Even so every Christian has far more need of due
Consideration; who must pass from earth to heaven, being subject to by paths,
and manifold dangers, as every pleasure of this world, every lust, every
dissolute thought, every alluring sight, and tempting sound, every devil upon
the earth, or instrument of his, which are infinite, being a thief, and lying
in wait to spoil him upon this way toward heaven.

2 As thieves seem mad unto wise men, that seeing so many hanged daily for
theft before their eyes, will yet notwithstanding steal again, and all for
want of due consideration: Even so the very same cause makes the wisest men of
the world to seem very fools, and worse then franticks unto God and good men,
that knowing the vanities of the world, and the danger of sinful life, do
follow so much the one, and fear so little the other. Math. 7. Luke 12. Romans 2.
1. Cor. 1.2, 3. Gal. 3.

3 Like as if a Law were made by the authority of man, that whosoever should
adventure to drink wine, should without delay hold his hand but half an hour
in the fire, or in boiling lead for a punishment, many no doubt would forbear
wine, albeit naturally they loved the same: and yet a Law being made by the
eternal Majesty of God, that whosoever commits sin, shall boil in the
fire of hell without ease or end, many for lack of consideration commit sin
upon sin, with as little fear as they do eat or drink.

4 As he may be thought to be but a foolish Merchant, that for quietness sake
would never look to his own accounts book, whether he were behind hand or
before: Or as a shipmaister were greatly to be laughed at, that for avoiding of
care, would sit down and make good cheer and let the ship go whither she
would: Even so much more in the business of our soul, it is madness and
folly to fly consideration for eschewing of trouble, seeing in the end, this
negligence must needs turn upon us more trouble, and irremediable calamity.

The Condition of man's creation.
AS a Merchant Factor when he is arrived in a strange Country, or as a
Captain sent by his Prince to some great exployt, is accustomed when he
comes to the place appointed: then advisedly considers wherefore he was
sent, to what end, what to attempt, what to prosecute, what to perform, what
shall be expected and rerequired at his hands, upon his return, by him that
sent him thither: these cogitations (no doubt) shall stir him up to attend to
that which he came for, and not to employ himself in impertinent affairs. So
likewise every Christian desirous of salvation, ought to ask of himself, why
and to what end he was created of God, and sent into this world, what to do,
wherein to bestow his days, thus doing, he shall find that it was for no
other cause, but only to serve God in a right manner in this life. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Luke 1.74.75.

Whosoever breaks one Commandment, is guilty of the breach of all.
LIke as if a Father should say unto his son: do such and such things, and I
will take thee for an obedient child, and give thee all my possessions: now the
son breaks somewhat of that which his father charged him withal, and is
therefore accounted disobedient, and deserves to loose whatsoever was
promised: Or as if one man bestow upon an other, house or land, or some such
like thing, and in consideration thereof, binds him to fulfill many
conditions, whereof if he break but the least, the gift is void, and it is
all one as if he had never given any thing: Even so likewise we may not
marvel, when we hear that by the breaking of one point of one Commandment,
we fail of perfect righteousness, and are made the heirs of everlasting
damnation, if God should measure out unto us the due reward of his damnation.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. and 28.58, 59. Iam. 2.10.

2. Even as if a Rule be broken in some part, or the link of a round chain,
yet we may rightly and truly say, that they are not wholely and altogether
broken: So likewise, if but one Commandment be broken, yet all are broken in
the sight of God, for the justice of God is indivisible.

The Covenant of God.
1 AS it is the chief and principal part in the law of Wedlock, and before
all required of the wife, that she kept this faith to her husband, that she
admit no other man in his sight, unless she will be refused as an
adultresse: So likewise this is the chief point in the Covenant of GOD, that
we stick unto him only, and alone, or else to be put out from the Covenant.

Creature.
1 EVen as a brittle glass being filled with some extreme strong liquor,
cannot but burst in sunder, not because of any antipathie which is betwixt
them, but because the glass is not of sufficient strength to contain the
liquor: So it is with the Creature when God does appear in perfect glory; in
regard whereof, the Angels themselves are said to cover their faces, least they
should behold it: how much more then has man, who is but dust and ashes, and
whose life is in his nosethrils, just cause of fear. Esa. 6.2. Psalm. 29.3, etc.

2 As the Aduouterous Woman has no more to do with her husband, nor with any
thing of his, for because of the transgression of this principal law and
Covenant, and the breach of the faith of Wedlock: Even so they have no more to
do in the Covenant of God, which by worship of other ^ods, have broken the
chief point thereof, and loosed the faith due unto one God alone. Deuteronomy. 5.6, 7.

3 Like as if a man would take to his wife a common woman out of the open
stews, and would first of all prescribe unto her in this sort: If thou will
abide in this fellowship of our Wedlock, first it is necessary, that thou
abstain from all other men, and keep the faith and Covenant of marriage whole
and unbroken only to me, else thou can not be my wife, nor I thy husband,
if thou do with me take others, and return unto thy accustomed filthiness
of whoredom: So likewise the Lord dealt with the Israelites, who were used
before in Egypt to the worshipping of other Gods: who charged them first to
cast away the gods which their fathers served in Mesopotamia, and in Egypt, and
to serve and worship him only; otherwise he would be no God to them, nor they
a people for him. Joshua. 24.14. And so the case is now betwixt God and us.

Church.
1 AS a Ship in the midest of the Sea goes not toward the haven, unless it
have a prosperous gale of wind: Even so the Church of God goes not to his
wished haven, to wit, the Kingdom of heaven, unless it be blown with the
Spirit of God, and directed and set on by the same spirit.

2 As a woman that is barren, yet after a long time childeth: Even so it is
with the people of God, though they be never so few, and the Church never so
small, yet God will multiply and increase it.

3 As the flowers of water Betonye, with the leaves and sprigs, though they die
often, and yearly, yet the root is ay-lasting, from which they come, and to
which they belong: so though discipline, and the outward beauty of the Church,
change and often die, yet the Church is lasting, and of all continuance.

4 As in the blew Lysimachus, Cowe-wheate, and winter Sauorie, and likewise the
Affodill, the lower parts and branches of them begin to flower: So in many
Churches and families, the inferior persons begin to profess God first, and
show forth themselves by an holy profession.

5 As the herb Sophia grows especially and best, where as there has been
in times have any building, now laid waste: So many cannot grow well and wax
rich enough, without the Church be laid waste: many grow best, where they have
pulled down all: but the Church grows best where Popery is utterly defaced
and pulled down.

6 As the flowers of Goates-beard, and Sansprge do, always bend toward the
Sun: So the Church bends always to Christ.

7 As by the description of the Facon, and nature of the true Meum, the common
used is found counterfeit: So by the description of the true Church, the common
reputed is found false.

8 As the diseases of the body be of two sorts, some cureable, and some
incureable, which are to death: So the Church, though it be subject to sundry
falls, cannot err in foundation to death, for the errors of Gods children be
cureable.

9 As where the dead carcass is, thither resort the Eagles: Even so where are
men that truly believe in Christ, there is the Church.

10 As false and counterfeit Coyners who would not have men to know and
discern their money by the finenesse of Gold and Silver, and by the
touchstone, but by the weight, by the sound, by the stamp, and by the color,
which they may easily falsify: Even so our adversaries the Papists would make
us believe, that the true Church cannot be known by these two marks; to wit,
the sincere preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments,
according to the institution of Christ, but rather by certain outward marks,
to wit, by antiquity, multitude, succession of places, and persons, by
miracles, and revelations, which marks in very deed are common, both to the
pure and sound Church, and also to the impure and corrupt Church.

11 Like as if one should tie or fasten to the body of a man, some piece of
flesh, bone, or sinew; were it done never so cunningly: yet that should not be
counted or called any part or member of that body, seeing it receives neither
life nor motion from the soul thereof; but does wholly depend upon the cunning
and workmanship thereof: So we confess, that here upon earth is a Church, a
fellowship and communion of Saints; that is to say, the congregation of the
faithful, not gathered together by the will of man, humane reason, or worldly
inuension, but through the holy Ghost, not tied or limited to any one place, but
distributed according to Gods good will and pleasure; to the which Church
hypocrites and such like are joined and tied, but not united or participating
like as members thereof. Mat. 16.17. 1. Cor. 12.3.

12 As a heap of wheat, though it have chafe in it, is yet called wheat: or
as a tun of Wine, though it have Lees in it, is yet called wine: or as a
field wherein tares appear with the wheat, is a corn field: Even so the
visible Church is the Church, though it consists of good and bad, and be
mixed of the elect and reprobate, yet are they called Gods Church for the elect
sake, and have their denomination from the better, not the bigger part. Math.
25.32. and 3.12. and 13.47. 2. Timo. 2.20.

13 Like as a wife is a wife although she obey not her husband, as long as
she keeps the faith she plight in marriage, and defiles not her self with
an others bed: Even so is it in the Church, that although she be manifoldly
undutiful toward her husband Christ Jesus, either by Atheism, or by
Idolatry, yet she remains still the wife of Christ.

14 As a wife that has broken her says and promise made in Wedlock, is not
forthwith out of the account of a wife, until she being convicted thereof, be
for that cause divorced from her husband: Even so the Church, notwithstanding
her spiritual adultries, is not vnchurched, nor cease to be reputed a
Church, until such time as the Lord by taking away from her the ministry of
the word, and the administration of the Sacraments, has as it were, by bill of
divorce disauowed her, by taking away from her all her Jewels and Ornaments
wherewith he bewtified her, when first he contracted with her.

15 Like as a Garden or Vine decays with our much heat and drought, except
after the planting thereof, it be by showers watered: Even so the Church, with
over much heat of afflictions withers away, except afterward it be
moystened by the water of the holy Ghost, which is the sincere preaching of the
Gospel.

16 As there be three forms in one and the selfsame School, and be not all
alike taught, and yet make not sundry schools, but contain sundry scholars
and learners in one selfsame school: So likewise is the Church not made many,
neither by alteration of times, neither by difference of places, nor by
chaunges of orders and dispensations.

17 As there be in one School diverse Vshers, and diverse teaching, but yet all
tending to one end; to wit, to attain learning, and so to come to the
University: Even so the true Church of Christ before the Law, and under the
Law, and since in the time of the Gospel, have been diverse instructors, as
Prophets, Apostles, Pastors and teachers, but yet all aiming at one mark, and
laboring to bring the people to the Kingdom of heaven.

18 Like as it is not in the power of any man to dispense, minister, or
distribute any part of that nourishment which he receives in at his mouth,
unto any member, which either is mortified and dead in his body, or that is
cut off from the same: Even so it is undoubtedly to be believed, that neither
the death, passion, and bloud-shedding of our Savior Christ, nor his
Sacraments, nor any of the graces of the holy Ghost, nor any good work in the
world, do or can any thing profit to remission and forgiveness of sins, or
salvation to any person, which is out of the Catholic Church, as long as he
shall so stand and continue out of the same.

19 Like as if a subject knowing the Letters of his Prince, and also his Seal,
should, because that he knows them well, and allows them to be his, presume
and take upon him to counterfeit his Princes Letters or Seal, he should be no
true subject, but a Fellone and a Traitor: Even so if the Church, because that
she knows the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, to be the true and
infallible word of her Lord and Savior, and the Sacraments to be his Seals,
should presume or take upon her, to alter Gods word; I mean the scriptures
that be contained in the Canonical books of the old and new Testament, or to
counterfeit the Sacraments; that is to say, to minister them otherwise then her
Lord and master has instituted and appointed in his word, she ought not to be
called the true Church, but the most traiterous harlot of Antichrist.

20 As it is great folly for a man that has a mote in his eye, to grow into
such a chafe or dislike with it, that so he should be unthankful for his eye:
Even so it is much more folly for men to separate themselves from our Church,
and wholely to condemn it, by reason that there be some imperfections and
wants in it, which is a means to breed unthankfulness, by forgetting the
manifold blessings which we have received, and do still enjoy, which is the
ready way to provoke God rather in his justice, to take away these good
benefits that we enjoy already, then in mercy to provoke him to increase
them more.

21 As the glory of God, is showed most herein, that he defends his spouse,
and has bewtified her with gifts from above, that she might be a pure and
undefiled spouse, chaste and holy unto himself: Even so this is our greatest
glory, of what state or condition so ever we be, to be members of this Church,
by the Communion whereof, we are his members.

22 As a man will not wittingly bestow a Diamond upon him that thinks it to
be but a piece of Glass; or a Pearl of him, that esteems it to be but a
grain of salt: Even so the Lord will not bestow his blessings but upon
those, that by his Spirit shall know and feel what they are; for if they
feel them not, and know not what they are, then they are not yet of Gods house
or Church. Heb. 3.6.

23 As it is not enough to set or sow a garden with good herbs and seeds,
and then let it alone, but there must be a Gardener to ouersee it, to dress
it, and often to weed it: Even so it is not sufficient for a Church to have
the word planted and sown in it, but there must be diligent and painful
Preachers and Pastors continually to water and govern it, or else it will
grow barren and fruitless.

24 Like as if the land be not often tilled, but lie barren, it will bring
forth nothing but briars, thistles, and nettles: Even so if Churches be not
continually labored by Preaching and Catechizing, they will wax secure, and
so bring forth nothing but ignorance, Atheism, superstition, idolatry, and
all wickedness of life.

25 As the army of heaven is innumerable, and the sand of the sea
unmeasurable: Even so God will multiply his Church. Iere. 33.22.

26 As the Bride pertains to none but to the Bridegroom: So likewise the
Church pertains to Christ alone. Hose. 2.19. 2. Cor. 11.2. John. 3.29.

27 As every true friend to the Bridegroom rejoices to see the Bridegroomes
voice obeyed: Even so every godly man is glad to see every member of the Church
to frame themselves to the obedience of the word of Christ.

28 As a Giant is too strong for mean men of middle size, and as his voice and
look is fearful to his enemies: So likewise will God be to all such as rise
up against him and his Church. Esa. 42.13.

29 As a waste ground broken up and rid of those things wherewith it was
ouergrowne, and the fruitfulness thereof hindered, is by good husbandry
brought to flourish and to be fruitful: even so, such is the state of the
Church, when after persecution, it pleases God to send peace and prosperity
thereto. Esaias. 33.1, 2.

30 As men hedge their grounds round about to keep them from being spoiled
with cattle: Even so GOD does fence his Church, and those which fear him
round about, that they may be defended against all evils.

31 As the grounds, are eaten, wasted, devoured, and rooted up, when the
hedges and fences thereof are neglected, and suffered to lie open: Even so it
fares with the Church, and with them that profess the name of God, when he
is provoked with their sins, in withdrawing his friendly defense, and
fatherly protection from them.

32 As the Shipmaisters are such as have cunning to guide the ship, wherein both
themselves and other men do sail: So almighty God, makes choice of such to
guide his Church, as can govern themselves, and so many as are committed to
their charge.

33 As that bush which Moses saw, was burning, but not consumed: Even so the
Church of God must be tried in the fire of affliction, but not destroyed. Exo.
3.2.

34 As the Moon is sometimes eclipsed, and sometimes in the full: So likewise
the Church of GOD is subject to darkness, as in the time of Popery and
superstition.

35 As the Moon does borrowe her light of the Sun, because of her self she
has little, or none at all: Even so the Church of God having no light of it
self, does take her light from the Son of God Christ Jesus.

36 As jealousy cannot abide that the wife should show any sign of love to an
other man: Even so Almighty God cannot brook that the Church his spouse,
should take the least part of of his glory from him, and bestow it upon a
strange God, that is both hopeless, and helpless. Exo. 20.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Math. 4.10.

37 As the Arc was long and broad So the Church and Kingdom of Christ is
long and large. Psalm. 71.8. Gene. 6.14, 15.

38 As the Arc was great and large, and yet small in comparison of the flood:
Even so the Elect are many (no doubt) but few in respect of the reprobate.
Luke 12.32. Math. 22.14. and 24.22. and 7.14.

39 As the Arc was made of many pieces of wood, and joined together in one: So
the Church consists of many members knit together in one faith: For in Christ
Jesus we are all one, without difference of man or woman.

40 As the Arc was made of incorruptible wood: Even so the Church consists
of immortal souls.

41 As the Arc did float in the flood: even so the Church is in this world, as
in a sea of troubles. Act. 14.22.

42 As one Billow in the sea pusheth forward an other: So likewise troubles do
come upon the Church by troops.

43 As the Moon is not always visible being in her change: So likewise the
Church of God to the eye of man, is not always in a visible show, as the
proud Church of Rome is, but has sometime war and adversity, sometime peace
and prosperity.

As a Ship upon the seas is tossed with the wind and waves from one place to
an other: Even so is the Church often tossed hither and thither in this sea of
this world, but yet never drowned, because Jesus Christ is in it, and holds
the stern with his hand.

44 As the hand cut off from the body, dies, and lacks life: Even so it is
in the mystical body of the Church, no life or salvation without the body of
Christ. Ezech. 13.9. Joel. 2.32. Act. 2.47.

45 As trees in winter which for that they are naked, and void both of leaves
and of fruit, do seem for the time little to differ from dead and starued
trees, and yet have secretly hid in them their Juice, which makes the^ spring
again, and as it were revive again in Summer: Even so such is the state of
the Church of God, which though in bitter persecution, seems to be as it
were quenched and extinguished, yet when God gives some peace and rest, it
flourishes and springs again.

46 As a Vine when the fences thereof are broken, lies open to the waste, and
is spoiled of every beast of the field: Even so the Church and people of God,
when for their sins he seems for a time to withdraw his protection and
defense, is subject to the injuries and violence of all sorts of the wicked.

47 As ground and soil that has lain long waste, by good husbandry is rid
and often brought to flourish with corn or grass: Even so the Church of God
after long persecution, is by the power and goodness of God, brought again to
a flourishing estate.

48 Like as if a man should have both his hands and his arms cut off, his eyes
put out, etc: yet as long as his head stands and other vital parts, he is to
be counted a man, although a maimed man: Even so it is in the Church or
assembly, as long as it holds the head, how defective it is otherwise, it
has the due and right of the Church of God.

49 And although a man should have six fingers on one hand, and but three on
the other, and albeit they should stand where the mouth does, yet all this
deformity should not hinder from being truly holden to be a man, although it
would be a great deformity in him: of the other part, if he had no head at
all, or there were no natural conjunction of the parts one with the other, but
a whole through displacing of every part from his proper seat, then verily
could he not be deemed to have either the proportion of a man, or his life: So
likewise if an assembly hold not the head which is Jesus Christ, or be nothing
else but a confused multitude, without any part of the order which the son of
God has appointed, the same is justly crossed out of the account of Gods
Church.

50 As he that enters into a fair and goodly goldsmithes shop, richly
furnished with precious Pearls, and costly Jewels of all sorts, ought not to
mislike those excellent things, and costly treasures, because he sees among
them, a black furnace, dustie coals, and sundry instruments of base metal,
because these instruments, coals, and furnace, must needs be had to make those
Jewels; as Chains, Earings, and Bracelets of Gold, withal: So in the Church
of God, where are innumerable men, some famous for their wisdom, some renowned
for their godliness, some forward and fervent in Christian love and charity:
many excelling in all kind of virtues: if a man see there some unlearned, some
deceiuer^, some wicked ones, some tyrants, and many ungodly ones, he ought not
therefore to pick a quarrel against the Church of Christ, nor yet to think
of the ruin and destruction of the same.

51 As the Lawier who has no further power but to expound the Law, is under
the Law: So the Church which has authority only to publish and expound the
Scriptures, cannot authorize them unto us, but must submit her self unto them.

52 As the Ocean sea which is but one, is divided into parts, according to the
regions and countries against which it lies, as into the English, Spanish,
Italian sea, etc: Even so the Church dispearsed over the face of the whole
earth, is divided into other particular Churches, according as the countries
are several in which it is seated; as into the Church of England and Ireland,
the Church of France, the Church of Germany, etc.

53 As the superfluous humors in the veins are no parts of the body: Even so
the ungodly, though they be in the Church, yet indeed they are no parts of it.
Math. 13.25.47.

54 As the Carcass of a dead man that wears a living man's garment, is not a
living man though he look never so like him: Even so the Church of Rome now
at this day, is of a spouse of Christ, become an harlot, and in very deed is
no true Church of Christ.

55 As in a family children are for the most part one like an other, and
brought up alike: Even so it is in Gods family, which is his Church: the
members thereof are all alike in heart and affection; and the reason is,
because they have one spirit to guide them all. Act. 4.32. Esaias. 11.6.7.

56 Even as in the field there grows up not only sound corn, but also
tares, cockell and darnell: Or as in the Floor there is not only pure Wheat,
but also Chafe: and as in the Net, there is not only good things, but bad,
as filth and such like: So in the militant and visible Church, the field,
floor, and Net of the Lord, there are not only sincere and faithful, but
also hypocritical and faithless worshippers of GOD, not only constant and
upright dooers of the word, but also vain and idle talkers of the same: yea
not only such as with good consciences, pure hearts, and faith unfeigned, do
serve the Lord and his Church, but such also as be reprobate to every good
work, whose end is to be cast eternally from the presence of God, and to be
burned as chafe in the fearful furnace of Gods wrath, and everlasting
indignation.

57 As the appetite of a woman ought to be to her husband: so the appetite of
the Church, ought to be to Christ. Cant. 5.7.

58 As the woman brings forth her children in sorrow and pain: Even so the
Church brings forth in grief of member, and loss of limbs.

59 As a woman must be obedient to the voice of her husband, and learn of her
husband at home: even so the Church that is good, must be ruled by Christ, and
not rule Christ; Christ's scholar, and not Christ's schoolemaister.

60 Even as John that bare witness of Christ, did confess that he was not
worthy to loose Christ's shoo-latchet: Even so the Church, though it bear
witness of Christ in respect of credit and authority, is not worthy to loose
Christ's shoo-latchet.

61 Like as when Christ put forth himself and began to be known to the
people: John said: It behooves me to wax less, and him to wax greater: So when
the Church has given a man to understand of Christ, and that Christ begins
to appear unto us, the Church decreaseth in authority and estimation like
John, and Christ increases and waxes greater in authority and credit.

62 As the light of the Sun avails not him that lies in a dark and close
dungeon, where is always night and never day: Even so the graces of God do
nothing help those that lie in darkness, and shadow of death, until they
have access into the Church of Christ, and so to be of the number of the
faithful. Ephe. 2.19. Romans 5.10.

63 As a builder or chief master of any works does not offend in building,
but because it happens sometimes, that being occupied with other thoughts and
fantasies not pertaining to the building, he does sometimes slide and fail in
his work: Even so it cannot be gathered by the force of the promise made to
the Church, that all things always are rightly defined in the Church, for the
greater part overcomes the lesser, and the worst the better.

64 Like as when Hester had procured safety for the Jews, and liberty to
revenge themselves upon their enemies: it is said, that many of the people of
the Land became Jews: Hest. 8.17. Even so, considering Christ has procured
freedom from hell, death and damnation for all that believe in him, we should
labor above all things to become new creatures, joining our selves always to
the true Church of God.

65 As the body is blind that wants eyes to see withal, and lame, maimed or
deformed, whereof the shoulders, arms, hands, or other principal parts are
wanting or displaced and disordered: So in like manner, that body of a Church
cannot be said to be perfect and entire, wherein there are not Ministers of the
word, who by the light thereof may direct the people in the ways of God, or
Elders that may discover and descrie every matter that may threaten any danger
to the body; or Deacons, who may distribute liberally according to that that is
in their hands, for the relief of the poor.

66 As Christ himself when he was rayled upon, gave no evil words again:
Even so the true Church of Christ is known in this, that it suffers
persecution, and does not persecute again.

67 As wise King Solomon judged her to be the true mother of the child, which
had such compassion on it, that she had rather forgo the whole, then have it
divided and dismembered, and the other to be the harlot, that had ouerlaine her
child, which had also consented to the death of the other child: Even so in
like manner we may discern evidently the Romish Church of Antichrist by her
bloody persecutions, from the true Church and spouse of Christ; the one with
sword and fire, seeks always to quench the truth; the other through the
spirit of lenity, to win men to the same: the one by compulsion and violent
oppression, the other by persuasion, and meek intercession: the one by the
sword, the other by the word: the one goes about to pervert and deprave, the
other seeks all means to convert and save.

68 As a King is stablished in his Kingdom, when his godly Laws are taught
and kept, and that Realm is strongly builded and blessed of God, where good
order is maintained: So is Gods Church and congregation well and surely
builded, where Gods word and Religion is purely taught, sin punished, and
virtue embraced.

69 Like as whatsoever is in the body receiving no life nor power from the
body, is not properly a part of the body, howsoever it seem to be joined to
the body: So the wicked, although they be in the outward face of the Church,
yet because they are not partakers of the spiritual life thereof by Christ, are
not truly to be judged members of it.

70 As in every well ordered Kingdom, the whole Realm should be of more
authority then the King: So the Church ought to be of more authority then the
Pope, though he were Prince thereof.

71 As the Arc was carried from place to place, and never rested in one
certain place: So likewise the millitant Church here on earth, has no
certain place, but is posted from pillar to post. Iosu. 3.14.17. 1. Sam.
4.3.4. etc.

72 As in the body of a man there is a full furniture of all members needful
to the discharge of their several duties, which are known both how many they
are, and what they are: Even so likewise is it in the Church.

73 As the want of a member, as one eye, or a hand, breeds grief: So in like
manner the want of a member in the Church, as a faithful Minister, which is the
eye, or of a Deacon, which is the hand, must needs be grievous.

74 As the disorder of a member in the body, as to have an eye where a nose
should be, or a foot for the hand, etc. causes both horror and grief: So the
like disorder in the Church of God, must needs be horrible and grievous.

75 Like as in the body of man, every member has his several function to
discharge, and no one member can discharge the duty of an other: So also it
ought to be in the Church of God.

76 As all the several members in the body of man are knit together and united
to the head: So all the several members of the Church, are knit and united
unto the head Christ.

77 As in the natural body, every several member, is as it were the member of
every other, in serving to their good; as the eye will see, the hand will take,
the mouth will speak, all for the good of any weak member: Even so it is in
the Church of God.

78 As the natural members take spirit and sense from the head: So the Church
has all her spiritual feeling and life of Christ, who is able to quicken and
give life.

79 As the husband that loves his wife, thinks himself not well, till she
has his company, and he her presence: So God loves the Church his spouse,
that he cannot abide to be without her company, and thinks her not safe,
except she be in his presence; therefore it pleases the Lord Jesus, not only
to call himself the head of his Church, and the Church his body, but also to
term his Church the fullness of himself, although he fills all in all
things, as though he were imperfect without his Church. Psalm. 41.12. Ephe. 1.23.

80 Even as the father or mother will have that Infant in their sight, which
they love most dearly: So God will have his Church in his sight, which he
loueth-most tenderly. Esaias. 45.15.16.

Christ our Righteousness.
1 LIke as our sins appeared so horrible, so great, so monstrous and ugly in
the presence of God, that (being once but imputed to Christ) he could not,
(notwithstanding that his unspeakable love) but even in justice most severely
punish our said sins in his son: so surely (such is the excellency of the
Righteousness of Christ, that being once but imputed unto us in the presence
of our heavenly Father) he cannot (notwithstanding all our former
unrighteousness) but be throghly pleased with us, and except such a discharge of
our sins by his Son, for our own discharge: none otherwise then the debt of a
Banquerout (discharged by some special friend) is accounted and accepted with
his creditor, the discharge of the Banquerout himself.

2 As the soul of a man does so quicken the body, that notwithstanding the
members thereof in themselves, be but weak, yet they are sure not to decay,
all the while they do hold any participation with the powers of the soul; but
appear in the presence of men, both lusty and strong: So undoubtedly our
Savior Christ being that immortal soul of his mystical body, which
inspireth spiritual life into all the members thereof, verily all those his
said members are sure (so long as they continue incorporate with Christ) both
to hold the substance of life, and withal to be accounted as lively members in
the presence of God, during their partitipation with that true life it self,
whereof they take sure hold by a lively faith. John. 14.6. 1. John. 5.11, 12.

3 As Cochlearia, or Spoonewort, the root of the water Lilie, and likewise
Telephium, and Gentian, laid to the body takes away black spots: So Christ
applied to the conscience, purges it from dead works.

4 As Smilax aspera, or rough Bindeweede serves not only against venom
received aforehand, but also against all poison taken after a man has eaten
it: So Christ received by faith, profits not only against the sins which
before has been committed, but also done afterward.

5 So long as a man stung with a Scorpion holds wild Carthamus in his hand,
he feels no pain: but so soon as he lets it go, the ache and pain
takes him a fresh: So as long as a man stung with sin holds Christ by
faith, he feels no torment of conscience, but so soon as he lets him go,
the terrors of death take him a fresh.

6 As the people of Israel, passing through the Wilderness, had to fight
oftentimes against Serpents, and when they were stung and smitten by them, for
to be preserved from the venom, and from death, they lifted up their eyes
toward the Brazen Serpent that Moses had set up amidst their tents, by sight
whereof they were healed: So we in like manner fighting against our
concupiscences, if it come to pass at any time that they give us any blow, to
the end that this stripe may not be deadly unto us, we must lift up our eyes
toward Jesus Christ hanging upon the Cross, and beseech him, that he would
forgive us all our trespasses, and be our Righteousness. John. 3.14.15.

7 As in a natural body, the power that the eye has to see, serves more to
the use of the other members the^ for it self, because that seeing and marking
them all, it is watchful rightly to guide them, and to direct their actions,
not being able in the mean time to see themselves, nor to serve it self: Even
so the Righteousness, innocence, and obedience of Christ Jesus, stand us in
more stead then him, seeing that notwithstanding he had all these things, and
was in his nature, life, and whole conversation, absolute and perfect, yet for
all this, he was condemned and crucified: We on the contrary part, albeit his
Righteousness, innocence, and obedience, be only imputed unto us, yet for
all that, by means of this imputation, we are absolved, justified, and
discharged of all our sins, and of all the accusations that all our enemies
can bring against us.

8 As it is enough that we gather the fruit of a tree, and that it always
remain in his place, and that we carry it not away with us: So in like manner
we must content our selves to be partakers of the fruits of Christ his
Righteteousnesse, albeit it be not essentially in us; but only by imputation,
and in as much as through his only mercy it is bestowed upon us.

9 Like as they do, that go up into an high Tower, who looking downwards, and
seeing the depth, are afraid to fall, and that they may be the more sure, they
lay hold of the railes: Even so must we lean upon the Righteousness and death
of Christ Jesus, and strengthen our selves in that, to the end we may be
preserved from falling.

10 Like as in Winter we can no sooner be from the fire, but we are cold: nor
out of light, but we enter into darkness: Even so we can no sooner be parted
from Jesus Christ, who is is our Righteousness and our life, but straight we
are in sin and in death; for as much as he is the life that quickneth us, the
Sun that gives us light, and the fire that warmeth, comfort, and
refreshes all his members. 1. Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.19. Esaias. 53.4, 5. Col. 1.20.

11 As the Moon has no light, but that which it has from the Sun, and as
the light is little, or great, as it is near or far off, in such sort, that
if it depart from it, it remains altogether obscure and dark: Even so in
like manner the Church has no light, Righteousness, life, health, strength and
happiness, but that which it has pleased her Husband Christ Jesus to give
unto her, because of that union and fellowship which he has with her.
Wherefore if at any time she be separated from him, and that there be a
divorce between her and her Husband, there remains to her nothing but
darkness, vice, and wretchedness. 2. Cor. 5.18.19. John. 11.25.

12 As Merchants which are of one Company, and become partners, are partakers
of all the profits, losses and damages which grow of their Merchandise: Even
so Jesus Christ, by reason of that society we have together with him, gives
us a part, and we likewise give him of all that we have and possess. The
difference that is in this, is, that the gains and losses that come amongst
men, is equal and common amongst them all; but here we gather up all the
fruits that arise of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ: he on the contrary
part takes upon him, and charge himself with all the damages and losses
that come of our disobedience. Romans 6.4.8.17. Ephe. 2.23.

13 Like as when a man looks upon things directly through the air, they
appear in their proper forms and colors, as they are: but if they be looked
upon through a green glass, they all appear green: So likewise if GOD
behold us as we are in our selves, we appear as vile and damnable sinners: but
if he look upon us as we are presented before the throne in heaven, in the
person of our Mediator Christ Jesus, willing that we should be approved for
his merits, then we appear without all spot and wrincke before him. Romans
8.34.

14 As Christ has taken away our sins by his suffering: So likewise he has
also clothed us with his Righteousness.

15 As it is not enough for a beggar to come before a King without his rags,
unless he have convenient apparel. So in like manner, it is not enough for us
to have our filthiness done away, unless we be clothed with convenient
Righteousness.

Contemplation of heavenly things.
AS they which come out of the clear Sun, into the shadow, have their eyes
dim and dark: So he which comes from the conte^plation of things divine,
into things human, comes from clear light, to the great clouds, mist and
darkness.

Concord.
AS the stone called Tyrrhenus, being whole, swimmeth, but being broken, every
piece does sink: So by Concord we be sustained and holden up, but by discord
and strife, we come to decay and ruin. Act. 2.44.46. Romans 13.13.

Content.
1 AS they that be bound, do judge them at liberty most happy, or as the
Country men do judge the Citizens happy and rich: the rich men again do say
the Lords are happy, the Lords the Kings, and the Kings again do judge the
people in most pleasure: So are such never with their own state contented,
which will behold by how much they are inferior to others. Phil. 4.11. 1.
Timo. 6.6.

Conscience good, or evil.
1 LIke as the body, when it is in good health is strong, and able to bear the
great storms and cold of winter, and likewise the excessive and intemperate
heat of the Summer: Even so a Conscience that is whole, and fully resolved,
can bear stoutly all accidents, without yielding or shrinking under the
burden and weight of any thing whatsoever may happen unto it. Act. 24.16. Pro.
15.15. 2. Cor. 1.12. 1. Timo. 1.5. 2. Timo. 1.3. Heb. 13.18. 1. Pet. 3.16.21.

2 And as a good Conscience is as Sugar to sweeten and mollify all our
affections: Even so the other is as sharp Vinegre, which sowreth and troubles
all our joys and consolations: and as the one is sufficient to resist all
tentations, even so the other is soft, cowardly, and vanquished, as soon as it
is assailed. 1. Timo. 4.2. Tit. 1.15.

3 As we are curious in looking to the health of our bodies, observing for that
purpose, the diet and government that is delivered and appointed by the
Physician unto us, and contrariwise, abstaining from all those meats and
excess which may offend and alter our health: Even so, to the end that we may
have the same desire and care to preserve that health for our souls, it is
convenient that we mark diligently all the rules and ordinances of good life,
which God the most high and sovereign Physician, has appointed us: and on the
contrary side, to take heed, to avoid and shun all that which he has
prohibited and forbidden us.

4 Like as it is a great pleasure and joy for a man, who returning home, after
alo^g and wearifome journey unto his own house, finds there his wife, who
comes to take him about the neck, and embraces him, kissing, and making
much of him: this courteous entertainment makes him by and by to forget all
his travel which he has endured in his journey. And contrariwise, if he find
his wife, after his return, brawling, riotous, froward, and who in stead of
comforting him, would all manner of ways vex and torment him: this doing, no
doubt would increase and double his pains and torments, which he has endured
in his long journey: Even such is the estate of the Conscience. Although that
our enemies commit a thousand outrages, violences, and villains against us, if
we returning from our selves, and entering into our own Conscience, find there
one with a cheerful and merry countenance, which does comfort and content
us, it makes us in a moment to forget all our enemies: but on the other side,
if we have an evil Conscience, it wearieth us in such sort, that we shall not
find any house worse then our own, nor any place where we may worse quiet our
selves then with our selves.

5 Lke as an evil Conscience is as a straight bed, in which a man cannot
stretch himself, nor turn himself at pleasure, because it is a hard thing
for a man there to sleep well, and rest quietly: Even so likewise a man which
has a festered Conscience, he cannot find any place or condition to content
him, and which is not altogether too straight for him.

6 As there is no other mean to answer to the judgment of God, and that can
pacify our Consciences, but the righteousness and innocence of Jesus Christ,
and not our own; Even so is it he alone, which can stand us in stead to
satisfy the judgment of our Consciences.

17 Even as untamed horses set to a chariot do ouerturne the same: So unbridled
and unmortified affections ouerruling the understanding, do clean overthrow a
good Conscience.

8 Even as our first Parents Adam and Eve, were cast out of Paradise for
tasting the forbidden fruit: So our Paradise is a good Conscience; the
forbidden fruit, are riches, honor, and pleasure: and therefore if we set our
affections upon riches, honor and pleasures, we must needs be cast from the
fruition of our Paradise a good Conscience.

9 Even as two Turtle Doves, when one eats, the other eats, they sleep
together, yea and die together: Even so a good Conscience and the graces of God
in us, they increase together, and die together.

10 As a fair and bewtifull countenance is pleasant and gracious in a man's
eyes: Even so a good and purified Conscience, is acceptable and delightsome in
the sight of God.

11 As overmuch fullness of the stomach, and superfluity of meats, grows
that obstruction which the Physicians do call oppilation, or stopping,
whereupon breeds a continual headache, and that frenzy, which brings men
to a madness: Even so, of a depraved and dishonest love of this life, of the
corruption of manners, of gluttony and excess eating: does spring an unbridled
and untamed lust, whereof arises that phereneticall madness of heretics,
and a corruption of their understanding in matters of faith: so that they which
care not to keep a good Conscience, do at length fall to an incurable contempt
of faith. 1. Timo. 1.5.19.

12 Like as if we have a child, that by crying is grievous unto us, we seek
to appease and still him, either by threats or promises, by gifts or stripes,
but if he will not be so stilled, either we can send him away from us, or we
our selves go from him, that we may not be troubled with his crying: But our
Conscience once feeling or apprehending the wrath of GGD even but a little,
will never suffer us to be quiet, promise, threaten, give, strike, what ever
you do, still it cries louder and louder, and still it tormenteth: yea when
you seek to send it away, it sticks closer unto you, neither can you depart
from it, for being in you, it is always at hand.

13 Even as he which is troubled with a burning fever, is hotter then he which
is parched with the Sun: So is that man more troubled which has a guilty
Conscience, then a good man by all outward afflictions.

14 As the sick man, when he seems to sleep and take his rest, is inwardly
full of troubles: So the benumbed and drousie Conscience, wants not his secret
pangs and terrors; and when it shall be rowsed and wakened by the judgment of
God, it waxes cruel and fierce like a wild beast.

15 Even as all renewed wounds, are hardly or never cured: So likewise when a
man sins against his Conscience, as much as in him lies, he plungeth
himself into the gulf of desperation: for every wound of the Conscience,
though the smart of it be little felt, is a deadly wound: and he that goes on to
sin against his Conscience, cannot call upon the name of God, for a guilty
Conscience makes a man fly from God.

16 As a Notarie or a Register that has always the pen in his hand, to note
and record whatsoever is said or done, who also because he keeps the Rolls
and Records of the Court, can tell what has been said and done many hundred
years past: Even so the Conscience observes and takes notice of all things
that we do, and inwardly and secretly within the heart, does tell us of them
all.

17 Like as the Master of a prison is known by this to have care over his
prisoners, if he send keepers with them to watch them, and to bring them home
again in time convenient: Even so Gods care to man, is manifest in this, that
when he created man and placed him in the world, he gave him Conscience to be
his Keeper, to follow him always at the heels, and to dog him (as we say)
and to pry into his actions, and to bear witness of them all.

18 Even as a man being to make an unknown journey, should find one that
would go with him, and show him the way, with all the turnings thereof, he
could not but take it for a great point of courtesy: So likewise seeing we are
Pilgrims in this world, our life is our journey, and God also has appointed
our Conscience to be our companion and guide, to show us what course we may
take, and what we may not.

19 As a wild beast, which so long as he lies a sleep seems very tame and
gentle, and hurts no man: but when he is rowzed, he then awakes and flies in a
man's face, and offers to pull out his throat. So likewise it is the manner of a
dead and benumbed Conscience, to lie still and quiet, even through the course
of a man's life: and heerevpon a man would think (as most do) that it were a
good Conscience indeed: but when sickness or death approaches and comes,
it being awaked by the hand of God, begins to stand upon his legs, and shows
his fierce eyes, and offers to rend out even the very throat of the soul.
Gene. 42.2.

20 As all the virtues of natural men are indeed bewtifull sins, and their
Righteousness but a carnal Righteousness: So the Conscience also of a carnal
man, though it excuse him for well doing, is but a carnal Conscience.

21 Like as when a man enters into his house at midnight, he finds or sees
nothing out of order: but let him come in the day time when the Sun shines,
and he shall then epsy many faults in the house, and the very moates that
fly up and down: Even so let a man search his heart in the ignorance and
blindness of his mind, he will straightway think all is well: but let him
once begin to search himself with the light and lantern of the Law, and so he
shall find many foul corners in his heart and Conscience, and many heaps of
sins in his life.

22 As some men seek day and night, from year to year, for honors, riches,
and pleasures, which they must leave behind them: So much more ought we to
seek for renewed and reformed Consciences: considering that Conscience will be
with us in this life: in death, at the last judgment, and for ever.

23 As a man arrayed and apparrelled in cloth of Tishue, set in a chair of
estate, having before him a table furnished with all dainty delicates: his
servants, Monarchs, and Princes, his riches, the chiefest treasures and
Kingdoms of the world: but withal, suppose there were one standing by with a
naked sword to cut his throat, or a wild beast ready ever and anon to pull
him in pieces, we cannot otherwise say, but that this man's estate, and all his
happiness, is yet nothing but woe and misery: Even so such is the estate and
condition of all men, that abounding with riches, honors, and pleasures, carry
about them an evil Conscience, which is a sword to slay the soul, or as a
ravenous beast, ready to suck the blood of the soul, and to rend it in pieces.

24 Like as in governing the Ship on the Sea, the Pilot holding the helm in
his hand, has always an eye to the compass: So we likewise in the ordering
of our lives and conuersations, must always have a special regard to the
Conscience.

25 As God gives to the eye certain lids of flesh, to defend and cover it from
outward injuries: Even so must we use means to avoid whatsoever may offend or
annoy Conscience.

26 Even as a pair of Turtle Doves, when the one feeds, the other feeds;
when one likes not, the other likes not; when the one dies, the other dies: So
where good Conscience is maintained, there are many excellent gifts of God
flourishing, and where Conscience decays, they also decay.

27 As diseases if they be long neglected become incurable: So the Conscience
much and often wounded, admits no comfort; neither will it always boot a man
after many years to say, at the last cast, Lord be merciful unto me; I have
sinned. Though some be received to mercy in time of death, yet far more
perish in desperation, that lived in their sins wittingly and willingly
against their own Conscience. Pharao, Saul, and Judas, cried all Peccaui, I
have sinned against God: yet Pharao is hardened more and more, and perishes:
Saul goes on in his sins and despaireth: Judas made made away himself: And
no marvel, for the multitude of sins oppress the Conscience, and makes the
heart to ouerflowe with such a measure of grief, that it can fasten no affiance
in the mercy of God.

28 As a Ship is on the Sea, if it be not well governed, or if there be a
breach made into it, it draws water and sinks, and so both men and wares, and
all in likelihood are cast away: So we are all as passengers: the world is an
huge Sea through which we must pass: our Ship is the Conscience of every man.
1. Timo. 1.19. and. 3.12. the wares are our Religion and salvation, and all
other gifts of God. Therefore it stands us in hand to be always at the helm,
and to carry our Sip with as even a course as possibly we can, to the
intended port of happiness, which is the salvation of our souls.

Christians.
1 AS wholesome herbs are in some countries growing plentifully, in other
sparingly, somewhere in every high way, otherwhere only in private Gardens,
somewhere again they cannot grow at all: So godly Christians are in some
places many, in other few: somewhere mewed up in close houses, somewhere
again not to be found at all.

2 As some herbs will prosper and grow in the Mountains, some in low grounds,
some in shadowie places, some in sunny places, some in the corn field, some on
the dry heath, some by the salt Sea coast, some by the sweet Rivers: So the
godly Christians grow up, some in high places, some in mean estate, some where
they have defense, and some where they are persecuted, etc.

3 As the bastard Narcissus, or yellow crowbellies, flowreth in February, and
is in flower under the Snow: So true Christians show forth their zeal, in the
coldest time and age, as Wickliefe, etc. in Popery.

4 As Woodrow an herb all of a most pleasant smell, yet loves dark shadowie
places: So many godly Christians of great gifts, love to live obscurely.

5 As some herbs last but a small time, and yet wholesome herbs; and
virtuous for all that: as Monsotaile, Adders-tongue, etc. So many Christians
live but a while, and die in the flower of their time, and yet good Christians
for all that.

6 As Sothernwood will not flower in every country that it will grow in: So
the godly oftentimes profess not, or cannot be suffered to profess openly
where they have been called.

7 As Appelles the Painter, much lamented if he should escape but one day
wrthout drawing some picture or line: So ought a Christian man be sorry, if
that any day should pass without some good work or exercise.

8 As the care of an evil Christian when he is sick, is to desire to be
whole, only to live and enjoy the pleasures of the world: Even so the desire of
a good Christian, when he is diseased, is to be whole; not so much to live, as
to glorify God, and to reform his life.

9 Like as Sheep do know the voice of their own shepherd, and flee from a
stranger: Even so godly Christians, acknowledge Christ only their Teacher,
and will hear only those that Preach his word soundly, and not credit any
other that Preach false doctrine, how great in authority so ever they be; yea
though it were an Angel from heaven. Gal. 1.9.9. John. 13.27.

10 As sheep follow their own shepherd, whither soever he goes: Even so
must faithful Christians follow Christ, in life, in persecution, and in glory,
beholding his life as a pattern, to lead their lives by; by suffering
troubles patiently, so often as it shall please God to lay them upon them, and
so afterward to become partakers of his glory. Math. 11.29. Mat. 20.28. 2.
Cor. 8.9. Phil. 2.5.6.7. 2. Timo. 3.12. and 2.11, 12. 1. Pet. 2.21. and 4.1.13.
2. Timo. 2.12. Iam. 5.10.

11 As in Infidels living honestly, the spirit of God bridleth the force of
sin, and the corrupt nature that it break not out, as it does in many other:
So also in Christians that are indeed godly, the same spirit not only
represseth the corruption of nature outwardly: but also mortifieth it within at
the root, and regenetateth the whole man into a new creature.

12 Like as when a man has a journey to go, his mind is to dispatch it in all
haste, yet when he is in his travel, he goes but slowly, by reason of some
lamenesse in his ioints: Even so likewise many good Christians, who have an
earnest desire and purpose to proceed in virtue and godlynes all their life
long, are yet now and then by the means of their corrupt nature so hindered,
that they cannot perform that duty, so fully and exactly, as they purposed to
have done. Romans 7.15.23.

13 As a candle lights every man in the house: So likewise should the good
behavior, wise dealing, and upright conversation of Christians, shine bright
before men, that God by them may be glorified. Math. 5.15.16. 1. Pet. 2.12.

14 As Doves are innocent, simple, and harmless: Even so Christians ought to
be simple and plain in their callings and behavior one toward an other;
especially such as be professors of the Gospel.

15 As buildings cannot stand except they be borne up by their foundation: So
likewise Christians are in an unstable state, except they stay themselves upon
Christ. 1. Cor. 3.11.

16 Like as good ground, which when it is tilled and sown, brings forth
fruit plentifully: Even so those which receive the word preached gladly,
believe it steadfastly, and express it in life accordingly, are good
Christians. Math. 13.23.

17 As nothing is judged fruitful, but that which brings forth fruit
plentifully: Even so it is not one or two good things whereby Christians are
judged to be good, unless they be filled with the fruit of Righteousness.
Phil. 1.11.

18 Like as Vines being let to grow out at large, in small time become wild
and fruitless: Even so Christians being given over of God, to run whither
flesh and blood would easily be allured, their case is desperate, and their
life fruitless. John. 15.5.

19 As Vines being proyned and dressed in such sort as their nature requires,
are fruitful in yielding both bigger and sweeter Grapes: so godly Christians,
the branches of Christ the true Vine, so long as they abide in him, shall be
manured by God the Father, that careful Husbandman, that their fruit shall be
both in quantity more abundant, and in quality more pleasant unto him.

20 Like as every man that tries maistries, whether it be in running,
wrestling, or buffeting, does with great wariness and diligence forbear the
meats, pleasures, and all other things that weaken the powers of the body, or
which may abate their nimblenesse, and either hinder or disappoint them of the
victory: Even so every Christian sustaining a continual encounter, and
wrestling with the devil, and their own sinful lusts, and outward
enticements, must throughout the whole race of their life, abstain from all
things that offend either God, or godly and weak persons.

21 As the Householder that fears thieves, will cause his house to be
diligently watched and looked unto, least the thief come upon him at unawares:
So likewise Christians should be wary and watchful, and be prepared for the
coming of our Lord and Savior, who will come in an hour wherein we least look
for him. Mat. 24.43. James. 5.7, 8.

22 As bones in men's body being the stronger, bear up the skin and flesh
which is the weaker: So likewise Christians whom God has endued with greater
strength, should learn to bear with many infirmities in others. Romans 15.1.

23 As a tree brings forth first leaves, then blossoms, and then fruit: So
a good Christian ought first to bring forth good thoughts, then good speeches,
and after a godly life, to the honor of God, the good of his children, and the
salvation of his own soul.

24 As our Savior Christ did not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking slaxe, that is, did bear with many infirmities in those which were
his Disciples, least he should break off, or quench those good things which
began to appear in them: Even so such as are sound and strong Christians,
ought also to bear and forbear, to cherish and foster such good things as
they shall perceive to begin to live and grow in their weak brethren. Romans
15.1. 1. Cor. 9.22. Gal. 6.1, 2.

25 Like as men-seruants, and maid-seruants, attend upon their master and
mistress, and yield their duties unto them, upon hope of finding help and
friendship at their hands: even so every good Christian ought to be diligent
and careful to please God, and to be well content to tarry his leisure, for
those graces and mercies which he looks for at his hands. Psalm. 123.2. Math.
8.9.

26 As the child which as yet can use no reason, is for all that a reasonable
creature: and the man in a sown feels no power of life, and yet he is not
dead: So likewise the Christian man has many quames come over his heart, and
he falls into many a sown, that none almost would look for any more life of
Christ in him, yet for all that he may be a true Christian.

27 As strangers and travelers abstain in Countries where they are
strangers, from many things which which would hinder them in their voyage: So
good Christians in their passage through this world, should abstain from the
lusts of the flesh, which hinder their souls from life everlasting. 1. Pet.
2.11.

28 As that unprofitable servant was grievously punished, who had received a
talent of his master, and went and dug it in the earth, and hid it: Even so
such Christians as have received any gifts of God, and do not employ them to
the common use, benefit and profit of the Church and people of God, shall
receive heavy and grievous judgments of God for so doing. Math. 25.30.

29 As Thieves and such other malefactors are executed, and suffer due
punishment according to their deseruings: So all Christians are to take heed
that they deserve not to suffer as murderers, thieves, evil dooers, o^ busy
bodies: but if they suffer for a good Conscience, then they are not to be
ashamed. 1. Pet. 4.15.16.

30 As branches cannot bring forth fruit, except they abide in the Vine: So
likewise Christians cannot bring forth fruits of Righteousness, except they
abide in Christ. John. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

31 Like as they which run or wrestle for the best game, do of their own
accord abstain from all things, which may either make them short winded, or
hinder their lightness, strength, or nimblenesse: Even so much more then ought
Christians cast off, and abstain from all those things, which may hinder them
in the way and course of everlasting life. 1. Cor. 9.25.

32 As an Owl peepes at the Sun out of a barn, but dares not come near it:
So likewise some Christians peep at Religion, and will not come to it, but
stand aloof, pinking and winking, as though they were more afraid of God, then
the devil.

33 Even as a candle, that it may give light unto others, it self is burned
and consumed: or as salt it self is bruised and molten, that it may give good
season, and a sweet savor unto meat: So a true Christian, especially one
advanced to dignity, and placed in authority, should spare no labor, but
even break himself with study and care, and undergo any pains to do good,
to profit many, and to win some souls to God. Math 5.13.14.

34 Like as in great and sore diseases, all the best remedies that can be
devised, are wont to be applied with all speed: Even so the more that
Christians see wickedness and ungodliness to abound, the more ought they to
con^ider by what means they may be remedied, that some may be saved among so
many thousands, which are ^ard-hearted, and enemies to all good warnings.

35 Even as the children of this world, do witness ^hemselues themselves to be
all one with the world, by ^ollowing their worldly lusts, ambition,
covetousness and pleasures: So in like case, Christians show themselves to be
made one with Christ by his holy spirit, when they follow Christ step by
step, and make his life to serve them as a most perfect rule to lead their
life by.

36 Even as the Sailors Gnomon, or rule, which is commonly called the Mariners
Needle, does always look toward the North-poole, and will ever turn toward
the same, howsoever it be placed; which is marvelous in that instrument and
Needle whereby the Mariners do know the course of the winds: Even so every
Christian man, ought to direct the eyes of his mind, and the ways of his
heart, to Christ, who is our North-poole, and that fixed and constant
North-Starre, whereby we ought all to be governed; for he is our hope, and
our trust; he is all our strength, whereupon we must still rely.

37 Like as the Gnomon does ever behold the North-starre, whether it be
closed and shut up in a Coffer of Gold, Silver, or Woodde, never loosing his
nature: So a faithful Christian man, whether he abound in wealth, or be
pinched with poverty, whether he be of high, or low degree in this world,
ought continually to have his faith and hope, surely built and grounded upon
Christ; and to have his heart and mind fast fixed and settled in him; and to
follwe him through thick and thin, through fire and water, through wars
and peace, through hunger and cold, through friends and foes, through a
thousand perilles and dangers, through the surges and waves of envy, malice,
hatred, evil speeches, railing sentences, contempt of the world, flesh, and
devil; and even in death it self, be it never so bitter, cruel and
tyranicall, yet never to loose the sight and view of Christ, never to give
over our faith, hope, and trust in him. Can. 8.6. Psalm. 16.8, 9. Heb. 12.2.

38 As all Rivers of waters go into the Sea, because they came out of it, and
so return to the place whence they came: So likewise every good Christian
ought to go and prease toward GOD, with all his heart, strength, and power,
because he came out from him, and was created of him. He ought therefore to
look upon him with the eyes of a steadfast and constant faith, grounded upon
his word. Eccle. 1.7.

39 Even as in the midst of the Sphere, is the Center, from which all lines
being drawn, do tend toward their circumference: So a good Christian man,
has God for his circumference: for whatsoever he thinks, speaks, or does,
it tends to Christ, of whom he is compassed round about. Psalm. 32.10. and
91.4. etc. and 125.2.

40 As some Infidels that know not Christ but are mere strangers unto him, do
think it better to loose their lives, then to violate their promises and
oaths made to their enemies: even so much more Christians in such cases ought
to be true and constant. Ezech. 17.18, 19. Iosu. 9.14.18.

41 Even as men's hands were made, that the one might help the other, and the
feet also, because they be members of one and the same body: So is it the
duty of all Christians, one to succor and to relieve an other in afflictions
and troubles, seeing the Church of God, is a certain body whereof we are
members. 1. Cor. 12.26, 27. Ephe. 5.30.

42 As it should be against nature, that one foot should hinder or smite an
other: So, it is very unreasonable, and ungodly, that one Christian should not
comfort and relieve an other, in their tribulations and wants. Gal. 6.2.

43 Like as if Herbs watered do still continue dry, we justly say they are
dead: So likewise we cannot aduow or assure our selves to be Christians,
watered with the spirit of Christ, so long as in stead of bearing fruit by
amendment of life, we continue dry and withered.

44 As he is not rightly called a rich man, that can tell how and by what
means a man may be exceeding rich; but he that has riches of his own, and
does possess them: So he is not a good and right Christian man, that can
according to knowledge, dispute and reason of virtue and godliness; and can
describe and define of the same: but he that is endued with virtue, and
possessed with true godliness, and does most willingly practice the same in
the whole course of his life, both with his friends, and with his foes: that
man, and such a woman, is rightly called, and is indeed a true Christian, in
whom the Lord has great delight. 1. Cor. 8.1.

45 As burning candles do give light until they be consumed: So likewise godly
Christians must be occupied in doing of good, so long as they shall live. Gal.
6.9.10.

46 As unto the ungodly man, said God, why do thou Preach my Laws, and
take my covenant in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to me reformed, and haste
cast my words behind thee? So we may be well assured, that it is not enough for
Christians to have the Gospel in their mouths, but they must express the
truth thereof in their lives: for is not enough to have the name of a
Christian, but to be found a Christian indeed.

47 As nature helped not Abraham's own children, but because they lacked
Abraham's works, they are called Devils sons: So likewise the bare and naked
name of a Christian without virtue, is a bare title without verity; and
profits not any at all.

48 As the Paschall Lamb was eaten with sour herbs and unleavened bread: So
the faithful Christian ought to repent him of his evil life past, and to give
himself to purity of life. Exodus 12.8.

49 Even as a man that passes through a strong flood or stream on foot,
least he stumble and fall down, sets his eye steadily upon the firm Land
which he minds to attain unto, and marketh not the swift course of the
water, and so goes over safely and is nothing dismayed: So likewise a sound
and good Christian, passing the raging waves of present troubles, turns away
his sight, his thought, and all apprehension, that he might otherwise have of
the misery of them; and lifting up his eyes to heaven, beholds there with a
spiritual regard, the inestinable treasures of the heavenly inheritance which
he strives unto, and by this means easily surmounteth all horror and fear
of torments and griefs, which commonly make alterations in men's heads, and
casts them headlong into desperation.

50 Even as every beast that is stricken with lightning, turns his face toward
the lightning: So likewise if Christians will have regard to God when he
pleases them, he will compel them also to have an eye to him when he strikes
them. Psalm. 78.34.5.

51 Like as the deawy drops, after great heat does cherish the grass: Even so
good Christians do bring forth works of mercy, pity, comfort, and
refreshing, to the people amongst whom they do live and are conversant. Mica.
5.7.

Commonwealth.
1 AS they which do learn Music at the first, do leese, break, and mar
sundry Instruments, as Gitterns and Lutes: So the Commonwealth susteineth
great detriment and loss, wherein Magistrates rude and unskillful do rule.

2 As it is a thing most hard and dangerous, to root up old trees, and to
plant them of new: So without great tumult and uproar, you cannot alter the
old custom and usage of the Commonwealth.

3 As water mingled with wine, makes it more moderate: So old men, joined
with young men, in the administration of the Commonwealth, is most necessary.

4 Even as a body without a soul, is dead, because it uses not the sinews,
joints, nor members: So that Commonwealth, or that City, may well and truly
be said to be dead, where good Laws, godly Statutes, and holy Ordinances are
not used and put in practice, which are the sure binding bands of man's
society, and the principal parts of a Commonwealth.

Common people.
AS they which frequent and haunt the school of defense, do live, strive,
contend, and fight one with an other: So of the Common People, one loves, the
other spoileth each other.

Careless men, who forbear to do well, because others will not do so.
1 LIke as if an Householder having many servants, and much work for them
abroad in the Country, should give them a general commandment to work
faithfully together in their common business, and that some of those servants
would in their Masters absence be idle and loyter: yet the rest of the
servants ought not to be idle, because the other will in no wise consent unto
them in the performance of that their appointed task: So likewise those
careless Christians, who in a carnal security neglecting the charge of the
Lord, and imagining a delay in his coming, shall begin to eat and drink with
the drunkards, and to be drunken themselves, and so in playing the loyterers
together, they shall justly deserve to be plagued together; for as they have
sinned together, so shall they receive their portion together. Math. 24.45.46.
etc. and 25.1. etc. Luke. 12.45, 46, 47.

Careless and negligent in good things.
1 AS Tiberius the Emperor, who being desirous to have canonized Christ, among
the number of Saints, thought it expedient first to have therein the consent of
the Senate; but while he waited for their consent, Christ was vncanonized,
whereas Tiberius might very well have done it himself: So it is with Careless
Christians, which in a matter so manifest, will yet weight for others consent,
to the hazard of their own salvation, and discovery also of their obstinate
folly.

2 Like as if many consenting together to play the good fellows (as they call
it) had played the unthrifts, and so had consumed their portions, and
inheritance, and were thereby become the most ^eggerly Banquerouts on earth,
and heerevppon ^he Prince being moved with pity, should say to one of them,
if thou will now forsake the company of that unthrifty assembly, and attend
wholely upon my pleasure, and become more honest and thriftie hereafter, I will
freely bestow such a Lordship upon thee: If heerevpon this man should say to
the Prince: I will none of your gift, unless these my companions shall give
their consent to the same: in thus doing he should show himself a wilful and
an unwise man: Even so is the case of al Christians, we are all become
prodigal children, we have all run astray; we have wasted our portions, and
are become utterly destitute of all goodness; the Lord notwithstanding in his
word, does freely offer unto us a Kingdom, so that we will forsake this
perverse and froward generation, with whom we are linckt, as in a cursed
community. Shall therefore any good Christian who feels the want, and finds
a desire in himself of the proffered possession, withhold himself from the
same, for that other his former companions will not grant their consent? we
hope no. And therefore such as are wise and fear God, will not prolong to turn
unto him by true and unfeigned repentance, until such time as all both tagge and
ragge, shall consent to the same, for fear Mat. 25.10.
the gate be shut: but rather will say with Joshua, Iosu. 24.15.
If it seem evil in your eyes, etc. Assuring themselves, that if there be but
Genesis 6.18.
eight souls in the whole world, one family Iosu. 24.15.
in a Tribe, one household Genesis 19.15.
in a City, yea but two men Nom. 14.24.30. Iosu. 14.6.
among many thousands: when God shall begin to visit the disobedience of the
wicked, and to hurl them headlong to hell: then such as harken diligently to
his voice, shall be Psalm. 36.8. and. 91.4.7.
safe under his wings, his faithfulness and truth shall be their shield and
buckler.

Charity.
1 AS the fire in all workehouses is the Instrument of all Arts, and the
means to make things well liked of amongst men: So in the life of man, nothing
is well done without love and Charity. 1 Cor. 13.1. etc.

2 As Gold does excel all mettalls, is rare and dear, and more fair and
durable: Even so Charity does excel all virtues, and cease not, but is
permanent. 1. Cor. 13.13.

3 As the body without the soul enjoys no life: So all other virtues without
Charity, are cold and fruitelesse.

Correction.
1 AS salues at the beginning do smart, and yet at the length do heal the
wound: So the Correction of the Father or Schoolemaister, though it seem
rigorous and sharp, yet it saves the child from the sincke of vices and
vanities. Pro. 13.24. and 19.18. and 22.15. and 23.13.

2 As the skilful Physician will not give his strong and bitter pill before his
preparatiue, least the working of it should be hindered by the stubborn and
indurate obstructions: Even so the wise parent in curing his sons vices, must
not strike before he has reprehended or premonished; least he be too much cast
down and discouraged, or wax obstinate. Pro. 13.24. and 22.15.

3 As Physicians, Surgions, and Apothecaries, are necessary in a Town for the
cure of sickness and bodily wounds: Even so are rods and chastisement for
the Correction of the corruptions of the soul. Pro. 19.18. and 23.18. and
29.15.17.

4 Like as Plants reasonably watered do take heart and grow, but too much
moisture does drown and choke them: Even so is it with the minds of
children: moderate exercise and labor, aduanceth them to goodness; but too
much Correction and oppression, dulleth and spoileth them. Col. 3.21.

5 As we use to slack the strings of our bows and lutes, to make them the
stiffer, and to hold the better, when we list to shoot or play: So likewise
it is needful that Parents and Schoolemaisters should require no more o^ their
children and scholars, then they are able to do, least they discourage them,
and make them to hate their study, or any other thing whereto they would bring
them.

6 Like as if we should see a mad man run unto a steep dangerous place,
it were much better to stay him, and cause him to be bound, and to be
corrected, then to let him go and break his neck: Even so it is in
correcting and punishing of offenders and wicked livers.

7 As doctrine is cold without reprehension: So are threatenings without
Correction. Zepha. 3.1, 2.

Persecution a means to enlarge the Church.
1 EVen as the Palm Tree, the more it is laden and pressed down, the more it
grows, and stretches out, or spreads his boughs in length and breadth: So
likewise the Church, the more she is persecuted and afflicted, the more force,
courage, and liveliness, she takes to her self. Psalm. 92.12. Act. 4.3, 4.
and 11.19.20, 21. Phil. 1.12, 13, 14.

2 Like as Roses and Lillies are accustomed to flourish and to increase among
thorns: So this is a common thing to the Church, to flourish and to increase
in the midst of Persecutions. Exodus 1.12.

3 As he that binds fire in his Napking, does not extinguish the same fire,
but burns his Napking, and so the fire is made greater: Even so they which
persecute the godly, do only make them more famous, and bring themselves to
destruction.

Christ the Redeemer of mankind.
1 LIke as the Sun is said to be a general light to every thing, although
there be that receive no light at all at it: Even so Christ is called the
light of the world, although a great number have no part of the grace of his
light, yet his Redemption is universal, because it is so appointed unto all
men, that without it, none is, nor can be redeemed. John. 8.12. and 9.5. 1.
Timo. 2.6.

Christ received by faith.
1 A As the natural body receives life from the head, and is dead without it:
and as the branch, though it be never so near the Vine-stock, yet if it abide
not in it, and grow not in it, has no life there from, and therefore
withers: and if it abide in it, then it likes and fructifieth. And as the
hungry and thirsty man has not the benefit of meat and drink to live by,
by coming where it is, seeing it, and knowing it, but by eating and drinking
thereof, and digesting it, so that by force of nature, there grow an union
betwixt him and his meat: Even so it is as necessary that the faithful be
united to their head Christ spiritually, engrafted into him and grow in him by
faith, and that every one that would be saved, eat him and drink him, and
that so effectually, as that he may be their spiritual food. For if it be
thus, they shall live for ever by him; otherwise, they remain in death,
wither, and must perish. Neither is it sufficient that we hear or read of
him and his merits and passion, but they must be received by faith. Col.
1.18. Ephe. 1.22.23. John. 6.53, 54, 55.

2 As meat and drink being set before us, is taken in by eating thereof to our
temporal nourishment: Even so Christ is as surely apprehended of us by faith
to our spiritual maintenance in the word preached, and Sacraments ministered,
which are the dishes wherein one and the selfsame Christ is offered unto us.

3 As the Soul naturally joined to the body, brings forth her effects: So
Christ dwelling in us by faith and the holy Ghost, after a spiritual manner,
and by a spiritual virtue, does show his power in us, to enable us to resist
sin, and to bridle the corrupt desires of the flesh. 1. Pet. 4.1.

4 As there can be no eating without taking or receiving of meat: So no
believing in Christ, without a spiritual receiving and apprehending of him.

How the two Tables of the 10. Commandments be alike.
AS one man may be like an other in nature and quality, although the one
exceed the other in greatness, degree, and dignity, etc. Even so the second
Table of the 10. Commandments, is like in quality and condition, unto the
first; yet they are not equal; for the first is in degree of more dignity and
excellency, then the second. Math. 22.39.

Confession of our evil deeds to God.
1 LIke as Beggars if they have any good thing, do conceal and hide it, and
do only show their rags, and their soars, whereby they may move and stir
the compassion of the beholders to pity them: Even so it behooves us, not to
boast our good deeds before God (as the Pharisie did) but to profess and
confess our evil deeds, if we will provoke the Lord his mercy toward us,
as the Publican did. Luke 18.9.10.11, etc.

2 As a man that has money to pay, whilst he has it in his hand, is loath
to part with it, but when he has once paid it, he is glad that it is
discharged, and would not for any thing it were to pay again: Even so men,
before they have confessed their sins, are unwilling to disburthen themselves
of them: but when Confession is once made, they have eased their hearts, and
discharged their consciences, conceiving such comfort, as they would not for
all the world it were to do again. Psalm. 91, 1, 2. etc.

3 As they which have in their stomachs meat undigested, or store of ill
humors, are eased if they vomit them up: So if sinners and evil dooers do
Confess their sins to God, they shall find ease in their souls and
consciences.

Proud Persecutors, which think that without Gods leave, they may deal as
they list with Christians.
LIke as King Kantus, sometime King of this Realm, standing by the water side
aftet a great rain, and marking how the water did rise, which by leisure so
increased, that it wet his feet where he stood, and he being so proud in
heart, thought that whatsoever he said, every thing would obey; straight
commanded the water that ^t should arise no further, nor wet his masters
feet any more: but when he saw that the water rose still, and would not obey
him, but ran into his shoes, he perceived his foolishnes, and confessed
there was a God and ^ King above him, whom only the waters would obey: Even so
all greedy Churles and covetous Cormorants shall well perceive, (when they
have wrought themselves weary, and gotten little) that all increase comes from
the lord, and not of themselves. Psalm. 75.6.7. and 127.1, 2. ^ro. 10.22. Luke
5.5.6.

Christ a most wholesome medicine and and salve to all poor sinners.
1 AS the brazen Serpent was elevated and lifted up in the Desert by Moses, for
to heal all those that did look upon it: So it was necessary that our
Savior Jesus Christ (as he himself does witness) should be hanged upon the
Cross, and lifted up on high, for to heal all those that be deadly stung and
wounded by the old Serpent the devil. Nomb. 21.8. John. 3.14. and 12.31, 32,
33.

2 As the brazen Serpent had the figure, form, and shape of a Serpent, and yet
it was no Serpent, no nor yet had any venom or poison: So our Savior Christ
did take upon him the shape of a sinner, and yet he was no sinner, but was and
is a most wholesome medicine and sovereign salve unto all poor sinners, that
do behold and look upon him by faith, and that seek for salvation no where
else, but in the only merits of his death and passion. Heb. 4.15.

3 As there was no Physic, Medicine, or Salve, that could heal those that
were stung of the fiery Serpents, but only the looking upon the braze^ Serpent
that was erected and set up by the commandment of God: Even so have we no
manner of Physic or salve against sin, and everlasting death, or any other
object or mark set before the eyes of our faith to behold, for to bring soul,
health, and salvation unto us, but only Jesus Christ, being crucified, who is
given unto us of God. For it does not belong unto us to choose the medicine or
salve, but it pertains to God our sovereign Physician, who alone is able to
heal us from this deadly sickness, who also alone knows what medicine or
salve is necessary for us.

4 And as it is not in our power to find the medicine of salvation: so can we
not of our selves find the manner and means how to use and apply the same:
For as in the sickness of the body, the sick person when he is past all hope
of health, and utterly dispayred, that it is needful for the skillful
Physician, not only to find and prepare the medicine, but also dispose the
sick person, so as he will and may use this medicine, and that he may
understand rightly how to use and apply it: So the sickness of the soul,
which is most precious above all things, and in the which makinde is not only
ignorant, but also enemies of their own salvation, then we must understand by
our Savior Christ the Physician of the soul, what is the medicine, and then
after what manner it must be used; yea and in such wise, that the same our
Physician Christ Jesus, do prepare and make us apt and meet, that we both
will and can use these remedies, which he has prepared and appointed for us,
or else it will be no profit, nor stand us in any stead.

Christ our second husband by faith.
LIke as if a woman be discharged from her first Husband being dead, and has
married an other man, the first Husband has no power over her: Even so we now
being espoused unto Christ our second Husband by faith, are freed utterly from
our first husband the Law, and (as the Apostle says) are no more under the
Law, but under grace; that is, under perpetual remission of sins; committed
not only before our Justification, but as well also after, and during all our
life long.

Christ our spiritual food.
AS verily as bread does serve for the nourishing and strength of the body,
and wine for the comfort thereof: So and as certainly to the inward man, in
Faith Christ is bread to the soul, and wine to the mind, and we mystically
made one in him, and he in us, feed on him, and he our spiritual food.

The last Commandment explaned.
1 AS the Lord by the former Commandments of the second Table, does utterly
condemn and forbid all wicked deeds, words, and counselles, that be hurtful
to our neighbor, and which go with deliberation and consent, with all full
purposes and conclusions to evil: Even so in the last Commandment, to the
end that he might touch us the nearer, whereby we might the better perceive
our own imperfections and weakness, he most straightly charge that our
hearts should be so pure and clean, that no evil thoughts, motions, desires,
concupiscences, lusts, delights, inclinations, or natural infections of
original sin, should once creep into our hearts. Gene. 6.5. Math. 5.28.
Romans 6.12. and 7.7. Iam. 1.14.

2 Like as if a woman were by unlawful act defiled, it were not simple
fornication, but adultrie, though the defiler knew not that she was married: So
we must judge also of lust and concupiscence, when one is coueted, not as
though she were married, but as one unmarried, and free in respect of a married
woman; whosoever coueteth her, coueteth his neighbors wife, whether he do it
wittingly, or ignorantly: as Pharaoh and Abimelech did. Gene. 12.15. etc. and
20.2, 3. etc.

3 Like as that man is desperate of his salvation, and provoke the anger of
God toward him, that says: If I shall be culpable in the sight of God for
the concupiscence of my heart, as well as though I do commit the fact,
therefore I will add unto my lust and concupiscence, the fact which it
desires, that I may carry away some pleasure of my sin, and not be damned
for nothing: So likewise it is the part of a faithful Christian man, to
acknowledge and bewail the sin and uncleanness of his heart, to lament for
it, and to fly unto the mercy of God, by faith in Christ our Savior; and to
withstand with all his power, the naughty desires and motions of the heart,
that so he may (for Christ his sake) be made partaker of the grace of God, and
true health and salvation.

4 As in this Commandment is forbidden all evil desires: So also by the
same, is commanded all good desires, good affections, good inclinations to
godly things, and the perfect obedience of our hearts, unto Gods will, and to
wish and desire that our neighbor may quietly possess and enjoy all that
which God has sent him, be it more or less.

5 As the Lord by the former Commandments, does command that the rule of
Charity should govern our wills, studies, and works: So he now commands
the conceptions of our mind, to be directed to the same rule, that there be
none of them crooked, and writhen, that may provoke our mind an other way.

6 As he has forbidden our mind to be bowed, and led into wrath, hatred,
fornication, robbery, and lying: so he does now forbid us to be moved
thereunto, by any lust or desire.

7 Like as a man purposing to destroy a tree, yet does no more then loppe and
shred off certain boughs and twigges, leaving the stumpe and root behind,
deceives himself: Even so likewise, so long as lust and concupiscence does
live in men, they may well seem in the eyes of men, to be very great conuerts,
if of ignorant idiots they are become such as have gotten some skill and
knowledge: or as if of dunkards, ruffians, adulterers, and such like, they
become sober and modest, and of good behavior; as this may be done before men,
and yet the heart nothing altered before God: for there be many causes which
may move men to seem outwardly to be godly, when the heart within is fraught
and laden with loathsome lusts, and full of rotten corruptions, which make them
still altogether abominable before God, and thus they have hereby gained
nothing.

8 As the Lord our God requires account of every idle word: Math. 12.36: So
likewise requires he tribute and account of wicked lusts and thoughts,
arrayneth them, makes them hold up their hand at the bar, keeps a court
for them, and sets fines and amerciments upon the heads of them.

Pope no Christian.
1 LIke as Judas bare the name of a Desciple and Apostle, and called Christ
master, when, and at such time, as he endeavored altogether to spoil Christ,
both of his authority and life: Even so the Pope and all his confederates,
although they boast themselves to be Christians, pretending the name of Christ,
yet they both rob Christ of his authority, and also men of their salvation.

Math. 26.49.
2 As the Lords who made the last rebellion in the North, charged the inferior
sort in the Queens Majesty's name, to put on Armor, and to come into the
field, as though it had been in defense of her Majesty, whereas their purpose
was the destruction of her royal estate, and the subversion of her Kingdom,
that they themselves might have reigned: Even so in like manner deals the Pope
and his affinity, concerning Christ and his Kingdom.

Corrupters of Princes are most severely to be punished.
1 LIke as they do most grievously offend, which do infect with poison a common
well or conduite, where all men do draw water: So likewise they deserve worst
of a Commonwealth, which corrupt the mind of a Prince with pernicious and
wicked counsels.

2 As he ought to suffer the greater punishment, which throws poison, not
into one Cup, but into the whole vessel, whereof every one should drink:
So offend they the most, and are therefore with all extremity to be tormented,
which do corrupt the nature and disposition of Princes.

Comforts for the afflicted.
1 LIke as a Father having a young Infant sick of some sore disease, though
the child can speak never a word, is ready to help it: and if it can
speak, yet being full of pain, cannot call for things as it ought, yet if the
mother can but by any signs guess at the meaning of it, she will accept as
much of it, as if it had spoken very plentifully: yea though it should say one
thing, and mean an other, she would give it according to the meaning of it:
Even so the Lord that is filled with the bowels of compassion toward us in
Christ, far above any father or mother, though he delights to hear us
pray unto him, yet when as by the extremity of our miseries, we are oppressed
or distracted, so that we cannot in any orderly manner pray unto him as we
ought, he allows of the sighs and sobbes that we offer up unto him, and
grants not so much our words (which are none or few) as the meaning of his
spirit, which is plentiful in us. Psalm. 103.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Romans
8.26. 2. Cor. 1.3, 4, 5. Isa. 38.14.

2 Like as if one in a burning Fever should in the midst of his sit ask cold
water, and his friend the Physician should in stead of that, give him a
wholesome medicine, should in denying that particular thing demanded, grant
unto his general meaning, which was, that he might have that which might do
him most good, though now being distempered, he was not able to judge of it,
but did take one thing for an other: So whatsoever we ask in our distress,
our meaning must needs be, if it be ruled by Gods spirit, that we would have
that which might procure our best good: therefore if the Lord turn our crosses
to our good, though we prayed for the clean taking away of them, he
fulfilleth both these promises at once. Romans 8.28. 2. Cor. 12.8, 9.

3 Like as if the Physician through his skill, can cure a man by taking away
his blood and humors, by cutting and searing his flesh, which of themselves
are hurtful: if he can by art so temper that which is poison (as the vipers
flesh) temper it with other wholesome things, and correct it with those that be
cordial, that of it, he will make a sovereign Treacle, even that which shall
expel poison, and so make that which could cause death, to be a preserver of
life: Even so, shall not the Lord by his infinite wisdom, and almighty power,
who brings light out of darkness, and good out of evil, and calls the
things that be not, as though they were; shall not he be much more able by the
most grievous crosses that can befall us, work the greatest good for us that
may be: so that when we would hope for good by our afflictions, and so be
comforted in them, we are not so much to look to the things themselves, how
they are like to work upon us; as the promise which the Lord has made unto us
concerning this matter, and so to be sure that the Lord himself will work our
good hereby, because he has said it?

4 As it is all one if the fearful Patient should have not one, but a whole
company of Physicians saying unto him, that undoubtedly this medicine is like
to do you good, we know the working of it well, and have had great experience
of it in many, you need not to fear it, take it upon our credit; this would
much move him: So no doubt this should correct the too much fear that is in
us, of being hurt by the cross, that we hear so many excellent and famous
men very skillful therein, to speak so boldly unto us of the benefit of it:
Even those whom wear most ready to believe in all other things, why then
should we not do so in this?

5 As the Mother by some unpleasant thing, weaneth the child from the breast,
upon which it would otherwise always linger to the hurt of it, now when
stronger meat is more fit for it: Even so the Lord weaneth us by affliction
from the love of this world, and thus turns it unto our good.

6 As the fire does not hurt the Gold, in consuming the dross, and the file in
taking away the rust: and the purgation in expelling ill humors: So
afflictions causing us to abhor and leave some sin or other, which if we
continued in, would destroy us; may truly be said to work our good.

7 As Physic serves not only to cure us of the diseases we are fallen into,
but to preserve us from them in some tolerable health: Even so the cross both
recouereth us out of sin, when we are fallen into it, and preuenteth many,
that otherwise might creep upon us.

8 As some sickly bodies are driven to diet themselves, and are in continual
Physic to prevent that which their corrupt estate would otherwise necessarily
pull upon them: So likewise some are always, or the greatest part of their
lives, in the diet of affliction, not so much to bring them from gross and
grievous sins, which they are not yet fallen into, as to keep them from
falling, which the Lord knows they are ready to do, in respect of their
ages, callings, and places that they live in.

9. As untamed Heyfers, which are kept from straying out of their pastures,
with hedges and ditches: Even so the Lord puts thorns and briars in our ways,
as Hoseah says, 2.6. that is, lays affliction upon us, and so as it it were,
stops the way that we might not break forth by disobedience to our hurt.
Psalm. 119.67.71.

10 As a father spares not the rod, till his child be thereby humbled, to
the confession and amendment of his fault, because his purpose is to do him
good, when as notwithstanding, he lets his servant go, when he sees that
he will not profit by words, or a few stripes, as not caring for him: So the
Lord when he spares the wicked in their sins, and reserueth them to further
judgment, correcting his own children, again and again, shows that his
purpose is to do him good.

11 As a wise and careful Physician, who purposing not so much to give
Physic unto his sick Patient, as to cure him thereby, if the first medicine
will do it, there he leaves him; if not, he applies one medicine after an
other, because he has a diligent care of him: and if at any time he makes
intermission, it is because the Patients weakness, whom he would by that
means to gather some strength, not that he means to leave him: Even so the
Lord purposing according to his word, by affliction to do us good, when by the
first cross we profit not as we ought, then either he lets it lie the
longer upon us, or removing it, sends an other in stead of it, though not
presently, because we could not bear it, yet afterward, when it seems best
unto him.

12 Like as when a man's body is so distempered, and some member so putrified,
then it is best for him to have his blood taken away from him, to be launced
and seared, yea to have a part cut off: Even so when any affliction or
calamity does befall us, let us not be discontented therewith, or be impatient,
but submitting our judgments and wills, to the judgment and will of God, let
us quietly endure, seeing the Lord gives us that, not which we fondly desire
as the best, but which he knows to be, and is indeed the best.

13 As the sick Patient cannot as he is man, but feel the launcing and
searing of his flesh, and so complain of it with great grief, yea cry out
for the extremity of pain, though he knows it to be best for him then, and
therefore does after a sort most willingly suffer it: Even so some are so full
of complaints in their afflictions, because they are not persuaded at that
time, that the very thing is sent for their most special good, and therefore
such are to meditate upon this heretofore set down, concerning this matter.

14 As in worldly matters we will bear many things at the hands of them whom
we love, as the child at the mother, the husband at the wife; and one friend at
an other: Even so, how much more ought we to bear al things at the hands of
God, whom we know so loves us in Christ, and therefore we ought so to love him
again, and no doubt would bear, if there were that love in us which ought to be.

15 Like as when the child has offended his father, he should say to his
servant in his anger; Take him out of my sight and punish him, it would be more
grievous then if he should take correction of him himself: Even so it may
minister unto us some comfort, that in afflictions we know that we are under
our Fathers hand, and that he has not delivered us unto any other to be
tormented. Romans 8.29. Psalm. 66.10.

16 As in a family great is the privilege of the eldest brother, and none
must look to go beyond him, nay every one cannot be like unto him; and if any
might come to as great an inheritance as he, by doing those things which he
did before them, they might not refuse the condition, unless they would prefer
themselves before him: So likewise seeing it has pleased the Lord to
consecrate the Prince of our peace through affliction: Heb. 2.10. and he came
unto glory no other way then this, we must think it good for us to go the
same way, that we might be like unto him, and so by our practice, show that
we acknowledge him to be the Prince of our peace, and our eldest brother.

17 Even as he is the chief and principal in the Commonwealth, in the
Church, in a private family, and in any place, that all desire to be like
unto: So when we are contented to be like unto Christ in any thing, even in
the Cross, then shall we declare that we hold him to be the chief and
principal; and as it is said, The first begotten among many brethren.

18 Howsoever there is great difference between the head and the rest of the
members, yet there is a certain conformity between the members of the same
body, and the head, and all of them are inferior unto it: Even so, howsoever
there is no comparison betwixt Christ and us, yet we must be like him in this,
that we must not be above him; and therefore not to refuse any condition tha^
he has undergone before, unless we would preposteriously prefer our selves
the members, before him our head: which were to darken the glory of him that
is the first borne; and to stain the honor of him, that is the Prince of our
peace.

19 As it were a disorder if the subjects would refuse to do that which the
Prince had done before; or if the younger brethren should think much to be
brought up that way that the heir has been before: Even so when we shall
refuse to bear the cross which our Savior Christ by the appointment of his
father, has borne in greater measure then we shall, or can; it is nothing else
but to lift up our selves above him, and to say that we will not be conformable
unto him, as to our Prince, or eldest brother.

20 As it did not repent Joseph, that he first enduring the prison, was
afterward made ruler in Egypt: or Jacob that he came to inherit his fathers
blessing at the last, by a long exile and tedious bondage: or as it did not
repent the Israelites, that by passing through a forlorn Wilderness forty
years, they came to the land of promise in the end: Even so we must not
prescribe the Lord any thing in the matter of our salvation, but think our
selves happy that we are saved any way: yea if we went to heaven by hell, and
when we are come thither, we shall find the joys so far surpass all
troubles and adversities whatsoever, that we shall never repent us of the
hardness of the way.

21 Like as if one bleed at his nose, so that he be ^n some danger of life,
the best way to remedy the ^he same, is to change the course of the blood, by
letting him blood in an other place: Even so, seeing there is no Comfort in
worldly poverty, but we think our selves most miserable, we must turn our
eyes to our spiritual poverty, and so we shall ere it be long find comfort.

22 Like as if one that were blind should be suddenly taken and carried to
some punishment, he knew not by whom, he might greatly fear what would be
the end or measure of it: Or if one should be dealt withal as is the manner of
the Spanish Inquisitours, to put the poor soul in the greater fear, if he
should have a tormenter sent unto him very ugly disguised, who should carry
him into a dark place, he knew not whither, that might increase the grief of
his affliction the more, but if when he were in the midst of it, he should
hear the voice of his father, and so perceive that it were his father that
corrected him, though so disguised, it might somewhat diminish his fear: Even
so, howsoever it be true, that every cross is so much the more uncomfortable
unto us, because we look not up unto him that sends it, and we are so
blind, that we consider not who strikes us, yet when we hear out of the
word, the voice of our father speaking unto us, and telling us that it is he
that deals with us, how strange and deformed soever the tormenter may seem
to be, let us not be too much discouraged, because that even when he strikes
us, the bowels of compassion in him, do yearne upon us, more then in a mother
toward her children, and he seeks thereby to do us good.

23 As a Noble man will have all his servants to wear one liuerie, that they
might be known: So the Lord would have all his children known by one badge;
even the badge that he put upon his eldest son Christ, which was the cross;
therefore none of us the younger brethren, must refuse it.

Covetousness.
1 AS the subtle fawning Spaniel, oftentimes fetches his Masters glove, in
hope to change it for a better morsel: Even so many men show great kindness
and give rewards, to the end to reap them double again.

2 Like as the infected member of a man vexed with an itch, is always clawing
and rubbing: Even so the covetous mind, is restless in seeking and gathering
together.

3 As fire is never sufficed with wood, nor the earth with water: Even so the
covetous man is never satisfied with money.

4 As the grave is open to receive dead Carcasses: or as hell is never full:
Even so the coffer of the covetous cormorant, is never contented.

5 As the stiller the water runs, the deeper is the River; and the more
deep, the more dangerous: Even so, the longer Almighty God suffers the
Covetous man to sin uncontrolled, the greater is his sin, and the more
grievous is the punishment that attends thereon in the day of account. Haba.
2.9.

6 As Covetousness is evil, yea the evil of all evils: So likewise it makes
those men as bad as it is, which are infected with the same; and as hateful in
Gods sight, as that sin it self; for that the effect is like the cause. 1.
Timo. 6.10. Psalm. 10.3. Exodus 18.21. Luke 12.15. Mar. 10.22.

7 As Cattle do keep the Pastors bare, with continual grazing upon them; so
does the covetous over awe the poor by endless oppression, and merciless
dealing. Iere. 6.13.15. Amo. 8.4. etc.

8 Like as if a sick man be laid in a bed of Iuerie or gold, or of wood, his
disease forsakes him never the sooner: Even so, whether you entreat the
Covetous by these sweet promises made by Almighty God in his holy Gospel, or
threaten them by his dreadful Judgments pronounced in his fearful Law, they
make never the more haste to repentance. Ezech. 18.1. tote.

9 As the Wax is pliable to every print: Even so the Covetous man's hand, is
ready to receive every bribe.

10 As the Ass, that notwithstanding he carries the meat for his masters
belly, and the clothes for his back, yet himself does feed upon grass, and
contenteth himself with one hairs skin: Even so the Covetous man, whose
Chests are stuffed with money, and his wardrope with apparel, such misery
has assaulted his soul, that he can hardly afford his belly a good meals
meat, or cover his back with a good coat.

11 As the Be brings sweet honey in his mouth, and a sharp sting in his
tail: Even so Covetousness has pleasure in this life, and pain in the life
to come.

12 Like as they that will tame wild bulls, must wear no read garments: So
likewise they that will no evil do through Covetousness, must do nothing
that belongs thereto.

13 As God punished both Ely the Priest and his two soones: the father for not
correcting them, and the sons for sinning so grosely: So likewise will he
plague both the Covetous man, for the evil getting of his money, and his
children for possessing that which is none of their own. 1. Sam. 2.12. etc.
and 3.11. etc. and 4.14, 15. etc.

14 As the glutton that ouerchargeth his stomach with meat, is compelled to
spew, and cast it up again: So the greedy covetous Cormorant, that gathers
great riches, and deuoureth and swalloweth up great substance, shall loose it
again; for God shall even draw it out of his belly. Psalm. 37.16. and 39.6.

15 As a River whose spring is small, yet by receiving other brooks and
streams, grows strong and violent: Or as they that are sick of the Dropsy,
who by drinking are never satisfied, but still increase in thirst: Or as a
flame, which is never abated with quantity of wood, how much so ever a man
lays on, well may it for a while be suppressed, and yield forth nothing but
smoke, but breaking out, it waxes greater, according to the abundance of
wood: So likewise the heart of a Covetous man, never regards that it has to
be therewith content; but what it has not, to covet thereafter. Esa. 56.11.
Ier. 6.13. and 8.10. 2. Tim. 3.2. 2. Pet. 2.3.

16 As the Fish swallowing the hook, together with the bait, is taken and
killed: So in like manner, Covetous men do pierce themselves through, with a
thousand sorrows, which do entangle them in death everlasting.

2. King. 5.27. 1. Sam. 8.3. Ioh. 12.6. Act. 16.16, 19. and 19.24. etc. Ier.
22.17.

17 As the Indian Ants or Emets, who gather the gold and keep it, yet neither
can use it, neither will suffer men to have it, so far forth as they may: Even
so Covetousness, which with care and labor slays the man that is subject
thereto, it draws him through fields and woods, sea and land, in the cold of
winter, and in the heat of summer; night and day, in rain, wind, and danger,
admitting no rest, and all to seek and hunt after goods: yet does it grant
him only the sight, but not the use of them. Prea. 4 ^. and 6.1, 2. Ephe. 5.3.
Mat. 13, 22.

18 As the good corn of Gods word is a sanctified seed of salvation and life:
So the falsehood and deceit of Coue^ousnesse and riches, do in such sort draw
men to aboun^ance, and withal, to the perverse use of the same, that hereby
this seed of salvation, and life everlasting, is choked up. Luke 16.9.

19 As charity is the gift of God proceeding from his favor and grace: So
contrariwise, Covetousness is a vengeance which he powers upon those, whom
for their sins he has given over into a reprobate sense. To. 1.28.29. 1. Cor.
5.11. and 6.10. Iam. 5.1.

20 As Aesops Dog, who swimming with a piece of flesh in his mouth, and
seeing the shadow thereof, taking that to be an other piece of flesh, opening
his mouth to catch that also, lost the same which he before had: So likewise
the Covetous man being insatiable, and every way seeking to increase that he
has, does many times loose that which is in his hand. Pro. 15.27. and 28.16.

21 As Gold of it self can neither feed, nor cloth us: So that which the
Covetous man buyeth with gold or silver, proceeds not out of the gold or
silver, but from Gods providence; neither can it minister any help without
Gods grace and blessing. Heb. 13, 5. Col. 3.5. Mat. 6.26.

22 As the remedy to quench his thirst that is vexed with a hot fever,
comes not of giving him drink, but of taking away his fever, which causes
his thirst: Even so the way to grow rich, is not by heaping of riches, but by
diminishing the Covetousness and unlawful desire of the same. Iam. 5.3. Luke
12.15.

23 As when the Spleen increases, the other members, joints, and parts of the
body, do consume and pine away: So Covetousness, and the great treasures and
riches of covetous tyrants increasing, the wealth of subjects and inferior
persons, is weakened and diminished, whiles they pill and poll away their
substance and goods, to enrich themselves withal.

24 As the Spleen increasing, the other members do decrease: So likewise
Covetousness growing greater and greater, all virtues do utterly decay, and
vanish away: bountifulnes, liberality, charity, truth, righteousness, and all
such excellent qualities, are no more found, in those me^ which are strangled
and poisoned with a great and greedy desire of worldly riches.

25 As Floods, which send their waters into the sea, and leave the dry land,
which is very thirsty, vnwatered: Even so, some Covetous men do now and then
bestow great cost and much of their riches, upon those that need them not; not
drawn thereunto with either love or mercy, but carried with vainglory, and
with vanity it self, so to do. Mat. 5.7. Esa. 58.7.

26 Like as the Sea is seldom or never seen without tempestuous waves: So
also we can never see a covetous man's mind free from carfulness, fear,
trouble, and vexations.

27 As a Pot has a wide open mouth: So Covetousness gapeth evermore after
worldly goods, riches, and honor.

28 As the Owls and night Crows, see better by night then by day: So the eyes
of covetous men, be blind to see how to come to heaven; but to get worldly
goods and riches, they can see well enough.

29 As we see some men, which naturally are so inclined to mischief, so
seditious, so contrary to peace and tranquillity, that they are no sooner
entered into a house or Commonwealth, but presently they sow discord and
dissension, troubling the common-quietnesse, and peaceable estate, which was
before: So also the cursed desire of Covetousness, is no sooner entered into
our heart, but that forthwith we perceive a great confusion of tumultuous and
dissentious appetites, to boil and rise up within us, which do straightwayes
entangle us in the nets and snares of the devil, and at the length brings us
to miserable ^eath and destruction.

30 As the Covetous man would not like of those servants and hirelings, who by
their negligence and careleslesse have suffered his houses to fall to ruin,
and have left his lands and vineyards untilled, neither would he be pleased
with that man or maid-seruant in his house, which serves him to no purpose: So
likewise if he himself make no use of his riches and treasures, but keep them
altogether unprofitably, he may not think that he is the servant of God,
holding of him whatsoever he has, with commandment to make use of them, and
that he is countable for the damages and loss which happens by his want of
traffic; that is to say, for that he has not used them as the Lord has
commanded.

31 Even as the fire is extinguished and quenched, not only by throwing on of
water, but also by taking away of the wood, and other matter whereby it is fed
and nourished: So also a Covetous man destroys and takes away the life of a
man, not only by offering him violence, but also in refusing to give or lend
that unto him, which is necessary for his preservation.

32 As a flood, which at the beginning being but a little River, by little and
little (as it runs) increases in such sort, that in the end it bears with
it whatsoever resists: Even so, if a Covetous man have once gotten one
hundredth pounds, he straightwayes desires two hundredth; from two hundredth, he
comes to a thousand; from a thousand to a million; and from millions, to an
infinite sum.

33 As one that climeth up a Ladder, uses the first step as a means to come to
the second; and the second, to come to the third; continually climing until he
come to the top: So likewise there is no difference between the Couetou^ man,
and him that climeth up the Ladder, but that the o^^ finds an end of his
ladder, the other finds none at all, neither of his care nor sorrows which
necessarily follow riches; neither yet of his earnest desires in the attaining
and keeping of them.

34 As the Ass that carries meat for the belly, and cloth for the back, yet
he himself feeds upon grass, and contenteth himself with an hairie
skin: So the Covetous, whose Chests are stuffed with gold and silver, yet
cannot afford their belly a good meals meat, nor cover their back with a
good coat.

35 As the Be brings sweet honey in her mouth, but a sharp sting in her
tail: So Covetousness has pleasure in this life, and pain in the life to
come.

36 As the Ape that is tied to the clogge, thinks that he keeps the
clogge, and not the clogge him; is greatly deceived: So likewise is the
covetous man, which thinks that he keeps his riches, when indeed his
riches keeps him.

37 As Dinah while she wandered to see fashions, and thought to feed her fancy
upon the daughters of a strange Country, she lost her Virginity amongst the
sons of the Country: So some men while they seek to feed and fill their
greedy worm of Covetousness and ambition, with diverse pleasures and profits
of the world, they loose their sincerity amongst them, and so make shipwreck
of faith and a good conscience.

38 Even as Tamar went out of her brother Amons chamber, with her maidens
garment of diverse colors rent, because she was enforced to leave her
maide^head behind her: So some Covetous worldlings, which sometimes with Demas
followed Paul, but now with Demas embrace his present world; are enforced to go
away with their gar^ent of diverse colors, rent and torn: for while they will
venture through the bushes and thorns of worldly cares, to get worldly
promotions, it is no marvel if they come out with their zeal quenched, their
courage abated, their faith blasted, their love cooled, their knowledge
withered, their humility defaced, their sincerity decreased, and the whole
garment of piety and Religion scratched, torn, and rent in pieces.

Continuance in Sin.
1 LIke as if a man's foot, leg, or arm be broken, with how great pain the
same is restored to his former estate, all men know. But if any member of our
body should be broken twice or thrice, or more often, in one and the selfsame
place; every man can then judge, how hard a thing it were for that part to
recover her perfect strength and health again: Even so fares it in the
ruptures and wounds of our soul. If a man do commit sin once or twice, and
do unfeignedly without dissimulation make his refuge to the medicine of
repentance, he does out of hand obtain health again, and that sometimes
without any skarre or blemish of the disease past; but if he begin to add
sins upon sins, in such sort, that the wounds of the soul do rather
putrify within him, by covering and defending them, then heal by repentance
and confession; it is to be feared, that such a one shall not find repentance
at commandment when he wishes for it. Romans 2.3, 4.

Carnal men.
1 AS a child borne and brought up in a dungeon, will not believe (if his
mother tell him of the light of the Sun, and such other pleasant commodities)
that there are such things, or very hardly: Even so no more will Carnal men
believe either the immortality of the soul, or the mercy and judgment of
the Lord, etc.

2 Like as in other matters it comes daily to pass, that me^ being in
process of tim^ brought by experience, to see their own errors wherein they
have done amiss, are displeased with themselves for so doing, wish they had
done otherwise, and so are said to repent, of this or that action: So Carnal
men having all their lives lived in vain and sinful pleasures, altogether
careless of the service of God, and of their own salvation, at length see the
vanity of their lives past, are grieved for it, and wish (although too late)
that they had taken an other course.

3 As Adam by coming out of the state of holiness into the state of sin,
had his eyes opened to see the filthiness of sin, and his own nakedness,
whereupon he being ashamed, desired to hide and cover himself: So in like
manner, Carnal men coming out of the state of senseless security, wherein
they neither knew, nor considered what sin is, into the state of repentance,
wherein they conceive of sin as it is indeed, and judge themselves in regard
of it, the most abject men of all other, unworthy of their company, or to come
in their sight: and therefore they decline and shun it, wherein this shame does
consist.

Covetousness in old men.
1 AS wayfairing men, the less way they have to go, the less careful need
they to be, either of spending their money or victuals: Even so for old men,
who have as it were one foot in the grave, to be covetous, is a very absurd
thing.

Christ our Prophet.
1 AS the print of a Seal is more plainly perceived in the soft wax, then in
the Seal it self: So likewise the knowledge of God is more manifest to us in
Christ, who is the lively image, and engraven form of his Father.

2 As the Moon does naturally receive her light of the Sun: So all the
light, all the true wisdom and understanding, or heavenly knowledge that the
Church has, it has it of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Christ was in our person justly cursed of God, and executed for us.
1 AS the Surety is by the just sentence of the Law, condemned to pay his
debt, for whom he has willingly and advisedly undertaken: Even so it is mere
and true justice, and no wrong, that Christ by the just sentence of the Law
was hanged on a tree, and so he bare indeed the true curse of the Law.

2 As the Surety although he be utterly clear obnoxious and guilty to none,
yet by his suretiship, is a debtor and obnoxious to the Creditor, and the Law:
So likewise Christ took our person on him, and presented himself therein
before his Father, and so he became by our sins, sinful, defiled, hateful,
and accursed.

3 Like as if a tender Ladies only child, should by some casualtie be all
tumbled in blood, or mire, and most stinking filth: the child so berayed and
loathsome, would breed great abhorring and loathing in the eyes of the delicate
Lady: yet the childs own person should be nevertheless beloved of the mother,
but rather the more if it may be: So such two persons or conditions are found
in Christ; according to one, he was always beloved; according to the other
which he took upon him (whilst he had not finished that office) he was justly
accursed.

Christ's Merits.
1 AS the Iebusites Gods enemies, could not fully be conquered until David
came: Even so, no more could the Kingdom of Satan be clean overthrown,
until Christ Jesus the King of glory, was borne of the seed of David, who
conquered sin, hell, and the devil, and possessed the holy hill Sion, and
made his people Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem. 2. Sam. 5.6, 7, 8, 9. Iosu.
23.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

2 Even as the Ointment that was powered upon the head of Aaron, rested not
there, but went down also upon his beard, yea to the skirts of his clothing:
So likewise the righteousness of Christ and his Merit, is given and attributed
to every one that be his members. Psalm. 133.2.

3 As Christ's righteousness is made ours really, by imputation, to make us
righteous: Even so we by the Merit of his righteousness imputed to us, do
merit and deserve life everlasting.

Christ a King.
1 AS King David when he had reigned 33. years in Jerusalem, died with great
victory: Even so Christ jesus our Lord and graund Captain, after he had
preached the Kingdom of his Father, gat this noble victory against death, and
all his enemies, in the 33. year of his ^ge, by suffering death, and
tryumphantly ascending into heaven, where he reigns a glorious King for ever.

Christian, a general name for all that are baptized.
LIke as every man and woman has a several and proper name, whereby he is
discerned and known from another: Even so there is one name, that is general^y
apperteining unto all men, namely Christian; which is ^eriued unto us from
Christ our Savior, as the Author (...) whom we believe, in whom we are
baptized, whose word we esteem, whose redemption and righteousness we do
reverence, by whose spirit we being anointed with holy oil, by him are made
joyful and glad. Act. 11.26. and 26.28. 1. Pet. 4.16.

Gods Children.
1 LIke as natural Children are like their natural fathers, in favor, in
speech, in laughter, or in some lineaments of their bodies: Even so the
spiritual Children of God, are like unto him their Father, in righteousness
and holiness of life.

2 AS we love them which love our Children, and our hearts and hands too, arise
against them which misuse the^: Even so the Lord our God, who exceeds all
fathers in love, much more loves those which love his Children; and his heart
and hand too, arise in his heavy wrath and displeasure against such as harm,
and misuse them. 1. John. 5.1. Psalm. 15.4. Mat. 10.40, 41. Luke 10.16. Zach.
2.8.

3 As a woman in travail, in the middle of her sorrow, cries in her pains:
Even so such is the estate of God his Children, in the midst of persecution.
Esa. 26.17.

The excellency of Gods Children.
1 LIke as David said when he should have married Saules daughter: Seems it
to you a light thing to be a Kings son, seeing that I am a poor man, and of
small reputation? So seems it to any, a light thing to be sons and
daughters of GOD, the King of all Kings, seeing we are sinful men, and of no
reputation, but have deserved rather eternal confusion.

2 As the sons of Princes are in great account with men in this world: Even
so the Children of God, are in greater account with God, and all godly men,
both in this world, and in the world to come.

3 As the Children of Kings are attended upon by Noble men, and guarded with
strong men, yet both but men, whose breath is in their nosthrils, and their
hands cannot accomplish the device of their heart: Even so the Children of God
are attended upon by God himself, whose eye is always over the righteous, and
they are guarded by the Angels of God, who for their swiftnes, are said to have
wings; for their readiness, they are said to stand in the presence of God; and
for their strength incomperable. 2. Kin. 19.35. Psalm. 34.15.

4 As the pleasures of the sons of men are such as the world does afford,
carnal security, worldly prosperity, fleshy delights, beastly sensuality,
with pride, and ease, wealth, fullness of bread, and such like: Even so the
pleasures of the Children of God, are such as the world can neither give nor
take; as the love of righteousness, delight in the law of God, patience in
affliction, love of the Saints which excel in virtue, and such like. Psalm.
1.2. and 16.3. 1. Cor. 2.9.

5 Like as the riches and treasures of the sons of men, are gold and silver,
houses, and lands, Lorships and manners, rents and revenues, and such like:
which thieves may steal, or moathes may eat, or rust may freate, or fire may
consume, or water may ouerflowe, or time may wear, or death may end: So
likewise the riches and treasures of Gods Children, are, the word of GOD, Gods
favor, forgiveness of sins, freedom from hell and the devil: liberty
with the Saints, the spirit of contentation, peace of conscience, continual
joy in the holy Ghost, and a Kingdom of glory in heaven, with such like;
which no thief can steal, no rust can freat, no fire can burn, or consume,
no water can drown, no plague can infect, no time can wear, nor death can
end. 2. Cor. 3, 17. Gal. 5.22. Esa. 11.2.

6 As those are in most honor with Princes, which are said to stand in their
presence, and attend upon them in their Courts, as Daniel did: So Gods Children
shall stand in the Courts of God, and have the full fruition of his comfortable
presence: and therefore on the contrary side, the ungodly are herein accursed,
in that they are shut from the presence of God; to wit, his gracious presence:
for otherwise all things whatsoever are in his presence.

The Children of God.
1 LIke as a heathen man being asked why he did wear such a long bushie
beard, answered; that so often as he beheld it, he might commit nothing
unworthy the gravity of the same: he would not be like a Tavern with a bush
at the door, and no wine within: So likewise, if any man shall ask the
Children of God, why they are called Christians; the Church of God, the spouse
of Christ, Citizens of heaven, and by such like names of love and honor: they
are to answer, that so often as they remember these names and titles, they
ought not to commit any thing unworthy the gravity and majesty of the same.

2 As many Papists, and some Protestants too, who be superstitious and Popishly
affected, do not remember what titles they have, nor by what names they be
called, and therefore they must have puppets and images in their Churches and
houses, to put them in mind of their duty to God: Even so, some men's Religion
and holiness, is all in their titles of Gods Children, and in naked names of
Christians, which only they hold, when indeed all Christianity is banished
from them.

3 Like as it is counted a shame for a Citizen to go like a Courtier, or for a
man to put on woman's apparel, or a woman to wear on man's apparel, which is
an abomination to the Lord: Even so it is a greater shame for the Children of
God, who are Citizens of heaven, to go after the fashion of the Courtiers of
hell, or after the manner of the world. Romans 12.2.

4 As when Christ the Lord of life was put to death, there was darkness upon
the face of the earth, the veil of the Temple rent, the graves opened, and the
dead arose, etc. at the sight whereof, the very enemies of Christ which watched
him, were afraid for that they had done unto him; yea they were constrained to
confess and say; Doubtless this man was the son of God: Math. 27.54.
So likewise the Children of God, that be or ought to be dead with Christ their
head unto sin, as he died for our sins, then there will follow a wonderful
alteration in their lives: there will appear such zeal in professing of the
Gospel, such pity in relieuing the poor, such patience in bearing the
cross, such faithfulness in performing of promises, such charity in judging
their brethren, such mercy in forgiving offenses, such sincerity in
worshipping of GOD, such constancy in defending of the truth, such watching
over all their ways, and such wisdom in winning men ^o God, that their very
enemies, which before did mock them, hate them, and persecute them, shall be
constrained with shame to say; These are no doubt the Children of God, these
are good men, these are true professors in^eed, etc. Romans 6.4, 5. etc.

5 Like as worldly men in their houses, in their apparel, (...) their
feastings, in their furniture, and in every thing, ^hey strive to have
matches, and all their things suitable: So ^^kewise the Children of God must
strive to have their titles and names, their lives and qualities, their
profession and practice, suitable and answerable the one to the other, and so to
depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.19.

6 As carnal men desire to be gorgeously apparelled: Even so the Children of
God desire to be clothed with their house, which is from heaven. 2. Cor. 3, 4.

7 Even as plants and trees, do spread abroad their roots in the earth, from
whence they have their nourishment: So likewise the Children of God, because
they be fed with delicates and dainties from heaven, and are norished with
the grace and favor of God, they hold up their hands, they turn up their
eyes, they lift up their hearts and minds to God that is in heaven, from
whence their souls receive comfort, joy, salvation, and everlasting life.

Salvation only to be had in Christ, if men know how to find him.
1 LIke as if a man knew certainly that in such a wood an infinite mass of
money were hid, if the owner thereof would give it unto him, yet if by no
means he could find the same, what should the gift of such a treasure profit
him? though it were of value to purchase a kingdom: nothing at all. Even so
stands the case between Christ and us: though we know never so well and
certainly, that salvation and all kind of treasure is permanent and to be
found in him, and do belong to such as can find him, yet if we can by no means
find him, what shall the understanding hereof profit us? nothing at all. 1.
Cor. 28.10. Esa. 55.6.

Christ to be found by hearing the word preached and read.
1 LIke as if one have a Moyne of Copper, Tin, or Lead, he uses great pain
and diligence to come by the same, but if it prove a vein of Silver or Gold,
then the owner thereof sets Pyoners on work, who with great care, courage
and comfort, labor night and day, in hope to be greatly enriched thereby: and
albeit the vein sink down very deep, and prove most hard and difficult to
win, yet do they not cease or slacken their labor, but rather add so much
the more diligence, in hope that their gains will double their pains, when
the Moyne is once won: for this they hold (as a rule infallible) that the
lower any metal does lie in the earth, the better and more gainful it proves
in substance: Even so it is in the study of the Scriptures, and in hearing the
same read and preached, the more pains and diligence one uses therein, the
more increase of sound knowledge, wisdom and comfort is gotten in the end,
being that most rich and invaluable Moyne, wherein all the treasures of
wisdom and understanding are to be found, containing and comprehending all
the counsels and commandments of the Lord, etc. 1. Chro. 28.10. Pro. 3.13,
14, 26. and 8.18.19. Ioh. 30.31. Mat. 7.7, 8.

Children dying before they be baptized, are not damned.
1 AS by Circumcision, which was a cutting off, of the the foreskin; the
Children of the Hebrews were brought unto God, were sealed up with the Seal
of his Covenant, and received into his Church, to the great comfort and joy of
the Parents, which were certified by the same, that God was not only their God,
but also the God of their posterity and seed; and yet if any thing had
happened unto them, before they could be circumsized, they mistrusted not, but
that GOD would by the virtue of his Testament save them: So by Baptism, the
Children of Christians are brought unto Christ, are sealed up with the Seal of
the people of God, and received into his Church, as members of his son Jesus
Christ, and fellow-heires with him of his heavenly Kingdom; which thing unto
the faithful parents must be a heavenly comfort: For by it, they are certified
and assured that their sins be not only washed away with the blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, but also the sins of their posterity and Children. But
if it be not the pleasure of God, that the fathers and mothers should see their
Children alive, for to offer and present them unto him by Baptism, yet there
is no cause why they should think that they should be damned, because the
grace of is not bound to the Sacraments. For if there were some good man among
the Turks, or else among the Idolaters and Infidels, which had the knowledge
of the Gospel, and a true faith in our Savior Christ, and yet could by no
manner of means come by the Sacrament of Baptism, or be baptized, yet no man
ought so much as to think, that such a one for want of a little water should
be damned, seeing he has the chief and principal; that is to say, a true
justifying faith: else the water should have more virtue and efficacy, then
the blood of our Savior Jesus Christ; or at least as much: and the Minister
that should minister the outward Baptism, should be of as much power as Jesus
Christ himself.

2 Like as the Water and Minister can do nothing without the spirit and blood
of our Savior Christ: So it should follow (if Children be damned that die
before they be baptized) that Jesus Christ, his spirit and blood, should be
able to do nothing, without the water and Minister. And so by this means, our
Savior Christ and his Spirit, should be as subject unto the Minister and Water,
as the Water and Minister should be subject unto Christ and his holy spirit:
and so consequently, his grace and mercy should be alligated and bound unto
corruptible elements, and made subject unto men: Whereby it should come to
pass, that Jesus Christ should be no more true God, nor yet true Savior.

3 As the fleshly Children of Abraham, and such as came of his flesh, which
departed this life before the eight day of Circumcision, were not damned; but
by the virtue of the promise and covenant of God, were saved: So also after the
same manner, the spiritual Children of Abraham, (that is to say) the Infants of
all the Christians, are not condemned, if they decease before Baptism, but are
saved by the efficacy of the promise of God, and by invisible Baptism,
wherewith our Savior Christ Baptizeth them, who (by his death and precious
blood) has redeemed them.

Cares of this world, cool the love and desire of heavenly things.
1 AS the Sea that the wind has lain sore upon, is yet tossed and troubled,
after the wind is laid, and the tempest gone: Even so man's man's mind lately
comne out of the business and Cares of the world, still casts and studieth
the same things, and pants after them, and cannot after this, come straight
to it self, and so to meditate and exercise spiritual matters. Math. 13.22.
Luke 8.14.

2 Like as when a River or Fountain is troubled, there can no water be taken
or drawn out of them, but such as is full of mudde: Even so when the mind is
troubled and choked with the over careful and unquiet savor of the mire and
dyrt of this peevish world, there can neither holy prayers, nor any godly
exercises be found there.

The breach of Gods Commandments.
1 AS many worldly men deal with their Creditors, who will hardly let slip one
hour, or day, but will take the advantage and forfeiture of their Bonds and
Obligations, without any more delay: Even so if our good God and merciful
Father should deal as precisely and stricktly with us, in taking advantage of
the Bonds, forfeytures, and penalties, wherein we daily fall into by breach of
his Commandments many ways, then our estate should be most miserable. Job.
9.2, 3.

2 As evil debtors, when their day of payment draws near, and when their
Creditors are at hand to demand the same, do seek to hide themselves, and to
shun their Creditors presence: So likewise the most part of the world be so
careless in keeping that covenant, vow and promise which they made to God at
their Baptism, that even wilfully they throw themselves indebted unto GOD, and
thrall unto Satan, some by one sin, and some by an other, through violating
and breaking of Gods Commandments, that when by sickness or death they are
summoned to render an account of their bayliwicke, then they wish that the
mountains would fall upon them, to hide them from the presence of God, but all
in vain. Esa. 2.19. Hose. 10.8. Luke 23.30. Reave. 6.16. Luke 16.2.

Christ is not a Redeemer, but unto them, who being turned from iniquity do
lead a new life.
1 LIke as if the Servant of some Noble man, or Gentleman, were for committing
of treason, felony or murder, condemned, and going to the place of execution;
and his Lord or Master of mere favor and good will, should not only by
earnest suit to her Majesty, procure a pardon for his life, and so deliver him
from that villainous death; but also should adopt and take him for his son
and heir: if he now after this his deliverance, go and say, I will take my
pleasure, be Idle, and follow mine own fantasy, and never endeavor to
please, or pleasure his Lord and Master, but rather seek to hurt and
displease him every way that he can; such a wretch deserves to be punished
most extremely: Even so such as say that Christ has Redeemed us, and by his
death has purchased for us forgiveness of sins, righteousness, and life
everlasting, and has adopted us to be his sons and heirs, wherefore we
will take our pleasure, be Idle, and rather we will do more wickedness:
doubtless Christ dyed not for such, nor satisfied for their offenses, no nor
yet merited heaven for them, to the end that they shouid spend their days in
Idleness, and heap sin upon sin, but rather to live Christianly and
godly. To. 6.4. Gal. 5.24. Tit. 2.11. 2. Tim. 2.19. Luke 1.75. Ephe. 1.4. and
2.10. 1. Pet. 1.15.

2 Like as if an Astrologer could or should tell an ambitious Cardinal that he
should be Pope, although he did put an undoubted trust therein, yet for all
that he would not be Idle, but would use all the means that possible he
could, to attain and come to that dignity: Even so the Children of GOD, the
surer they are that Christ has Redeemed them, so much the more they understand
the great good will of God toward the^; and therefore they are always forced
more and more by godly conversation of life, to make certain unto themselves,
the knowledge of their election and Redemption by Christ. 2. Pet. 1.10.

3 If a miserable and wretched Thief shall have committed many thefts and
murders, and after that his wicked deeds were known, the son of a King
should be brought to be arrained and condemned for the same, and so bear the
punishment thereof, and this thief to be discharged and pardoned: if hereupon
the thief should rejoice and make a scoff at him, when he sees the son of
a King to be put to death, and suffer the punishment that he deserved; such a
Caytiffe deserves a most horrible death: Even so at this present it fares
with us: behold our Savior Christ, the only Son of God, is imprisoned, and
we delivered: he condemned, and we pardoned: he put to death, and to all
shame, and we received to honor: it is not therefore for us to be
drowsie-headed, and live securely, and to flatter our selves in our sins and
iniquities.

4 As the Israelites were never able to yield sufficient thanks to God for
their bodily deliverance from the bondage which they were in, in Egypt: So to
Christ our Savior for our Redemption and spiritual deliverance from the
tyranny of Satan and sin. Exo. 14.30. and 20.2. Psalm. 81.10.

Gods Providence over his Children.
1 AS it was impossible that Herod and Pilate, together with the Gentiles and
Jews, should conclude more, and bring any more to pass in afflicting Jesus
Christ our head, then the hand and counsel of the Lord has ordained to be
done from everlasting: So also it is impossible that the Herod's of our time,
the Pilates and the Pharisees, together with the mad and bewitched people,
should take more in hand, and bring more to pass in afflicting the members of
Christ, then the hand and counsel of God has first decreed to be brought to
pass by them. Act. 4.27.28, John. 7.30. and 8.20.

2 As the smallest birds of the earth are not taken without the will and
providence of our heavenly Father: Even so, nothing good or evil does happen
unto Gods Children without his provident will. Math. 10.29. Amo. 3.6.

3 As the Lord in mercy feeds the birds of the air, that they have
sufficient, and also so gallantly decketh the Lillies of the field (which be
so gorgiously and so richly clothed, that even Salamon in all his royalty,
was not apparelled like one of them:) Even so much more if we have an assured
trust in him (so liberal and bountiful a Father) he will not (doubtless) see
us his Children lack any thing that good is, concerning our food or
sustenance, apparel or clothing, as shall be meet and expedient for us.
Math. 6.26, 28, 29, 30.

What Comfort we receive by the name of Christ, or anointed.
1 LIke as the annoynting, whereby at Gods Commandment, Prophets, Priests,
and Kings, were appointed amongst his people, with an outward and visible Oil,
was a public testimony, that God would govern and defend his people by this
person, and also keep and uphold his divine worship, and likewise teach his
people: and this person had commandment of this thing; that they might suffer
themselves to be governed, cleansed, and taught: Even so the Son of God
manifested in the flesh, concerning his manhood, is anointed with the holy
Ghost without measure, (which is the truth of that outward annoynting) and so
is ordained and given of the Father, to the Prophet, Priest, and King of his
Church.

2 As it must needs be that all they be made sad that doubt under what Lord
they are in this life, whether under Christ, or Satan: So on the contrary, it
cannot be but all they must be filled with joy, who by the inward testimony of
the annoynting of faith, and by the outward washing of holy Baptism, are
assured, that they are under Christ the King of righteousness. Col. 1.13. Luke
17.21. and 2.10, 11.

3 Like as in time past when Salamon by the commandment of God was anointed,
there was public joy among the people of God; because they knew that God would
do them good, and defend them by the hand of a King: Even so we when we hear
out of the word of God, that our Lord Jesus is Christ, that is, that same
anointed of the Lord, we ought with the Angels to be filled with an exceeding
joy of mind, being surely persuaded, that even in this very thing that the
heavenly Father has appointed, and in very deed given his own Son Christ,
that is anointed, to be our King, that he does openly from heaven declare,
that he by his son will become the everlasting restorer and defender of his
Church.

Christian Service.
AS in a man's body one part is very ready to do service to an other, the
foot to the eye, and the eye to the foot: Fuen so every Christian man, as
parts of the mystical body of Christ, must be willing and ready to do service
one to an other, not envying those which be in greater calling, nor scorning
his inferiors.

Christianity.
LIke as every thing which strikes a hard Stone is broken in pieces, the stone
remaining whole: Even so every man which strikes against Christianity,
hurts himself, and cannot prevail against the same.

Christ became poor to make us rich.
LIke as the poor birds have their neasts to fly unto, and to rest themselves
in: So contrariwise, our Savior Christ being base and poor, had no place of
his own in the earth to rest his head in, that so he might enrich us. Math.
8.20. 2. Cor. 8.9.

Christ the bread of life.
1 AS bread perishing nourishes us in this life for a small time: Even so
Christ the bread that perishes not, but endures for ever, nourishes to
everlasting life. John. 6.48, 51.58.

2 As he that will be nourished by bread, must eat it: So likewise he that
will be benefited by Christ, must believe in him. John. 6.55. 1. Cor. 10.17.
John. 6.35.40.

3 As the Devil is the food of the wicked, which he nourishes in all
iniquity, and brings up into everlasting damnation: So is Christ the very
food of all them that be the lively members of his body, and them he
nourishes, feeds, brings up and cherishes, unto everlasting life.

Christ rejects not a weak faith.
LIke as the week or match of a Candle, Link or Torch, which either wanting
Oil, Tallowe, Wax or Rosen, or having thereof not sufficient, yields forth
at sometime, but a dark blind snuff, and imperfect ^ight: Even so Christ our
Savior, rejects not a weak, slender, and wavering faith, which yet
(notwithstanding so long as any spark of godliness ap^eareth) is not quite
quenched and extinct, albeit at ^ometime it be very near thereunto. Esa. 42.3.
Math. ^.20.

Contentious men.
1 AS we see one coal kindle an other, and wood to be apt matter to make a
fire: Even so those that be disposed to Contention and brawling, be apt to
kindle strife, and to set men together by the ears.

2 As a litie spark many times sets a whole house on fire: Even so a
Contentious and froward person, of a little matter of naught, makes much debate
and division among lovers and friends.

The Cup of Gods wrath.
LIke as we see men take the Cup one at an others hands and drink in course:
Even so we, when we have tasted of the Cup of Gods wrath for our sins, if we
repent, we are to comfort our selves that it shall be taken out of our hands,
and given to our enemies, even to those which hitherto have made a spoil of
us, and they shall suck out the dregs thereof. Esa. 51.21, 22. Iere. 51.7.
Ezech. 23.31, 32, 33, 34.

Death of Christ.
1 AS the Bands of Matrimony are set free by the death of the married couple:
So are we made dead to the Law, by the death of Christ; and freed from the
yoke, servitude, and bondage of it. Romans 7.3, 4. and 5.12.

2 As a strong Corasiue laid to a sore, eats out all the rotten and dead
flesh: Even so Christ's death being applied to the heart of a Patient sinner by
says, weakens and consumes the sin, that cleaues so fast unto our natures,
and dwells within us.

3 Like as in the common destruction of the first borne in Egypt, they whose
doors were sprinkled with the blood of the Passover, were safe: So likewise,
if there shall come a common destruction upon any land for their sins, yet
they that have their souls sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus
by his death, shall be saved.

4 As the life of Christ, is the life of life: So the Death of Christ, is the
death of death.

5 As the Libard uses a strange kind of policy to kill the Ape, he lies
down upon the ground, as though he were stark dead: which the Apes seeing,
come all together, and in despite skips upon him; this the Libard bears
patiently, till he thinks they have wearied themselves with their sporting;
then suddenly he likewise leapes up and catches one in his mouth, and in each
foot one, which immediately he kills and deuoureth: Even so, such was the
policy of Christ, he was laid in the dust for dead: the devil then insulted
over him, and trampled upon him, but he like a lively Lybard, starting up on
Easter day, astonished the soldiers set to keep him, which were the devils
apes, and made them lie like dead men, even as he told them before by his
Prophet. Math. 28.7. Ose. 13.7.

6 As the Cameleon when he espies a Serpent taking shade under a tree, climbes
up into that tree, and lets down a thread, breathed out of his mouth as small
as a Spiders thread, at the end whereof, there is a little drop as clear as any
Pearl, which falling upon the Serpents head, kills him: Even so Christ climbes
up into the tree of his Cross, and lets down a thread of blood, issuing out
of his side, (like Rahabs read thread hanging out of her window) the least
drop whereof being so precious, and so peerless, falling upon the Serpents
head, kills him. Joshua. 2.18.21.

7 As the wild bull of all things cannot abide any red color, therefore the
Hunter for the nonce standing before a tree, puts on a red garment, whom when
the Bull sees, he runs at him as hard as he can drive, but the hunter
slipping aside, the Bulls horns stick fast in the tree; as when David slipped
aside, Saules spear stuck fast in the wall: Even so such a hunter is Christ,
who standing before the tree of his Cross, puts on a red garment, dipped and
dyed in his own blood, (as one that comes with read garments from Bozra)
therefore the devil and his angels like wild bulls of Basan run at him, but
he shifting for himself, their horns stick fast in his Cross.

8 Like as when Mahomet, the second of that name, besieged Belgrade in Seruia,
one of his Captains at length got up upon the wall of the City, with banner
displayed; another Bohemian espying this, ran to the Captain, and clasping
him fast about the middle, asked one Capistranus standing beneath, whether it
would be any danger of damnation to his soul, if he should cast himself
down headlong with that Dog (so he termed the Turk) to be slain with him?
Capistranus answering that it was no danger at all to his soul; the Bohemian
forthwith tumbled himself down, with the Turk in his arms; and so by his
own death, only saved the life of all the City: Even such an exployt was
this of Christ; The Devil like the great Turk, besieging not only one City,
but even all mankind, Christ alone like this noble Bohemian, encountered with
him, and seeing the case was so, that this Dog the Devil, could not be killed
stark dead, except Christ dyed also; therefore he made no reckening of his
life, but gave himself to death for us, that he only dying for all the
people, by his death, our deadly enemy might for ever be destroyed.

9 As it was bootelesse for Golias to brandish his spear against David: So it
little auailed the Devil to shake his spear likewise in and by the hand of
the soldier, against the heart of Christ, when he suffered death.

10 As David having heard Golias prate and talk his pleasure, when they came
to the point, at the first stroke overthrew him: So Christ with that very
selfsame spear, which at his death gave him a little venny in comparison, or
(if it be lawful so to speak) but a philip on the side, which was soon
after recured, gave the devil a deadly wound in the forehead, which with all
his paws, he shall never be able to clawe off.

11 As David only with his sling, did vanquish and overcome Golias: So Christ
only by his death, and by the power of his cross, did conquer and subdue the
devil. 1. Sam. 17.51, 54.

12 As Pennyroyal being hung up in the larder-house, yet buds his yealow
flower: Or as Noah's Olive tree being drowned under the water, yet keeps his
green branch: Or as Aarons rod being clung and dry, yet brings forth ripe
Almonds: Or as Moses bramble-bush being set on fire, yet shines and is not
consumed: Or as the Palm tree, though it have many waights at the top, and
many snakes at the root, yet still it says; I am neither oppressed with the
waights, nor distressed with the snakes: So Christ the right Penny-royall, the
true Noah's Olive Tree; the right Aarons rod, the true Moses bramble-bush: and
the true Palm tree, though all the Judgments of GOD, and all the sins of
the world, like unsupportable waights were laid upon him, yea though the cursed
Jews stood beneath like venomous snakes hissing and biting at him, yet he was
neither so oppressed with them, nor so distressed with these, but that even
upon his cross, he did most flourish, when he was most afflicted.

13 As Epaminondas being sore wounded in fight, demanded of his soldiers
standing by, whether his enemies were ourthrowne or no? They answered yea: Then
whether his buckler were whole or no? They answered all, I. Nay then (said he)
all is well. This is not the end of my life, but the beginning of my glory: For
now your dear Epaminondas dying thus gloriously, shall rather be borne again
then buried: So Christ likewise was sore wounded, but his enemies death and the
devil, were overthrown and spoiled: his buckler, which was his Godhead, was
whole and untouched: therefore there was no harm done; his death was no death,
but an exaltation unto greater glory. John. 12.32.

14 As Gedeons fleece when it was moist, the earth was dry, but when it was
dry, the earth was moist: So when Christ's fleece was moist as a green tree,
then were all we dry like rotten sticks: but when his fleece was dry, all the
blood and water being wroong out of his precious side, then were we moystned
with his grace. Judge. 6, 37, 38, 39.

15 As a Lamb is much more nimble and lively for shearing: So Christ the Lamb
of God, by this shearing of his death, which was a kind of quickening to him,
and only a trimming to him before he ascended to his Father, as Joseph was
trimmed and polde before he appeared to Pharaoh.

16 When Adam slept, his side was opened: So when Christ died, his side was
opened.

17 As Adams side being opened, flesh and bone were taken out: So likewise
Christ's side being opened, wate^ and blood were taken out.

18 As of Adams flesh and bone the woman was built^ So of Christ's water and
blood, the Church was built; so that the death of Christ is nothing but the
sleep of Ad^^

19 As Jacob traveling toward Haram, when he had laid an heap of stones
under his head, and taken a nap by the way, was much revived with it after his
tedious journey: So Christ traveling toward Heaven, when he had slept a little
in that stony Sepulcher, which was hewn out of a Rock, lived then most
princely after his painful passion. Genesis 28.10, etc. Math. 27.60.

20 Even as when many birds are caught in a net, if a Pelican, or any other
great bird that is among them get out, all the rest that are little ones follow
after: So likewise Christ by his death, as a great bird having broken through
the net of death, all we escape with him.

21 As Honey being found in a dead Lion, the death of the Lion was the
sustenance of Sampson: So Christ's gall is our honey, and the bitter death of
Christ by reason of his righteousness, is the sweet life of man. Judge. 14.8,
9.

22 As Debora rejoiced when Barack put Sisera to flight: Even so we have great
cause to rejoice, seeing Christ by his Death, has put death to flight. Judge.
5.1, etc.

23 Even as a noble Champion, having already had a leg and an arm slasht
off, when all the stage in admiration of his valor and manhood, cries: Save
the man, save the man: yet puts out himself, and standing up on one leg, and
striking with one arm, fights still as stoutly as if he had never been hurt at
all: So Christ having been scorned and scourged already, when the whole Theater
of heaven and earth wept for him, yea when the powers above the heaven came
down, and the dead under the earth rose up to moan and pity him, only he
himself would neither ask any favor of others, nor yet show any favor to
himself, but was very angry, and called him Satan, that gave him such
counsel: yea though all the Saints in heaven and earth did bleed at the very
heart, in a manner as much as himself did upon the cross, to see so good a man
so shamefully despited, yet nothing could stay him, but still he went on
forward as pleasantly and as chearefully as to any banquet or feast, to this
most rufull and dreadful death.

24 As when the heart of a man has received a deadly wound, he is accounted
for dead, because he cannot escape death: So sin in the Death of Christ, has
received a deadly wound; so that by reason of that near conjunction which by
faith we have with Christ, we are said to be dead with him. Romans 6.3, 4, etc.

Christ betrayed and sold.
AS Joseph was sold of his own brethren into the hands of strangers: Even so
was Christ our Savior, betrayed and sold of Judas his own Disciple, and
delivered of his own Nation into the hands of Pilate, and the Heathen. Math.
26.15, 16.

Christ dyed to deliver us.
1 AS Sampson, who dyed himself to deliver his people from the Philistines: So
likewise Christ to deliver us from the Devils, dyed himself. Judge. 16.30.

2 Like as if a man should go to prison for debt, or any such matter, and one
of his friends should come in the mean season, and pacify the Creditor by
satisfying and paying the debt, then we may well say, that he has delivered
this man out of prison, although he came not there, but should have gone
thither: Or as when we say, such a man has delivered his friend from the
gallows, we mean not that he was already hanged, for then were the
deliverance too late: but we mean, that he delivered him, that he should
not be hanged: So likewise when the Scripture says, that Christ dyed to
deliver us out of hell; because he saves and delivers us that we come not
there, which else should surely have gone thither, and have been damned
perpetually, except Christ by his death had delivered and loosed us.

Christ reuiueth us again that were dead.
LIke as the Pelican, which having brought forth her young ones dead, or
being stung or killed by Serpents, she pecketh forth her heart blood to
revive them: Even so we being conceived and borne in sin, and altogether
dead in our trespasses and offenses, stung of that old and fiery Serpent the
devil, which first beguiled our Parents in Paradise, and so having the reward
of sin, which is death; we in this case are revived, and quickened again by
the blood of the true Pelican Jesus Christ, which he from his heart has shead
and powered out for us. Col. 2.13, 14.

Christ's person consists of two natures.
1 LIke as there must be both these two natures, true and sound, the properties
of either being kept in one person of Christ, to reconcile man to God, and to
strike this covenant: So also to keep this covenant, that according to the
promise and oath of God, it may be everlasting, both natures must remain for
ever sound with their properties, unless we will have the covenant in the
pillar and foundation to be shaken.

2 Like as when the root of a tree is hurt, the branches also do wither, and
there can be no fruit hoped for: Even so the Doctrine being corrupt,
concerning the person of Christ, and the two natures in the same person,
together with their distinct properties, the doctrine also of the Priestly and
Kingly office of Christ remains corrupt, which are as it were the fruits of
the doctrine concerning his person.

Christ though amazed and confounded with sorrows and fears, yet remained
still sinlesse.
LIke as if you set two glasses filled, the one with muddy water, and the other
with clear Crystal water, and first let them stand till all the muddinesse
in one be settled at the bottom, then shake both these glasses, in the one the
mudde arises straightway, and defiles all the water there: in the other,
although you shake it never so much, yet the clear water, though troubled
likewise, remains still all clear as Crystal: Even so, if any of us be
shaken and disquieted with any trouble, our muddy affections arising, do
presently defile us all over: but Christ (in whom was man's true nature, but not
any the least defilement of nature) being likewise shaken, he remained still
clear from any the least spot of sin at all.

Christ never lost his confidence in God.
LIke as those men do never loose their confidence and trust in God, who by
some violence are stricken into astonishment, or naturally fall on sleep,
their faith, patience, love, obedience, decreaseth not in them for all that:
Even so, neither in Christ, his assurance in God could never decay: albeit his
sinlesse nature, might and did fear the pain, and being astonished with
excessive pain, might and did suddenly desire ease. Math. 27.46. Mar. 14.33,
etc.

He that Speaks in the Church.
LIke as if the Harp make a confused noise, and gives no distinct sound, it
delights not, it recreateth not, because no man can tell what it is that is
plaide: So he that Speaks in the Church, in a language which other men
understand not, cannot edify, because men understand not what he speaks.

Confessing of secret faults.
LIke as he is unwise that opens his disease, and commits himself unto an
unskillful Physician, that will rather make him worse then cure him: Even so as
unwise is he that reuealeth his secret falls and scapes to them whose mouths
are ready with the Pharisees to say; See thou to that: or to blabbe abroad
their brethrens infirmities, so making the matter rather worse then better.

Christ after a sort present with us in body.
1 AS the sun, which though it remain still in the firmament, and therefore in
very deed touches not the eye, yet the body of the Sun is present to the
sight, notwithstanding so great a distance between: So likewise the body of
Christ, which by his ascending is taken up from us, and has left the world,
and is gone to his father, is indeed absent from our senses: yet our faith is
conversant in heaven, and beholding that son of righteousness, and is verily
in presence with it there present; like as our sight is present with the body
of the Sun in the firmament, or as the Sun is present with our sight in
earth. Ioh. 14.19. and 16.28. Act. 7.55. Col. 3.1. Hebr. 4.16. and 10.28.

2 As the Sun with his light is present to all things: So is also Christ with
his Godhead, Spirit and power, present to all, and fills all. Ephe. 1.23.
Col. 1.17, 18.

How Christ sits at the right hand of God.
1 AS it is the use and custom of Kings and Princes, which have their deputies
and substitutes, to whom they freely give all authority to rule and govern,
and do cause that man to sit by him, and at his right hand, whom he will give
most honor, and unto whom he will give most authority and power: Even so we
understand by these words: (He sits at the right hand of God:) that our
Savior Christ is exalted above all creatures, and that he has dominion or
governance in heaven and in earth, and that he reigns with his Father, having
equal power with him. 1. King. 2.19. Psalm. 45.9. and 110.1. Mat. 20.21. Phil.
2.9, 10, 11. 1. Pet. 3.22. Ephe. 1.20, 21. and 4.15.

2 As those on earth that are set at the right hand of Kings, do execute
justice in courts or Assizes, for the maintenance of the state and peace of the
Kingdom: Even so Christ Jesus sitting at the right hand of his Father, that
is, being made sovereign Lord of all things, both in heaven and earth, is to
hold a Court or Assise, in which he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead.

Christ confounds his enemies.
AS Joshua dealt with the five Kings that were hid in the Cave, he first makes a
slaughter of their arms, then he brings them forth, and makes the people to
set their feet on their necks, and to hang them on five trees: Even so Christ
deals with his enemies: he treades them under his feet, and makes a slaughter
not so much of their bodies, as of their souls. And this the Church of God
finds to be true by experience, as well as it finds the love of Christ
toward it self. Iosu. 10.24. Luke. 17.27. Psalm. 2.9. and 110.1.

Corruption of truth by man's traditions.
AS sweet Dough is made sour by a little Leaven: So is the sweetness and
comfort of the doctrine of truth corrupted, if it be never so little entermedled
with humane doctrine, or man's traditions. Mat. 13.33. and 16.6.

The Creature may not control his Creator.
AS it is unreasonable for a piece of clay to challendge the Potter for the
form, shape, or use, that it is made for: Even so it is an intolerable
presumption of man, to reason against his maker, for the end that he is made
for, whether it be honor or dishonor. Job. 10.9. Psalm. 103.14. Romans 9.20, 21.
Esa. 64.8.

The wonderful Change of Christians.
AS it is a great miracle for a dead man to be raised again: So likewise is the
change that Christ has made in those that be his, wonderful. 1. Pet. 4.6.

Christians in great misery, if God forsake them.
AS women traueyling in childe-birth, and have not strength to bring forth
their fruit, are in great misery: So likewise are the Children of God in
great distress in the days of trouble and affliction, if God leave them, and
forsake them therein. Esaias. 37.3.

Contentious Spirits are dangerous.
AS we are to take heed of Dogs when they are fighting and brawling for a
bone, that we be not too busy in kicking them, least we be caught by the
shinnes: Even so are we to take great heed of such as be unquiet and
troublesome spirits, that are ready to wrangle and disquiet the Church, about
every trifle. Phil. 3.2.

Christ the appointed Reconciler.
LIke as there was a certain person, by whom sin entered into the world, and
by sin, death, and so became as it were, the cause and foundation of falling
away from God, and entering into league with the devil: So also must there be
a certain person appointed of God, that might be the foundation and cause of
Reconciliation, and of never breaking the same conjunction with God, the
fountain of all happiness.

Custom an other nature.
AS impossible as it is for a Black-moore to cast away his skin, and to
become white; and for a Leopard to put away his spots: So impossible it is for
them that noosell themselves and accustom themselves continually with evil
doing, to change their custom, and to endeavor to do well. Iere. 13.23.

Christians are to pray chiefly for spiritual graces.
AS Achsha begged of Caleb her Father, a blessing to her dowry, and springs of
water to her dry soil: So must all Christians entreat Almighty God, to give
them the grace of his holy spirit, with the gift of his heavenly Word, that
they may pay unto him the tribute of honor. Iosu. 15.19.

The benumbed Conscience, is senseless of spiritual graces.
AS the sick man lying upon his bed, is not able to go to the Physician to
seek for his health; but the Physician is to be entreated to come to minister
to him: Even so, such people as are ignorant and sick of sin unto death, are
not able to go to the spiritual Physician the Preacher, or have any mind so
to do, because they neither understand their disease, nor the danger they be
in, nor yet feel the grief thereof, so that oftentimes when the godly
Preacher comes unto them, and ministers wholesome medicines and
consolations, yet are they not able to receive the same. Ephe. 2.12. 2. Tim.
2.25, 26.

Good Counsel, not to be refused of the wisest.
LIke as they that are given to gather wealth, although they have great store
of wealth at home: yet if Gold and Silver be brought to them from other
places, they do not refuse it; and the richer they be, the more they desire: So
wise Magistrates (whose treasure is to consist rather in the wisdom and
faithfulness of good men, then in the hugest mass of money that can be)
though they be most wise and rich that way, yet they ought not to refuse the
wise advise of any, but be willing and glad to hear it, whose soever it be.

Affectionate Admonitions unfruitful.
LIke as he that observes the wind shall never sow: So likewise they which
have an eye always unto the affections of men, and will know what
entertainment their admonitions and reproof shall have before they will bestow
them, can never profit thereby: for that in so doing, they seek rather to
please men and feed their humors, then that God should have his glory
increased thereby. Prea. 11.4. Gal. 4.10.

Christ comfort his.
AS the Rain makes the new mowne grass freshly to spring again, and showers
so comfort the earth, that it yields the fruits thereof: Even so shall Christ
refresh, foster, nourish, and cherish his people. Psalm. 72.6.

Christ a sure Rock.
AS he that sets the foundation of his house upon a firm Rock, may be
sure that the foundation shall be ^ble to bear the weight of that which shall
be set upon ^t, and that no rain or flood shall wash it away: So he that
builds his faith upon Christ, as he is set out and preached unto us in the
Gospel, shall be sure that hell gates, that is, all the power, force, and
cunning of the devil, shall never be able to prevail against him. Math.
7.24.25. Mat. 16.18.

The complete armor of Christians.
1 AS a Soldier, if he be not shod but barefooted, shall quickly be
surbatted, and unable to travail: Even so a Christian, not having the Gospel
of peace, cannot endure. Ephe. 6.15.16.17.

2 As it is an absurdity for a Soldier, to put himself into the field naked,
without armor and weapon, as well to strike the enemy, as to defend himself.
So also is it always necessary for a Christian to be armed at all points,
especially, to have the shield of faith, the helmet of saluauation, the sword
of the spirit, which is the word of God.

Christian freedom.
AS servants, when they have served a time, change their masters, and are
maisterlesse, or serve others: Even so Christians are to remember, that their
condition is so unstable and uncertain in the Church of God, except they have
the spirit of freedom: namely the spirit of adoption of children, and so by
Christ, and in Christ, be truly made free. Ioh. 8.35.36.

Christ our graund Captain.
AS soldiers are to resort to their standard: So faithful Christians are
appointed to flock to Christ. Esaias. 11.11.12.

Contemners of the truth.
1 AS Swine will moozell up and down in the mire, whatsoever precious thing
shall be offered them: So wicked contemners and despisers of the word, do (as
it were) tread under their feet, whatsoever promise is offered, or in
judgment threatened to them out of the word.

2 As they which are displeased with all things that profit them not: Or as a
deaf man, who seeing the lips of speakers to move, thinks them too lavish
of their tongues: Or as a blind man, which groping by the walls and windows
of a fair house, does find fault with the windows, because they are not so
smooth as the walls: Even so such are they that find fault with the
Scriptures, because they show as well the spots, as the beauty; the vice, as
the virtue. Math. 7.6.

Comfort from Gods spirit.
AS water refreshes the thirsty, and as floudes do moysten the dry land,
and make it fruitful: so God by his spirit rejoices the people of his
Church, and powers out abundance of his blessings upon them. Esaias. 44.3.

The growth of grace by Christ's death.
AS Wheat except it be sown in the ground, and there die, does not spring
again, and so multiply: Even so the knowledge of those benefits which we
have by Christ, are increased, grew, and multiplied throughout the whole
world, by his death. John. 12.24.

Calling.
1 LIkewise a sword being committed into the hands of a Soldier, by the
Captain general, he is not to smite before he be commanded to fight, and
before the Trumpet be sounded to battle: Even so, though a man have
excellents given him, yet he is not to execute any function, especially
publicly, before he receive a particular warrant and Calling from God. Reave.
16.1.

2 As Sampson though he had strength given him, that he was able to have
defended the Israelites, and revenged them of their enemies, yet he could not
take upon him the government of the people, until such time that the Lord had
called him unto it: So likewise the Ministers of the word, albeit they have
never so notable gifts of knowledge, utterance, etc. yet they are not in any
case to entrude themselves into the Ministry, unless they have a particular
Calling from the Lord.

3 As the Ostrige has wings and flies not: So some men have a Calling, but
they answer it not: they have knowledge, but they practice it not: they have
words, but they work not.

4 Like as if a stranger should violently thrust in himself to be the
shepherd of thy sheep, thou would ask him who sent for him, what he
had to do there, and thou would rather think him to be a thief, and a
murderer of thy sheep, then to be a faithful and trusty servant: So surely
if thou come to take charge of Gods people, before he inwardly move thy
conscience to pity his people, and outwardly by order, call and place thee
where he thinks good, he will judge thee a thief, a woolfe, a deuourer, and
not a feeder.

Beauty.
AS a Ring or Jewel of Gold is very unseemly, and does not become the filthy
snoute of a swine, that is always rooting in the dyrt and myer: So uncomely is
Beauty to a woman that has not wit nor discretion to behave her self.

Benefits.
AS the Moon does show her light in the world, which she receives from the
Sun, so we ought to bestow the Benefits received of God, to the profit and
commodity of our neighbor.

The Authority of the Church, not above the word of God.
1 LIke as it is not reason nor just, that a Wife should control, or be
superior and above her Husbands word and commandment, having a wise and
discreet Husband to govern and command her: So likewise it is no reason or
right (whatsoever the Papists say) that the Authority of the Church, which is
the Wife, should be greater and of more force, then the word and will of the
Husband Christ Jesus. Ephe. 5.24.

2 As man is not above God, nor the Wife above the Husband; for otherwise to
say, the one is blasphemy, and the other absurd: Even so it is blasphemy and
absurd, to say that the Authority of the Church, is greater then the word and
Scriptures of God.

Wise Counsel of a friend.
AS the sent and savor of a sweet Ointment or Perfume, is comfortable to the
brains and heart: So is the wise and hearty Counsel of a man's assured
friend. Pro. 27.9.

Cities and Countries.
AS a Pot of meat seething on the fire, which no body skimmeth, must needs be
full of loathsome filth: So Cities and Countries continuing in bloody
violence, without repentance, and amendment, must needs be ^oathsome and
abominable in the eyes of God. Ezech. 24.6.

Men must be fitted to their Callings, and the Callings to the men.
LIke as a member of a man's body out of joint, is dangerous, and hinders his
health and welfare: So in like manner, the setting of Children to Callings
unfitting their gifts and affections, is dangerous and hurtful, both to the
Church and Commonwealth.

Distinction of Callings.
LIke as the members in a man's body, although they live by one life, and one
soul, are notwithstanding distinct and diverse one from an other in functions;
as the foot sees not, but the eye; the ear hears, and not the hand, etc.
Even so also the members of Christ, howsoever they live all by one and the same
faith, are notwithstanding in their particular functions and Callings, one to
be distinguished from an other.

Gods Creatures admirable.
AS when men behold any curious work of a cunning and skillful Craftsman,
straightway they will leave the work, and enquire after him that made it, that
they may praise his skill: Even so it is the duty of Christians in this case,
when they come abroad, and behold every where in all the Creatures, the
admirable and unspeakable wisdom, goodness, and power of God, then they
must make haste from the Creature, and go forward to the Creator, to praise and
glorify him. Reave. 4.11.

Christ our Lord.
1 AS in former times the custom has bee^^ that when one is taken prisoner in
the fields he that pays his ransom shall become always after, his Lord:
Even so likewise Christ, when we were bondslaues under hell, death, and
condemnation, paid the ransom of our redemption, and freed us from the bondage
of sin and Satan, and therefore in that respect he is our Lord.

Christ took upon him our infirmities.
LIke as if a man be sick of some grievous disease, and if a friend come unto
him that has been troubled with the same disease, he will show more
compassion then twenty others: Even so Christ having felt in his own soul
and body, the anguish, and the manifold perplexities that we feel in our
temptations and afflictions, has his bowels as it were a running toward us,
evermore being pressed and ready to relieve us in all our miseries. Heb. 2.17.
and 4.15. Esaias. 53.3.4.

Christ's humane nature.
AS the Plant called Mistell, having no root of his own, both grows and
lives in the stock or body of the Oak, or some other Tree: So our Savior
Christ's humane nature, having no proper substance, is as it were ingrafted
into the person of himself, and ^s wholely supported and sustained by it, so
as it should not be at all, if it were not sustained in that manner.

Contempt of the Minister.
AS Husbandmen that misuse their Landlord and his servants, which he sends
to them for the rents and profits of his land, are woorthily and justly
thrust out, and others planted in their rooms: So likewise were the Jews cut
off from being the people and Church of God, for misvsing of Christ, his
Apostles, and Prophets: and so assuredly shall all they be, that despise and
set naught by, and cruelly misuse and entreat the Ministers of the Gospel, and
the Preachers of his word, which are sent unto them.

A fruitless Confession.
AS it is bootelesse for a man that is very hungry, to know and believe there
is meat in the world, except he knew the place, and the man that had it for
him, that he might resort unto him: Or as it is in vain for one to confess
his disease and sickness, unless he know some good and skillful Physician who
might help him: So likewise it shall profit us nothing at all to know or
confess our sins, if we be ignorant of the Mediator that should take them
away. John. 1.29. 1. Timo. 2.5. Math. 11.28.

Christ the sovereign salve for our souls.
1 LIke as if the sick person should seek out such a Physician, as either
could not, or would not cure him, his labor also were unprofitable, and all
one, as if the needy man should go to one for an alms, that were as needy as
himself: Even so we being sick of our sins in our souls, must be careful
that we go and run to such a cunning Physician, as we are sure both can and
will for his ability and compassion, cure and heal our infirmities, and has
a salve for every sore and malady. Luke 3^.46, 47. Act. 10.43.

2 As it was in Egypt, in the great dearth and famine of corn, none could have
any food of Pharao the King but by the hands of Joseph, whom he had made
Ouerse^^ and Ruler of the land in his name (for when they cried to him for
bread, he said: Go ye to Joseph, and what he says to yo^ do ye. Gene. 41.55.)
So likewise it is now in the famine and dearth of our souls for spiritual
food, we can have nothing to feed our hungry souls from the King of
Heaven, but by the means of the true Joseph, which is Jesus Christ, who is
ordained of his Father to rule and govern all things in his name; so that he
sends us to his son when we ask any thing of him, for in him he is well
pleased, and for his sake only, and for no man's else, does he bestow this
benefit upon us. 1. John. 5.11.12. John. 8.24.

Christ.
1 LIke as our arms, hands, feet, and the rest of our members are nourished,
not of and by themselves, but of and by the meat that is conveyed into our
mouth and head: Even so we are nourished, not of and by our selves, but by the
virtue that is powered in the head of Christ Jesus. Heb. 2.11. Ast. 17.28.

2 Like as the Sun with his light beneficially comfor^eth all the world: So
Christ the Son of God, reaches his benefits unto all men, so that they will
receive them thankfully, and not refuse them disobediently. Psalm. 19, 1.2.

3 As the Sun is the wellspring of lively power: So Christ gives life
everlasting to all believers.

4 As the Sun with his brightness drives away clouds and foggie Mystes: So
Christ the son of God sitting at the right hand of his Father, is the
conqueror of Tyrants and Heretics.

5 As the Sun in winter when he is most farthest off from the Pole, is most
nearest the earth: so the son of God is most near unto the godly ones in
misery, and gives them help and salvation.

6 As it is a most certain token of death to a sick man, (as Hypocrates says)
if he dream that the visible Sun is hidden, obscured, and darkened: so
likewise a most cer^aine death of the soul is nigh at hand, if our Son
Christ be darkened by abolishing or corrupting of the true doctrine.

7 As the sun gives light plentifully to the whole world, and yet keep the
self same light within it self: Even so our Savior Christ God and man, has
the perfect fullness of all goodness in him self, and yet gives part to us,
as he thinks good, not loosing any piece of that he has himself, but
lightning our darkness with that light which he has within himself. 1. Cor.
1.30.

8 As the fountain from which all men do draw water, and from which the small
creekes and arms do run and flow, is said to have water of it self, and
yet comes not as of it self, but from the spring which daily feeds it, and
from the flowing streams, and is sufficient for all men to draw out off: Even
so Jesus Christ has life in himself, to wit, the fullness of life wherewith
he lives, and quickneth his, and yet has he it not as of himself, as he
witnesses in an other place, that he lives because of his father. Iam. 5.26.

Carnal profession.
LIke as all those that were borne of Abraham, were not the children of
Abraham: So likewise all that profess the Gospel, are not partakers of the
Gospel.

2 As it is not usual to curb in the horse in his race, but before he
begin to run: Even so, those which be by nature choleric and
melancholic, are by reasons and persuasions to be won and restrained, before
they begin to be angry.

Contempt of Christ.
AS a strumpet loves the tokens that her lover sends her, better then her
lover himself, and in time of poverty she will utterly forsake him: So
Christ is our lover, and man's soul is she whom he loves, he has given us
tokens as pledges of his love; to wit, all kind of riches and good things
whatsoever we possess in this this world: now if for love of keeping these
things in time of persecution, we forsake our lover, we be abominable
strumpets, unworthy to be beloved of him.

Christ suffered in his soul for our salvation.
1 AS the Holocaust, or whole burnt offering, the whole and every whit being
chopped and cut into pieces, was altogether put into the fire, and burnt: and so
it was by a special name called the Whole burnt offering: Even so, not the
body only, but also the soul of Christ, even every whit of his humanity,
was burnt and consumed in the fire of affliction, as a perfect Holocaust, and a
whole burnt offering for our sins. Leuit. 16.5. etc. Esaias. 53.20. 2. Cor.
5.21. Heb. 2.14.

2 As we have sinned both in our bodies and souls: So likewise Christ was
made our propitiation, who purposely and answerably did suffer both in body and
soul.

3 As an army of soldiers do altogether get the victory, and not any one of
them asunder, and yet for all that, each one singly, is profitable in fight for
the attainment of victory: Even so the sufferings of Christ, as his death and
bloodshed, his hatred, his shame, and ignominy, etc. both of his body and of
his soul, all together do sufficiently merit, but each one in several, is
profitable, and helps thereunto.

Christ's victory over Satan.
LIke as if two enemies fight together, and the one let the other choose his
weapon himself, and appointe the other what weapon he is to use, if he which
is dealt so withal, do vanquish and overcome the other, the greater is his
glory which does so overcome: So likewise Christ and Satan fighting, Satan
did choose to fight with him in the flesh (the weakest of many weapons) yet even
with that weapon did Christ overcome him; which got Christ the greater glory,
and gave Satan the greater shame.

Christ suffered and died as he was man.
AS the precious stone called the Carbuncle, to see too, is like an hot
burning cole of fire, shining exceeding brightly, the which feels no fire,
neither is it molten, changed, or mollified therewith: If thou shall take it,
and close it fast in a ring of lead, and cast it into the fire, thou shall see
the lead molten and consumed before thy face, but the Carbuncle remaining sound
and perfect without blemish as before: for the fire works upon the lead, but
upon the Carbuncle it cannot work: Even so, Christ our Savior, being in the
hot scorching fire of his torments, suffered and died as he was man, but as
he was GOD, he neither suffered nor died: the fire of his afflictions,
wrought then upon his manhood, but his divinity and godhead continued perfect,
and utterly untouched.

The Cross makes peace.
AS in a ciuell government and commonwealth, nothing is more occasion of war,
then overmuch peace: So in the Church, and among Ministers of the Church, as
nothing is more pernicious then too much quietness, so nothing more cease
private contentions oftentimes arising amongst them, the^ the public Cross of
persecution.

The personal union of Christ.
AS a certain soul, being joined to a certain body, makes one certain
person, as Peter, Paul, John: So the eternal word of the Father, took unto it
that flesh of the virgin, that is to say, made the same so proper unto it
self, that from hence comes and proceeds that person, which is called
Christ.

Christ the resurrection and life.
1 LIke as in a perfect body when the head has sense and motion, the hand that
is of the same body has also sense and motion convenient for it: So likewise
Christ being the resurrection and the life, as there is spiritual life in him,
so every member of his, shall feel in it self spiritual sense and motion,
whereby it is raised up from sin, and lives unto God. Ioh. 5.25. and 6.63.

2 As the Burgess of a Town in the Parliament house, bears the person of
the whole Town, and whatsoever he says, that the whole Town says, and
whatsoever is done to him, is also done to all the town: So Christ upon the
Cross stood in our place, and bare our person, and what he suffered, we
suffered; and when he died, all the faithful died in him: and so likewise as
he is risen again, so are all the faithful risen in him.

3 As Christ, by the merit of his death, wipeth out our iniquities; and by his
blood cleanses our consciences from all mortal sin: So in like manner, by
his resurrection from death, he declares himself to be righteous, and in all
respects perfectly pure, according to the law of God. Rom: 4.25. Psalm. 16.16.

Christ has prepared a place for us in heaven.
LIke as if a man were assured that there were made for him a great purchase in
Spain, or Turkey, so as if he would but come thither, he might enjoy it, he
would not forbear to adventure the dangers of the Sea, and of his enemies
also, if need were, that so he might come to his own: Even so, seeing that
Christ Jesus has made a purchase for us in heaven, and there is nothing
required of us, but that we will come and enjoy it, we ought to refuse no
pains or fear in the way, but carefully to strive to get in. Luke 13.14.

Christ our Intercessour.
LIke as he that would know whether the sun shine in the firmament, must not
clime up into the clouds to look, but search for the beams thereof upon the
earth, which when he sees, he may conclude, that the sun shines in the
firmament: Even so, if we would know whether Christ in heaven make
intercession for us, let us ransacke our own consciences, and there make
search whether we feel the spirit of Christ crying in us, Abba Father. As for
those that never feel this work of Gods spirit in them, their case is
miserable, whatsoever they be. Romans 8.26.

Calamity.
EVen as a cloud darkneth the air, and covers the sun: So Calamity and
misery, makes cloudie the mind of man, and taking from him all his joy, it
leaves him bare and naked, without comfort, and full of sorrow.

2 Like as lightnings do smite whatsoever they find in the earth, except the
Laurel tree, as Pliny affirms: Even so great Calamity, is able to take
away, and to overthrow whatsoever is in man, or that he has, save only firm
and constant virtue: for constant virtue is a goodly Laurel tree, ever
flourishing and green, and will not be consumed, burnt up, nor destroyed, with
any fire that breaks out of the clouds, be it never so fierce, nor with any
violence of torments and troubles whatsoever.

Rude and wanton Children.
LIke as when any are stinged, with the poyson-ful sting of Serpents,
forthwith they labor for remedy against the same, least the wound rot and
put them to further annoyance: Even so, such Children as be infected and
diseased with wanton Idleness, being also destitute of good manners, and
learning, must be sent to the school to be cured of their master, with the
rod of correction, and virtuous education.

False Christians.
LIke as among a great sort which are stricken with extreme sickness and
diseases, some do always escape as it pleases God: So it is to be hoped, that
among an infinite number of false Christans, God will touch some, to bring them
back from the filthiness and corruptions of the world, and to lead them to
the fearing of himself.

It is impossible to know who is a true Christian before he die.
LIke as in a ground sowed with diverse seeds, no man can certainly know some
seed from an other, which shall bring forth fruit; and which shall not; yea
though it have already put forth, yea and that more is, though it be eared:
Even so, no one man can know an other man thoroughly to be a Christian (which
is the greatest felicity that is) before the end of his race; because no man
is to be counted happy before his deaths day, by reason of many miseries and
calamities which may befall him.

Christ the cause of our resurrection and life.
1 AS the first Adam was the root of all mankind, and he conuyed sin, and by
sin, death to all that sprang of him, Christ only excepted: So likewise
Christ the second Adam, which is the root of all the elect, conueyeth life
both in body and soul, to all that are united to him; and by the virtue of his
resurrection, they shall rise again after this life.

2 Like as the power of the Godhead of Christ when ^he was dead in the grave,
raised his body the third day: So also shall the same power of Christ his
Godhead, convey it self unto all the faithful, which even in death remain
united unto him, and raise them up at the last day.

Why God afflicts his Children.
AS a godly and wise Surgeon, purposing to cut the corrupted wounds of a sick
body, and to take away, or to fear with an hot Iron, the rotten flesh, in
cutting or searing has no pity of the weak man, to the end, that in curing
his sore, and healing his wound, by cutting and searing, he may show him
pity: Even so, our most wise God, that celestial Physician, and heavenly
Surgeon, smites and afflicts us, that he may heal us; cutteth and seareth
us, that he may cure us. Heb. 12.6.7. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Amo. 3.2. Psa. 89.31.32.

Good Christians are much grieved, when God is dishonored.
AS a water pot, or a Vial full of liquor, if suddenly it be overthrown, does
shed and scatter the liquor: So a devout and godly Christian, abounding with
tears, being moved and troubled with sorrow, because of the injuries,
dishonor, wrongs and blasphemies committed against the Lord, does presently
power out great abundance, and as it were mighty streams of salt and bitter
tears. Luke. 19.41. Psalm. 119.136. Math. 26.75.

Disobedient Children.
EVen as a long and a prosperous life is promised unto obedient sons: So on
the other side, all disobedient, unthankful, and obstinate Children, are
assured of the punishment of infamy, joined with diverse and great o^ lamities
and torments. Exodus 20.12. 1. Sam. 2.22. 1. King. 1.25, etc. Deuteronomy. 21.18. etc.
Pro. 20.20. Ephe. 6.2.

The end of our Calling.
LIke as if her Majesty (to show her puissance against a foreign power)
should call forth one or two of her subjects, who are most beholding unto her,
to Just and turney in her presence for her honor, they would no doubt strain
all their strength in this service, yea and their lives too: Even so, much more
ought we that are Christians to perform this duty to our God, and Prince, who
has called us out by name to fight for his honor, to be a chosen and peculiar
people, unto himself, to stand on his parts, to show forth his virtues, and to
be zealous of good works (yea and that we might the better perform this
service, he has furnished us with his own armor and weapons, yea and his
own hand is with us too, though all men see it not) and therefore we must
endeavor to do valiantly, and to do our best, to answer the expectation of
our heavenly king and prince. Tit. 2.13.14. Psalm. 130.4. 1. Pet. 2.9. Cantic.
8.6.

The Churches variable estate upon earth.
LIke as the day and night do one follow another: So likewise in the
administration of the Church here upon earth, Christ suffers a continual
intercourse between peace and persecution.

Christ is to be served and pleased before our selves or others.
AS the master of those servants that are borne in his house, or whom he
purchases; do pretend that they do him wrong, when they spend any time
either to their own particular profit, or in the service of others: So may
Jesus Christ much more justly complain of us, that are his twofold servants;
namely, by birth and by purchase, if we employ even never so little of our
lives to serve and please our selves, the world, or the devil, our enemies. 1.
Cor. 6.19. Math. 16.24. Luke 9.23. Romans 12.2.

It is spiritual Adultrie to forsake Christ, and love the world.
EVen as a woman may rightly be called an Adulteress, that gives her body to
other men, and sets her love on an other: So they which fly from Christ,
and forsake him, being their spiritual husband, by setting their love on this
world, or any thing therein, do commit adultery against Christ. Iam. 4.4.
Ephe. 5.30. 1. Cor. 6.17.

Christ is sent of the Father.
AS fire sends forth both heat and light, but neither heat nor light
sends fire: so the father sends both Christ, and the all knowing comforter,
and he is unsent.

Christ and the holy Ghost are of the Father.
AS both the light and the heat are of the fire: So Christ and the holy Ghost
both are of the Father; the one begotten, the other proceeding; and the Father
only is of himself, and of no other.

Christ is to be loved for saving of us.
1 LIke as if thou fallest into a deep river, being in apparent danger of
drowning, if any man should cast the a rope, or himself leap into the water
to save thy life, thou can not sufficiently confess and acknowledge thy
self his debtor, to do him pleasure and service all the days of thy life: So
likewise we were not only in danger of falling into hell, but were already
fallen, even from our infancy, and daily through our sins fell deeper and
deeper: Yet Christ cast us not in a rope to pull us up and save us, but threw
himself into our sea of woe, into our hell; to be short, into horrible death,
wherein we were drowned, to pluck us forth, and therefore with great zeal
and affection we are bound to say: Lord we are bound to love, honor, serve,
please, and obey thee, in all that we may, with our whole hearts, all the days
of our life.

2 Like as if thou werst upon a Scaffold ready to be beheaded for thy
drunkenness or adultery, and thereupon should have a pardon, and so thy
life saved, upon condition, that thou should fall no more thereinto; thou
would no doubt willingly and heartily promise, yea, with thy hand subscribe,
and with thy tongue swear, that thou would never more commit adultery or
drunkenness, but that thou would abhor all Tauernes, Alehouses, and
drunkerds, all whores and bawdes, and so amend thy life: Now seeing Jesus
Christ has saved thee, not from an apparent danger of death, but even from
death it self, and not from the death of the body, but from everlasting death;
who requires of thee to amend thy life, which thou art bound so to do, yea
thou ought cheerfully and earnestly promise and faithfully vow, to reform
and amend, and to shun all occasions that might procure thee to displease and
offend him.

Counsel.
EVen as out of an Apothecaries shop, where very wholesome medicines,
precious ointments, and most pleasant perfumes are sold, sometimes comes
most rank and deadly poison: So very often, from men greatly experienced, and
deeply learned, do come very pestilent, pernicious, and treacherous Counsels.

The right knowledge of Christ crucified.
1 AS Elizeus when he would revive the child of the Shunamite, went up and
lay upon him, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his hands upon his hands,
and his eyes upon his eyes, and stretched himself upon him: Even so, if thou
would be revived to everlasting life, thou must by faith as it were, set
thy self upon the Cross of Christ, and apply thy hands to his hands, thy
feet to his feet, and thy sinful heart to his bleeding heart; and content not
thy self with Thomas to put thy finger into his side, but even diue and plunge
thy self wholly both body and soul, into the wounds and blood of Christ. 2.
King. 4.34.

2 As the dead Soldier tumbled into the grave of Elizeus, was made alive at
the very touching of his body: Even so shall thou by a spiritual touching of
Christ dead and buried, be quickened to everlasting life. 2. King. 13.21.

Our Conformity with Christ, by a certain kind of imitation.
1. AS Christ in the garden, and upon the Cross, by prayer made with strong
cries and tears, presented and resigned himself up to be a sacrifice of
propitiation to the justice of his Father for man's sin: So must we also in
prayer, present and resign our selves, our souls, our bodies, our
understanding, will, memory, affections, and all we have to the service of
God, in the general calling of a Christian, and in the particular callings in
which he has placed us. Psalm. 40.7.8.

2 As Christ bare his own Cross to the place of execution: So must we as good
Disciples of Christ, deny our selves, take up all the Crosses and afflictions,
that the hand of God shall lay upon us, if it be every day, and follow him.
John. 19.17. Math. 10.38.

3 As our Savior Christ, when he apprehended the wrath of God, and the very
pangs of hell were upon him, wholly stayed himself upon the aid, help,
protection, and good pleasure of his Father, even to the last: So must we by a
true and lively faith, depend on Gods mercy in Christ, as it were with both our
hands, in peace, in trouble, in life, and in the very pang of death: and we
must not in any wise let our hold go; no though we should feel our selves
descend to hell.

Children not to be clothed with over costly apparel.
AS the soft Flax soon catches hold on the fire: So likewise youthful
nature, will soon be inflamed with Costly apparel, and with new fashions,
which is a great fault in parents; as lamentable experience too much teaches
this day. Esaias. 14.12. Zeph. ^.8.

Christ will take Compassion on us.
1 AS the Apple of the eye is so tender, that it may not be touched, but with
great grief: So likewise the conjunction between Christ and us, is such, that
he feels our afflictions, and thereof takes great compassion. Zach. 2.8.

2 As Alexander the Monarch of the world, whenever he came to any City to
besiege it, he would at the first show forth and display his white flag or
banner, in toke^ of mercy, if they would yield: but if they would not, then he
would set forth and display his red flags and banners, in token of wrath and
blood: So in like manner at the first our Savior Christ will show mercy unto us,
hoping that we will turn and repent, but if we will not, then he will bring
dreadful judgments upon us.

Cards and Dice.
1 AS by lots the soldiers parted the garments of Jesus Christ: So may we well
say, that these games of Cards and Dice, is the means to part between the
world and the devil, many of those, who professing reformed Religion, are
addicted thereunto. Mat. 27.35. Pro. 16.33. Ephesians. 5.16.

2 As the pleasure of gain, and the sorrow for loss in play, are mighty
passions to move the hearts of men: So also a number of braules, quarrels, and
controversies do arise, of Carding and Dicing: as swearing, cursing, and
blaspheming of God. etc. Exodus 20.7. Math. 12.36. 1. Cor. 10.31.

3 As they that whet their knives upon a chalk stone, do not sharpen them, but
rather make them more dull and blu^t: Even so, such as use Dicing and Carding,
do not quicken their wits, but rather dull them.

Christ is the food of a Christian soul.
AS every man is carnally fed and nourished in his body by meat and drink:
Even so is every good Christian man, fed and nourished in his soul, by the
flesh and blood of our Savior Christ.

Care of the salvation of others.
AS when one of our friends is ill at ease or sick in his body, we will not
stick to ride and run to procure any means whereby to restore his bodily
health: Even so, much more ought we to be more careful of the salvation of the
souls of our brethren, by how much more the the soul is of greater price then
the body.

Christ crucified heals us.
AS skillful and cunning Physicians, are wont sometimes, when a sick man is
sore vexed with a numnesse of his whole body, to cut a vain of his head, that
the letting of blood may heal the body of that disease and sickness: Even so
Christ is our head, and we are his members: A vain of our head is cut, that
our whole body may be healed: Christ suffered, that mankind might be redeemed.
Col. 1.18. Gal. 4.4.

Original Corruption is the root of all sin.
AS the cause of trees and plants, of their roots, stocks, stems, and
boughs, is in the seed: So the cause of our transgressions, foul sins, and
most dangerous iniquities, is our own Corruption, wherewith we are moved,
and inclined to all evil; and the ignorance, and not knowing of our selves,
wherewith we are greatly hindered in the knowledge of our God, and do also most
sharply censure those things in others, which we do love and cherish in our
selves.

Our Conversation is carefully to be looked unto.
AS it behooves him that walks upon cords strained and fastened on high,
diligently to look to his footing that he may not totter, or decline this way,
or that way: Even so it stands us upon, to be wary, and carefully to look
about us, and to take good heed where we set our feet, that is, our
affections and the delights of our hearts, least we fall down headlong into
the bottomless gulf of Gods displeasure. For if we will fix our affections,
and bend our wills, with a deliberate consent, to do the thing that is evil,
unjust, and ungodly, making no conscience of any thing that we do, be it
never so opposite and contrary to the will of God, it cannot be, but falling
from the state of grace, we shall fall most suddenly and shamefully, into the
infernal pit of hell, death and damnation.

2 As a wheel although it turn about on the ground, yet the greatest part of
it is always from the earth, and but little of it touches the ground: So
although our body be on earth, yet the Conversation of the soul, which is the
greater part of us, must be in heaven.

Christ is possessor of heaven for us.
1 AS if upon the confiscation of an inheritance coming to many brethren, when
the Prince afterward makes a release, the eldest brother takes the possession
for assurance, that himself and his brethren are restored to their goods, and
the same is an assurance to the coheires with the eldest, that in the person of
their eldest brother, themselves are put in possession of the inheritance
common to them all: Even so Jesus Christ has taken possession of heaven, not
only for himself, but also for us his coheires. Romans 8.17.

2 As the high Priest entering into the holy Sanctuary, upon his shoulders and
breast, carried the twelve names of the twelve Tribes of Israel: So Jesus Christ
entered not alone into heaven, but we also with him. Ephe. 2.5.

Company changes nature.
AS the Camelion, is sometimes black, and sometimes green, sometimes pale,
and sometimes blew (for he ever takes his color, of the thing which he sees
to be next unto him, and does show and represent, the color of what thing is
set before him:) So men of all degrees, are wont very much to imitate the
nature, disposition, and manners of those, whose Counsel they follow, and
whose familiarity they use. Psalm. 101.1.2. etc.

Christ's care of his members, though absent.
EVen as the Eagle, having her young ones shut up in the nest, although she
flies exceeding high, and pearseth the lofty air, yet she withdraws not
her eyes from her young ones, but still beholds them; and they also, crying
after their manner, with their streatched our necks, do look after her: Even
so the Lord Jesus ascending into heaven, did behold his Disciples, and they
also hungring and thirsting after him, did fasten their eyes upon him, and did
not loose the sight of him, until he pearsed and broke open the heavens, and
entered into the presence of his Father. And although they were divided from him
in body, yet in heart and mind they followed him still. Act. 1.9.10.11.

Crosses are the badge of a Christian.
EVen as it is a thing very commendable and worthy praise, that a Soldier
do ever bear about him, the signs and badges of his Captain, that it may
appear to whom he belongs: So is it no little honor to a true Christian
man, to pass through many dangers, and to be experienced in many troubles,
and to endure many afflictions for his Captain Christ's sake: for sorrows,
vexations, and trbulations, are the armor and badges of Christ. Gal. 6.17.

Christ fisheth for men.
AS the Devil, that wicked and crafty fisher, with his great, large, long, and
broad Nets, takes and draws up great multitudes, and infinite numbers of
souls, The Devils bait.
which voluntarily give themselves unto him, and do suffer him most easily to
take them, by and with with his baits, which are, voluptuousness, the foul
pleasures, and rotten delights of the flesh, worldly wealth at will, the vain
glory of the world, innumerable riches of all sorts, power, authority,
vanity, an insatiable desire to bear rule, and a thousand such others; the
seely poor fishes being deceived by these baits, do never feel the hook,
until it stick so fast in their jaws, that there is no scaping, but the
devil makes a full account of them, as of his own: Even so contrariwise,
Christ does fish for men, that he may draw them out of the bitter waters of
the dangerous sea, and that he may give unto them the water of grace, who
seeks to save their souls, and to bring them to everlasting happiness, and
celestial immortality, (who yet fly from him, and would not come near him)
he fisheth with a sharp and bitter bait, Christ's bait.
very unpleasant to the corrupted nature and appetite of a natural man; to
wit, with much fasting, praying often, with watchings, honest labors in a man's
calling; contempt of the world, spiritual poverty, bitter tears, deep
sighs, and grievous groans, for sins committed against the Lord; with
humility and lowliness of heart; with kindness, peace, patience,
righteousness, and such other things: all which, although to those which are
inclined with a right and true love of God, they are pleasant and welcome, yet
nevertheless, to the will and desire of a mere natural man that is a friend
of flesh and blood, they are hard, and do seem very bitter to his corrupted
taste.

Men which can keep no Counsel, are very dangerous.
1 AS the Sea, called the dead Sea, which is a Lake in Judea, called
Asphaltits, whereof Aristotle, Pliny, Iustine, and diverse others do make
mention: wherein is neither fish, nor any living creature found in it,
whereupon it has the name Dead: and in it nothing is covered, neither does any
thing that is in it, sink to the bottom thereof, but all things do swim, and
are in sight, and do continue in the top of the water: Even so, such are they
that will keep no Counsel nor secrets whatsoever, but will reveal and bewray
all things that they know, whether they be good or bad.

2 Even as Hypanis a River in Scythia, which has a marvelous sweetness,
until a little bitter spring which Herodotus calls Exampeus, be mingled with
it, and then it is corrupted with a wonderful bitterness: Even so, those men
which are like torn vessels that will hold no water, and so full of chinkes,
that they neither can nor will keep any secrets or Counsel, are very bitter
and intolerable men, and do much harm in every place where they come; neither
can any Counsel or secret be committed unto such, without great danger to the
Commonwealth wherein they dwell; and especially to all those that repose any
trust in them. Such men, seem they never so wise, learned, and full of
Counsel, are not to come near godly Princes, neither to be made acquainted
with matters of state, and the affairs of the Commonwealths, least they do
great hurt, both with giving counsel themselves, and also by discovering such
weighty secrets, as shall in trust be committed unto them. Job. 22.18. Psalm.
1.1.

Christ is less beholden to the most part of the world, then Caesar was to the
Romans.
AS Marcus Antonius with an Oration that he made upon the death of Caesar, is
said to have greatly delighted the people of Rome, and that he moved very many
of them, to shead great store of bitter tears, when he put them in
remembrance of the great benefits which they had from time to time, received
of Caesar, and withal, did show them Caesar's garments, wherein his enemies,
Cassius, and Brutus, had slain him, all full of blood: whereat they were so
mightily moved, that they expulsed the homicides and murderers out of the
City, so that they durst not, if they would live any longer, come near it:
And yet in these days of ours, though the Preacher (never so good an heavenly
Orator,) come with the Oracles of God himself, in his mouth, and show most
plainly, what Christ the Redeemer of the world, has done for man, and prove
that man has received unspeakable and innumerable benefits, by and through
Christ; and declare what bitter tears, water and blood, did trickle down his
cheeks, and what deep and deadly sighs, with many fearful and grievous
groans, did rise from his heart, before he came to the Cross; and though he
rip up his passion stitch by stitch, as the holy Book, and divine Word, shall
direct and lead him; and though particularly he show, how and where he was
wounded, that he was beaten, spit upon, crowned with thorns, nailed hand and
foot to the Cross, scorned and mocked of the Jews: and though he show most
lively, that the wicked and cruel Jews embrued their hands in his blood, and
gave him vinegar and gall to drink: yea, and although the Preacher declare and
prove, that besides the death and passion of his body, he suffered in his
soul, the heavy wrath and indignation of his Father, and the extreme
tortures and torments of hell, for a time, no less then the the reprobates
that be there already, and no less then all we by just desert should have
suffered for ever, if Christ had not done it for us: and yet few or none for
all this will shead one tear, give one groan, or sigh once from the bottom of
his heart.

Christ his goodness considered, there was never any creature dealt so
unkindly with him, as man does.
AS sometimes it falls out, that a Hen sits upon Ducks eggs, and with
her diligent sitting, and the heat of her body, she does hatch, and bring them
forth: and when they be able to follow her, she clucks them, and after her
manner, as though they were her natural Chickens, she does call them about her;
but they being not of her, but the Ducks kind, though by her they have been
hatched, and of her have received life, and though she has a continual care
to bring them up, and to defend them from such enemies as seek to devour
them, yet nevertheless, they will follow and seek after that whereunto by
nature they are inclined and given: when she is scraping and scratching in the
earth to find them food, they will be in the water, mire, or foul puddle,
after their kind; she may cluck and walk alone, they will not keep her
company, unless perhaps in some danger, when the Kite is ready to catch
them, for some succor they will fly to her: howbeit at the length, when she
perceives them to be unnatural and unkind to her, she does forsake them and
give them over: Even so our sweet Savior Christ Jesus, having taken great
pains for us, and having humbled himself, even in the lowest degree of all
humility that can be named; as in coming down out of his fathers bosom,
being most perfect, most holy, and omnipotent God, being every way equal, and
in nothing interior to his Father, to take our weak, frail, and feeble
nature upon him, and (sin excepted) to have a perfect feeling of all our
miseries and infirmities; as wearisomnes of body, hunger and thirst, and such
others: and besides the enduring of these, many years together, having suffered
a most cruel death, and even at his death upon the Cross, having tasted and
taken a full cup of his Fathers fury and indignation, which was indeed filled
and prepared for us, as a just reward for our sins, and should have been our
own cup, and our own portion, for ever and ever, had he not even then taken
and supt it up, to clear and to free us from it. Again, after all these
things, having still continued his humility in suffering death, to keep his
body three days in the grave, and even as it were to tread and trample upon
him, and then manger death, hell, devil, and Jews, having risen again, and
being ascended, and gone up to his Father, where now (until his coming
again, to judge the quick and the dead) he sits at the right hand of
majesty and power: He now speaks and calls unto us; by his Prophets,
Apostles, and Ministers, and wills us to remember, what case and estate we
were ^n, before he died, and suffered all these things for us; and he would
have us to know, to be sure and never to forget, that if he had not suffered
death here upon earth, as he did, we should never have found any way or
entrance into heaven: the celestial joys, and pleasures of the Lords saints,
salvation, and eternal life, should never have be^onged unto us; we should
have had no more to do with them, then they that live without faith, and die
infidels: The horrors of hell, and the stinking lakes of unspeakable shame,
confusion, torments, endless death, and damnation, should have been our
inheritance, lot, and perpetual portion. Christ therefore does daily put us in
mind, that we be not our own, but his, and that we be the greatest and
dearest purchase, that ever was made, in heaven or in earth; and that the like
price and cost was never bestowed upon any creatures, as upon us. When the
Angels, which were in heaven, in the presence of their creator, did once offend
they were hurled out, and cast into hell; Christ would not bestow upon them one
penny of all that great price, and rich ransom, which he paid for us; he
would not then become man, to shed one drop of blood for them; but for our
sakes, he spared not one drop, but shed all. The Hen, that himself speaks
of, was never so diligent and careful, to gather her chickings under her
wings, as he has ever been, most ready to shroude and to protect us, against
all the enemies of our souls and bodies. Many mothers shall sooner forget the
children of their own womb, and utterly forsake them, before Christ will
forsake us; yea he will never forget, nor forsake us, unless we first forget,
and forsake him. Now therefore we being his, so dearly bought, and so truly
paid for, he calls upon us every day, he clocketh us, and looks for us,
that we should follow him, and tread in such steps, as he has appointed, and
that we should not range at random, but keep our selves within the hearing of
his voice, and our lives within the limits of obedience unto the same: these
things he looks for at our hands. But we deal with this most kind, most
loving, and most merciful redeemer, and Savior of our souls and bodies, even
so as the unnatural and unkind Ducks deal with the Hen, of whom they have
received life; they regard not her clucking, neither we Christ's calling: when
she is seeking and providing for them, on the fair, dry, and wholesome
earth, they will be in some foul water, filthy mire, or stinking puddle: And
when the Lord Jesus calls us to integrity of life, to do the thing that is
just and right in his own eye, and to speak the truth, according to the
knowledge of our hearts, then will we with greediness, pollute our souls and
bodies with all wickedness, and things that be abominable: then will we oppress
our brethren, not caring who sink, if our selves swim; then will we not
stick to speak lies, even to Gods own face: And when the Lord calls, and
sends us to seek heavenly things, we presently return to the foul puds of
the world, carnal delights, and vain, yea vile pleasures: So that, we ever
take the contrary way, to that which Christ commands. Christ calls for
our hearts, to have them in truth and sincerity, with all diligence to attend
upon his pleasure, and to wait on his will; he would have us, not in part, but
wholly to give them unto him, and without the heart, he will receive, and take
in good part, at our hands and lips, nothing. But we on the other side, give
nothing less to God, then our hearts. There is nothing that may and cannot
command our hearts, and have them at pleasure, sooner then Christ Jesus, who
with the death of his own heart, gave life to our bodies and souls. If the
world do but a little smile upon us, and give us but an alluring look, and a
fair word, we will by and by follow it, and bestow upon it all our
attendance. If the devil himself can make us believe, that we shall either
have profit, or pleasure by doing his will, our hearts, minds, wills, and al,
are readier for him, then for Jesus Christ. O matchless, yea monstrous
madness! they that seek our destruction, can sooner with a pleasant look,
then Christ with the giving of his life for us, have us at commandment. Christ
would have us to mortify our earthly members, as fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affections, evil concupisence, and covetousness, which is
Idolatry: But alas, we nourish, pamper and cherish all these. The Lord would
have our conversation in heaven, but we are altogether carnally and earthly
minded. The Lord would have our feet to stand within the gates of Jerusalem,
but we love rather to be trampling the streets of Egypt, Babylon, and Sodom.
The holy Ghost would have us to fight a good fight, to finish our course after
the will of God, and to keep the faith, not only in words, but also in life
and deeds: Indeed we are apt and ready to fight and strive for worldly
promotion, honor, dignity, revenues, and riches; but for heaven, and heavenly
things we will never strive, take no pains, nor once trouble our selves, we
will have it with ease, and all manner of pleasures, or else not at all,
farewell it. The courses we take here in this life, are very bad; and the end
(unless we repent) is like to be worst of all: And whiles we have no care to
keep good consciences, it is impossible for us to keep faith. If Christ and
Satan should stand before us, the one pointing us to heaven, and eternal
felicity, but the way to it, full of troubles, griefs and sorrows: the other
pointing to hell, but the way to it, full of delicates, pleasures, and dainty
delights; and let God call, and the devil call, yet the devil (it is to be
feared) is like to have the greater number to follow him, for those short
pleasures: and Christ but a few to follow him, because they must go loade^ with
Crosses and afflictions; daily experience does teach us no less, seeing all
our actions are carnal, and have only but little outward show, and no taste
at all of true godliness, nor so much as any relish of the spirit, and love
of Christ Some will abstain from the committing of any gross sins, now and
then, and yet not that, in any true and sincere love to God, but either for
fear of shame and punishment in this world, or else fear of vengeance, in the
world to come; which both are unprofitable: for the Lord has no pleasure in
forced service, he will have it voluntary, with the heart, and proceeding of
love, not of a servile fear, otherwise it shall be numbered with the rest of
our sins. This does greatly condemn us, that though we do not such things
our selves, yet we can without trouble of conscience, grief of heart, or
vexation of mind, see and hear the Lords name blasphemed, his Sabbath
unhallowed, Idolatry committed, parents dishonored; whoredom, theft, murder,
and Covetousness, commonly used; and all the laws of God utterly contemned;
and it shall never offend the greatest number, so much as a thorn in a foot,
or a blaine or push upon a finger. This undoubtedly is even to forsake God in
the plain field, and to be afraid to serve him in truth and sincerity, least
we should thereby purchase man's displeasure: unless therefore we learn to
serve him better, in more truth, with greater zeal in singlenes of heart, we
have nothing else to look for, but that he will forsake us, both in this
world, leaving us destitute of his assistance, that our enemies may pray upon
us; and also in the world to come, in giving out against us, his malediction,
curse, woe, and sentence of death. Math. 25.37. Psalm. 15.2. Pro. 23.26. Col.
3.5. Phil. 3.20. Psalm. 122.2. 2. Tim. 4.5.6.7. Math. 25.41.

Breakers of the fourth Commandment.
1 AS those parents that bring not their sons and daughters, (being of years
of discretion) on the Sabbath day to the Church, to be partakers of the holy
exercises, as preaching, prayer, Catechizing and Sacraments, do transgress
this Commandment: So in like manner, those pa^ents greatly offend herein,
that bring their young children to the Church on the Sabbath days, who either
by their crying or running up and down the Church, do both trouble
themselves, the Minister, and the people, that the word preached, and the
prayers uttered, cannot with reverence be so well heard, as otherwise they
might. And no less do they offend herein, that bring their Hawks, Hounds or
Dogs, to disquiet the Congregation.

2 As Magistrates, Schoolemaisters, as also all Artificers, and Handicrafts
men, ought to abstain from their Offices and callings on the Sabbath day,
because they are impediments to hinder their zeal and attentiveness, that
they ought to give to God in his worship and service that day: So contrariwise,
if God will not have them exercise their vocations and trades, being lawful
and necessary, then much more he will not have them exercised in unlawful and
unnecessary works, as in gayming, dycing, daunsing, carding, drinking,
rioting, and other vanities of this world, whereby they are not only drawn
from the company of the holy Congregation, but also do thereby defile their
bodies, which they ought rather to sanctify and keep holy.

Christ comes of the Father.
AS the Sun remains the same, and is not lessened by the beams which it
spreads abroad: So neither is the substance of the Father lessened or
changed, though he have the Son, an Image of himself.

Christ not to be denied in persecution.
AS the Serpent when he sees he shall come into man's hands, defends his
head, either by gathering himself into a circle, or thrusting his head into a
hole, leaving the other parts open to the wounds: So likewise we must do in
time of persecution, even keep Christ our head from wounds, howsoever our
bodies suffer.

Curiosity.
1 AS the Physicians do speak of the members of a man's body, that they are made
and composed of form, substance, strength, and greatness: and placed and
disposed very conveniently, to show their effects and operations: So likewise
in every Commonwealth, God has raised up some men, either Ciuilians, or
Divines, and furnished them with such graces and gifts, as are necessary to
effect such things, as he has before determined: now if the foot will take
upon him to execute the office of the hand, or that the hand will needs walk as
the foot: if the ear will strive to see, and the eye to hear, it would be a
very vain and foolish thing for them to enterprise such things, seeing they
have not been made and framed thereto: In like manner we strive in vain, when as
we endeavor to effect such things whereto by nature we are not appointed and
ordained.

2 As men having heard a report of the fertility, pleasure, and abundance of
any strange Country, are never quiet until they have seen it: but they have
not bin there a year, but they are in great dislike with it, as ever they were
with their own native soil; for though they change their air, they never
alter their nature; their minds are as full of fancies, and their heads of
toys, as ever they were: Even so, such as are possessed with wandering and
straying cogitations, who will needs occupy every Trade, and be of all
Occupations, and change their opinions as often as they do their garments,
having one foot in the Court, and an other in the Country; they do no sooner
undertake any thing, but they are presently weary of it; and they have not so
soon given it over, but forthwith they would take it in hand again.

3 As we see the diseases of man's body, do bring such unquietness and irksomnes
with the^, that the poor Patie^t disliketh every thing whatsoever: yea such
oftentimes, as in his health and prosperity, were most pleasing unto him, as
his wife and children, his bed, his meat and drink, and such like. So likewise
it is apparent in the affections of the mind, which being once distempered, we
cannot long live contentedly in any condition of life whatsoever.

4 As the Egyptian (who carried somewhat wound up in his napking) answered
(unto him that demanded what it was) that he had covered it, to the end, that
no man should see it: So likewise must we learn, that if there be any thing
hidden and laid up in the works of God, that it is of purpose kept from us, to
the end that we should not be too curious to inquire after it; and that it is
far better to be utterly ignorant herein, then to have all the knowledge
thereof that may be. Deuteronomy. 29.29. 1. Tim. 4.7. and.6.20. Tit. 3.9.

5 Like as Coursers and Hunters, who leading their dogs into the fields, do
not let them slip at al adventures, at whatsoever comes next to hand, but
hold them until their game be found, to the end they may be the more fresh and
lusty to maintain their course: So likewise must we hold and keep in our
Curiosity, and not suffer it to follow after whatsoever it lusts, but only
that, which being once attained unto, brings with it both pleasure and profit.

6 As they, who in reading over a book, do note nothing but the faults and
errors therein contained: Or as such, which take much more pleasure in beholding
a monster, then a body which is perfectly made: Or to view an Antike picture,
or some old counterfeit, wherein there are strange devises: Even so let one
speak to us of the wisdom, Justice, liberality, modesty, and temperance of
another, and we will scarcely give any ear thereto: but let one tell us, that
some young wench have lived incontinently; or that some woman is taken in
Adultery; or that there is strife and contention among brethren, or some
discord among friends, we are waking enough, and but too too curious and
ready to hear.

7 As we see Serpents nourished by venim, and live in filthy, stinking, and
darksome Caves: So curious men, do nourish themselves, with woeful and
sorrowful discourses, and never take pleasure in any thing, but in that which
deserves pity and commiseration.

8 As Surgeons search and seek out the disease, with intention to heal it,
and if it be a soar that should be kept secret, they are both wise and
faithful enough to conceal and hide it: So contrariwise, curious men are
desirous to know every malladie, to the end they may make it known, and
publish it, wheresoever they come.

9 As backbiters take pleasure to hear evil of their neighbors: So these
curious men take delight to report the worst to the next company they meet
with, so that they are exceeding envious, and rejoice in nothing but in other
men's wants, imperfections, and mischiefs.

10 As it were a foolish and an intemperate humor, for a man that has a
fair, beautiful, amiable, and virtuous wife, with whom he might very
lawfully enjoy his pleasure and delights, to reject her and cast her off, and
to buy at a very great rate, with pain, sorrow, and shame, the love of an
other most foul, and filthy Slut: So in like manner, it is a most sottish and
foolish thing, to despise so many godly histories, and beautiful discourses of
this life; so many learned books; so many excellent Treatises and worthy
examples, whereby we may reap such exceeding profit and pleasure: Curiously
to busy our selves in enquiring after our neighbors matters; to open sealed
letters; to harken under men's windows; or to whisper in women's ears, and such
like absurdities: whereto curious men are most commonly addicted.

11 As old Lamia (so much spoken of in ancient stories,) who had eyes like unto
Spectacles, which she might take out, and put in at her pleasure, so soon as
she came home into her lodging, she used to lock the^ up into her coffer,
and set her down to spinning, as blind as a beetle, and never saw what she
did in her own house: but she went no sooner abroad, but she put them in her
head again, and would very curiously behold what other men did. In like
manner, we through a folish and sottish self-love, do never view our own
imperfections, although they be clear as the Sun, and as big as a
millstone: but on the contrary, we can quickly epsy other men's vices, though
it be at midnight, and that peradventure they be not so big as a peble stone.

12 As it is reported of Democritus, that walking abroad, he was wont to shut
his eyes, least by wandering regardes, his mind should be turned from the
contemplation of honest things: So likewise must we with all our endeavors,
bar and shut up this curious humor, to the end to keep it in, that thereby
we may search after nothing, whether it be touching God, nature, or our
neighbors, but that which may profit us, and tends to our edification;
rejecting al unprofitable, impossible, and superfluous things: about the
knowledge whereof, we consume our bodies, mispend our time, and loose our
labors; all which should be carefully and diligently employed in the study
and seeking after, of more commodious and more necessary matters.

13 As Rebeccaes two twins did struggle and wrestle before they were borne,
for hatred and malice: but Elizabeth's one child did spring and skip before he
was born, for joy and gladness: So he that is curious, and busieth himself
about more things then one, shall never prove singular in any thing; nay he
shall find that strife and resistance in his head, which Rebecca did in her
womb: but he that labors and travels only about one thing, shall bring it to
good perfection; and be as well delivered of it, as Elizabeth was of John
Baptist. Phil. 3.14.

Courtesy.
1 AS the tree is known by his fruit, the gold by the touch, and the bell by
the sound, so is a man's birth by his benevolence: his honor, by his humility;
and his calling, by his Courtesy.

2 As the peg straineth the Lute strings, so Courtesy stretches the heart
strings.

3 As it belongs to the Sun to lighten the earth with his beams; so it
pertains to the virtue of a Prince, to have compassion, and be Courteous to
the miserable.

Courts of Princes.
AS it was a saying sometime of Asia, that it was no praise never to have seen
it; but to have lived soberly and temperatly in Asia, was praise worthy: Even
so it were no great matter, never to have seen the Courts of Princes; but to
have lived Christianly in those Courts, were a special work of God in his
children.

Spiritual Doctrine of our souls.
1 AS God works in his creatures, that after winter comes Summer, and after a
storm, comes fair weather: So in the spiritual Doctrine of our souls, first
he teaches repentance; preaches the Law; threatens vengeance for sin;
castes down man in his own sight; and lets him look even into hell, with
fear of conscience for his disobedience; but afterward he comforts him,
rayseth him up, and heales him. Math. 9.13.

Desires of the flesh, how they are quenched.
LIke as the Dropsy desires and longs after drink, and drink greatly
increases it: Even so evil Desires, and corrupt affections, if they be
followed, do much increase, but being refrained, they decrease.

The Deceites of the world are dangerous.
1 AS they which walk in a mist, do not see it so well, as they which stand
upon an hill from it: Even so it fares in discerning the Deceites and
dissimulations of the world; whose property is to blind them that come to it,
to the end they may not see their own estate: Even as a Raven first of all
strikes out the poor sheep eyes, and so brings to pass, that she may
not see the way to escape from his tyranny.

2 Like as a man's naked body tossed and tumbled among many thorns, cannot but
be much rent and torn, and made bloody with the pricks thereof: So a worldly
man's soul, beaten with the cares and cogitations of this life, cannot but be
vexed with restles pricking of the same; and wounded also with many temptations
of sin, which follow upon it.

Discord.
AS Music, if the harmony of the strings be not consonantly fitted, the
sound is not sweet nor acceptable to any good and tunable ear: Even so, if
Christians do disagree amongst themselves, they are unacceptable to God.

Diseases of the mind.
AS the wounds of the body with often rubbing and chafing, are made sometimes
incurable: Even so the Diseases of the mind, if they be exasperated and stirred
up, will more and more rebel and draw the party in whom they are to sin
more greedily, then ever he did before.

Death of the body not to be feared.
1 LIke as a traveler, who having passed many dangers, rejoices greatly when
he approaches near unto his own contrie, or home. Or as a man, who willingly
departs out of a ruinous house, ready to fall upon his head: Even so a godly
Christian can take no pleasure in this transitory world, seeing each day he
draws nearer to an end then other, where the pleasures that he receives, are
nothing to the pains he suffers, and his delights do cost him so dear.
Phil. 1.23.

2 As men lock up their best apparel in a chest, meaning to wear them
again: Even so are the Dead bodies of the faithful, buried in sure and
certain hope of rising again to life everlasting. And therefore none ought to
fear Death, or be unwilling to die.

3 As money borrowed is to be paid again with thanks, and good will: So the
life that we have borrowed of God, is to be yielded up with cheerful
countenance and thanks.

Dunsticall writers.
AS the savor of the beast Panther, seems sweet to none other then unto
brute beasts: So is Scotus and other Dunsticall writers, to sharp, quick,
and good wits, most foolish: Whereas unto doltes, and dawes, they are as dear
as any darling.

Decree, or purpose of God.
AS no man is able, neither King, Prince, nor Potentate, to stay, stop, or
hinder the course of the Sun, Moon, or Stars: So likewise can no man stay,
let, or hinder the Decree, purpose, determination, or counsel of God. Pro.
21.30.

Decrease of renewed holiness.
AS when a thief goes about to spoil any man of his goods, if he offer to
break in at the broadside of his house, he is straightway espied and receives
the repulse; but if he undermine the house, he may be within it, and on the
dweller before he be aware: So when as Satan comes as it were bluntly to a
Christian, and does at the first dash, move him to forsake, and renounce God by
infidelity, his malicious purpose is soon espied, and for the most part so
carefully resisted, that he has not any hope ever to prevail by that means,
and to rob the regenerate man of his renewed holiness: So that he is driven
to take another way by the end (for he will never give over) and to go more
closely to work.

Day of Judgment terrible to the wicked.
1 AS Cornelius being a just man, and feared God, was yet afraid when he saw
the Angel: Even so, much more shall the wicked be astonished and confounded at
the presence of God, at the Day of Judgment. Act. 10.2.3.4. 2. These. 1.9.10.

2 Like as when the boughs of the Fig tree be tender, and that it begins
to bring forth leaves, it is a certain token that Summer is near: Even so,
treasons, pestilence, wars, famine, Earthquakes, etc. are the Prefaces or
Prologues to sorrows, and show that the Day of Judgment is near, even at the
doors. Math. 24.32. Math. 13.28.

Death of Christ.
1 AS the herb Panax, or Panace, has in it a remedy against all diseases:
So is the Death of Christ, against all sin, sufficient and effectual.

2 Like as the storm and tempest of the Sea, was pacified, and ceased as soon
as Jonas was cast into it: Even so, by the Death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ, the wrath of God was truly, and indeed pacified; that calmness might
be given unto the troubled consciences of sinners: and a most sure atonement
and peace made betwixt God and us. Iona. 7.2. etc.

3 Like as a Corrasiue which being applied to the part affected, eats out the
venime and corruption: Even so the Death of Christ by faith applied,
frettethout, and consumes the concupiscence, and the corruption of the whole
man.

Displeasure foreseen.
AS a man does receive more at will, and with less danger, the stroke which
he foreseeth: So a Displeasure foreseen, and provided for, and before
perceived, does less annoy him.

Death.
1 AS no man may marvel at a thing burnt, that might be burned, or at a thing
molten, that was to be melted: So is it not to be marvelled, that any is Dead,
which was mortal, and borne to die.

2 Like as a man which walks over a field covered with Snow, and sees not
his way, but when he thinks to run on, suddenly falls into a pit: Even so
they which have all things at will, and swim in pleasures, which as a Snow
covers their way, and dazeleth their sight; while they think to live on and
rejoice still, suddenly rush upon Death, and make shipwreck in the calm sea.

Delight.
THey that seek in Plato, Demosthenes, and specially in the sacred Scriptures,
nothing but utterance and eloquence: Are like unto those that delight in the
only color and savor of salues and medicines.

False Doctrines, and inventions of men.
1 LIike as hey, wood and stuble, put to the fire, are brought to sudden
consuming: Even so the Doctrines and inventions of men, not stablished by the
word of God, cannot bear the trial of the holy Ghost, but they by and by fall
away and perish. 1. Cor. 3.12.13.14.15.

2 As there is no food more wholesome then the food of the word of God, if it
be received sincerely as it is: So there is none more noisome and hurtful,
when it is marred with mixture of other things mingled with it, then is the
false Doctrine of men.

3 As smoke hurts the eyes, and suffers them not to see clearly: So also
does perverse Doctrine, it dazeleth the eyes, takes away judgment, and
blinds with error.

4 As it is great foolishness to forsake the clear fountains, and to drink
puddle water: so it is great folly to leave the sweet Doctrine of the
Evangelists, and to study the dreams of men's imaginations.

Discipline.
1 LIke as if there were never so fair a garden or orchard planted, and yet
the same left without a fence, or but with a bad fence, so that something (ere
it were long) should get in, and so root up the herbs, and mar the plants:
Even so is it in the Church where Discipline wants, although there be never
so sound and good preaching with Catechizing, against sin and wickedness, yet
the edge thereof is so dulled, that it is fruitless and of little force.

2 Like as when a man goes a stray and wandreth in some Forest, not knowing
in what great danger, it would no doubt, be a great comfort to him to be told
of his error, and taught the right way: Even so the principal end of
Discipline, tends, that every member of the Church should walk in the fear
of God; and that if any one go a stray, he should be brought back into the
way of salvation. Math. 18.15.16.17.

3 Even as when a man falls into a ditch or deep pit, ready to be drowned,
he has good cause to thank him that pulls him out and saves his life: So
likewise we are to account our selves much bound and beholding to the
Ecclesiastical Discipline of Gods Church, when we, (through wickedness and
lewdness of life, are ready to be drowned in hell) then (I say) we are by
good documents, exhortations, reprehensions, and public admonitions, hayled
and drawn out of the same.

4 As no City, Town, house or family, can maintain their estate, and
prosper, without Policy and Government: Even so the Church of God, which
requires more purely to be governed then any City, or family, cannot
without spiritual Policy, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, continue, increase
and flourish.

5 As the word of God is the life and soul of the Church: So a godly order of
Discipline, is as it were sinews in the body, which knit and join the members
together with decent order and comeliness: It is a bridle to stay the wicked
from their mischiefs: It is a spur to prick forward such as be slow and
negligent: yea and for all men, it is the Fathers rod, ever in a readiness
to chastise gently the faults committed, and to cause them afterward to live
in more godly fear and reue^ence.

Drunken men.
AS one ouer-loaden with Wine, can very hardly hide or keep any meat in his
stomach: So also the drunken man; may keep or contain in him no secrets.

Drunkards, and Drunkenness.
1 AS Lot in seeking to make himself merry with wine, did incur thereby a
perpetual heaviness: Even so all those that do practice the like, are in
great danger of getting dishonestie and shame. Genesis 19.32.

2 Like as the immoderate drinking of wine, was only the cause of Lots
abominable and vile incest: Even so the like excess in all other Drunkards,
is the only cause, why they do many things, whereof, being come to themselves
again, they are then both sorry, and sore ashamed. Pro. 31.4 1. Tim. 3.3, 8.
Tit. 1.7. Leuit. 10.9. Number. 6.3. Esa. 5.11.

3 As a man by reason is discerned from a bruit beast: So when wine and strong
drink depriueth him of his understanding and reason, it depriueth man of man,
and places him in the degree of beasts. Prou. 20.1.1. Cor. 6.10. and 5.11, 22.

4 As there is no exercise more profitable for the children of God, for their
salvation, or wherein God is greatlier glorified, then in prayer,
thanksgiving, and praises to the Lord: So is there nothing that sooner
quenches the use of the same, then Drunkenness. 2. King. 16.9. Luke 21.34.35.
Ephesians. 5.18. Romans 13.13.

5 As long and sore rain moysteneth the earth, and so conuerteth into mire,
that it cannot be tilled to bring forth fruit: Even so our bodies distempered
with too much drink, cannot receive the spiritual Husbandry, neither yield
any fruit beseeming the immortal soul. Pro. 23.29, 30. 1. Pet. 4.3. Mich.
2.11.

6 As all men do desire to have sufficient and competent showers of rain in
their fields and closes, so that they may be able both to exercise tillage, and
to enjoy the plenty of their fruits and increase: Even so in this field, men
should drink but so much as behooves; least by excess and Drunkenness, the
very earth of their body (being as it were turned into a very Fenne and
Quagmyre) may better serve to breed Woormes and Serpents of vice and sin,
then it should be able to bring forth the fruit of charity.

7 As whatsoever grows in Fennes and Marshes, brings forth no fruit, for
therein do breed Serpents and sundry kinds of woormes, which do bring more
horror and dread, then increase of victual: Even so such are Drunkards, being
fit for no profit or commodity; for oftentimes in their Drunkenness, they
know neither themselves, nor any body else, neither can they go, stand, nor
speak any thing that pertains unto reason. Esaias. 19.14. and 28.1, 23, 7.
Amo. 2.5.15.

8 As when there is too much rain, the ground is unfit for Tillage and turned
to mire: So when one is Drunken the spiritual tillage can take no force, nor
the soul bring forth her fruits of Christianity.

9 As a Sip on the Sea without a guide, leaning now on the one side, now on the
other, so often in danger: So ^n like manner it often happens to the
Drunkard, who ^acketh the guide of reason, stumbleth at every stone, and
sometime falls in the mire.

The Diet of the soul.
AS it is not sufficient for the good estate of man's body, that it be brought
into the world, in the natural ^erfection of it, which consists in the
equal tempera^ure and just proportion of the several parts of it, for that
it being left here, would soon perish and come to ^ought: And therefore it
must of necessity be conti^ually both nourished with meat and Drink, and
also preserved from all hurtful things; yea carefully restored to the former
state of health, if by any inward or outward means it fall into sickness, or
be any way hurt, wounded, or distempered: Even so, no more will it serve for
the good estate of the soul, that it be both prepared by repentance for
regeneration; yea actually regenerated by the spirit of God: but it likewise
must continually be tended, fed, right Dieted, and cherished; yea healed of all
those maladies, which by any means happen unto it.

2 As the body being neglected for a small time, becomes weak and
distempered, yea soon falls into sickness, and does perish: So is it with
the soul, the which being neglected but a little, there will a decrease of
holiness be plainly felt; yea perhaps seen by others.

3 As the body must continually be repaired with nourishment, because it is
continually consumed by our natural heat: So must the soul by a good Diet
daily used, be preserved.

4 As it is impossible to order the body aright, either i^ sickness or in
health, without the certain knowledge of our complexion, age, and strength,
and unless we ma^^ in what parts it is most weak or strong, that accordingly
choice may be made both of meats in health, and of r^medies in sickness: So
the foundation of the right ordering of the soul, consists in this, that we
know our age and strength in Christ, whether we be ripe and strong men, able to
digest solid meats; or but babes and weaklings who must be fed with milk:
and also our infirmities, wh^^ sins we are most subject unto, that so we may
avoid a^ occasions of them.

5 As most men living are said to have their health howsoever that exact
temperature, ad pondus, where of Physicians dispute, cannot be found in any
man or in any age: So absolute perfection of holiness, is not required to
spiritual health.

6 As it is sufficient for bodily health, that the distemperature be not so
great and manifest, as that it hinder any of the natural faculties from their
functions: So likewise if the corruption of sin be so brideled, as that it
hinder not the performance of any Christian duty, there is spiritual health:
yea although this corruption of sin be so strong, that it does sometimes
bring forth some sin, and hinder in part the performance of some Christian
duty; yet if for the general course of life, the grace of Gods spirit do
prevail, so that it represseth that sin, and performs all duties, sometimes
faintly, and imperfectly; at other times fully, and courageously, yet here is
health.

7 As the natural life of man may (if no outward violence come) be preserved
with the least care, cost, and pains that can be: but if a man desire to keep
his body in vigor and strength, there must choice of Diet be made, and care
used; and most of all, if he go about to augment either his stature in his
young years, or afterward his strength or flesh, he must be yet more
careful, yea curious in his Diet, bestowing all his time, yea great care and
cost in it: So it is in spiritual life, the which being once put into the
Soul of man by the hand of God, will continue there ever by itself, although
(as it comes often to pass) the owner of it be negligent in mainteining it;
yea in a manner careless of it. Whereas he that desires to continue a whole
and strong man in Christ, without any sickness or decrease of grace, must make
account to bestow great care in this work, and far greater, if (as he
ought) he desire to increase in grace.

8 As it is the part of a wise man, not to walk too near the brinke of a
deep River, whereinto if he chance to slip, there is danger of drowning, but
rather to keep a a loofe off, and so to be in safety: So a good Dietarie of
the Soul, must carefully avoid licentiousness, and the too free use of
worldly pleasures. Luke 21.24. 1. Cor. 6.12. and 9.27.

9 As it is not sufficient for the feeding of the body, that meat be received
into the stomach: for that if by any infirmity thereof, it be straightway
voyded, it does not any whit nourish the body: Even so no more will it serve
for the feeding and dieting of our Souls, that we hear the word with great
joy and delight: yea, with care and attention, unless also we remember and
keep it in our souls.

10 As the body, the which although it be fed to the full, and daily filled
with meat, yet it cannot be preserved, much less increased in health,
strength, and vigor, unless it be exercised, that so the meat received into
the belly, may be drawn and fastened to the other parts of the body, which
otherwise will not nourish, but soon passes away without any profit: So for
the preservation of spiritual health and strength, exercise is no less
needful then food: the truth here of appears in many: who although they
feed their souls with all care and diligence, being continually conversant in
studying, hearing, reading, meditating, and regarding the word: yet their
Souls are not nourished by this food, because they do not join exercise unto
it, as prayer and invocation of the name of God, both public, and also private
conference, etc. 1. These. 5.17. Luke 18.1. Ephe. 6.18.

11 Like as men feeling their bodies any way heavy, distempered, and out of
course, straightway they fly to this remedy of exercise, not doubting but
that it will soon put it away: So whenever we feel our selves prone to
sin, and untoward and sluggish in the service of God, if we give our selves
to the exercise of prayer, and stretch out the joints of our souls before God,
we shall no doubt feel a great change in our souls, and that now they are
light and able to lift up themselves to heaven.

11 As it comes to pass in our bodies, both in the whole, and also in the
several parts and members of them, that the more they are exercised, the more
they are both confirmed in strength, and augmented in quantity; and
contrarily, the more they cease from performing their natural functions, the
less able they are to perform them: yea by this means it comes to pass,
that they are little and weak: Even so it comes to pass in the dieting of
the soul, the graces whereof, as they are more or less, put in practice in
the doing of good works, and the performance of Christian duties: so they do
either increase or decay.

12 As when the bodies of men, or rather of children, do not grow up to their
full and natural stature, it argues some secret distemperature, and some
natural infirmity in them: So when Christians do not grow on from one
measure of grace to a greater, it does of necessity infer an evil Diet and
constitution of the Soul. Ephe. 4.15. 2. Pet. 3.18.

13 As the holiness of the Soul is nourished by the same thing by the which
it is begotten: So it is increased by the same Diet, by the which it is
nourished.

14 As there is required a greater verture and force, both of nature, and of
Diet, to augment the body in stature, then to keep and continue it in life
and health: So he that desires not only to continue, but also to go on in
grace, must indeed use this conseruatiue Diet of spiritual food and exercise:
that is, to cleave to God, to his service, and to all spiritual exercises,
without separation or intermission: to wit, to the hearing, reading, and
studying of the word of God; to the considering of his works, and observing of
his actions; to prayer, singing of Psalms, to the exhorting and instructing of
others in the ways of godliness: And lastly and summarily, to the daily
performance of all Christian duties, and the exercising of all those graces,
which he has received.

15 As we know by daily experience, that many notable Physicians have fallen
into dangerous and mortal sicknesses, and by them be brought to untimely
Death: So it is not sufficient for our spiritual welfare, that we know how to
Diet and order our souls, as long as they are in health and strength, it being
also required, that we know how by a convenient and meet Diet, to recover them
out of sicknesses, and to heal all the maladies happening unto them.

Deferring of Repentance.
1 LIke as we would esteem and judge a man not to be wise, or well in his
wits, that traveling on the way, and having great choice of lusty strong
Horses, should let them all go empty; and lay all the carriage upon some one
poor beast, that could scarce bear it self, or much less stand under so
great a weight laid upon it: Even so, surely, no less unreasonable is that
man, who passing oueridlie and carelessly, the lusty days and times of this
life, without amendment and reformation of his wicked life, reserueth and
deferreth the same unto feeble old age.

2 Like as the holy Ghost accounts them accursed, who having whole and sound
Cattle, do yet offer to God the lame, the blind, the sick, and that which
they would be ashamed to give to a mortal man: Even so how much more are they
accursed before God, that having so may days of youth, strength, and health,
do yet dedicate and appoint unto his service, only their limping old age,
allotting to God a little, short, maimed, and uncertain time: and unto his
enemy, the greatest, the fairest, and the surest part thereof. Mal. 1.8.
Leuit. 3.1, 6. Numb. 18.12. Eccle. 12.2.

3 Like as if a Captain accompanied with other Soldiers, did enter into a
rich City to take the spoil thereof, and one Soldier should say, I will
stay; and come in the next day after, when all the spoil is gone: Might not
he be well reckoned to be both a coward, and unwise? Even so, is it not great
folly and perverseness in some men, that pass over their youthful days in
not serving of God, but living dissolutely, and will not take time whilst time
is? Seeing that now is the time of fight, for the obtaining of our Crown: Now
is the day of spoil to seize on our booty: Now is the market, to buy the
kingdom of heaven: Now is the time of running to get the game, and price: Now
is the day of sowing to provide us corn. Pro. 20.4.

4 Like as a Prince sometime pardons a malefactor, when he is come to the
very place of execution; yet were it not for every malefactor to trust
thereupon, for that this is but an extraordinary act of the Prince his favor,
and neither showed nor promised to all men: Even so no man ought to flatter and
deceive himself in Deferring his conversion, and reforming his life, by
alleging the example of the good thief, saved even at the last hour upon
the Cross, and carried to Paradise that same day with Christ; for this act was
a special Miracle, reserved for the manifestation of Christ his power and
glory, at that hour upon the Cross; and besides, this act was upon a most
rare confession, made by the thief in that instant, when almost all the world
forsook Christ. Luke 23.40, 41, 42, 43.

5 As before the destruction of Jerusalem (for that God desired to spare his
people, and the place of his habitation) he sent his messengers betimes in the
morning, which ceased not to call them back, saying: Return ye wandering
children, confess your iniquity, and your starting aside will I heal again:
Even so did the godly Preachers in the last year of King Edward the sixth,
before their sudden change of state, never more often, more earnestly, more
boldly, and vehemently, cry out and Preach Repentance, then then, fearing the
people from their sins: But nevertheless for all their threatening, they
could not make their stony hearts to relent: They would not turn to the Lord
with all their hearts, with weeping, fasting, and lamenting: But being past
shame, with stiff necks, and uncircumcised hearts and ears, continued still
in their sins; till desolation and confusion fell upon them. 2. King.
21.12.13.14.15. and 23.27. Eze. 21.2.2. Chro. 36.6.19. Math. 24.16. etc. Luke
13.34.35.

6 Like as the Jews, who scorned the messengers of God, mocked his Prophets,
and derided their Sermons, until such time as the wrath of God was kindled
against them, and no redress or amendment could be had: So likewise a great
number with us in England, do most shamefully scoff and deride the word of
God, despise the ministers of Christ, and account of them as mad men, and most
wickedly esteem their preaching, (being the true Oracles of God) to be but
vain fables and lies. 2. Chro. 36.15.16.

Desertion of Gods spirit.
LIke as God did not lead the Children of Israel the directest way into the
promised land of Canaan: So likewise we go not directly to heaven, but are
carried about by the wilderness of this world, for the trying of our patience,
and exercising of other graces given us of God. Numb. 33.1. etc.

Sound Doctrine does cheer the spirits.
AS ripe Grapes do relish sauourly, and with their pleasant and toothsome iuce
do singularly refresh the palate, and delight the throat: Even so sound
Doctrine, wholesome admonition, and gracious speeches, do cheer the spirits,
and comfort the minds of Christians. Esaias. 24.7, 13.

Dead in sin.
1 AS Dead men can do nothing, that living men should do: So when we are Dead
in sin, we can do none of those things which declare and show forth our
life in Christ. Ephe. 2.1. Col. 2.13.

2 As a Dead man in his grave cannot stir the least finger, because he wants
the very power of life, sense, and motion: So likewise no more can he that is
Dead in sin, will the least good: Nay if he could either will or do any
good, he could not be Dead in sin.

3 Even as a Dead man in the grave, cannot rise but by the power of God: So no
more can he that is Dead in sin rise, but by the power of Gods grace alone,
without any power of his own. John. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.10. and 4.24. Phil. 2.13.

Devise of the wicked.
AS the Eggs of the Cockatrice hatched, are full of poison: Even so are the
devises of the wicked, and the execution of their enterprises hurtful. Esaias.
59.5.

The Devil fearful, and envious.
1 LIke as if an enemy of great might, having also an advantage of us, by
reason of the ground wherein he has planted himself, be dreadful to us, so as
we have good cause to fear him: Even so much more we ought to be afraid of
the Devil, having the like or greater advantages of us. Ephe. 6.11.12.

2 As a good Midwife is careful to help the woman in travel and save the
child: Even so the Devil contrariwise, is ready to hinder and hurt the Church,
and to destroy her seed. Reave. 12.2.3.

God Delights in the conversion of a sinner.
AS a Father takes great joy and comfort, when his Son, who was wild,
unthrifty, and ungodly, becomes modest, thriftie, and religous: Even so it
is a Delightful and acceptable thing to God, when any sinner is converted from
his wicked and lewd course, and now lives Christianly. Luke 15.23.24.

Dissentions.
AS Bees when they strive together, and are stirred up through some vehement
motion, with throwing of dust, are brought into order, and appeased: Even so
men, when they are tossed and tormented, with troublesome broils,
perturbations and passions, if they would remember dust, whereinto of
necessity they must be turned, and never forget death, which they shall never
be able to escape, they would easily bestayed, pacified and quietted, and
would repress and keep within compass their strangling lusts, and unruly
appetites, which cannot endure to be tamed and ruled by reason.

How to encounter with Death.
1 LIke as if a man were to fight with a Dragon, his best way to deal with
him, is to pull out his venomous sting: Even so the Dragon wherewith every
Christian man is to encounter, is Death, whose sting is sin; therefore that
we may not take the foil of Death, we are in all our life, to labor to
bereave him of this his sting. 1. Cor. 15.56.

2 As the Philistines, that they might the better deal with Sampson, cut off
his hair where his strength lay: So also every one of us, that we may the
better deal with Death, are to cut off our sins, which be the strength of
Death. Iud. 16.5. etc.

Death.
1 LIke as he that is to pass over some great and deep river, must not look
downward to the stream of the water: But if he would prevent fear, he must
set his foot sure, and cast his eye to the bank on the furthest side: Even so
he that draws near Death, must as it were, look over the waves of Death, and
directly fix the eye of his faith upon eternal life.

2 Like as if a poor man should be commanded by a Prince, to put off his
torn and beggarly garments, and in stead thereof, to put on royal and costly
robes, it would be a great rejoicing to his heart: Even so much more joyful
news must this be unto all repentant and sorrowful sinners, when the King of
heaven and earth, comes unto them by Death, and bids them lay down their
bodies as ragged and patched garments, and prepare themselves to put on the
princely robe of immortality. No tongue can be able to express the
excellency of this most blessed and happy estate.

3 Even when a man was to offer a Bullock or Lamb in sacrifice to God, he
must leave his offering at the Altar, and first go and be reconciled to his
brethren, if they had ought against him: So much more must this be done, when
men are in Death, to offer up themselves, their bodies and souls, as an
acceptable sacrifice unto God. Romans 12.1.

4 As Travelers, not thinking of the Sun setting, are overtaken with
darkness, before they be aware: So does Death suddenly come upon many, that
never thought of it, neither have learned to die, nor what shall become of them
when they be dead: so that it behooves all Christians, that will be saved, to
watch, to stand steadfast in the faith of Christ, to quite themselves like men,
and to be strong; and to do, all that they do, in love. 1. Cor. 16.13.

5 As earthen vessels are alike subject to danger and breaking, whether they be
new or old made: So likewise all men are open and subject to Death alike;
whether they be young men and in their lusty and flourishing age, or they be old
men, and well strooken in years.

6 Like as if a man shall come into a Potters warehouse, where he shall see a
large Table, set full of Pots, some old and some new; some little, and some
great; and shall demand of the Potter, which of them all, shall first be
broken: he may well say for answer; That which shall fall first to the ground:
Even so among men, he dies not first, that is elder, but he that first falls
to the ground; that is, comes first to his grave. Psalm. 2.9. Esaias 30.14.
Reave. 2.27.

7 Like as if a Beggar should be commanded to put off his old rags, that he
might be clothed with rich and costly garments, he would not be sorry, though
he should stand naked a while, till he were wholly bestripped of his rags: So
likewise when God calls a man to Death, and bids him put off his old rags of
sin and corruption, and be clothed with the glorious roabe of Christ's
righteousness, there is no cause why he should be loath to die, seeing his
abode in the grave, is but for a space, while corruption be put off. 2. Cor.
5.1, 2.

8 As bread of all other nourishment does sustain the body: So above all
things, a continual thought of Death is wholesome for the soul.

9 As young scholars, who having spent their time diligently at their books,
return from the Universities to their friends, and are welcomed home both of
father and mother, brother and sister, every one preasing forward with great
desire to kiss them, and to make the greatest demonstration of joy and
gladness that may be, for their happy return: So in like manner, when true
Christians die and depart out of this world, where they are, as it were at
school, to return to their fathers house: God himself is the first that
bids them welcome; and wills them to enter into the joy of their Lord and
Father: Jesus Christ is the next which takes and leads them into the Palace
of the King, and says; Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom
prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. Then come the Angels, who
carry them like Lazarus, into Abraham's bosom, to rejoice for ever with them,
and with the other holy Fathers. Math. 25.21, 34.

10 Like as some pleasant companions, and merrily disposed, will often say, that
God favors a man when he takes away his wife by Death; especially, if she
be evil, and of bad condition: So likewise if this be true, we may safely say,
that God bestows a marvelous grace upon us, and does us the greatest
pleasure that may be, when as by Death he delivers us from our flesh, which
is the most treacherous and disloyal wife that can be: and which does so
torment the poor m^nd with whom she is married, that she vexes and
disquieteth her silly husband, with the greatest and most intolerable grief
that may be.

11 As we see in the seasons of the year, that from the beginning to the end,
they are appointed of God, and that in such sort, that all the me^ in ye world,
though they should employ all their whole force, counsels and endeavors to the
contrary, were not able to alter them: Even so likewise may we be assured,
that our lives are so limited and bounded by God, that neither king nor Prince,
power, nor Potentate, can any manner of ways shorten or prolong them: Yea and
that which may wonderfully comfort us, so often as we remember it, that God
does oftentimes prolong our days by the means of wicked tyrants, which would
cut them off by Death. As Moses and Daniel were. Exodus 2.2.3. etc. Dan. 3. toto
and 6.5. etc.

12 As the brazen Serpent was so far from hurting the Israelites, that
contrariwise it healed them: So after the same sort, Death is now so far from
hurting any godly Christian, that on the other side, that if affliction as a
fiery Serpent sting us, or if any thing else hurt us, presently it is helped
and redressed by Death.

13 Even as a Be stinging a dead body, takes no hurt, but by stinging alive
body, many times loses both sting and life together: So likewise Death, so
long as it stung mortal men which were dead in sin, was never a whit the
worse, but when it stung Christ once, who is life it self, by and by it lost
both sting and strength.

14 As they which will needs play the hob-goblings, or the night-walking spirits
(as we call them) all the while they speak under a hollow vault, or leap
forth with an ugly vizard upon their faces, they are so terrible, that he
which thinks himself no small man; may perhaps be afrighted with them: But
if some lusty fellow chance to step into one of these, and cudgel him well
fauoredly, and pull the vizard from his face, then every boy laughes him to
scorn: So it is with Death; who was a terrible bulbegger, and every man afraid
of him a great while; but Christ dying, buckled with this bulbegger, and
coniured him (as we may say) out of his hollow vault; when as the dead coming
out of the graves were seen in Jerusalem: and pulled the vizard from his face,
when as he himself rising, left the linen clothes, which were the vizard of
Death, behind him. Math. 27.52, 53. Ioh. 20.6.

15 As that Ass called Cumanus asinus, ietting up and down in a Lions skin,
did for a time terrify his master, but afterward being descried, did benefit
him very much: So in like manner, Death stands now like a silly Ass, having
his Lions skin pulled over his ears, and is so far from terrifying any, that
it benefits all true Christians; because by it, they rest from their labors:
and if they be oppressed with troubles or cares, when they come to Death, they
are discharged: Death as an Ass does bear these burde^s for the^.

16 As he that felleth a tree upon which the Sun: shines, may well cut the
tree, but cannot hurt the Sun: Or as he that powers water upon iron which is
red hot, may well quench the heat, but he cannot hurt the iron: Even so Christ
the Son of righteousness, did drive away the shadow of Death: and as
glowing iron, was too hot and too hard a morsel for Death to digest.

17 Like as all the while that Adam did eat any other fruit, which God gave
him leave to eat, he was nourished by it: but when he had tasted of the
forbidden tree, he perished: So Death had free leave to devour any other man,
Christ only excepted, but when it went about to destroy Christ, then it was
destroyed it self.

18 Even as those barbarous people called Cannibals, which feed only upon raw
flesh, especially of men, if they happen to eat a piece of roasted meat,
commonly they surfeit of it and die: So likewise the right Canniball, the only
deuourer of al mankind, Death I mean, tasting of Christ's flesh, and finding it
not to be raw (such as it was used to eat) but wholesome and heavenly meat
indeed, presently took a surfeit of it, and within three days died.

19 Even as when Judas had received a sop at Christ's hand, a non after his
bowels gushed out: So likewise Death being so saucy as to snatch a soppe (as it
were) of Christ's flesh, and a little bit of his body, was by and by like Judas,
choked and strangled with it, and feign to yield it up again, when Christ on
Easter day revived.

20 As a fire goes out, when all the fuel is spent, but burns, as long as
that lasts: So Death died when sin cease, but where sin abounds, there
Death rages.

21 As the little worm that grows out of the tree, gnaweth and consumes the
tree, of whom it has his beginning: So Death grows and waxes out of sin,
and sin with the body, it consumes.

22 Like as if one that is about to shoot a Gun, be vnsteadie at the letting
of it go, he misseth altogether, and all that he prepared for it before, is in
vain: Even so at the end of this life, are the devils most busy, to turn us
from the right mark, that our former travail and labor may be lost; for as
much as they know that there remains but a very small time of life: So that
if the soul escape the^ now, they shall afterward go without it for ever.

23 Even as mighty enemies do besiege and lay assault to a City: So the
devils compass the soul of man at the hour of Death, with violence, and
subtlety, to take possess^on of the poor soul, to apprehend it, and bring it
to hell.

24 Like as if an old silver goblet be melted, and new fashioned after a
beautiful manner; then is it better then before, and neither spylt nor
destroyed: Even so have we no just cause to complain of Death, whereby the
body being delivered from all filthiness, shall in his due time be perfectly
renewed.

25 As the Egge-shell, though it be goodly and fair fashioned, must be
opened and broken, that the young chicken may slip out of it: Even so none
otherwise does Death dissolve and break up our body, but to the intent that we
may attain unto the life of heaven.

26 As the mothers womb carries the child, seven or nine months, and
prepares it not for it self, but for the world wherein we are borne: Even so
this present time, over all upon earth, serves not to this end, that we must
ever be here, but that we should be brought forth and borne out of the body
of this world by Death, into another and everlasting life. Ioh. 16.21.

27 Like as a child out of the small habitation of his mothers womb, with
danger and anguish, is borne into this wide world: Even so goes a man through
the narrow gate of Death, with distress and trouble, out of the earth into the
heavenly life: For to die, is not to perish; but to be first of all borne
aright.

28 As the brazen Serpent, which having the form and proportion of a Serpent,
was yet without biting, without moving, without poisoning: Even so though Death
be not utterly taken away, yet through the grace of God, it is so weakened and
made void, that the only bare proportion remains.

29 Even as when the master of the Ship perceives that he is not wide from
the haven and place where he must land and discharge, he sayleth on forth the
more cheerfully and gladly: So likewise the nearer we draw unto Death where we
must land, the more stoutly ought we to fight, and withstand our ghostly
enemies.

30 Like as he that goes a far journey, has uncertain lodging, travail, and
labor, and desires to return home to his own country, to his father and
mother, wife, children, and friends; among whom, he is surest, and at most
quiet, by means whereof, he forces the less for any rough careful path, or
way homeward: Even so all we are strangers and pilgrims upon earth: Our home
is Paradise in heaven: our heavenly Father is God; the earthly father of all
men, is Adam: our spiritual Fathers, are the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, which altogether wait and long for us. Psalm. 39.5, 6. 1. Pet. 2.11.
2. Cor. 5.1.2. Phil. 3.2^. Heb. 13.14.

31 Like as when a man live in a dark miserable prison, with this condition,
that he should not come forth till the walls of the Tower were fallen down,
undoubtedly he would be right glad to see the walls begin to fall: Even so our
soul is kept in within the body upon earth, as in captivity and bonds: now
as soon as the body is at a point, that it must needs fall, we ought not to be
sorry therefore: for by this approaches our deliverance, when we, out of the
prison of misery, shall be brought before the most amiable countenance of God,
into the joyful freedom of heaven. Psalm. 142.7.

32 Like as it is no grief for a man to go sleep, nor when he sees his parents
and friends lay them down to rest, (for he knows, that such as are a
sleep, do soon awake and rise again): So when we, or our friends depart away
by Death, we ought to erect and comfort ourselves with the resurrection.

33 As a good Householder makes provision for himself and his family, and
buyeth aforehand, fuel and victuals, and such things as he has need of,
for a month, or for a whole year, etc. according as he is able: Even so much
more ought a Christian to provide before his Death, that which concerns, not
only one month, or one year, but an eternity that has no end.

34 Like as faithful servants wait for their master: So in like manner we
ought to look for the coming of Christ, when he shall call us out of this
wretched world by Death. Luke 12.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Math. 24.42. etc.

The time of our Death unknown.
LIke as Christ would have his last coming to be hidden from men: So also he
would have the time of their Death, for the very same cause to be unknown unto
them unless that he opens the same unto some, either by particular
revelation, or by probable conjectures. Mat. 24.36.

How to Draw near unto God.
LIke as he is said to depart from God, which does abandon and give himself
to the lusts of the world, by which he Draws near unto the devil: So
likewise he which departs from these, is said to Draw near unto God; and so
cleaves unto him by faith and true obedience. Iam. 4.8.

No Divinity (except it be against God) is prescribed to the Minister.
AS there is no Law by the which a Preacher for his doctrine may be punished,
if he speak not against the Prince: So there is no Divinity by the which a
Preacher is particularly prescribed, or generally ordered, if he speak not
against God, the mighty prince of peace.

Desires of heaven.
AS they that are strangers in a foreign country, and have parents and great
wealth in their native soil, being hardly entreated where they soiourne, and
upon the point to return home into their country, are undoubtedly very glad
thereof; even already they seem to see their houses, lands, and possessions,
and in their conceits, do talk with their parents, and feel a fervent
Desire to be soon there: Even so we, if we remember that we have treasures of
eternal riches, an undefiled inheritance, immortal and incorruptible, which
is reserved for us: a heavenly Father that loves us in his well-beloved son,
our elder brother Jesus Christ in glory; the Angels, and holy Spirits enjoy;
and that we their fellow Burgesses, have our portion in all these goods, and are
even upon the point to be really in heaven with them, we ought then to be
ravished with a fervent desire to be lifted up thither. Phil. 1.23. Romans 7.24.

Daunces.
AS Apothecaries do cover their bitter Pills with some sweet substance,
whereby to make them go down the easier: So the Devil, under the sport and
pleasure of Daunces, makes men to swallow lustful desires; and albeit they
proceed to no greater iniquity, yet is this a mortal wound to the soul,
considering that we know that such lusts are accursed in the sight of God.
Exodus 32.6. and 18.19. 1. Cor. 10.7. 1. Pet. 4.3.4. and 5.8. Romans 12.2. 2. Tim.
2.22. Judge. 21.21. Ephe. 5.3, 4, 16.18.

The Duty of Parishioners to their Ministers.
1 AS they that sit at a Table do eat, chewe, and digest their food: So they
that be Parishioners, and hear the word of God, ought to listen unto it,
meditate upon it, and print it in their hearts, that so they may receive the
nourishment signified by the word, and duty to feed, commended to the
shepherds of Christ's flock* 1. These. 5.12. Phil. 2.29. 2. Cor. 7.15. Hebr.
13.17.

2 As in meat we are not so much to seek licorousnesse as health: So must it
be in the preaching of the word: for Ecclesiastical assemblies be not l^ke to
common Plays, whereto men resort for pleasure: but in Sermons we are to look
for that which is health some for the soul.

3 As in a banquet, if any dish chance to be over saulted, or otherwise it is
not well dressed, the same does not so offend us, that therefore we can eat
but little of the rest that is well seasoned: So likewise if in Sermons we hear
any sentence or word, not so fitly applied as it were to be wished, we must not
for that, leave to make our profit of the rest that is well and devoutly
spoken. 1. Cor. 2.4, 5.

4 Like as when a man fills out but a little wine into an excellent wrought
and graven Cup, men regard more the Cup, then the wine: when contrariwise, if
most excellent wine be brought in a simple Cup, they consider and commend the
wine, rather then the Cup: Even so is it with the treasure of the Gospel,
presented in a Cup either of earth or of gold; because man's curiosity has more
respect to the pot, the mouth, or the eloquence, the^ to ye treasure. 2. Cor.
4.7

5 As we see by experience, that the sucking of the child brings in milk
into the mothers breast: Even so such as show themselves desirous to hear the
word of their Pastors, are a great encouragement to them to proceed the more
cheerfully, and do even as it were bring words into their mouths.

6 As it is in vain to call the Physician and to hear his counsel, when we
list not to take the medicine that he does prescribe: So in like manner the
people that hear the Sermons, and do not put the words in practice, in stead
of reaping profit, shall incur the greater damnation.

7 Even as he that having been two or three years at school, and has not
profited, is worthy to be taken away: So those Parishioners that have been many
years in the school of Christ, and heard his word, yet do not amend; neither
increase in faith and love, do worthily deserve to be deprived of such a
benefit of God; and according to the threatening of Amos, to endure such a
famine, not of bread, but of the word, that the strongest and most lusty,
seeking after it, but not finding it, may perish. Amos. 8.11.

8 As the Church is the house of God, and the kingdom of Christ: So those
Parishioners that bestow their goods upon the maintenance of the holy
ministry, without the which this house and kingdom cannot subsist, do offer
a sacrifice of a most excellent sweet savor, in the presence of the Lord. 1.
Cor. 9.7. etc. Gal. 6.6. etc.

9 As Christ commands us to pray to the Lord of the harvest, to send workmen
into his harvest: So is it the Duty of Parishioners, when he has given them
faithful Pastors, to pray unto him: First to preserve them in health and long
life, for the good and edification of his Church: Secondly, by his holy spirit
to guide them, that they may faithfully, and with fruit, employ themselves in
their ministry. Math. 9.38. Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.3. 2. Thessa. 3.1. Romans
15.30, 31, 32.

Men Distressed do seek after God.
AS they which have great need of water, do make haste to come to the
fountain or well, where water is to be had, but having drawn the water, and
filled their vessels, do depart, and turn their backs to the fountain,
which has supplied their want, and satisfied their Desires: So very many, wheh
they be compassed round with perils and dangers, and are beset on every side
with afflictions and troubles, then they fly apace to the fountain of grace
and mercy; but when they have obtained the water of comfort, then they do
despise that flowing spring of living water. Iere. 2.13. Luke 9.61. Psalm. 84.7.

Students in Divinity.
LIke as he which would behold the light of the Sun, does rub and purge his
eyes, that they may behold it the better: So he which would attain to the
knowledge of Divinity, must first wash his soul and his life, that he may
the better understand those things which God has revealed in the Scriptures.

Diversity of wills and opinions.
AS amongst many thousands of men, there are not two faces alike, nor one voice
agreeable with the other: So will every man have his own mind, use his own
way, wit, and fashion.

Evil speakers.
AS slouching and cowardly dogs do bark at all men, whom they know not: So
the rude and barbarous people, do carpe and reproach what thing so ever they
understand not.

Examining of a man's own self.
LIke as no man will ever seek to the Physician, except he know himself to be
diseased, or acknowledge the excellency and necessity of the Physician, and
how much he is bound unto him, except he know his own disease to be
pestilent and deadly: Even so, no man acknowledges Jesus Christ to be the
only Physician of our souls, (who died for our sins, and rose again for
our Justification,) except he first know his own soul to be diseased: Neither
can he perceive the excellency of Christ crucified, nor how much he is bound
unto him, except he first enter into the consideration and knowledge of his
own outrageous sins, and the incurable infirmity, which we have received
through the infection of our first parents, Adam and Eve. Romans 4.25.

Election of God.
1 LIke as if one to see the better, should fix his eyes upon the Globe of the
Sun, by the beholding of which light, it is not to be doubted, but his eyes
would wax dim, who if he looked upon that light in the sun beams, might
have use of it, and see all things offered to his sight, and how, and what way
to direct his steps: Even so likewise the eternal Election of God, while it is
considered in Christ, in whom we are chosen, and we seek for in ourselves,
the testimony that the holy ^host yields us by our effectual calling; then
it affoordeth us especial comfort, and assures us of our salvation; otherwise
it brings trouble of mind, and vexation of conscience. Ephe. 4.9, 13, 14.

2 Like as all men would account him a fool that should take upon him to lead
the Sea, and because he is not able to do it, should say there is no water in
it: Or if he should say there is no world, because a child cannot measure it
with his spanne: Or that there were no light in the Sun, because his bleared
eyes cannot abide the light of it: So when man with his short wit shall come to
the deepenesse of Gods wisdom, and Election, and because he cannot with his
little dish of wit take up all, and should say there is no Election or
predestination at all, he were greatly deceived. Romans 9.12. etc.

3 Even as if a man have two debtors, and he forgiueth the one, and follows
the Law in exacting his own of the other; he cannot truly be said to be
unjust, or an acceptor of persons: So it is with God, in Electing and calling
some to salvation, and in damning other some.

4 As there is not a more evident testimony, and a surer argument, that a man
is in the state of everlasting damnation, which has no mind to hear the word
of God, nor to lead his life according unto the doctrine thereof: So likewise
is there not a more certain sign, that any man is Elected and predestined to
be saved, then when he has a mind to hear of the word of God truly preached.
John. 8.47.

5 As the clay lies before the Potter to be used and handled, disposed off,
and formed as shall please him: So were all men at the first before the Lord in
his eternal counsel, to receive an end or use, according to his will; to life
or death, to honor or dishonor; to salvation or damnation; to heaven, or
hell. Romans 8.30. and 9.22, 23.

Enemy.
1 AS Linceus the man (of whom Verro did write) could see through a wall: Even
so our Enemy sees through our servant and friend, oftentimes what we do.

2 As the Bees, although they sometimes sting the hands and face of the owner
and master of them; yet they be profitable in providing for him the sweet
honey and wax: Even so an Enemy, although he persecute, injury, and wrong a
good Christian, yet is he very profitable unto him, in furthering him to heaven
wards, if so be that by patience he possess his soul, and do pray for him,
as our Savior Christ and Steven did. Luke 21.19. and 23.34. Act. 7.60.

3 Like as if one had a great Enemy, and the Queen (who yet is but a mortal
woman) had promised to protect and defend him from the same his Enemy; he would
not fearc him: Even so much more we ought not to fear our Enemies, seeing that
God, who only is Almighty, and of power to preserve, does say: Fear not, for
I am thy protector, thy defense, and thy reward shall be exceeding great. Genesis
15.1. Esaias. 41.10. Math. 10.28.

4 As there is no such grief to a Iester or a Iugler, as when he does see that
with all his jests and fooleries, he cannot move mirth, nor change the
countenances of them that hear him, and see him: So there can be no greater
torment to a wicked and malicious enemy, then to see thee no whit grieved, nor
moved at his malice against thee, but that thou do so bear his injuries, as
if they were none at all; for thy adversaries purpose is to anger thee, and to
drive thee into thy dumpes, which if he cannot bring to pass, then is he
chaffed and vexed ten times more then he was before. Romans 12.22.

Envy.
1 ALthough there be some country (as Candie) which wants poison: Yet is
there no Commonweal, Country, nor Court, which is void of Envy. Act. 7.9.
and 17.5.

2 There are (as some dream) that will bewitch a man with their looks: So an
Envious man seeks by all means to destroy the prosperous estate of his
neighbor. Neither is the eye of a mighty man much for the profit, if thou
have any thing that excels in fairness, or that he thirsts after. As
Ahab did for Naboth his vineyarde. Genesis 31.1. 1. King. 21.1. etc.

3 As those that be runners be nothing grieved or vexed with the victory of
the Wrastlers, but be very glad of their own: So ought we not to Envy the
prosperous estate of others, but rejoice at our own.

4 Like as a Gun that is always charged, and wayteth when it may best shoot
off: Even so the Envious man is stuffed full of malicious poison, and seeks
opportunity and convenient time to put the same in practice. Gene. 4, 5, 6.

5 As the Snake, the Adder, and the Toade, have deadly poison in them,
wherewith they hurt others, and yet hurt not themselves: But Envy is so
poysonfull a thing, that it kills him that has it first, and hurts not
other, for he fretteth with himself, he fumes, he pines away to see others
do well: He eats not, nor sleeps quietly, nor can be merry, until he see
some mischief fall on the good man.

6 As the canker eats and consumes hard iron and brass: Even so malicious
Envy, with fretting, consumes out envious stomachs.

7 As the Viper does kill her damn by gnawing out her guts, and afterward does
sting and poison others: Even so Envy does consume him in whom it is bred, and
afterward hurts others.

8 As malice drinks the most part of her own poison: Even so Envy hurts
more the envious it self, then the thing it Enuieth. Romans 1.29. 1. Cor. 13.4.
Gal. 5.21. Tit. 3.3. 1. Pet. 2.1.

9 As of necessity, a shadow does accompany those that walk in the Sun:
So is Envy a continual companion to those, that in good and honest things do
excel others, and are advanced and renowned with the best.

10 As there is no shadow, where there is no Sun: So where there is no
prosperity, there is no Envy.

11 As they that are tender sighted, do find themselves grieved with every
light and bright object: So is it with the envious, in every the prosperity of
others.

12 As Cantharides, a certain green and venomous worm, or fly, usually
feeds upon wheat when it waxes ripe, and on Roses in their pride: So
likewise does the envious man, he takes against those that be honest, and
grieueth at the increase of other men's virtue: So that it is more easy for a
poor man to shun contempt, then for a rich man to avoid Envy. Genesis 4.5.
and 30.1. and 37.4.

13 Even as the Sun beating directly upon the crown of the head, yields but
a small shadow: So they that are in eminency and authority far above us,
do purchase small Envy against them. 1. Sam. 18.8.

14 As smoke, which so long as the fire is but small makes a great show; but
so soon as it flameth, vanishes away, or at the least appears nothing so
plainly as at the first: Even so Envy is many times extinguished by the
greatness and excellency of other men's prosperity.

15 Like as self-love is such a plague, as that all the children of Adam are
therewith poisoned: So the Envy that grows thereof, is but ouer-common, and
too deeply rooted, even in those that profess themselves to be the children
of God.

16 As rust consumes the iron: So does Envy waste the man that is possessed
therewith: for it is a moath to the soul, a canker to the thought, and a rust
to the soul.

17 Even as a Viper by devouring the womb of her damme, makes her passage
forth: So Envy eats and consumes the soul of that man, that in his heart
has conceived her. Job. 5.2.

18 As the joys of the happy do increase: So do the sorrows of the Envious
multiply.

19 As the poison of Serpents hurts other, but not themselves: So
contrariwise, the poison of the Envious hurts themselves, but not others: for
the Envious man conuerteth the good of another to his own hurt, and so
tormenteth himself at the felicity of others. Math. 20.15.

20 Like as the Dorre, who naturally lurking in dung, takes her food thereof:
So does the envious man grow fat in other men's calamities: because hatred and
Envy are directly opposite to love, which rejoices in other men's felicity.
1. John. 3.15. Iam. 3.14, 16. Math. 27.18. Gal. 5.21.

21 Even as smoke preaseth and flies up on high, as though it would cover and
darken the sky: So Envy and calamity, do aim at those especially, which
are advanced and placed in high degree; so that many times, they are cast down
headlong from their dignity, very suddenly with much ignominy and disgrace;
especially when their honors have changed and corrupted their manners.

22 Even as a moth, or woorme, does not breed in the Cedar, being a goodly and
odoriferus tree, always fresh and flourishing, the wood whereof does not rot:
So Envy is not bred in the heart of a wise and virtuous man, but in the mind
of a man that is wicked and ungodly; and is grieved and tormented at the
happiness and welfare of other men, and repining and envying those especially,
that in any gift or quality tare before him.

23 As a ship which is tossed with continual waves is in danger: So an Envious
man, who is always in trouble of mind, pining and repining at the good
success of others.

24 As we see among beasts, some feed upon venim, and other some upon
carrion: So likewise does the Envious man, fat himself in the loss, poverty,
misery, death, and destruction of his brother.

25 As Flies leave the sound parts of the body, and light upon the corrupted
and putrified parts thereof, and take such delight in the matter and filth,
that it is hard to keep them from it: So likewise an Envious man takes no
pleasure in all other parts of a man's life, but only in that which is diseased
and corrupted.

26 As the enmity which is between Egles and Dragons, or that between the
Crows and the Owls, the Cock, and the Lion, the Boar and the Elephant,
between whom (it is reported) there is such discord and hatred, that even when
they are dead, their blood will in no wise be mingled together: So likewise
Envy and virtue can in no wise agree: for he that will be in favor with the
Envious man, must needs be vicious.

27 As the Moth in the garment, the worm in the tree, the rust on the iron,
which first consume those things that have engendered it: So likewise Envy
consumes it self; For Envious men (as the old saying is) are not only like
unto Vipers, in that they be always full of poison, but also for that neither
the one nor the other, can bring forth their young ones without killing
themselves: And they differ in nothing but in this, that when as the young
Vipers are hatched, the old presently die; whereas malicious men consume by
little and little, as men pined in prison, or wasted with long sickness.

28 As darnel springs up among good wheat, and netles among roses: Even so
Envy grows up among virtues.

Enterludes or games.
1 AS Socrates did will men to beware of those meats, which might entise them
without hunger to eat; or of those drinks, which should allure them without
thirst to drink: So are those Enterludes, games and talk, to be avoided,
which might move the beholders or hearers to any dishonestie or vice.

2 Like as if it be not lawful to name vices, unless it be in the way of
dislike. Ephesians. 5.3. So much less is it warrantable in Enterludes or plays, to
gesture, or represent vice, in the way of recreation and delight.

Eyes and Ears.
LIke as Hunters in no wise will suffer their Hounds to bite of every beast,
but will keep them fresh for the wild beasts: So ought we not to suffer our
Eyes and Ears to be busied about every triflle, but rather reserve them for
things necessary. Psalm. 119.37. Job. 31.1.

Elected or predestined to life everlasting, are Elected to all the means of
attaining unto it.
LIke as a man appointed to go to a place, must go the direct way unto it: Even
so must men appointed to salvation, go in the way to it; that is, to be
called, justified, sanctified, and glorified. Romans 8.29, 30. Tit. 1.1. 1. Pet.
1.2. Ephe. 2.10.

Example.
1 AS they which do deck themselves, have then the looking Glass before
their eyes: So they which go about any worthy thing, must have of worthy men
the Example in mind, and do it in that manner, that others may not scorn to
make them their Example in such a matter.

2 Even as the Lambs, with the which the sheep were conceived, as they beh^ld
Jacobs Rod, were of the same color that the Rod was of: So as such religion,
and actions, of Princes, Peers of Realms, and Countries, Ministers, Parents,
and Governors be, such for the most part, is the religion; and such be the
actions of subjects and inferior persons.

3 As Examples are very dangerous in evil things, so be they of great force
and virtue in good and holy things: For Princes would have, godly, virtuous,
loyal and obedient subjects; they must deal with them, as Jacob did with his
sheep, they must lay before them, the rod of true Religion, Justice,
holiness, righteousness, and integrity of life and manners; and then no
doubt, they will conceive in their hearts, thoughts that be pure, righteous,
chaste, sound, and holy, and bring forth great plenty of fruits of the same
color that the rod is off: To wit, not words only, but works also of faith
and obedience to God and man. Parents with their natural children; Ministers
of the word, with their spiritual children; and masters with their servant,
must do the like. 2. Sam. 3.35, 36. Ezech. 16.44.

4 As when many Birds flicker and flock together, they fall upon the net
without any fear, but one or two alone will be afraid: Even so the Example of
many, and many sin companions, do imbolden men to run through the snares
of Satan, without any mistrust. Exodus 23.2.

5 As the cloud did guide the Israelites through the wilderness to the land of
Canaan: So the faithful now are to be guided to the heavenly Canaan, by the
Examples of good men that have believed in God before us, and have walked the
straight way to life everlasting. Heb. 12.1.

Good Entents.
AS if a man who had borrowed a piece of money of a creditor, should come to
him at the day appointed to repay it again, and should say to his Creditor,
that he had dreamed that he had paid him: This Creditor by this saying,
would not think himself fully satisfied and paid: Or as if a master, who had
given forth in writing his will and mind, to one of his servants, and had given
him in charge and commandment, neither to add, not to diminish it, would be
content with such a servant, that would not vouchsafe either to read, or
learn his remembrance, but trusting to his own wit, would do all things
after his own will and mind: Even so we may not think, that our master and
heavenly Father, who has left us in writing his will and mind, to the end that
we should keep, and fulfill the same, will allow, and take for payment our
well meanings and good intents, without either knowing, or learning the same
his will and mind. 1. Sam. 13.9. etc. and. 15.8. etc. 2. Sam. 6.6. 1. Chro.
13.9, 10. Ioh. 16.2. Act. 6.12. etc.

Edifying of others.
LIke as they that carry Musk or other sweet Odours about them, cannot be
hid, but must needs be made known to all, and that others must needs smell
them: Even so godly and faithful men, that carry in their hearts the Gospel
of Christ, must needs make others partakers of the same.

Epicurisme the fountain of sin.
AS the moist and waterish grounds bring forth nothing but Frogs and Toades:
So the belly and wa^rie stomach that is stuffed like a tun, brings forth
nothing but a drousie mind, foggie thoughts, filthy speeches, and corrupt
affections.

Equality in marriage.
1 AS two Palfreyes, or two Oxen of unequal stature, cannot be coupled under
one yoke: So a Noble woman matching with a man of base estate, or contrarily, a
Gentleman with a beggar, cannot be consorted, or coupled under the bands of
wedlock.

2 As the Lord commanded that an Ox and an Ass should not be yoked
together, because the match is unequal: Even so it is an unlawful thing for
the faithful to marry with Infidels, or else to have any thing to do with
them. Deuteronomy. 22.10. 2. Chor. 6.14.

A great Error for a man to think he shall be saved when he is dying, if he
say, Lord have mercy upon me.
1 LIke as if an arrand Thief should thus reason with himself and say, I will
spend my days in robbing and stealing, I fear neither arraignment, nor
execution; for at the very time when I am to be turned off from the Ladder, if
I do but call upon the Judge, I know I shall have my pardon; behold a most
dangerous and desperate course: Even so the very same is the practice of
careless men in the matter of their salvation; for a man may die with Lord
have mercy in his mouth; and perish eternally, except in this world he enter
into the first degree of eternal life. Math. 7.21. Ioh. 5.24.

2 As every wound kills not the man: So every Error depriueth not man of
salvation.

3 As the natural parts being wounded or infected, brings death: So those
Errors that destroy the fundamental heads of the truth, bring everlasting
destruction, unless the Lord prevent them with repentance.

Overmuch Ease, and pampering of the belly, is a great provocation to sin.
AS with a pyle or stacke of small and dry wood, the fire is quickly kindled,
and caused mightily to flame out: Even so, the outragiousnesse of carnal and
fleshly lust, is greatly provoked, moved and stirred up, through ryoting,
daunsing, banqueting, quaffing, gulling, swilling, and continual feeding and
pampering of the belly; and by taking the body from good, lawful, and honest
exercises, and giving it to Idleness, slothfulness, and overmuch Ease, and
rest from labors.

The fearful Estate of many people.
1 AS the Smythes Stithie, the more it is beaten, the harder it is made: Even
so, commonly the hearts of men, the more they are beaten with the hammer of
gods word, the more dull, secure, and senseless they are.

2 Like as when a Malefactor on the day of Assise is brought forth of the
Iayle, with great boltes and fetters, to come before the Judge, as he is going,
all men pity him, and speak comfortably unto him: But why so? because he is
now to be arraigned at the bar of an earthly Judge: Even so such is the
Estate and case of all impenitent sinners, which is far more miserable then
the case of this man: for they be fettered in bondage under sin and Satan,
and this short life is the way in which they are going every hour to the bar
of Gods justice, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, there to be
arraigned, and to have sentence of condemnation given against them.

We must give diligence to make our Election sure.
AS men are careful in the world, and painful enough to make assurance of
lands and goods to themselves, and their posterity: Even so we ought to be
more careful and diligent to make our selves the Election of God, which is more
worth then all the world beside. 2. Pet. 1.10.

The Elect are ordained to lead a godly life.
AS the Sun was ordained to shine in the day, and the Moon in the night, and
that order they keep, yea every creature in his kind, observes the course
appointed unto it by creation, as the grass to grow, and trees to ^ring forth
fruit: So likewise the Elect were ordained to this end, to lead a godly
life: and therefore if we would ^ither persuade our selves or the world, that
we are indeed ^hosen to salvation, we must be plentiful in all good works, and
make conscience of every evil way. Ephe. 1.4. and 2.10. 2. These. 2.13. 2. Timo.
2.21.

Gods love to his Elect.
AS Joseph loved all his brethren, but Benjamin he loved with a more special
love, and therefore he gave messes of meat to them all, but Beniamins mess was
five times as much as the rest: So God gives liberty to all his creatures as
a good and a loving God, in so much that the earth is full of his mercies, but
his love to his Elect children by Christ, is a thousand times more then the
rest, for them he vpholdeth in their integrity, and does set them before his
face for ever. Genesis 43.34. Psalm. 104.24. and 41.12.

The Elect cannot finally perish.
AS an Elm, or an Oak, casts their leaves in the winter, yet abides their
sap still in them: Esaias 6.13. Even so shall the holy seed continue in their
substance, so that though there appear no fruits outwardly to our gross
senses: yet the sure ground and substance, which he has there planted,
remains; and though it have no outward seal in our sight, yet has it a sure
seal in Gods sight, for the Lord knows it to be there, which is sufficient.

Election to salvation, does not abolish, but establish the second causes.
1 AS God has limited to every man the term of his life, but withal, he
has ordained and appointed, that for the preserving thereof, he shall both
eat and drink: Even so God has ordained necessarily, that the Elect must be
saved, yet by such means as he has appointed in his wisdom, for the
bringing of them to it: to wit, by hearing the Gospel preached, by believing
in Christ, by amending their lives, by praying to God, etc.

2 As he that should abstain from food, and say that he need it not to live
by, should directly fight and strive against the will and pleasure of God, and
so tempt him: So likewise they that say, that being Elect, they need not
believe the Gospel, nor amend their lives, for the attaining to the kingdom of
heaven; do tempt God, reuerse his providence, strive against his will, and so
far as in them lies, abolish the means and way to life and salvation, and
do draw on to death and damnation: and therefore they that be Elected to life
eternal, are also Elected to have Faith; and consequently to amend their
lives. Romans 8.1. etc. Ephe. 1.4. and 2.16. Colloss. 3.12. 1. Pet. 2.9, 10.

3 Like as a poor maiden, who hearing that some King had among all other,
chosen her to be his sons wife, and withal, ordained, that to that end she
forsaking her parents and kinsfolks, should come to him on foot in the midst
of winter; no doubt she would willingly and readily leave all, and even in
winter and on foot, come to the King to finish this great marriage: as the
like we read of David. 1. Sam. 18.17. etc. Even so we understanding, and
having witness that God has chosen us to be the spouse of his son Jesus
Christ, and coheires of his kingdom: and also that it is his will, that
forsaking the world and the flesh, we should walk through the path of good
works, in amendment of life, to come to heaven; there to accomplish this
happy marriage; we ought fervently to renounce the world, the flesh, and every
thing that contrarieth his will, that we may the more speedily and cheerfully
proceed in amendment of life, and so perform this blessed marriage.

4 Like as if the Sun in his force shining upon a stone, can so heat the
same stone, that a man shall not be able to touch it with his hands: Even so
much more shall we, if we meditate upon the love of God toward us, in our
Election, albeit, we were as cold as Marble, be warmed and kindled to love him
with all our hearts, with all our strength, and with all our minds. 1. John. 4.19.
Luke 14.15.

Expectation of reward.
AS two that should pass together toward their country, the one to receive
honor, for his good service done abroad, the other as prisoner, to be
arraigned of treasons committed in former Dominions, against his Sovereign,
could not be like merry in their Inn upon the way, (as it seems to me:)
and though he that stood in danger, should sing, or make show of courage and
innocence, and set a good face upon the matter: Yet the other might well
think, that his heart had many a cold pull within him; as no doubt, but all
wicked men have, when they think with themselves of the life to come: or as if
Joseph and Pharaos Baker, had known both their distinct lottes in prison; to
wit, that on such a day the one should be called forth to be made Lord of
Egypt; and the other to be hanged on a pair of Gallows, they could hardly
have been equally merry, whilst they lived together in time of their
Imprisonment: Even so the like may be said, and much more truly, of virtuous
and wicked men in this world: For when the one does but think upon the day of
death (which is to be the day of their deliverance from their prison) their
hearts cannot but leap for very joy, considering what is to ensue unto them
after: But the other are afflicted, and fall into melancholy, as often as
mention or remembrance of death is offered; for they are sure that it brings
with it their bane. Gene. 40, 41, 43. chap. Gene. 30.1. and 37.4. 1. Sam. 18.8.

Eloquence in Sermons forbidden.
EVen as those sheep, which in the presence of their shepherds, do vomit and
cast out again, the grass which they have eaten, do not profitably show how
much and how well they have fed: but those rather, which do inwardly digest and
concoct their meat, and do give abundance of milk, and do bear the
softiest, weightiest, and finest Wool, and do show themselves to be fat,
fair, and well liking: For by these things they show, and plainly prove, that
their pasture is exceeding good: Even so, not those Pastors, Ministers and
Preachers of the word, which do deliver words, and stuff their Sermons with
Eloquence and brave phrases, do fruitfully and thoroughly declare unto the
people, that Virtues pasture is excellent good, and wholesome, and to be
desired of all; but they rather, which do inwardly concoct virtue, and do
observe it, and bending themselves to the actions and performance thereof, do
flow with the sweet milk of mercy, and do cloth themselves and others,
with the fine fleeces of Christian love and charity; do evidently declare,
how much they have profited in the doctrine of Christ, and how much also others
ought to profit in the same; and do stir up the hearts and minds of their
hearers, to virtue and godliness, both with their doctrine, and living. 2.
Tim. 4.1, 2, 5. Tit. 2.7. Math. 5.19.

Our Elders and ancestors in time of ignorance, had yet good consciences in
Civil causes.
AS the men of Niniuie repented at the preaching of Jonas, and not the Jews at
the preaching of Christ, who was greater then Jonas: Even so the good and
faithful dealing which our Elders and ancestors had in times past in Civil
causes, does reprove our iniquities, and show what they would have been if
they had had the preaching of the Gospel so plainly as we have. And
therefore well says a godly Father; Men had better consciences then, and less
knowledge: Now have they more knowledge, and worse consciences. Math. 12.41.
Beza Epis. 1.

Excess takes away pleasures.
AS too bright a light dazeteth our sight, and too great a noise hinders our
hearing: So likewise too great curiosity in devising our pleasures, takes
away a great part of the fruition of our delights; neither is there any thing
that makes our meat more sauerie, then hunger and health.

Enemies of the Gospel.
AS Archers do aim their arrows unto a certain mark: So the Enemies of the
Gospel, bend and bestow all their endeavors unto the subversion of the true
doctrine, and of the true Church of God. Psalm. 2.2, 3.

Faith.
1 LIke as the Sun, which although it remain still in the Firmament, and
therefore in very deed touches not the eye, yet the pieces or rese^blance of
the body of the Sun, is present and reaches to the sight; notwithstanding so
great a distance between: So the body of Christ, which by his ascending is
taken up from us, has left the world, and is gone to his Father; is in deed
absent from our senses: Yet our Faith is conversant in heaven, and beholds
the Son of righteousness, and is verily in presence with it, there present,
like as the Sun is perceived by our sight in earth. John. 14.19. and
16.10.28. Act. 7.55. Col. 3.1. Heb. 4.16. and 10.28.

2 As the Sun with his light is present to all things: So is also Christ with
his Godhead, spirit and power, by Faith present to all, and fills all. Ephe.
1. 23. Col. 1.17, 18.

3 Like as when a man has liberty to go into the treasure house of a King,
there to enrich himself, will first of all seek to have the keys wherewith he
may open the doors, and so enter, for otherwise, it will nothing profit him:
Even so we, if we desire to be enriched with Gods graces, must first of all
labor to have Faith, which is the only keye of Gods treasure house, and does
bring upon us from God, all graces needful, both for soul and body.

4 Like as no man may live a corporal life, by means of the soul of an other
man, but only by his own soul: Even so no man may live a spiritual life by
the Faith of an other, but by his own Faith. Aba. 2.4.

5 As no man may entertain and conserve the life which he received by mean of
his soul, by the food and nourishment, which an other does take, nor by that
which he eats and drinks, but only by that, which he himself does take,
and by the meats and drinks, which he receives by his own person: Even so
is it of the nourishment of the Faith of every man by the word of God, for the
entertainment and conservation of the spiritual life.

6 Like as no wicked and ungodly son, is made better, for and in respect of
the Faith, and virtue of his godly Father; neither yet any godly son is worse
in respect of the ungodliness of his wicked father: So no man is saved by an
other man's Faith, but by his own. And yet it cannot be denied, but that both
temporal and spiritual benefits be obtained and gotten, for and through the
Faith of other men: Even as one man by his wisdom, may make another man prove
wise: So he that belieueth may by his Faith and prayer obtain Faith for other
men. Yet notwithstanding, like as no man is wise, by an other man's wisdom,
but by his own: So no man is saved by another man's Faith, but by his own.
Ezech. 18. Math. 8.5. etc. and 9.2. Mar. 2.3, 4, 5. Luke 5.18.

7 As the leaves, and flowers, and sprigs of Water Betonie, or Browne-woort,
though they have their yearly course and change, yet the root from which
they spring is everlasting: So though the outward fruits of Faith are
chaungeable, and decay many times; yet Faith continues ever.

8 As Dictam or Tragium received, causes Darts sticking in the flesh to fall
out: So the promises of God in Christ apprehended by Faith, cause the fiery
Darts of the Devil to vanish and fall away.

9 As the smell of Trefoile, is often stronger in a moist and cloudie dark
season, then in fair weather: So the strength of Faith, utters it self,
more in adversity and affliction, then in pleasure, or time of prosperity.

10 As the Parents are a means to beget the bodily form of their children:
Even so the Preachers (which are called fathers) beget the form of a Christian
mind, which is Faith; or the confidence of the heart, which lays hold upon
Christ, and cleaves to him alone, and none else. 1. These. 2.11. 2. King.
17.10. and 13.14. Phil. 10.

11 Faith is compared unto Gold, but Faith is much more noble then Gold: For
as Gold is the most precious metal in things mortal: So Faith does most
excel in things spiritual.

12 As a house is made to keep us from cold in winter, and from heat in
Summer, and to defend us from thieves and violences that may be offered us,
which house if it be always in building, does not save us from any one of
those harms: Even so our spiritual house of Faith, if it be once built, it
saves us from heat of persecution, and coldness of all kind of adversities,
from the Devil, and from all kind of temptations, wherewith he assalteth us;
but being always in building, it saves us from none of these.

13 As those Birds that flies highest in the firmament, are not so quickly
snared by the fowlers Ginnes, as other be: So likewise those men that have
always an eye through Faith unto Jesus Christ, whose minds does mount above
the skies, are not so soon snared by the flesh, the world, and the devil, as
others be.

14 Like as Fire, if fuel or wood be not always added to it, will at length
go out: Even so Faith, if we let it alone, and never stir up the same by
hearing the word preached, by repentance, and invocation, it will clean be
extinguished.

15 As no Man may live a corporal life, by means of the soul of an other
man, but only by his own soul: Even so no man may live a spiritual life, by
the Faith of an other, but by his own Faith. Abac. 2.4. Romans 1.17.

16 Like as no wicked and ungodly Son, is made better, for, and in respect of
the Faith and virtue of his godly Father; neither yet any godly Son is worse,
in respect of the ungodliness of his wicked Father: Even so no man is saved by
an other man's Faith, but by his own. Ezech. 18.

17 As one Man by his wisdom may make an other man prove wise: So he that
belieueth, may by his Faith and prayer, obtain Faith for other men. Math. 8.5.
etc. and 9.2. Mar. 2.3, 4, 5. Luke 5.18.

18 Like as no man is wise by an other man's wisdom, but by his own: So
likewise no man is saved by an other man's Faith, but by his own.

19 As the plaster, if it be not laid to the wound will never heal the
soar: Even so Faith and belief, will not profit any man, unless he truly
apply it to himself. Romans 1.17.

20 As the mighty Oak, whose root as far stretches downwardes, as his bows
upwards, may be shaken, but yet not plucked up quite: Even so they which have
fixed their Faith firmly in Christ, and have cast the Ancor of their hope in
his lap; though they be tossed too and fro diverse ways, cannot finally fall
away from God.

21 Like as an Emplayster or Cataplasme, made of the bruised seed of Mustard,
is known to have singular virtue and effect, being applied to them that have
their members benumbed, and that are fallen into the Letharge, or drowsy
Evil; or that be troubled with the swimming and giddiness in their head: Or
that have the Apoplexy, Palsy, Falling sickness; and to be short, for all
cold griefs and diseases, because it warmeth, and brings heat, motion, and
sense again into the affected parts; and is also good to help Leprous,
Scuruie, Scabbie, and vlcerous persons: So likewise Faith being vpholden,
shored up; and surely Anchored unto the word of God, reuiueth, erecteth,
cheareth up, and restores the dull spirits, and appalled conscience of man,
making it ready and prompt, to execute, atchiue, and exercise the offices and
functions of godliness.

22 As a Laborer in serving a Mason or slater, as he goes up the ladder;
stays himself by one of his hands, and serves the Mason or slater with the
other: Even so, every good Christian in this world, is as it were upon a
ladder, his two hands are Faith, whereby he stays himself in his calling,
depending on the commandment and promise of God; and the other love, whereby
he performs the works of his calling, to the good and benefit of others.

23 Like as a man with a Palsy hand, can stretch it out as well to receive a
gift at the hand of a King, as he that is more sound, though it be not so
firmly and steadfastly: Even so we must know, that a weak Faith, will as
truly apprehend Gods merciful promises, for the pardon of sin, as a strong
Faith, though not so soundly.

24 Even as it little profits the wounded man to have the best medicine lying
by him, except he had a hand to lay the plaster upon the soar: Even so the
mercies of God can do us small good, except we have Faith to apply them unto
our sinful souls. Habac. 2.4. 2. Cor. 1.24. and 5.7.

25 As our hand is to our mouth, and the mouth to the stomach, and the
windpipe to the heart, so that if thou have not a hand to feed thy month, and a
mouth to feed thy stomach, thy body must needs soon perish. And again, if
the windpipe should be cut asunder, presently thy heart dies, and al thy
members fall down, because they want the breath of life: Even so if thy Faith
which is the only mean, whereby thou receiuest the breath of Christ's spirit
into thy soul, and whereby thou live that new life in Christ Jesus, of which
the Prophet Habacucke speaks; The just shall live by his Faith: If this pipe
and Cunduit be perished or broken in thee by thine own negligence, or cut off
by thine adversary the devil, who seeks nothing else night nor day, but thy
everlasting poyle, then certainly, both thy soul and body must needs perish
too.

26 As the Fig tree that bare no fruit, was threatened to be cut down: or as a
Sun without light, is but a painted Sun: Or as a coal without heat is dead: Or
as a body without motion lives not: Even so Faith without works is dead, and
the Christians that brings not forth the fruits of the spirit of Christ,
belongs not to Christ, and so is no Christian. Luke 16.6. Iam. 2.17.

27 As Infidelity is the head-spring of all wickedness and vice: So on the
contrary side, Faith is the original well and fountain of all virtue and
godliness. Which Faith is declared not only by words, but by such deeds and
works, as God has commanded us in his holy and sacred Scriptures; and where
no such works be, speak they never so godly, there is no true lively Faith.
Tit. 1.1 3, 1 6.

28 As Beggars, which not being worth one farthing will yet boast of great
wealth: So many brag of great Faith and holiness, but have little or none;
even as though they could remove mountains out of their places, and yet know
not what true Faith is. Luke 18.8.

29 As the Sun except it shine and beat upon the face of the earth, there
will no fruit spring, increase, or ri^^pen: Even so, except Faith shine in the
souls of men, they shall never be acceptable to God.

30 As the Sun shining in the firmament, avails him not, that has none
eyes to see the same; neither him that winketh with his eyes, and will not see,
but only him that does behold the light thereof: So does the death of Christ
profit him nothing, which lacks true Faith to lay hold upon the same; but
only such as by a lively and fruitful Faith, apply the same unto themselves.
Gal. 2.20. John. 3. and 6. tot.

31 As some kind of medicines are so composed that they will serve for a
general help for all diseases: So Catholic Faith, does serve against all
diseases of the soul.

32 As a Traveler, which iourneying into a Country where he might live
delightfully and profitably, does leave the right and straight way, and
follows by paths, which will lead him into dangerous places, to the loss of
his life, is unwise: So every one that thinks to please God without Faith,
takes a wrong course, and deceives him self, to the destruction and loss of
his soul.

33 As a shield or buckler is the chief defense of a Soldier, whereby he
beats back his enemies weapons: So likewise Faith in time of spiritual
conflict, repelleth the devils weapons, or instruments. Psalm. 5.12.

34 As the superstitions Pagans, thought that an Idol, which they termed
Vibilia, kept them from erring out of their way: So Faith which is our Vibilia,
will not suffer us to wander out of the way, so long as we do all things
according to that pattern which was showed us in the mount. Exodus.25.40.

35 As the argument is always good for the subsistence of any subject, unto the
natural property of the same: and contrariwise; the property being set, the
subject of necessity must be seen: So Faith which justifies man, being set,
good works, which are the properties of the spirit of of Faith, are
necessarily set.

36 Even as good works being set, Faith, from which they do spring, must needs
be set: So whersoeuer Faith is not, good works are not; and where good works be
not, there is not faith, ye cause of good works. 1. Tim. 1.18, 19. Ma. 25.34.

37 Even as without eyes no man sees, without ears no man hears; without
smelling no man smells; without tasting no man discerns tastes; without
touching no man touches any thing: So without Faith, can no man see, hear,
smell, taste, eat, and finally touch Christ.

38 As by the preaching of the Gospel, the holy Ghost does kindle Faith in us:
So he increases, feeds, cherishes, and confirms the same by the use of
the Sacraments. Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.13. Math. 26.26, 27. 1. Cor. 11.23.

39 As the body has his hand, mouth and stomach, whereby it takes,
receives, and digesteth meat for the nourishment of every part: So likewise
in the soul, there is a Faith, which is both hand, mouth and stomach, to
apprehend, receive, and apply Christ and all his merits, for the nourishment
of the soul. Gal. 3.14.

40 As in the little and tender budde, is infolded the leaf, the blossom, and
the fruit: So where men are displeased with themselves for their offenses, and
do withal, constantly from the heart desire to believe, and to be reconciled
to God, there is Faith, and many other graces of God infolded. Isay 42.3. Math.
6.6.

41 Even as in a child when he grows to be a man, remains to be the same
substance that was in the child before, but now is made stronger by age, and
castes away all childish toys: So in the same Faith which we profess in our
Baptism, must we grow and learn the full understanding of it, that it may he
felt sweeter unto us daily more and more, while we live, even to our last end;
and by which Faith we also grow in the fear of God, and by which we be saved.

Faith is Faith, though it be weak, or small, or lie hidden.
1 LIke as a little child, who with his little hands; or as a poor man, who with
his rugged and scabby hands, refuse not to take bread and other alms that men
will bestow upon them, as well as if they were greater, and hole: And like as
diseases that are universal throughout the whole body, (as a burning ague)
though they weaken all the parts of the same, and specially the stomach more
then all the rest: yet nevertheless, hinder not, but that it may take a
medicine; yea rather the disease is an occasion unto it, to provoke it unto it:
Even so also it ought to be so far of, that the weakness of our Faith should
keep us from embracing righteousness, and the other benefits of Jesus Christ,
that it must prepare us to the contrary. Luke 5.31, 32.

2 Like as our diseases and infirmities let not, but that our Faith, be it
never so weak, is yet capable of the graces of God, and of all the
righteousness of his son: Even so the litlenesse of Faith, makes it not
less caple to be able to apprehend and embrace, the righteousness of Christ,
etc.

3 And like as the Apple of the eye, which is so little, and yet for all that,
can apprehend the light of the Sun, which is spread over all the horizon, yea and
the Sun it self; which is far greater, and more ample then all the earth:
Even so the eye of Faith, albeit that it be very small, yet it cease not to
lay hold of the Son of righteousness; together with his light and other
gifts, which are as great, and as many in number.

4 Like as a woman with child, though she feel not the child always stir,
yet because she has sometimes felt it, she comfort her self, that she is
with child: and as she is with child a good while before she can sensably
feel it move, and at the first she feels it but weakly; yea, after she has
felt it strongly, sometime she feels it not again a good while; and when she
does, in much weakness, sometimes in comparison of the former; and yet for all
this, has in the end a happy travail: Even so Faith is not felt to move
strongly, as soon as it is bred, and when it begins once, it continues not
always alike motions: So that it is with Faith, and with all other the Graces
of the Spirit, as it is with the Sun, which sometime sets, sometime
rises; sometime shines, sometime is covered with clouds, or shaddowed from
us, by thick and foggie mysts arising out of the earth. Even so Faith and other
virtues, sometimes seem to be set and gone down in us, but when the morning
comes, they arise again; sometimes they are covered from our eyes, by such
mysts and clouds, that arise out of the flesh, that we cannot epsy them; but
yet for all this, as he reasons ilfauouredly and untruly, that says; The
Sun cannot be seen now for clouds, therefore it is not in the firmament: so
he that says; I cannot see and perceive Faith, and the Spirit in me now, for
the fruits of the flesh, therefore they be not in me.

5 Like as it does not follow, that a little child has no reasonable soul,
because he has not the use of it: or that the Trees be dead in winter, because
they bear no fruit; or that there is no fire, because there is no flame: Even
so; whosoever has a certain testimony of his Faith and salvation in all his
life, may be assured, that it is there still, and shall be unto the end, although
for a time he feel it not, nor perceive the working of it, etc. Ioh. 13.1.
Phil. 1.6. Romans 11.29.

6 And like as when fire is raked under the ashes, it shows not his
brightness or heat outwardly, until it be vnraked and kindled in a flame:
Even so it oftentimes falls out with our Faith, which is hidden and covered
with many vices, which the most holy Saints of God themselves, do many times
themselves commit (even as to fall into diseases, the which continues, till it
please God to stir us up anew by his spirit, and to kindle us again, even
like as when a candle is put out.

7 Like as Rebecca when she felt the Twins strive in her womb, though it
payned her, yet she knew, both that she had conceived, and that the children
were quick in her. Even so they who have these motions and holy affections in
them; to wit, that their sins are pardonable, desiring mercy and pardon of
God in Christ, by hearty prayer for them; may assure themselves, that the
spirit of God dwells in them, and consequently that they have Faith, though a
weak faith.

8 As a poor diseased beggar with a lame hand, having the Palsy also, is able
nevertheless to reach out the same, and receive an alms of a King: Even so a
weak and languishing Faith, is sufficiently able to reach out it self, and to
apprehend the infinite mercies of our heavenly King, offered unto us in Christ.

9 As an Infant takes and holds with his little hand a whole Apple, though
he does it not so strongly or surely as a man: Even so Faith, how little so
ever it be, takes hold on Christ, and receives him, not by halfes, but all
whole. Math. 17.20.

10 As the apple of our eye, though marvelous little, we see very great
mountains, and the very body of the Sun, much greater then the whole earth:
So likewise our Faith, though very little, takes and receives al whole Jesus
Christ the son of righteousness. John. 3.16.

11 As a little child does as truly hold a precious Ring with his finger, as a
Giant with all the force of his hand and fist, being one and the self same
Ring: So our Faith, whether it be weak or strong, apprehends, and takes
hold upon the merits of Christ Jesus the Son of God. Mar. 9.24.

Faiths object.
LIke as the act of healing the eyes of the Israelites, and the brazen Serpent
went together: So in the act of justifying, these two, Faith and Christ, have a
mutual relation, and must always concur, Faith as the action which
apprehends; Christ as the object, which is apprehended: So that neither the
passion of Christ saves without Faith, neither Faith helps, unless it be
in Christ his object.

Faith how it is alone, and not alone without works.
1 AS the Queens Majesty, though in her state and office she be alone, yet
she goes not without her maids of Honor after her: Or as the office of the
eye alone is in the head to see, yet the eye is not without other members of
the body, which have also their offices to them assigned, and appropriate: Even
so it is with Faith: for most true it is, that by Faith alone (in respect of
other works of the Law) we are justified. And yet the same Faith being alone,
she is not alone: In her office alone, but in practice not alone: So that as
every thing must stand in his proper charge and office; so also must every
thing need in some respect, the society and help of an other.

2 Like as the root sucketh of the ground, the body receives of the root,
the branches takes of the body, the fruit shoots out of the branches;
these successively go together: Even so Faith grounded upon Christ's passion,
Faith gives the sap of love, love blossometh forth in good works. And
therefore in Faith we must be constant; in love fervent; in works diligent;
and in doctrine we must keep order; we may not let the effect presume before
the cause, nor the daughter before the mother.

3 As works without Faith, make but a Pharisaicall hypocrite: Even so Faith
without works, makes but a carnal Gospeller.

4 Like as the flame of fire burns the wood, without help of the light, and
yet the flame cannot be without the light: Even so is it assuredly true, that
Faith alone consumes and burns away sin, without the help of works, and
yet that the same Faith cannot be without good works: And therefore if we see
a flame that gives no light, we know by and by that it is but vain and
painted: Even so when we see not some light of good works in a man, it is a
token that he has not the true inspired Faith, which God gives to his chosen,
to justify and glorify them with all: So that most certain it is, that the
love of God, and a man's neighbor, do of necessity go jointly together with
Faith.

5 Like as with the rising of the Sun, there goes jointly of necessity, the
spreading forth of his beams and his light: Even so of necessity, love and
good works follow Faith in those that are justified, in so much as he that
loves not, and lives well, abides in death.

6 Like as that body wherein there remains no feeling or moving, lives not:
And yet it follows not thereupon, that feeling and moving are the cause of
life, but life is the cause of moving: Even so the efficient cause of our
justification is God, for the obedience, passion and death of Christ only: And
Faith is the instrument, whereby we take hold of Christ our righteousness. So
then the love of God and a man's neighbor, must of necessity follow Faith in
him that is justified: Like as moving and feeling, do of necessity follow
life. But love and good works, cannot proceed but of Faith, like as there can
grow no good fruits but of a good tree.

7 As we commonly say, that white hairs make an old man, and yet our meaning
only is, that they declare him to be an old man: Even so when we say that
works do justify, it is meant that works do but declare whom is justified.
Iam. 2.18.

8 Like as in the fire, the light and the heat are joined together for man's
use, yet the heat only warmeth: So likewise Faith and works go together, in
man's life and conversation: But yet it is Faith alone without works, that
saves.

9 As the hand has a property to reach out it self, to lay hold of any
thing, and to receive a gift: But the hand has no property to cut a piece of
wood of it self without a saw or knife, or some such like instrument; and yet
by the help of them, it can either divide or cut: Even so, it is the nature of
Faith, to go out of it self, and to receive Christ into the heart. As for the
duties of the first and second Table, Faith cannot of himself bring them
forth; no more then the hand can divide or cut: Yet join love to Faith, and
then can it practice duties commanded, concerning God and man.

10 As in regard of substance, although the eye be never alone, yet in regard
of seeing, it is alone: Even so, though Faith subsist not without hope and
love, and other graces of God, yet in act of justification, it is alone without
them all.

11 Like as when any one of the Israelites were stung to death by fiery
Serpents; his cure was not by any Physic or Surgerie, but only by casting of
his eye up to the brazen Serpent, which Moses had received by Gods
commandment: Even so in the cure of our souls, when we are stung to death by
sin, there is nothing required within us for our recovery, but only that we
cast up and fix the eye of our Faith on Christ, and his righteousness. John.
3.14.15.

Forgiveness of sins only from God.
1 LIke as the Prince only has power to Forgive and pardon fellonie or
treason in his subjects: Even so God only has power to Forgive sin. Mar.
2.7. etc.

2 As that man is a Traitor, who being a subject himself, will take upon him
to pardon treason or fellonie, in another subject: Even so is he a Traitor to
God, that will take upon him to pardon that sin, that is committed against God.

3 Like as no man can forgive debts, but the Creditor, to whom the debt is due:
So no man can forgive sins, against whom there is no sin committed, but he
only that is hurt and offended by the sin, and that is God, either immediately,
or by means. Esaias 43.25.

4 Like as if one do forgive an other man's debts, the debtor is abused, if he
do believe that he is discharged of the bond of his debt, and the Creditor has
wrong done him, without whose knowledge and will, the debts belonging unto him
are forgiven, and his debtor discharged, which forgiveness he does make void
immediately, and does nevertheless claim the debt upon his debtor: Even so
likewise, if any man do forgive sins, which be not done against himself, he
deceives him whom he forgiueth, and sins against him also, to whom the
offense was done, which has the power only to forgive, or withhold the
offenses done unto him: and so he does both not discharge the party that is
guilty, and does offend him also, into whose right he does unadvisedly intrude.

5 As men do not give alms at any time to a stout beggar, who although he have
need, yet will not confess it, and crave alms gently, acknowledging his
poverty: Eue^ so no more will the Lord give unto us any spiritual alms, to
wit Forgiveness of sins, unless we shall humble our selves before him, with
true feeling of our poverty and misery. Math. 9.13. and 11.28.

False Doctrine.
1 AS the herb Blattaria, wheresoever it be strewed or laid, the Mothes and
Bats incontinently find it out, and come unto it: So corrupt Doctrine,
wheresoever it be dispersed, by and by, such people as are corrupt, will flock
unto it.

2 As a dram of the root of Solanum somniferum, causes Idle imaginations,
two drams causes madness, and four drams kills one: So a little False
Doctrine, makes an idle head.

Feeling of Faith, and other good graces which we are endued with, is not
always alike and the same in us.
1 LIke as we are not always alike disposed, at one time as at an other: So we
have not always alike desire to see, or to hear the word of God, or to read
it, or to confer with our brethren, which are more advanced in the knowledge
and zeal of the true and right manner of worshipping of God, then we are. And
likewise the spirit of God, does not touch and stir us up always alike. And
this is the cause, that in our Faith, as in all other qualities, there is
sometimes more, sometimes less, and that oftentimes it is more strong and
lively, and then sometimes again more remiss and faint.

2 Like as we see the water is more hot or cold, according as it is near or
far off from the fire: Even so is it with us, according as we are more or
less exercised in the word, and driven by Gods spirit, we have more or less
zeal and affection.

3 And altogether like as the disposition of the body follows the quality
and temperature of the air, Elements and exercises, to which we give our
selves: Even so according to the places where we live, and the nourishment that
we there take, is the estate of our souls and consciences. But be it that
water is sometime hot, and sometime cold, and that it change his qualities,
sometimes one way, sometimes an other, yet it is always water: Even so the man
that is elect, after his regeneration, is always faithful, howsoever in that
he is the child of Adam, he be sometimes inclined to evil, and that his
Faith be not always in one and the self same estate, and that he is not
always accompanied with the like zeal and affection. For oftentimes it
comes to pass, that we feel Jesus Christ to stir and move himself in
us, and by and by after, we have no manner of Feeling at all: But therefore
he cease not to dwell in us, no more then our souls do dwell in our bodies
when we sleep, although in sleeping, we neither Feel them, nor any of their
operations.

Feeling of sins greater in some, then of the merit and righteousness of
Jesus Christ.
1 LIke as we Feel the calamities and miseries of war, more then the fruits
and pleasures of peace; and the griefs and diseases, more then the quietness
of health; and the hardiness of poverty, more then the profits and
commodities of abundance and riches: Even so we ought not much to marvel, if
we Feel the stingings and pricks of sin, a great deal more, then the
consolations of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, seeing that sin dwells
in us, and not righteousness, which thing is the cause, that the one is more
sencible then the other: Notwithstanding for all this, we must not think,
that sin is greater and stronger then righteousness; or that it can in any
respect be compared unto it; or can be more able to condemn and destroy
us, then the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the grace of GOD is, to
justify and save us. Romans 6.1. etc.

2 Like as we have sometimes in the end of our finger, some pain or grief,
which we feel a great deal more then the health that is all over the rest of
the body; yea though it be much greater then the pain of our finger: Even so we
must not esteem the greatness or the strength, whether it be of
righteousness or sin, according to that feeling we have, because the one,
that is sin, is more sencible then the other; and specially, forasmuch as we
embrace righteousness only by Faith, which is of those things that are not
outward and sencible.

Feeling and finding not always in our selves, good desires to holy Exercises,
yet we must not be discouraged therefrom.
AS a man that takes bread and meat, and eats it without any great
appetite, has not such a pleasure in eating, as if he were well an hungered:
notwithstanding that which he receives, cease not to profit and sustain
him, as we see in sickness: Even so do prayers and other Christian Exercises,
to which such cold persons do give themselves. And therefore it only remains
for them to search the means how to encourage themselves, and to do even as a
man would do to fire, when it is almost out, which he would have kindled
again; he blows it, and lays matter about it, wherewith to kindle the same:
or as a man that puts Oil to a Lamp, when the light is going out.

Babbling of Foolish men and women.
AS there is no beast that more loves his Whelps or yonglings then the Ass
or Ape: So some Foolish women, and fond men, do more regard their own tale,
and blind babbling, then all other men's.

Faith as God gives us it, so he increases the same in us.
AS it is the part of a natural Father, to nourish and set forth the child
which he has begotten: Even so no doubt, God is so faithful, that as he
gives Faith unto his dear children, so he does further, feed, and conserve
the same also in them. Psalm. 68.28. Luke 17.5.

Faith the only truth which reciueth the body of Christ crucified.
1 AS the sustenance of bread and drink, being holden only in the hand, or
gazed upon with the eye, nourishes not, except the same be inwardly received
and conveyed into the stomach: and yet neither again the receiving of every
thing sustaineth man's body, except it be meat and drink, which have their
condition properly to nourish: So in like sort it is with Faith; for as the
believing of every truth, and Faith of every object saves not, but that Faith
only which is in Christ's blood: so neither again does the same blood of
Christ profit us, except by Faith it be inwardly received. Mat. 11.28. Ioh.
3.15, 16, 18. and 14.1, 11, 12. and 15.4, 5, 7. Act. 10.44.

2 As the Sun, the fountain of all light, shines not, but only to such
which have eyes to see, nor yet to them, unless they open their eyes to
receive light: Even so the body of Christ crucified, being the material
sustenance only of our souls, it follows that the same sustenance must be
received by Faith into our inward hearts, or else it is not effectual.

3 Like as Justifying Faith, goes ever with his object Christ; Eue^ so to the
same faith also must be required, that it stand not only in outward profession,
in words, in tongue, and talk, as swimming only in the lips, nor in inward
forms, in shows, and gestures only, which is but a dead and an idle Faith,
making an Hypocrite before men, rather then a justified man before God: but
must enter further into the inward heart; and as the sustenance of the soul
must inwardly be received and digested.

Forgiveness of sins to be preached to all men.
1 LIke as God has shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all: Even so he will have this grace of Forgiveness of sins, of his mercy,
to be set forth and preached to all mankind. Romans 11.32. Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh.
2.1, 2.

2 As the hungry stomach is able to receive meat; but yet for all that,
unless he which is hungry do receive and eat the meat, he is not refreshed:
So likewise the contrite and humble heart, is able indeed to receive
Forgiveness of sins; but yet unless he do receive it in very deed, the
conscience of sin is not quietted, but it does receive it indeed, when it
receives the word of Grace by Faith.

3 As Forgiveness of sins is not obtained without true repentance and
amendment of life: So after it is once obtained, it is not continued without
the constant observing of the same. For to what end is the disease cured, which
is of purpose procured again, when it is once healed? Mat. 3.2. and 4.17. Ioh.
8.11. and 5.14.

Faith has need of continual increase, and yet is never perfect in this life.
1 LIke as in every man's body, it is necessary there be increases of the body,
according to the measure and quantity of every one, until it come to the
perfect measure: Even so it fares with the case of Faith, for the bringing of
it unto a just measure; saving that the increase thereof, cannot be made up in
any certain number of years, as the body may, but needs to have continual
increase, as long as we have our being here upon earth, by continual preaching
and Catechizing, by the right use of the Sacraments, by true and earnest
prayer, and by discipline. Romans 10.17. 1. Cor. 3.2, 6. Act. 2.38. Math. 7.7. 1.
Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.

2 Even as a Candle or Lamp, unless they be nourished with supply of new
Tallow, or Oil, are soon extinguished: So also the word of our Faith utterly
decays, unless it be preferred by new Doctrines, and meditations of
Scripture.

Flatterer.
1 EVen as the beast Hyena, does imitate a man's voice, and so learneth ones
name, whom he calls forth and destroys: So a Flatterer will so sooth you
with yea and nay; that at the length he will bring you to the pit of
destruction.

2 As a Camelion can turn himself into al colors save white: So will a
Flatterer change himself into all shapes and hewes, save honesty.

3 As there is nothing more dangerous, then poisoned honey: So nothing ought
more to be bewared, then a Flattering friend.

4 As lice do forsake the dead bodies, where the blood is decayed, and
whereupon they used before to feed: So Flateres are present so long as
prosperity reigns, but in adversity, they are fled and gone.

5 As they which do bring up any wild beast, will first behold wherewith his
nature is pleased or offended, until at the length by continuance, the same is
made tractable and tame: So a Flatterer does accommodate himself to the will,
mind, and affections of his friends, until at the length he may gather the
knowledge of his inclination.

6 As the shadow when the Sun shines, does follow thee, whersoeuer thou
go: So a Flatterer in thy prosperous state, is ever with thee present.

7 As Orators sometimes do speak in the persons of other: So a Flatterer will
report that he heard things of thee, although it were nothing so.

8 As a Scorpion is a venomous creature, which has a pleasant face, but
wounds deadly with her tail; she stingeth not with her face, but with her
hinder part: Even so such a one is every smoothe tongued and flattering body,
which speaks fair to his neighbors face, and kills him in his heart.
Prou. 26.22, 28. and 18.8. Romans 16.18.

9 As a Be does carry a flower in her mouth, but behind does prick very
sharply with her sting: So likewise very many in these days, do use most
sweet and pleasant speeches, and will even stroke, as it were thy humor and
disposition, with soft and sugared communication, to the end, that (by reason
of some malice couched in their hearts) they may work thy woe and utter
overthrow. Psalm. 118.12. Psalm. 78.36, 37. Prouer. 28.23. Eecle. 7.7.

10 Like as the end of an Orator, is, with eloquence to persuade: and the end
of the Physician, with medicine to cure and to heal: Even so the end of the
Flatterer is, with his humble communication, and sweet alluring talk, to
deceive: so that flattery is a sweet music to a man's ears; but indeed,
there is none more pernicious and pestilent then that is.

11 As a Looking-glass does imitate, whatsoever is set before it, and does
represent the likenesses of them that look in it, but by a contrary way, for
it shows the left side to be the right; and if thou look into the East, it
does represent thee, looking toward the West: Even so a Flatterer in voice and
in gesture, will imitate thee: If thou laugh and be merry, he also will be
pleasant and merry: If thou weep, he will weep for company: If thou will
backbite and slander a man, he will take thy part; and will, with raylings,
obloquies and slanders, even grievously wound the same man. And if thou will
praise thy self, he will help thee: Or if thou love to hear thy self
praised of others, he will carry thee, as it were upon the wings of praises
and commendations, up into the clouds and lofty skies. Through his subtle
slights and crafty devises, he turns and bends himself every way: When
he will work upon men that be sad and heavy, he is presently translated into
their humor. With men that are remiss, and without courage, he deals
merrily: He handles old men gravely, and young men courteously; with wicked
men he is bold and impudent, and with libidiuous and leacherous people, he is
filthy and shameless. The Flatterer has always at his fingers ends, and
ready under his girdle, the gestures, voices, inclinations and dispositions of
all persons, high and low; he leaves out none, that he may deceive all: He
will praise thee in thy presence, and scorn thee in thy absence; for the
Flatterer is double tongued; he now extolleth thee and does set thee aloft with
great praises, and by and by, he will cast thee down with injuries and wrongs.

12 As sticks and wood do nourish and maintain the fire, but the fire does
waste and consume them: So a man that is Flattered by smooth dissemblers and
hypocrites, does maintain his Flatterers, for the most part, but in the end,
they will devour, and utterly undo him.

Fickleness of the state of great persons.
AS the Pine is a great tree, yet the fruit falls quickly away: So the
goodness of many great persons quickly decays.

Friend and frindship to be tried, and then trusted.
1 AS Zeusis painted slowly, and with leisure, that which should long last, and
continue: So must that Friend be a long time tried, which shall for ever
continue faithful. Eccle. 6.6, 7. etc.

2 As evil and unwholesome meat can neither be detained in the stomach,
without danger of diseases, neither expulsed without great grief and pain:
So if you will keep an evil Friend, he will hurt you; but if you will reject
him, he will exclaim, and breed you great tumult and trouble.

3 As he which has none other money, then one counterfeit coin, is altogether
monylesse: So he which has none other Friend, then he which is unproven, or
tried, may be well named friendlesse.

4 He which goes about to obtain the frindship of many, is like the unchaste
woman, who ioying herself with many, has no one assured lover.

5 As Telephus (the Son of Hercules,) all void of Friends, was compelled to
seek salve for his soar, even of his enemy: So such as have no faithful
Friends, at whose hands they should be counseled, are feign sometimes to hear
their foes.

6 As the concord in Music of five tunes, and two half tunes, seems as it
were but one voice and sound: So for true Friends, there ought to be but one
mind; yet so does the flatterer obey the talk of the rich man in all things,
that a man would think one only spoke, and not two: but such are to be tried.

7 As if the field might be made more fertile with praising, and lauding it,
then should it be no less praised, then plowed or dunged: So if your Friend
may by praising him be made better, good it is then to commend him; if not, to
what avails such hateful, fond, and unprofitable flattery?

8 As in trying vessels, we first do fill them with water, and not with wine:
So in proving of our Friends, we ought first to try them with trifling
matters, before we do commit unto them our weighty affairs and secrets.

9 Like as a Physician cures a man secretly, he not seeing it, so should a
good Friend, help his Friend privily, when he knows not thereof.

10 As mighty floods, by how much they are brought into small ryuers, by so
much they loose of their strength: So friendship cannot be amongst many,
without abating the force thereof.

10 As the man that drinks poison, destroys himself therewith: So he that
admits a Friend err he perfectly know him, may hurt himself by too much
trusting him.

Faith only the means of Forgiveness of sins.
1 AS no man can be said to enjoy and possess riches, who is himself
uncertain, whether he has any riches or no: Or as he that cannot be said to
enjoy regal honors, and princely dignities, which doubts whether he shall
ever or never obtain them: So in like manner, neither must we think that
there is any felicity in remission of sins, if this certain and undoubted
trust of Forgiveness of sins be wanting. Psa. 51.12. and 103.12. Math. 9.2.
Mar. 2.5. Romans 5.1. and 4.7. and 8.38. Esaias. 1.18. and 44.22. Mich. 7.19. 1.
John. 2.12. Job. 13.15.

2 Like as we apprehend colors by the sight, and sounds by the ear: Even so
we apprehend by Faith Gods promises, in which he offers life unto us, and all
other graces. Romans 5.1. Abac. 2.4. John. 3.15.

Flattery.
1 AS glass a thing of no great regard, is much like unto the Crystal, a
thing precious and dear: So Flattery a thing as well vile as wicked, does
imitate friendship, a thing worthy of due laud and commendation.

2 As oil is death and destruction, unto Flies, Ants, and such others: So is
Flattery and adulation unto Princes and Provinces, utter ruin, and clean
decay.

3 Even as Oil does cause the fire to flame: So Flattery does minister
nourishment to errors: So that it is not good to believe a Flatterer, for under
the person of a most sweet friend, he is a most bitter enemy. Pro. 29.5.

4 As no vermin will breed where they find no warmth, no vultures sleep,
where they find no pray; no Flies swarm where they see no flesh; no pilgrim
creep where there is no Cross: So there is no Parrasite or Flatterer, will
lurk where he finds no gain.

Faith and obedience requisite in them that be baptized.
LIke as there be in the doctrine of Christ two parts, one concerning Faith,
the other obedience: Even so, they be both also required of them that be
baptized. For baptism is added to the doctrine of Christ, so that a man may
say aright in this case, as the Apostle says unto the Galathians: I do
testify to every man that is baptized, that he is a debtor, to accomplish,
and keep the whole doctrine of Christ. Gal. 5.3.

Folly of some men great.
LIke as he deserves not to be reputed wise, that applying all his study, to
the trimming of his garments, suffers his body to perish with hunger, and
diseases: Even so neither ought such men to be accounted wise, that pursuing
and following the delights and vanities of the body, abandon and neglect the
care of their souls: The bodies being none other, but the apparel to the
souls, as the garments to the body.

2 As Flies are busy in the Pothegaries shops, and if they happen to get into
his glasses of sweet Syropes and ointments, and there die, they stink, and so
spoil his Syrope or ointment: Even so does a little folly him, that was had in
great estimation for his wisdom. Prea. 10.1.

Faith without a particular appliance, has no comfort or commodity in it.
LIke as if a man should believe himself to be rich, because many men possess
great riches; himself to be filled and satisfied, because other men have
whereupon to eat: Or himself to see, because other men have eyes, herein he
should much deceive himself: Even so it is impudency, or rather infidelity,
for a man to believe that other men have their sins pardoned them, and not
he himself. Abac. 2.4. Ephe. 1. 14.

Flesh and spirit.
1 AS the Air in the dawning of the day, is not wholly light or wholly dark,
as at midnight, and at nooneday, neither is it in one part light, and an other
part dark, but the whole air in the same Horizon, is partly light, and partly
dark throughout: Or as in a vessel of lukewarm water, the water it self is
not only hot, or only cold, or in one part hot, and in an other part cold;
but heat and cold are mixed together in every part of the water: Even so is
the Flesh and the spirit mingled together in the soul of man, and this is the
cause why these two contrary qualities fight together. Gal. 5.17.

2 As a man does feel a pain, which is but in the top of his finger, more
sensibly, the^ the health of his whole body; yet the health of the body is
more, then the pain of a finger: Even so a godly Christian, does more feel
the Flesh then the spirit; yet the power and efficacy of the spirit, by the
virtue of the holy Ghost, is such, that it is able to prevail ordinarily
against the Flesh: and therefore the Flesh is not more then the spirit; and
as men feel corruption, not by corruption, but by grace; So the more they
feel their inward corruptions, the more grace they have.

3 Like as if the wood be taken from the fire, and the embers quenched, yet
nevertheless the stones oftentimes remain hot and burning: So the Flesh,
though it be chastised with hot and dry maladies, or consumed by many years
in travail, yet concupisence abides still in the bones.

Forgiving of others.
1 LIke as a Seal put to a piece of wax, leaves an Impression or mark, like
it self in the wax, which when a man looks on, he does certainly know that
there has been a Seal, the print whereof is left behind: Even so it is in
every one that has readiness to forgive others; for by it, a Christian may
easily know, that God has sealed to him the forgiveness of his sins, even
in his heart.

2 As a man walking under a wall in a cold Sunnie day, is heated of the wall,
which first received heat from the Sun: Even so he that shows mercy to
others, has first received mercy from God. Math. 5.7.

Faith and hope do differ.
1 A As Faith apprehends a present benefit: So likewise hope looks for one
to come.

2 As Faith apprehends the promise made by Christ: So neither hope nor other
works can do.

3 As Faith is a knowledge in the mind, and trust in the will: So hope is a
knowledge in the will, and in the heart.

Faith perfect in substance, but in quantity grows greater by daily increase.
1 AS a child when it is newborn, is a perfect man, and a man full grown is
a perfect man: So also stands the case with Faith: That Faith is perfect,
which receives and takes hold upon Christ; but it has need of daily
encreasements, to the end it may become full in all parts. Mar. 9.24.

2 Like as a child though he be a perfect man, yet has need of daily food
and nourishment, to the intent he may come to his full growth and making: Even
so he that belieueth, has need to mind Gods word continually, and to hear
the same preached often, with other like helps, to the end that he may from
day to day take new encreasement.

3 Like as the power of reason, which we received at the first birth of our
flesh, must always be nourished, helped, and exercised to the necessary uses
of our life: So likewise Faith, which is as it were a certain reason of our
second birth, and new man, must be fed and furdered like an infant, to the
spiritual life.

Faith is tied to no time, to no age, nor quality of life.
LIke as it is in the Summer season, some trees are fruiteful naturally in the
beginning of Summer, some a little after, some in the midst, some after the
midst, yea and some do bear their fruit at the latter end: And the tree is
counted to be never a whit the less fruitful that bears at the last, then
the same which bears in the beginning of the year: But the same is
unfruitful, which does bear no fruit at all; neither in the beginning,
neither in the midst, nor yet at the end of the Summer. For when the Summer
is once past, there is no hope that the tree which has been barren all that
time, can bear fruit at winter, because that God has so appointed, that they
should bear not in winter, but in the Summer season: Even so likewise, he that
comes unto Faith at the last cast of his life, must be deemed no less
faithful, then he which began to believe in his youth. But he that is never
made faithful at all in this life, there is no hope of him, that he can come
unto faith in the winter time, which shall follow the Summer of this our life.
Luke 13.7. Luke 23.42, 43. Act. 9.1. etc. and 8.22, 23, 24.

Fear.
1 LIke as the Bristle which is on the Shoemakers thread goes through the hole
first, and so draws a long and strong threede after it: Even so the Fear of
Gods vengeance first goes before, and throws down a man in his own sight,
and then follows the long threede of Gods mercies in Christ offered in his
word. Agge. 1.12, 13.

2 As the theife that will not steal, not for love of any righteousness, or
reverence to God, but to escape the gallows: Even so some men do well, and
eschew evil, not for any fear or love of God, or goodness it self, but to
escape punishment.

3 Like as when the air is covered with clouds, the Sun darkened, tempest
begin to arise, lightnings and fire fly from heaven, rumbling and noise is
in the air, the clouds bursts, and the thunder crack comes, then rain falls,
and straight follows Sunshine and fair weather: Even so a man truly
fearing God, being touched in conscience with sorrow for his sins, as one
oppressed with the burden and vileness thereof, complains to God, accuses
himself, groans, sobbes and sighs like the thunder crack, dare not look up
toward heaven, for his wickedness, but condemns himself: At the last
burstes out on weeping, and tears like drops of rain comes trickling down his
cheeks, straightwayes follows quietness of conscience, with wondering and
praising the unspeakable goodness of God, for his mercies and comfort in
Christ his Son, offered to such a troubled conscience.

Friends are not always to be chosen for their wealth.
AS he is a fool, which buying a horse, beholds only the gay Saddle, and
brave Bridle: So is he most foolish, which going about to get Friends, chooses
them rather by their wealth and apparel, then by their good nature, qualities
and conditions. Eccle. 6.6, 7. etc.

Frailty of man's nature.
1 LIike as a Hound cannot but follow his game, when he sees it before him, if
he be loose: Even so can we not but fall into sin, when occasion by
temptation is given us, if the Lord in mercy withdraw and keep back his
helping hand from us.

2 As a small threede holds a strong man, where he gladly desires to be,
and a little pulling, draws a man whether he willingly goes: Or as a little
wind drives a Ship with the stream and tide: Or as a light persuasion is
enough to make a leacherous man believe that fornication is no sin. And an
angry man, that it is lawful to revenge himself, etc. Even so if the Lord
lead us into temptation, and give us over for our unkindness and unthankfulness,
seeing our blind nature delights in evil, and is prompt and ready of it self
to believe lies, a little is enough to make them that love not the truth, to
believe lies, fainings, and superstitions, and to harden them therein. 2. These.
2.1, 2. etc.

3 As a stone cast up into the air, can neither go any higher, neither yet
there abide, when the power of the hurler cease to drive it: Even so seeing
our corrupt nature can but go downward only, and the devil, the world and
the flesh, drives there to the same way: How can we proceed further in
virtue, or stand therein, (when we are tempted,) if our merciful and good God
do not by his holy spirit, from time to time, guide and govern us?

In Gods Favor.
LIke when a man is in Favor with his Prince, he is then bold to come unto
him, and may have free access unto his presence, and may sue to him for any
benefit or preferment, whereof he stands in need; and may obtain it
before any other: Even so they which are in Gods Favor, by reason that they
are freely pardoned, and justified in Christ, do boldly approach into Gods
presence, and they are ready to ask, and are sure to obtain any benefit that
is for their good.

Faithful.
1 AS an whole man when he is a thirsty, tarrieth but for drink, and when he
hungereth, abides but for meat, and then drinks and eats naturally: Even
so is the Faithful ever a thirst and an hungered after the will of God; and
tarrieth but for an occasion, and whenever an occasion is given, he works
naturally the will of God.

2 As the unbelievers declare their unbelief by the working of the evil
spirit in them outwardly, the fruits of the flesh: Even so the belieuers
declare their Faith, by the working in them outwardly the fruits of the
spirit.

3 Like as when we hear a Musition play sweetly, or a painter, picture
curiously, we do not inquire what countrymen they are, or whether they be
borne of noble parentage or no; but diligently hearken to the Music, and
mark and view well the picture: So a Faithful and careful hearer of the
word, must not so much regard the state and condition of the Preacher, as
diligently to mark the good things that he teaches, and so to practice them
in his life and behavior.

Fall of man through his own pride.
AS we see a child, who whilst he runs up and down to show his new clothes,
he stumbleth even upon his clothes, and catches a Fall, and seeing himself
down, and his clothes soyled and arrayed in the dust, he cries louder at his
Fall, then he crowed before at his new Coat: So God has put many excellent
graces upon thee, thou crowest at the sight of them, as Nebuchadnezzer did at
the sight of his Palace; and like a fool thou art in admiration of thy self,
till thou stumblest even upon thine own gifts; and when thou art down, thou,
which before did crow like a fool, do then cry like a child; especially
because thou see thy excellent graces, even thy coat of diverse colors,
stained, and foiled with thy Fall. Psa. 75.6, 7.

The Famine of the soul.
LIke as when God sends a Famine, that we hardly find wherewithal to
sustain our lives, then our condition is miserable: Even so much more
dangerous and greater is the Famine of the soul, when God takes away from
any people, the sincere Preachers of his word. Amo. 8.11, 12.

Fear of God.
1 AS Joseph did dream, that the Sun and Moon did bow unto him: So must
the whole world Fear and stand in awe of Gods majesty. Genesis 37, 9.

2 As Jacob told his uncle Laban, that except the Fear of Isaac had been
with him, meaning the Fear of God, who was Isaacs Fear, he would have sent
him away empty: Even so it is with us all, except Gods Fear remain and
continue with us, though the Lord has deserved never so much at our hands, yet
we like unthankful Labans, would send him empty away, and rob him of the
praise of all his blessings and graces bestowed upon us. Gene. 31.42. Pro. 1.7.
and 14.27. Exodus 20.20. Gene. 42.18.

Gods Face is fearful to the wicked.
AS the Face of an earthly Judge, (which can but kill the body) is most
fearful and terrible unto that party which is brought before him for his
wicked fact: Even so the Face and sentence of the eternal and heavenly Judge
of Judges, will be most terrible against the wicked, who after he has killed,
can cast both body and soul into hell fire; and from whose countenance, flies
away both the heavens and the earth. Math. 10.28. Reave. 20.11.

Friends unprofitable.
AS the stumpe of a tooth is unprofitable to eat withal: So they in whom there
is no faith nor credit to be reposed, are Friends unfit and unprofitable for
a man in the day of trouble. Prou. 25.19.

A Friend forsaken.
AS a vessel, how profitable so ever it has been to the owner, and how
necessary for his turn, yet when it is broken, it is thrown away and
regarded no longer: Even so such is the state of a man forsaken, of those,
whose Friend he has been, so long as he was able to stand them in stead.
Psalm. 31.12.

Such a Father, such a Son.
AS Vipers brood destroys them that breed them: So generally the children of
them that murdered the Prophets, and showed cruelty to the saints of God,
fulfill the measure of their fathers, and are unmercifully bent against all
those that seek their life and salvation. Math. 3.7 and 23.33.

A dead Faith.
1 LIke as he that falls into a River, if he neither move hands, arms, nor
legs, is quickly drowned, and sinketh down dead to the bottom; but if he swim,
escapes alive: So he that trusts to a dead Faith, which because it has no
good effects, and brings forth no lively fruits, as an holy love to God and
man, piety, patience, pity, mercy, compassion, and such like virtues, he
must needs be drowned in utter destruction, and sincke down into the
bottomless gulf and pit of hell: but he that moves his hands and his feet,
to do the deeds of a true and right Faith, which works by love, and shall be
a dooer of the word, and not an hearer only, he shall escape safe out of all
dangers, and shall arrive at the happy haven of eternal happiness, and
everlasting life, through Christ Jesus. Iam. 2.14. etc. Gal. 5.6. Iam. 1.22.

2 Like as if a man say to one that is hungry, fill thy belly, and gives him
nothing, this shall not be true charity: So likewise, if a man say he
believes, and brings forth no works of Faith, this shall not be true faith,
but a certain dead thing set out with the name of Faith, whereof no man has to
brag, unless he will openly incur reprehention, seeing that the cause is
understood by the effects. Iam. 2 15, 16.

Spiritual Fornication.
AS they that forsake their husbands, and give themselves over to strangers,
do so become common Whoores: Even so such is the state of those which leave
God and the truth, which sometime they professed, and commit Idolatry, and
cleave to superstitions. Ezech. 23.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Fasting, when needful.
1 AS men accused in times past with long hanging beardes, with vncombred
hair, with black array, were wont humbly to abate themselves, to the end to
procure the mercy of the Judge. So likewise when we are accused for our sins
before the judgment of God, when either pestilence or famine, or war begin to
range abroad, or if any calamity otherwise seem to hang over our country,
then it behooves us both for his glory, and for common edification, and also
is profitable and healthful for us, that we should in pitious array, humble
our selves in Fasting and prayer, before his majesty, and so crave to escape
his severity. Joel. 2.25.

2 As bridles are necessary for wild horses: So likewise is Fasting sometimes
for a Christian, to tame the flesh.

3 As some men naturally are continually out of measure, and inclined to one
extremity or other, which are both naught, and many there have been, which
have always continued but too licentious: So also some there have been so
superstitious in Fasting and abstinence, that they have made conscience to use
such things, as God has left free, and at their liberty.

Fained Friends.
1 EVen as a brook in winter, is carried with great violence, and runs with
a mighty force, flowing over, with abundance of waters on every side, when
there is no want nor need of waters; but in the heat of Summer is dried up
and empty, when water is scant, and hard to be had, whereto thirsty passengers
as they travail, running in hope of water to drink, are utterly deceived: So,
a feigned and hollow hearted Friend, in the time of thy prosperity, and rich
estate, will promise thee many things, when thou have need of nothing: but if
the wind shall turn, and blow the contrary way, and thou shall be turned and
tossed with many sharp brunts, and blustering blasts of troubles, adversity,
penury and poverty, thy Friends (as thou thought) will be like a tree
withered through want of sap; and like a ditch without water, dried and parched
with the heat of the Sun.

2 As a shadow does follow that man which is lighted with the bright beams of
the Sun, but if the Sun be hid, or covered with a cloud, the shadow
vanishes, and is clean gone: So a fained and counterfaited Friend, does
follow and plie that man, whom he perceives to be rich, to be famous,
honorable, and in the Princes favor, at whose hands he hops that some thing
will be gotten: But if he shall fall into calamity, be despoyled of his
riches, and shall tumble down from the top of his honor, into the
lowevallie of disgrace, he presently forsakes him, and makes no reckoning
nor account of him. Prou. 17.17.

3 As a Swallow whose company may be had in Summer, but not in winter: So
likewise Friends (as they go now a days) will swarm about thee, so long as
thou art able and willing to feed their humors, and serve their turns; but
that ended, they will leave thee in the midst of a thousand surges and wants,
of what troubles soever shall light upon thee.

Forgiveness of sins.
1 AS the Serpent or the Toade, when they die, are not in so miserable a state
as sinful men, because there is the end of their woe and misery: So
contrariwise, when men dies out of the favor of God, and without the benefit
of Forgiveness of sins, there is the^ the beginning of his woe and misery.

2 Like as when Benhadad king of Syria, was discomfited, and overcome by the
king of Israel, by the counsel of his servants, who told him that the kings
of Israel were merciful men, he sent them clothed in sackcloath with ropes
about their necks to entreat for peace and favor: Now when the King saw
their submissio^, he made covenant of peace with him: So likewise we by our
sins, most justly deserve hell, death, and condemnation, every day, and
therefore it stands us in hand, to come into the presence of God, and to
humble ourselves before him in sackcloth and ashes, craving and entreating for
nothing in the world so much, as for pardon of our sins, and that day by day,
without ceasing, till the Lord give his blessed answer to our consciences,
that all our sins are put out of his remembrance. 1. King. 20.32. Psalm. 32.1.
Esaias. 38.17. and 44.22. Mich. 7.19.

3 Like as a man that for some misdemeanour has been cast into prison, and
lain there many years, winter and Summer in cold yrons, when he obtaines
liberty, he will often bethink himself of his old misery, and take heed
for ever, least he fall into the same offense again: So likewise he which
has seen his own sins, and felt the smart of them, and withal by Gods
goodness obtained assurance touching the pardon and Forgiveness of them, will
never willingly and wittingly commit the like sins any more, but in all
things change the course of his life.

Faith must not waver in prayer.
AS the wave of the Sea is driven sometimes into this coast, sometimes into
that, according as the wind and the raging of the Sea is: So likewise a man
doubting, now thinks this thing, shortly after his mind being changed, he
thinks an other thing, even as he is driven on with erroneous doctrine, and
blind affections. Such a man prays in vain, because he is destitute of true
Faith. Iam. 1.6, 7.

Forgiveness of sins free, yet requires thankfulness.
1 EVen as the King, his servant owing him ten thousand Talants, yet when he
fell down and besought him, he forgave him the whole debt freely, and of his
mere liberality: So also God the Father does freely forgive them all debts,
that is sins, which fly unto him for succor, with trust and confidence in
Christ. Math. 18.23. etc. Luke 7.41, 42.

2 But even as the king called again unto punishment, that servant, being
unthankful, and cruel toward his fellow servants, and that which before he
forgave him when he humbly besought him, now he requires again of him, being
stubborn and cruel toward his fellows: So God, after he has received us
being sorry for our sin, into favor, will have us imitate his example in
liberality and goodness toward our neighbor. Math. 18.32, 33.

Faith without works is vain.
1 EVen as that speech is vain, wherein it is said to the needy, warm your
selves, and fill your bellies, when as helping hands are not also put to: So
that Faith is vain, and dead, which is in the mouth, without the fruit of
works. Iam. 2.15, 16.

2 As a Carkas wherein is no lively spirit, deserves not to be called a living
creature: Even so Faith that is dead, and without works, deserves not to be
called Faith. Iam. 2.17.

3 Even as the spirit which is inwardly in a living creature, quick and lusty,
does bewray it self by moving and feeling, and by the outward actions: So
likewise a lively Faith, does show it self by good works; otherwise it is
like a tree without a root, by which it is nourished, held up, and adorned.
Iam. 2.18.26.

4 As Alms and liberality to the poor, which is but in fair speeches, is
cold and does not help: So in like manner, the Faith which is but in words and
outward profession of speech, although it be with never so great brags, is
dead; so that we must understand, that a thing which is weak and dead in it
self, can by no means have power to give life and to save.

5 Like as if that liberality which is only in words, be cold and dead, and
does not profit the poor, nor make him a liberal man which uses it: Even so
that Faith which is only in speech is dead, and therefore cannot save or
profit him which has it. For if words only could profit or cause it to be
Faith, then should words also profit the poor man or woman, which is
destitute: But words only can not make a faithful man, nor only words make a
liberal man.

6 As a man is known to be dead, when he does not breath, cannot stir, see,
hear, and such like; and contrariwise when he does any of these, he is known
to be alive: Even so is it with Faith, if it can or do bring forth no good
works, then is it dead: on the contrary part, the actions and stirring
thereof, do show it to be alive.

7 Even as we see some painter so skilful, that he can cast such colors, in
painting fire, that at the first blush, it might make a man judge it to be
fire indeed: But if a man hold his hand to it, to feel for some heat, and to
make trial by the effects, a child will be able to judge easily, that it is
but a dead image, because the effects are wanting: Even so, there be very
many men, as cunning as any Painter, to make a show of Faith, through great
bragges and vaunts, that God is their God, and that they put all their whole
trust in him; that they look to be saved as well as the best; yea though but a
few, yet they hope to be of the number of those.

8 As an unfaithful servant, which does his business deceitfully, and
hypocritically, to his Lord and Master, whose wages he takes, and in the
mean time, favors his enemy, and labors by all the means that he may,
to please him, and with his diligence to serve him: Even so in like manner, he
which boasts of Faith in Christ, and in the mean time lives loosely and
wickedly, he does no otherwise, then to speak outwardly, those things with
his mouth, from which, both the heart it self, and all the studies and actions
of his whole life, do disagree. Ioh. 8.40.44.

For the love of Christ we must Forsake all.
1 AS a faithful wife having her husband in a strange Country, who sending
for her, does forthwith Forsake Father and Mother, Friend and acquaintance,
goods and lands, not regarding either peril or poverty, that may happen
unto her, so that she may be in the fellowshippe and company of her husband,
because she loves him, and has her sure confidence and trust in him, and is
sure that she shall participate with him, whatsoever he has: Even so we that
are faithful Christians, ought (unless we would be reputed unnatural
branches, unkind lovers, and insolent persons) to abandon and Forsake for the
love of Christ, who has married us unto himself with the Ring of Faith) all
worldly and fleshly pleasures, what and how many so ever they be, yea and our
lives too. Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26.

2 As a weak woman will not refuse to forsake all, and to follow her loving
husband, who is nothing else, but earth, ashes, flesh, blood and corruption,
having yet no certainty of his life, nor no full assurance of his person nor
presence: Even so, much more we ought to Forsake all, when our heavenly
husband Jesus Christ for our salvation and commodity, and because he would
make us like unto himself, does call us out of our own country, and to
follow him, which is the author of life, the preserver from perils, the giver
of all good gifts, and the most faithful lover of our souls.

3 Like as a husband that has diverse mansion places, the which also by the
common right of marriage, belong unto his wife, who causes her to dwell in what
house it pleases him, and when he list, he causes her to remove and to
change habitation as he thinks best, which she willingly is contented with,
being a dutiful wife, and delighting in the company of her husband: So
likewise Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of the universal world, who also has
married us to him by Faith, will have this prerogative over us, namely to place
us in which of his houses it pleases him best: So that it is our part for his
love to Forsake all, and to obey him, and willingly to dwell in what place he
will have us, and there to remain in leading a Christian life, till such time
as he shall call us thence unto some other place.

Superstuitie in Feasts and banquets.
1 LIke as if a Horse by eating too many Oats, should grow heavy, dull, and
slack to go or draw, the owner would beware of giving him too much, least he
should both loose his prouender, and weaken his horse: Even so in meat and
drink, and long sittings at Feasts, if the plenty make us heavy and slow in
our vocations, namely in the service of God, we have just cause to cut it off,
and so to take away the abuse, which is especially hurtful, and to be
condemned. 1. Cor. 10.31.

2 As men use to put water into their wine for fear of drunkenness, and to
put salt in their meat to season it: Even so must our speeches and talk
savor of sobriety and Christian reformation, at Feasts and other meetings.
Job. 1. 4.5. Math. 12.36.

Favorers and furtherers of wicked actions and sin.
EVen as when some huge and great Fish, is drawn out of a river, in a net,
many small ones, which are about him, are taken and drawn out with him: Right
so it is the Lords manner, not only to tangle and to trap, within the
infringible net of his indignation and heavy judgments, the first Authors,
and chief bruers and brochers of Idolatry, treason, treachery, or any kind
of evil whatsoever: But all those also will he censure, with the same weight
and measure of punishment, which have any pleasure in those forbidden evils,
and are so far from being offended and grieved at the same, that they wish
in their hearts, good success, and continuance unto the^. Eze. 29.4, 5.

A fellow-like Feeling.
LIke as there is no one part in our carnal body, that is hurt, but that all
the rest of the members Feel smart by the same: Even so ought we to have
compassion one upon an other, when he is in trouble, and suffers any sorrow,
and our neighbors business ought no less to be ours, then our own. Romans
12.10.15, 16.

Free Will lost in Adam.
1 AS he which kills himself, does it whilst he is alive, but being dead,
cannot revive himself again: So we had Free Will to do good, before we lost
it in Adam, but having lost it, we cannot recover it.

2 As a man that is in close prison must needs thereabide, and cannot possibly
get forth and walk where he will; Yet can he move himself freely, and walk
within the prison: So likewise, though man's will be chained naturally by the
bonds of sin, and therefore cannot but sin; and thereupon sins
necessarily, yet does it also sin Freely.

3 As that prisoner that is not only sick and weak but even stark dead:
Which cannot stir though the keeper untie his boltes and chains, nor hear
though he sound a trumpet in his ear: and if the said keeper would have him
to move and stir, he must give him not only his hand to help him, but even
soul and life also: Even so such a one is every man by nature, not only
chained and fettered in his sins, but stark dead therein, as one that lies
rotting in the grave, not having any ability or power to move or stir: and
therefore he cannot so much as desire or do any thing that is truly good of
himself, but God must first come and put a new soul into him, even the
spirit of grace, to quicken and revive him, and then being thus revived, the
will begins to will good things, at the very same time, when God by his
spirit first infuseth grace. Iere. 10.25.

4 As a Ship when the Stern is broken, is driven hither and thither where the
tempest will: Even so by the devil, we are driven from one sin to an other,
neither hitherto can do any thing, but even as the devil will; and except God
does deliver us with his strong hand of his mercy, we shall remain in the
bonds and chains of sin unto death. Gene. 6.5. and 8.21. and 20.6. Prou.
16.1.9. and 20.24. and 21.1.

5 Like as if a man should fall into a myrie deep, and stony place, and so
should both be drowned, be arrayed with mire, and also be hurt: So we by
original sin, are drowned in the darkness of ignorance: we are so defiled
with lusts and concupiscence, and we are wounded as touching the powers and
faculties of the mind. Iere. 31.18. Ezech. 36.26, 27. Ioh. 6.44, 45. Romans 9.10.

6 As the understanding does see nothing of it self, but that which is
carnal: Even so the will of man, does hate and abhor of it self, all things
which are good, and loves that which is evil, carnal, and nothing durable.
1. Cor. 2.14.

7 Like as when a man takes a knife and cutteth bread with it, the knife also
does cut, but not without the hand of him which holds the knife, for the
knife is not Free of it self, either to cut or not to cut; yet for all that,
when a man does cut any thing with a knife, he says, this knife cutteth well
or ill, although of it self it does cut nothing at all, but by the power and
force of the cutter: So we likewise can do nothing of our selves that is good
and right, except the spirit of God works it in us: So that all godly
Christians, will confess and say, we have labored, we have preached, we have
prayed, etc. knowing yet them selves to be nothing else but the instruments of
the Lord which works. Prou. 16.1.9. and 21.1. Iere. 10.25. and 13.23. and
34.7. Ezech. 36.26.

Godliness the beginning and foundation of righteousness.
1LIke as before the coming of our Savior Christ in the flesh, when
sacrifices were used, as God had then commanded, it was appointed, that the
same sacrifices should be seasoned with salt, or else the Lord would not
allow of them: So likewise, unless we be seasoned with the the salt of true
Godliness, we and all our doings, shall be unsavory to the taste of the Lord;
yea whatsoever we do, this being wanting, though it seem never so glorious
before men, yet shall it be loathsome in his sight, as a thing defiled, and as
a counterfeit righteousness. Leuit. 2.13. Mar. 9.49, 50.

2 As the buyer, while he is in buying, disprayseth the thing which he
buyeth, and says it is naught, it is not worth the price which ye ask, but
when he has bought it, so soon as he is gone, he boasts of his peniworthes,
and says it is better then his money: Even so Godliness, before a man have
it, he says it is not worth his labor, and thinks every hour too much that
he spends about it, but when he has found it, he would not loose it again
for all the world: because it makes him contented with that he has. Prou.
20.14. 1. Tim. 6.6.

3 As a Syence or impe that is grafted into a tree, does in such wise draw
away the sap and force thereof, that it brings forth fruit according to his
own kind, and not after the kind of the tree whereinto it is grafted: But with
Jesus Christ it is contrary, for they that are grafted in him, do in deed
gather strength from him; yet so, that they alter their nature, and bring
forth fruit, not after the kind of Adams children, but of Jesus Christ, into
whom they are grafted. Ioh. 15.5.

Good men's estate amongst the wicked.
AS the good corn may not grow nor increase, unless the unprofitable weeds
be weeded away: So except vicious men, and vagabounds were punished, good men
might not prosper, nor live in peace.

Grace.
1 AS where Sothernwood, Lysimachus, Poley, Calamint, Dictam, Nigella,
Peutidanum, are laid or grow, there venomous beasts fly away: So where the
Grace of God is, Satan and evil motions depart. Math. 12.

2 As we see the leaves fall from the trees in a boystrous wind: So the Graces
of God, shall decay and drop away in the wicked, one after an other, as though
they were in a consumption. Luke 8.18.

3 As those that were out of the Arc, though they had wit, glory, riches
and learning, were drowned in the flood: So likewise no wit, nor learning, nor
riches without Grace, can save a man from perdition. Gene. 7.21.

4 As that which is not in the vessel, is not of the vessel, nor comes
thereof, yet it is drawn out of the vessel: So Grace is not of the
Sacraments, nor comes of them, but springs of the eternal fountain, of the
which fountain, the soul seeks in the Sacraments.

5 As a man does run to the vessel, when he seeks the lycoure: So must he
which seeks the lycoure of Grace, and has it not, run to the Sacraments.

6 As when the West wind blows with her pleasant blastes, the foulness and
sadness of winter is put away, and the whole face of nature, waxes new and
young again; as the trees are beautified with boughs, and the green grass
is distinguished, with the sight of diverse flowers; and the Sun it self, and
the show of heaven, does delight the eyes with a pleasant aspect: Even so
soon as the Grace of the holy Ghost does blow upon the mind of man, forthwith
does the deformity and foulness of the former life pass away. And in the
steed of vices, the whole life shines with virtues of comeliness. So that
man may be counted to be borne again, and luckely to wax young.

7 As fire is kindled and stirred up by often blowing and putting too of wood:
So the Grace of God must daily be stirred up by the use of the word,
Sacraments, and prayer, and by meditating, striving, asking, seeking, and
knocking. Math. 25.26. 2. Timo. 1.6. Gene. 17.1. Psalm. 119.57.

8 Even as they are liker to retain and recover their health, who are careful
in using a competent diet of meat and medicine, then they who do carelessly
distemper themselves in sickness, and in health, nor regarding what things are
wholesome or hurtful for them: So likewise those Christians, who are careful
and painful in seeking and serving God, are far liker to attain to Grace,
then they who are otherwise.

9 As it was the peoples duty to come to the visible Arc, and there to wait
and look for the Grace of God: So no man may hope for the Grace of God, except
he come to Christ visible man, and eat his visible flesh, and do incorporate
the same into himself by faith.

10 Like as a spring lock, which of it self can shut, but cannot unlock
without a key: Even so we of our selves, may run into sin and wickedness,
but we cannot return and come out of the same, without the keye of Gods Grace.

Government of the commonwealth.
1 AS he must not take the Lute in hand, which is utterly ignorant in singing
and playing: So ought none to take the Government of the common wealth in hand,
unless he were endued with wisdom and knowledge.

2 As the virgins of Vesta, had one time appointed unto them wherein they
should learn, an other, wherein they should exercise, and the third, wherein
they should teach: So the like ought they to do, that take any Government of
the commonwealth in hand.

God does us not all the good he will do, at a clappe, fearing least we would
utterly abandon and loose it.
AS a Father of an household well advised, who at the first dash does not much
advance his servants, but does for them by little and little, the better
always to put them in comfort and hope to receive advantage at last, to the
end that by this mean, they may be holden in service, and not depart from his
house: Even so God, during the time that we are in this world, gives us more
hope, then he does benefits (and yet it is plain, that the graces that he
bestows upon us are infinite) for fear least that if he should make us
great and rich at once, and should give us out of hand, all the good that he
keeps in store for us, it would make us to abandon his service, as we see
sometimes it happened to the Jews by this occasion. Iere. 22.21.

Good turns or benefits unexpected.
AS the Fig tree blossometh not, having yet fruit most sweet: So some men do
Good turns and benefits, though they promise none.

A Gainefull man, but sumptuous.
AS a fruitful field which requires great labor and charges, yet does
yield much profit to the owner, but none for it self: So a Gainefull man and
thriftie, but yet sumptuous, can leave no store of wealth behind him for his
heir. Such one, may be said to be pennie-wise, but pound-foolish.

Good Will.
AS a flood divided into sundry little brooks or stremes, runs both weak
and small: So Good Will, stretched toward many, must at the length, be feeble
and faint.

God is not the cause of sin.
LIke as it happens sometimes, that the selfsame Wine being powered into a
corrupt vessel, is lost and made palde, and loses his verdure, which Wine,
as it is brought by the husbandman, and put into the vessel, is both sweet
and good. Neither is it hard to understand, how one and the selfsame act, may
as touching one, be vicious: and in respect of an other, just. For as when a
murderer and a hangman do kill a man, the act as touching the matter or
subject, is all one, namely the death of a man; and yet the murderer does it
most unjustly, and the hangman by law and justice: Even so God is not the cause
of sin, for if we will speak properly, and that it may the more manifestly
appear, we must mark, that one self act, as it is derived and comes from
God, it is both good, just, and holy. For punishment is by God imposed and
laid upon wicked men; and to punish sins, no man is ignorant, but that it
pertains to Justice. Wherefore God in withdrawing his grace from the ungodly,
and ministering some occasions which might move to good things, if they happened
to right and just minds, and which he knows the wicked will turn to evil,
may after a sort, (though not properly) be said to be the cause of sin. And
undoubtedly, that act, in that it passes from us, is sin, but not as it
comes from God: For in that it comes from God, it is most perfect Justice.

God is not the author of evil.
1 LIke as if a man cut with an evil or dull knife, he is the cause of
cutting, but not of evil cutting or hackling of the knife, but the badnesse of
the knife is the cause thereof. Or if a man strike of an Instrument that is out
of tune, he is the cause that the strings sound, but that they sound iarringly
and out of tune, that is in themselves, and the man that strikes them, is not
to be blamed for it: Even so it is no good argument, neither follows it, that
because all things are done and come to pass by God his determinate will and
providence, that therefore he should be the author of evil. For seeing one may
be the author and cause of an action, and yet not of the evil in the action,
it does not therefore follow, that if God be the cause of the action, that by
and by the evil in the thing must also proceed of him. Nay contrarily, this
Doctrine is a sealed truth: That no evil comes of God in any work, but
though in every thing that is done, the Lord be some worker, yet as he does
it, it is ever good. As by these places of Scripture may plainly appear.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. Job. 8.20. and 34.10, 11, 12.17. Psa. 5.4. Iere. 10.10. and 12.1.
Dan. 4.34. Iam. 1. 13, 14. Romans 9.14. 1. Ioh. 1.6.

2 As a man that rides upon a lame-Horse, and stirs him, the rider is the
cause of the motion, but the Horse himself of the halting motion: So God is
the author of every action, but not of the evil of the action.

3 As the wheels of a clock, whereof some run forward, and some backward,
but all to make the clock strike: Even so God and the devil works both to one
end, though God have one good purpose, and the devil and his ministers have an
evil purpose: Yet there is no evil in God. Esaias. 45.7. Amo. 3.6.

God is not the author of sin.
1 AS he that makes tools and Instruments of iron, or other mettle, makes
not rustinesse and canker, neither is to be blamed, if those things which he
has made, by reason of too much moisture, dust, or other corruption, shall
afterward gather canker or rustinesse: Even so, that heavenly workman, our
God, did not bring in sin and iniquity, neither can he justly be blamed, if
his creatures do stain and blemish themselves with the foulness of sin
and wickedness; for he made them good. Gene. 1.10.12.

2 As the earth affoording sap, as well to the evil trees, as to the good,
cannot be found fault withal, because the evil tree brings forth evil
fruits: So much less can God be called either the author, or cause of our
sins, although by his providence, he moves all things, yea even the ungodly.
Act. 17.28. Psalm. 5.6. Pro. 6.16.

3 Like as that which is no fault in the master of the house, is a great fault
many times in any of his servants, because it is the breaking of their masters
commandment: Even so doubtless, the selfsame work is sin in the servants
and creatures of God, which to God is no sin, but an ordinary work,
appointed for some special purpose, either for the manifestation of his power,
as was the hardening of Pharao, or for the declaration of his mercy; as was the
fall of David, of Peter, of Mary Magdalen, and all other repentant sinners.

4 As the Sun sending forth his beams and heat, to the carrion, and so
engenders in some corruption, draws to it self, neither corruption, neither
yet any filthiness: neither yet does the Sun by his purity and
brightness, so purge the carrion, but that it remains stinking and corrupt:
So does God so work by the wicked, that the justice which is in him, does not
justify the^, neither yet is he defiled by their wickedness and corruption.

Godly men, wants nothing good for them.
AS a natural Son, may assuredly trust, that his Father will do for him all
things that may be for his setting forth, and preferment: Even so we may
undoubtedly assure our selves, that having Almighty God to our Father, we shall
lack nothing, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, which may be
profitable and expedient for us, toward the enjoying of the everlasting
inheritance, which our heavenly Father has prepared for us.

God alone sufficient to his people.
AS the Sun has no need to be helped of the company of any other lights,
to give light to the world; and as one soul is enough to keep life and to
govern the body: Even so is one God alone, sufficient to his people, yea to
all the world, for all things abundantly, without the help of any other.

God tempts no man to sin.
LIke as if a man have a servant, which is a thief, and yet nevertheless he
would be esteemed for an honest man; and to try and prove him, his master
leaves his purse full of money before him: If his servant take and steal it
away, is he a thief, and does he not declare himself to be such a one? Yes
undoubtedly. And now who made him a thief? The master, or the money, which was
left, where he might come by it? Surely neither of both, for the money is the
good creatu^e of God. And when the master put it before his servant, ^e did
not compel him to take it, and to steal it. If this servant had been an
honest man, he would not have touched it; or if he had taken it, he would have
brought it unto his master, and would not have kept it: But seeing that the
servant was then already a thief, and had his heart given to theft, when he
had the occasion to put in execution the wicked affection of his heart, he did
it. And whereas he did it no sooner, that was because that he had not the
occasion and means. For if occasion had been sooner offered to him, and if
he had found whereto to reach out his hand, he would not have kept it in; and
when he began to put forth his hand, he has not only then begun to be a
thief, but he has only begun to declare himself what he was. As we have
the example in Judas, who was a thief a long time, but he never showed it,
until he had opportunity: Even so, although that God has given the occasion
to man, for to prove and try him, and for to make him to make known that
which is in his heart: It follows not therefore that God has done the sin,
nor yet is the author of it, and that we must impute the fault to him, and not
to him which has committed it. John. 12.6. Gene. 50.20. Job. 1.11.

One God, and three persons.
1 AS there is in man, the soul, the spirit, and the body, three distinct
substances, which nevertheless do make but one man, and not three: In the
soul there is the mind, the understanding, and the will: but these do not
make three souls, but one. In the Sun there is the very substance of it, the
heat and the light; and yet these, there be not thereby made three Suns, but
one: If the light and shining be taken from the Sun, we should then see the
body of it no more: And if the heat or warmeth be taken from the Sun, we
should then not feel whether there were any Sun in the sky or no: Even so,
if the word and spirit be taken from God, we should then come by no knowledge
of him at all. Therefore, whereas the Son and the holy Ghost, are joined unto the
Father, it does further nothing to the making of many Gods; but to the
manifesting of one true God, in nature and essence; and three in persons and
properties, which was to be spread throughout the world, by the preaching of
the Gospel.

2 Like as the Sun in the firmament has three distinct and sundry things,
of the which every one differs from an other; as the Globe, the light and the
heat: And although every one of these keep severally their properties, yet it
is but one Sun, and is not divided into three Suns: So in the Deity, the
unity of essence is not taken away by the distinction of persons, and yet for
all that, is there no confounding of persons; nor changing of one into an
other. For as there is but one Sun in, and through the whole world; no more
is there but one God. And as the Sun shows himself by his beams: Even so
God as Father, does show himself by his Son Jesus Christ, which is his word,
and eternal wisdom: And as the Sun by his heat, does make us feel his
force: Even so God makes us feel his virtue by his holy spirit, which is his
infinite power. Deuteronomy. 6.4. and 32.39. Esaias. 43.10, 11, and 44.6. and
45.5.18.22. 1. Cor. 8.6.

3 As reason, will, and memory, are not three, but one and the same soul: So
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are three distinct in property, and
one God.

The holy Ghost compared to fire and water.
1 AS the fire is pure and clean, and can suffer no uncleanness: So the holy
Ghost does purge, cleanse, and lighten the consciences of Christians, setting
them on fire, with the love of God. Math. 3.11. Luke 3.16.

2 As fire is an Element exceeding pure and clean, and so necessary for man's
life, that we may in no wise want or forgo it: So also the water is very
needful for us, being a very clear, pure, and clean nature, and very meet
for to represent and signify, the nature, office, and properties of the holy
Ghost. Or as the water does renew and comfort the earth, makes it fertile,
causing it to bring forth fruit, and also does wash away the filthiness of
the body: So the holy Ghost, does wash, purify, refreshe, and water the hearts
and consciences of the faithful; moving, stirring, persuading, ruling,
lightning, and finally, comforting them, and making them to bring forth
pleasant fruits, acceptable to God. Esaias. 55.1. and 44.3. Ezech. 36.25. John.
3.5. and 7.37.

3 Like as water does put out fire, and quench thirst: So the holy Ghost does
quench the fire of the evil concupisences of the flesh; and does also quench
the thirst of the poor troubled souls, satisfying them for evermore: Yea he
does assuage, ease and comfort the griefs, and mourning of the godly, which
commonly are in this world most afflicted, and whose sorrows do pass all
humane consolation, whereof he has the proper name Paraclet, or the Comforter.
Ioh. 4.13, 14. and 16.7.

4 Like as in this life, it comes to pass in the Elect and chosen, as we
see it by experience in bladders, the which if they be empty, and thrown
into the water, forthwith they sink: But if they be blown and filled with
wind, they fleet and swim above like a bubble, and sink not under the
water: Even so men's minds being as yet void and destitute of the spirit of
God, are drowned in their inordinate desires, sensuality, pleasures, and other
sundry passions and worldly affections: But when they are replenished, and
filled with the holy Ghost, they triumph over sin, and are of it never
overcome: So that by his means, we have ability to will those things that
are right, and to do those things that are good.

5 As it is the nature of fire to warm the body that is benumbed and frozen
with cold: So when a man is benumbed and frozen in sin, yea when he is even
stark dead in sin, it is the property of the holy Ghost, to warm and
quicken his heart, and to revive him. Mat. 3.11. Ioh. 3.5.

6 As it is the property of Water to cleanse and purify the filth of the
body: Even so the holy Ghost, does spiritually wash away our sins, which
are the filth of our nature.

7 As Oil does strengthen the members, and make them more nimble, and does
also restore and heal them being broken: So much more does the holy Ghost make
us cheerful and quick, readily and constantly to perform the duties of our
calling.

7 As fire alters things, sometimes by burning out, sometimes by inflaming:
So the holy Ghost alters man by regenerating; burns out, by mortifying the
old man; inflameth, by quicking and raising up the new man.

Great men full of cares.
AS the tops of trees placed on great mountains, are moved with the least
blast of wind that blows: Even so those men, which are set in high places of
honor and dignity, are troubled with the report of every messenger, though
never so base; whereas men of low degree and calling, for the most part live
quietly at ease, without any molestation.

Grace wrought by degrees.
AS a man looking steadfastly on a Dial, cannot perceive the shadow move at
all, yet viewing it a while, he shall perceive that it has moved: So in
hearing of the word, but especially in the receiving of the Lords supper, a man
shall judge even his own faith, and other graces of God, to be little or
nothing increased; neither can he perceive the motion of Gods spirit in him at
that present, yet by the fruits and effects thereof, he shall after perceive
that Gods spirit has by little and little wrought greater faith, and other
graces in him.

A Godly life.
AS it cannot by any means come to pass, that he which enjoys the beams
of the Sun, should be in darkness: Even so it is impossible, that he which
has his conversation with God, should not be immortal.

Holy Ghost works, where and in whom he will.
1 LIke as the wind blows in what quarter of heaven it lists, and where it
begins blowing, and where it ends no man can tell, neither can any man
devise means to stop the course of it: Even so with like liberty, and with
the like open appearance, works the holy spirit of God, where and in whom he
will, and no power nor ability of man, is able to resist and withstand it.
John. 3.8.

2 As of dry Wheat, one lump cannot be made without moisture, nor one
loaf: So neither could we that are many, become one in Christ Jesus, without
water, which is from heaven, that is, without the holy Ghost.

Good will not to be mocked.
AS a man having a servant that is an idle fellow, who forefloweth his
business, minds other matters, and goes to his work lastly, and like a
Bear to the stake; would not be pleased with his service, but rather would
shift his hands of him, and send him packing: Even so the Lord our God, cannot
abide that we should worship him with our bodies, when our souls are far
from him; that we should honor him with our tongues, when our hearts wander
from him: Or that we should serve him in part, some piece of the Sabbath, and
to serve sin and Satan the rest; for he will not be mocked, he is ever
jealous of his own glory. Gal. 6.7.

God a spirit, which cannot be represented by any bodily shape.
LIke as a bodyly Image, which represents unto us the face of man, ought
lively to set before us all his lineaments and proportions, that by the
counterfaiting or engrauing, we might conceive whatsoever might be seen in
him, which the same represents: Even so the image of God, must through the
same likeness, set before our senses, a certain understanding of the knowledge
of God. For this we are sure of, that nothing may bear the image of God, but
that which is a spirit, because in very deed, God is a spirit, and therefore
this image of God in man, can have no abiding place, but in the soul. Gene.
1.26, 27. and 2.7. and 5.1. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.

All Good things come from heaven.
AS the rain and dew falling from above, watering the ground, makes it
fruitful: So likewise the grace of the holy Ghost, coming from God the
father, stir up our minds to all goodness. 1. Cor. 4.7. Iam. 1.17.

Gentleness rather to be used then rigorousnesse.
AS some disease, which by no force can be expelled, oftentimes is with the
juice of herbs assuaged: So some men you shall sooner overcome, and win by
clemency and Gentleness, then by rigorousnesse and extremity.

The Gospel to be mingled with the law in preaching.
1 AS the strong purgine black Hedebore, given uncorrected with other things
to allay the power of it, hurts more, the^ profits: So the terrible
judgment of the word, when it is preached without some comforts intermingled,
will do more harm then good.

2 As bitter Wormwood, and sweet Honey mingled together, are very profitable
to take away the dimnesse of the bodily sight, and to make a man see worldly
things clearly: So the bitter threatenings of the law, and sweet promises of
the Gospel, laid together, are most fit to take away the dimnesse of spiritual
eyes, and to make them see clearly heavenly things: So outward adversity, and
prosperity, mingled together.

3 As Pepper-woort once sown continues, and can hardly be destroyed: So the
word once received continues, and can hardly be banished.

Gospel.
1 AS the law, because it is the ministry of death, it fitly serves for the
taming and maistering of the rebellious flesh: Even so the Gospel, containing
the bountiful promises of God in Christ, is as Oil to power into our wounds,
and as the water of life, to quench our thirsty souls: And it fitly serves
for the strengthening of the spirit.

2 As the Diamond, which being moystned in the warm blood of a Goat, may be
bruised, though otherwise it cannot be hurt with any fire, be it never so
hot, nor broken with any violence, be it never so strong: Or as the Horse
which erst while was outragiously fierce, is by gentle handling, meekened and
made handsome for the Saddle: Or as the Dog, in like manner, whose nature is
churlish and untoward, which is agreeable to his name, is yet by gentleness
brought to do that, that is not incident to his nature: Even so some men,
whose hearts cannot be mollified and softened by the terrors and judgments of
the law: are yet reclaimed, won, and made to relent, by the mild and gentle
persuasions and promises of the Gospel.

3 As the Dove found no footing at the first sending: Even so the Gospel of
Christ, does not always find entertainment. Gene. 8.8. Math. 10.14.10.3.19.
Act. 13.51.

4 As the seed sown in the field, as wheat, brings forth grain and
corn, according to his nature and kind: So the Gospel preached, brings
forth out of a godly heart, that which both in it self, it teaches, and that
which it delivers: to wit, faith in Christ, amendment of life, the knowledge
of God, love toward God and our neighbor, and such other fruits as are
sown and preached.

5 As the lightning that breaks out of the clouds, shines over all: Even so
does the Gospel of Christ.

6 As men light not a candle to cover or whelme it under a bushel, but on a
Candlestick, to light all that are in the house: Even so the light of Christ's
Gospel may not be hid, nor made a several thing, as though it pertained to
some certain holy persons only; nay, it is the light of the whole world,
and pertains to all men, and therefore ought not to be kept from any. Math.
5.14.

7 Like as the Frogs of Egypt, raised out of the dust, by the devilish art of
the Magicia^s, cried out against Gods verity, calling again by Moses and
Aaron, the people of God, to the true liberty and worshipping of God: Right so
do the Popes Legates and Papists, molest with their talk and speech, the
preaching of the Gospel, the free deliverance, the Christian liberty, and
true service of God. Exodus 8.7.

8 Even as a murderer guilty of death, contemning the favor, which he
hears to be offered unto him, of a most merciful King, calls and procures
to himself the more grievous punishment: So in like case, if any hearing the
Gospel of grace, imbraceth not the same, is to himself the author of heavier
punishment, and condemnation.

Godly men.
1 LIke as in the strait Seas, the water ebs and flows: Even so is it in the
Godly, as long as they live in this world, according to their own feeling,
there is an access and recesse, a coming and going of the spirit. Psalm.
1^^.5.88. and 77.2, 3.7, 8.

2 As the lights and stars of the firmament, do give light to all which are
under heaven: So the virtues of Saints and Godly men, do give light to others
to follow their example.

3 As the Palm tree is least at the bottom, and the higher it is, the greater
and thicker the branches are: but all other trees are contrary: So the Godly
are most conversant, and have the best part, that is the soul in heaven, but
the wicked are contrary.

4 As a Panther has four claws and no more, on each foot behind, but five
claws, and no less, on each foot before: So the Godly, though they be weak
to the world-ward, yet they are strong to Godward. Mat. 11.12.

5 Like as the filthy do more and more wallow themselves in the mire, and
array and defile themselves too vilely: So the Godly do more and more apply
themselves, daily to cleanness and holiness of life. Reave. 22.11.

6 As the Owl is howted and wondered at, among other birds: Even so the Godly,
are often made a gazing stock, and a wonderment unto the ungodly, because the
course of Godliness is most strange and foolish in their eyes. Lam. 4.3. 1.
Cor. 4.9.

7 As all Birds, though hating one an other, do wonder at the Owl: So
likewise all the wicked, being enemies amongst themselves, do set their
several powers against the Godly. Psalm. 22. Luke 23.12. The reason is, because
they hate nothing, neither any people so much, as the truth and the professors
thereof. Math. 5.11.12. and 12.34.

8 As Sheep are simple, but yet bring profit to their owners, both when they
are living, and when they are slain: Even so the Godly, are not only
harmless and innocent as Doves, and yet can discern of true doctrine and
false, but they are also very profitable, both in their life and death.

The use of Gods Gifts to men.
AS a sheep has and bears a fleece of Wool, not for himself, but for the
necessity and benefit of men: Even so the Gifts of God which he gives us,
either spiritual or temporal, we are not to keep them only for our selves,
but to supply the necessities and wants of others. Eccle. 11.1, 2, 3.

Gods promises.
LIke as if an earthly King should promise one a living, whilst he lived, it
would be an occasion that he should lessen his carfulness for earthly things:
Even so, how much more should Gods Promise, make us careless for worldly
things, which is King of all kings. Hebr. 13.5, 6, 7. Iosu. 1.5. Psalm. 118.6.

2 Like as nutritive and cordial medicines, are not good for every sick
person, especially when the body needs rather a strong purgation, then a
matter restoratiue: Or as incarnatiue medicines for the time allay the pain of
the Patient, but after, the grief becomes more grievous: Even so, the
comfortable applying of Gods Promises, are not so profitable for every one that
is humbled, especially when their souls are rather to be cast down, then as
yet to be raised up: so the sugared consolations, may for a time ouer-heale the
conscience, and abate some present grief, but so, as afterward the smart will
be the sorer, and the grief may grow the greater: whereof ensues this effect,
that comfort seems to cure for a while, but through want of wisdom, in the
right discerning of the cause, we minister one medicine for an other; and so
for want of skill, the latter fit grieueth them sorer than the former.

God the Author of men's afflictions.
1 LIke as if a man having received a grievous wound, should not care for the
healing of it, should not hasten to the Surgion or Physician, nor should
provide any remedy: but should sometime accuse his own sloth and negligence,
for that he did not avoid the arrow, sometime grinning, should byte the arrow
it self; or finally, do some such like thing, when as he ought rather to
apply some remedy to his wound, whereby it might be healed: Even so, as often
as we are in any afflictions, and in desperate cases, we must not look upon
our selves, nor upon our enemies, nor upon the world, as though we might from
thence hope to have ease of our pain and grief: but let us look up to God,
who of his most notable and just judgment, sent and shot those arrows at us:
Let us cast our eyes upon God, not to murmr against him, or to detract any
thing from his perfect equity, but rather humbly to crave his mercy, and to
require a salve of him, who gave us the wound. Psalm. 32.4. Esaias 1.5. and 9.13.
Ier. 5.3. Job. 1.21.

Gods graces.
1 AS a man sailing in the maine sea, carrying his Jewels with him in the ship,
if so be he make shipwreck, does together with his ship, lose his Jewels: So
likewise this sea is the world, our ship the conscience, the Jewels Gods
Graces, shead abroad in our hearts: If so be therefore, that we once make
shipwreck of a good conscience, we do utterly indammage all the Graces of God
in our hearts.

2 Like as skill or cunning in any Science or Trade, if it be exercised, is
both continued and increased: Even so Gods Graces in us, if they be stirred up
in us, by continual exercise, they are increased: but if they be neglected
through carelessness, they do utterly decrease.

3 Even as iron if it be not used will rust: So the Graces of God in us, if
they be not put in practice, will rust, and decay utterly. Math. 25.24.

4 Like as the grain of Mustard-seede, is small to see too at the beginning,
but after it is cast into the ground, it increases speedily, and spreades it
self: Even so, if a man have but some little feeling of his wantes, some weak
and fainte desire, some small obedience, he must not let this spark of Grace
go out: but these motions of the spirit, must be increased by the use of the
hearing of the word preached, Sacraments and prayer, and they must daily be
stirred up by meditating, endeavoring, striving, asking, seeking, and knocking.
Math. 25.26. 2. Tim. 1.6.

To Glorify God.
LIke as the Apostle aduertiseth the Hebrews, where he says: Brethren, exhort
one an other, while it is to day. Hebr. 3.13. So also Christians ought to take
occasion of Glorifying God, whilst it is offered unto them: least as Ioab came
to Absolon, when his barley field was burned, so they resort unto God when it
is too late: Therefore the sooner they come unto him, the better it will be for
them. 2. Sam. 14.30, 31.

God comfort afflicted souls.
AS God many times casts down and confounds all those, that vainly trust
in things transitory, britle, and momentanie: Even so on the other side, he
does raise up, and recomfort such as be weak, pensive, faintharted, sorrowful
and mourning, and with spiritual instruction, does cherish, furnish, and
refresh their sick souls and bruised consciences. 1. King. 14.15. Esaias.
42.1.13. Luke 4.18.

God comfort his.
1 AS the Eagle cherishes her young, and fluttereth over her Birds, and takes
them and carries them on her wings: Even so does God cherish and make of his
people and Church. Deuteronomy. 32.11. Obed. 1.4.

2 As natural Fathers and Mothers are moved with pity and compassion
toward their Infants, when they are in any distress: Even so our heavenly
Father, is moved with much greater compassion toward us his children, when
we are in misery, or suffer affliction. Psalm. 103.13.

3 As the Apple of a man's eye, is the tenderest thing about all his body, and
therefore most duly and carefully preserved from any thing which may hurt it:
Even so God, does protect, defend, and care for those that are his. Deuteronomy. 32.10.

God hears our complaints.
AS parents are ready to give their children good things when they beg or
crave them: Even so much more God our Father, will not deny any thing to his
children, when in a true faith they do beg or crave it of him. Math. 7.9,
10, 11.

God.
1 AS the Husbandman or Vine-dresser, cutteth off every branch that brings
not forth fruit, and lets it wither, and makes a fire of it: So God does
cut off fruitelesse Christians, and throw them into hell. John. 15.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.

2 As the Vine-dresser does purge the fruitful branches, that they may bring
forth more fruit: So God by diverse means, does purify and cleanse his
children, that they may be more fruitful.

3 As they which try a vessel, first put water into it, to see whether it
will hold water, then they commit Wine unto it: Even so, first God gives us
one grace, if we use that well, then he gives an other, and after that an
other. Luke 8.18. Math. 25.23.

4 As the devil is not dead in those which are his, but works still to their
damnation: So is not God dead in them which be his, but works still to their
salvation.

5 As from the Sun which we do behold, proceeds to the world, both light,
heat, and beams, whereby all things are quickened and nourished: So from God,
who is an invisible Sun to his Church, there proceeds both light, that is,
a clear knowledge of God; and heat, that is, the burning affections of hope,
faith, and love; and also the beams; which are the manifold consolations,
wherwithal the souls of the faithful are quickened, nourished, and made merry.

6 As a wise master of a family, desiring to know the disposition of his
servants, hides himself in a corner, or behind a cloth, and there both
beholds the unruliness and misdemeanour of some, and also perceives the
virtues of others of them, the which they would never have showed in his
presence: So God does in a manner absent himself from the world, that both the
faith of his servants, and the outrage of sin in the wicked ones, may be made
manifest.

7 As a shadow does protect us from the beams and heat of the Sun: So God
does protect us from dangers. Psalm. 91.1.

8 As in high and defenced Towers, we are safe from the enemy: So God does
set us in safety. Psalm. 91.2.

The Good of our brethren must be regarded.
1 AS the parts of a man's body, every one has his proper function, yet not so
much for himself, as for the Good of the whole body: Even so in like manner in
the Church and commonwealth; every man must have his particular calling, not
so much for himself, as for the common Good, and weale-publike.

2 As the Stagges, when they swim over a great water to feed in some
Meadowe, they swim on a row; and lay their heads one over an others backs,
carrying the weight of one an others horns, and when the first is weary, an
other takes his room, and so do it by course: Even so must we do, helping
and doing Good one to an other, till we have passed the troublesome waves of
this world, and are come to heaven.

God the author of all callings.
AS the General in the field, appoints every particular man his particular
standing and office; in which he must live and die: Even so it is God, that
appoints every man his particular place and standing, and function, wherein
he must continue to the end of his life, unless God call him to some other.

God forsakes his children sometimes, and leaves them to themselves.
1 AS a mother sets down her young child, and hides herself, suffering it to
cry and break the face, not because she hates it, but that she may teach it
to depend upon her, and love her: Even so God gives grace to his children, and
yet again sometime he does in part withdraw it from them, and then they
fail in their duties sundry ways: and this he does to make them ashamed of
themselves, and to cause them to put all their confidence out of themselves, in
the merits of Christ.

2 Like as the Corn field that is plowed and sown with good Corn; but yet
for a time, it neither gives rooting beneath, nor so much as a show of any
blade appears above: Even so God grauntes his servant the holy mean of
salvation, namely preaching, prayer, Sacraments, and yet holds back the
efficacy of his spirit for a time. Can. 2.4, 5.

3 Like as the prisoner, who has escaped the hand of his Gayler, has an
affection to run a thousand miles every hour: But having happily his Boltes
on his legs, he cannot for his life but go very softly, galling and chafing
his flesh, and so with much grief falls again into the hands of his
keeper: Even so God gives his children a strong affection to obey his will,
but he lettes them fail in the obedience it self. Romans 7.22, 23, 24.

4 As the trees in the winter season, that are beaten with wind and weather,
bearing neither leaf nor fruit, but look as though they were rotten and
dead, because the sap does not spread it self, but lies hid in the root: Even
so the manner of Gods forsaking his elect is, when he hides his graces for a
time: not by taking them quite away, but by remoouing all sense and feeling of
them. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.

The Godhead of Christ.
1 LIke as when a man sleeps, the soul is not severed from the body, but
lies as it were dead, and exercises not it self: Even so the Godhead of
Christ, lay still, and did not manifest his power in his manhood; but did as it
were lie a sleep for a time, that the manhood might suffer, and thus the
manhood seemed to be forsaken. Math. 27.46.

2 Even as the Altar in the old Law, did sanctify the sacrifice that was
offered upon it, and made the same propitiatory: So also the Godhead of Christ
(the Altar whereon he offered his humanity) sanctified the same, and made it
propitiatory and meritorious for all mankind.

3 Like as in Christ incarnate, there be several things, and not several
persons: So in the Godhead, there be several persons, but not several
things. Philip. 2, 6, 7. Hebr. 1.3.

4 As Honey and Oil being mixed together, cannot be called either Honey or
Oil, because when things are mingled together, they cannot retain a name of
one of the simples: Even so the Godhead of Christ, cannot be changed into his
manhood, or yet mingled with his manhood: Because the properties of the
Godhead, cannot agree with the properties of the manhood; nor the properties of
the manhood, with the properties of the Godhead: For as the Godhead cannot
thirst, no more can the body be in many places at once.

God the refuge of the comfortless.
1 AS the Rocks that are hard to be clambred unto, are good refuges for the
afflicted to fly unto from the face of their pursuers: So God is the safety
of all such as in distress, do fly to him for succor. Psalm. 18.2.

2 Even as the Birds and fowls of the air, that they may escape the nets and
snares of the fowlers, are wont to fly up on high: So we to avoid the infinite
snares of innumerable temptations, must fly to God, and lift up our selves
from the corruptions, lying vanities, and deceitful slights of the world.

God uses the ministry of all.
AS in a great house, there be many vessels of sundry sorts, to diverse uses,
not only of Gold and Silver, but also of wood and earth, some for honor, some
for dishonor: So likewise in the outward society of the Church, there be men
of all sorts appointed for diverse ends, as apt and meet vessels for the Lord,
and some otherwise, etc. 2. Tim. 2.20, 21.

God no partial Judge.
AS dry wood is apt to burn, and green wood, though not so quickly, will be
consumed with fire: Even so both strong and weak, high and low, rich and
poor, one and an other go to wrack, when God punishes impiety and
wickedness. Ezech. 20.47.

A Godly man, is a mighty man, though he be never so poor.
LIke as precious stones, though they be cast into the mire, yet they loose
not their beauty, nature, and property: So likewise men endued with honesty,
replenished with goodly virtues, and well acquainted with the true worshipping
of the most high and gracious GOD, although they be silent as men in their
graves, and are had in contempt of the world, yet have they not lost their
dignity and the true honor proper to Christians, which consists not in the
wealth and renown of this world, but in holiness, in righteousness, and in
the faithful imitation of Christ.

God the life of the soul.
AS the Soul is the life of the body: Even so God is the life of the Soul:
and his spirit is the soul of our souls, and the want of fellowship with him,
brings nothing but the endless and unspeakable horrors and pangs of death.

The holy Ghost God.
AS Christ is called the word of God, not a word of Letters or Syllables, but a
substanciall word, that is, being for ever of the same substance with the
Father: Even so the holy Ghost is called the virtue of the most highest, not
because he is a created quality, but because he is the substanciall virtue of
the Father and the son: and therefore God equal with them both.

Guilty before God.
AS in the malladies and diseases of the body, that disease is most dangerous
that has possessed and seized upon the body, and yet the body feels it not:
So likewise in all Gods judgments, to stand Guilty before God, is most
dangerous, because a man stands Guilty before God many years, and yet never
feels it.

The Graces of the holy Ghost, cannot finally be abolished.
1 AS coals under ashes; and as Sap in the root of the tree in the winter
season, are hid and covered, and appear not for a time at all in the
branches: Even so the common gifts and Graces of the holy Ghost, may be lost
and extinguished, but the gifts proper to the Elect cannot; they may indeed be
diminished and covered, and the feeling of them may be lost, but they cannot
either finally or totally be abolished.

2 Like as a Mother that loves her child most tenderly, sets it down in the
store, lets it stand and fall, and break the face, and all this while she
hides her self, not because her purpose is to leave her child quite, or to
make it hurt it self; but that when she takes it up again, it may love her
the better: Even so the holy Ghost deals with men, to make them see their
own weakness and frailty; he hides himself as it were in some corner of
the heart for a season, that they may the more earnestly hunger after Grace,
the want whereof they feel. 2. Chro. 32.31.

Graces of God.
1 AS the excellency of natural and outward blessings, being abused, is the
means of the excessiveness of sin, not of it self, but by the corrupt
disposition of our nature: So the spiritual Graces of God, bestowed upon men
living in the Church, do often by the just judgment of God, work the same
effect, and that in far greater measure.

2 As it is impossible that among Heathen men, they who are of small wit,
capacity, knowledge, strength, and riches, should be wicked in so high a
degree, as they who excel in the foresaid respects: So it is not possible that
any, who has not received some spiritual Graces of God, should come to so
high a degree of sin, as they in whom it has pleased God, to work that
shadow of regeneration, which has bin declared in the former Chapter.

3 As we see it comes to pass in natural things, as namely in water, which
after it has been a little warmed, becomes more cold, then if it had never
had any heat in it: Even so men, who have had some heat of Religion kindled
in their hearts, by the spirit of God, if they contemn and abuse the said
Graces of God, become more wicked and irreligious, then they who never knew
what Religion meant.

4 As the increase of light, does make a decrease of darkness, it being
impossible, that two things of contrary natures should be together in one
subject, the one not expelling the other, either wholly, or in part: so the
spiritual Graces of God, which are the matter of man's holiness bestowed on
unregenerate men, do work in them a decrease of sinfulness, making them less
sinful then otherwise they would be; and then usually unregenerate men are.

5 As all sweet and pleasant things are sower and unpleasant unto the taste of
sick persons: So likewise will Gods Graces and gifts be unto us, if we vainly
waste or abuse them.

The Gifts of God.
AS men preserve the fire by blowing it: So by our diligence, we must kindle
and revive the Gifts of God bestowed on us. 2. Timo. 1.6.

Though there be degrees of Glory, yet all shall have sufficient.
LIke as if sundry vessels, whereof some are bigger, and some less, if they
be cast all into the Sea, some will receive more water, and some less; and yet
all shall be full, and no want in any: So likewise among the Saints of God in
heaven, some shall have more Glory, some less, and yet all without exception,
full of Glory. 1. Cor. 15.41. Dan. 12.3.

Some love Godliness, whilst nothing is required of them contrary to their
own affections.
AS Ajax would seem devout toward God, so long as he perceived nothing to be
required of him, which was contrary to his affections; but when he was
commanded to spare Ulysses: In other things (says he) I will obey thee, but
not in this thing: Even so of this sort is the Religion of many at this day,
who will be lovers of Godliness, so that it does not disagree with their
affections, which they will have wholly to be satisfied, yea though God be
angry therewithal.

God chastises his of very love and mercy.
1 LIke as a natural Father, first teaches his dear beloved child, and
afterward gives him warning and admonition, and then corrects him at last:
Even so, God our heavenly Father assayeth all manner of ways with us, which
are well grown, and old in years, but young and tender in faith; first, he
teaches us his will, through the preaching of his word, and so gives us
warning; now if so be that we will not obey him, then he beats and ierketh us
a little with a rod, as sometime with poverty, sometime with sickness and
diseases, or with other afflictions, which should be named and esteemed as
nothing else, but childrens rods, or the wandes of correction.

2 Now if a small rod or wand will not help, nor do any good of the child,
then his Father takes a whip or a cudgel, as in case his Son waxes
stubburne, and will prodigally spend his money and thrift wantonly, and
ryotously in evil company, then comes the Father, and pulls him out by
the hair of his head, binds his hands and feet, and beats him till his
bones crack, and sends him into prison, or banisheth him out of the country:
Even so when we wax obstinate and stubburne, and care neither for words nor for
stripes, then God sends unto us more heavy and universal plagues, as
pestilence, dearth, sedition, uproar, casualtie of fire, murder, war, loss
of victory, that being taken of our enemies, and led away prisoners and
captives, etc. And all this he does, to fear and to tame us, and as it were
with violence, to drive and to force us unto repentance and amendment of our
lives.

3 Like as in truth, it is against a loving Fathers will and mind to strike his
child, who would much rather do him all the good that ever he could, but
through long sufferance, and overmuch cherishing, his child waxes rude, and
evil nurtured; therefore does he punish him, but yet in the mids of all his
anger, his fatherly heart breaks out; in case that he puts his Son away
from him, for some grievous fault, yet he sends him not away altogether
comfortless, but gives him some apparel, and some comfortable words, and so
sends him from him, not to remain for evermore in banishment, but when he is
once a little humbled, meekned, and amended, then to receive him home again;
and this he does to turn and keep from his Son, all such things as might
hurt and destroy him; not minding to cast away his child, or utterly to
forsake him: Even so certainly, when God sends misery and affliction upon
us, there lies hidden under that rod, a fatherly heart and affection: for the
peculiar and natural property of God is, to be loving and friendly, to heal,
to help, and to do good to his children; and therefore he sends us evil,
that he may do us good; and yet in the mids of all affliction and punishment,
he sends some mitigation, comfort and succor.

4 As a Mother feeds and nourishes her child, and all the good she can do
unto it, that does she, even of a tender and motherly heart; and yet, through
the frowardness and unruliness of the child, she is sometime so moved and
provoked, that she is angry with it, chideth it, rebukes it, and beats it:
Even so such is the very nature and property of God, to suffer no manner of
misfortune to happen unto us, but yet through our minifolde sins, he is
provoked to punish and chasten us.

5 As little as the Mother can forget, deny, forsake, or give over her child,
though she be angry with it, and displeased at it: Even as little does God
forsake or give us over in our need and necessity, misery and affliction,
though he seem never so much to be displeased with us. Esaias. 49.15.

6 As a Master does not correct and chastise his scholar or servant, for any
intent to hurt him, or for any malice and evil will toward him, but only that
he should learn better afterward, be more diligent, and take better heed:
Even so likewise Christ receives no Scholar or Disciple, but such as will
forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow him, etc. Math. 16.24.27.

7 Like as the Physician or Surgion, does cut away and burn out the rotten and
dead flesh, with his iron and instrument, that the whole body be not infected
and poisoned, and so perish: Even so does God sometime afflict and punish our
bodies, sharply and grievously, that our souls may be preserved and healed;
and how deep so ever God thrusts his iron into our flesh and bodies, he does
it only to remedy and to heal us.

8 As the Physician in making of his Triacle, occupies Serpents and Adders,
and such like poison, to drive out one poison with another: Even so God in
afflicting and correcting of us, occupies and uses the devil and wicked
people, but yet all to do us good withal.

9 As long as the Physician has any hope of the recovery of his patient, he
assayeth all manner of means and medicines with him, as well sower and sharp,
as sweet and pleasant; but as soon as ever he begins to boubt of his
recovery, he suffers him to have and to take all manner of things
whatsoever the patient himself desires: Even so the heavenly Physician, as
long as he takes us for Christians, and has any hope to recover or to heal
us, he restrains us from our will, and will not always suffer us to have
what we most desire, but as soon as he has no more hope of us, and gives us
over, then he suffers us for a time, to have and enjoy, all our own will and
pleasure. Job. 5.1. etc. 18.

10 Like as when the Horse-breaker gives unto a lusty fresh young Horse, too
much of the bridle, he is wild and wanton, and goes not well as he should
do, and so by chance, in a slipperie and slyding place, he falls headlongs
over and over: Even so, if our Creator and maker, should suffer us over much,
and give us too large liberty, we should soon wax wild and proud thereof,
and so it might happen, that we should undo and destroy our selves; therefore
he gives us a sharp bit in our mouths, and helps us to bridle, and to tame
our flesh, that the noble and precious soul perish not.

11 Like as the Carter yerketh his Horse with the whip, and strikes them
sharply, when they will not draw nor go forward, and yet favors and
spares them also, that he may enjoy them the longer: Even so God strikes and
whippeth us, when we do not right as we should do, and yet nevertheless
spares us, and will not utterly make an end of us.

12 Like as the poor shepherd, when his foolish sheep stray abroad in the
wild wilderness among the Wolves, drives them from strange ways, into the
right way; and hunteth them into their sure sheepfold, where they may be in
safeguard: Even so we likewise, for so much as we mix our selves often times among
the worldlings, and have fellowship with those that are enemies unto our
Christian and true Religion, therefore God comes unto us, and drives us with
sorrow and repentance from them, that we should not be destroyed, and perish
together with them.

13 As the Heard-man will suffer such Calves and Cattle, as are appointed
shortly to the slaughter, to run, and spring about in the pasture at
pleasure; and again, such as are reserved to labor, are kept and used under
the yoke: Even so Almighty God, does suffer and permit unto those ungodly
persons, whose destruction is at hand, to have all pleasure and lust upon
earth, and to accomplish and fulfill their pleasures and desires; but the
godly, whom he will use to his honor and glory, those keeps he under the
yoke, and restrains them from the pleasant lusts of the world.

14 Like as if the Gardener cut off the knobs and the withered and crooked
boughs from the trees, in his garden, and loppeth them a little, yet as long as
the roots remain, the trees are never the worse, but wax nevertheless, and
bring forth fruit: Even so does God loppe and hew the crabby old Adam, with
the cross and afflictions; not to the end to hurt or harm us, but to keep us
in awe, and to teach us godly manners, and Christian behavior: and therefore
as long as the root of Faith remains with us, though we be spoiled and
destitute of all riches, and of all manner of worldly and bodily comfort, yet
shall we bring forth good fruits, to the honor and glory of gods holy name.

15 As the Free-mason heweth the hard stones, and heweth off, here one piece,
and there another, till the stones be fit and meet for the place where he will
lay them: Even so God, the heavenly Free-mason, builds a Christian Church,
and he frames and polisheth us, which are the costly and precious stones, with
the cross and troubles, that all abomination and wickedness, which do not
agree unto this glorious building, might be removed and taken out of the way.
1. Pet. 2.5.

16 As Physicians use to heal men diseased, with filthy potions: Even so God
uses to chastise, and try his children, by the means of wicked things, as by
Satan, by wicked men, etc. which shall be damned.

17 As in Cities, the Governors thereof keep executioners and hangmen, not
that they like or commend that office, but only do suffer them to execute
their office for the better preservation of their City: So likewise God does
suffer Tyrants and ungodly men, to afflict and grieve his faithful servants,
and all for their good.

18 As we make great account of gold, which is but a metal that we will try
in the fire, to make it please us the better: So after the same sort, it is not
to be marvelled that God sometimes tries of very love, the faith of his
Children, to the end, that when they are once well purged from the dregs and
filth of incredulity, which remains in them, and are purified in the furnace
of diverse afflictions, and so melted, as it were a new, their faith may be of
like account before him.

God may reward and deal with his creatures, as likes him.
AS the Clay is in the Potters hand, to order it at his pleasure: So are men
also in the hand of their Creator, so that he may reward them as likes him
best. Esaias. 45.9. Romans 9.20, 21.

God is a Husbandman to his people.
AS the Husbandman dungeth his land, Tilleth and dresseth it, that it may bring
forth good Corn: So Almighty God, tilleth and cleanses the hearts of his
people, the which be prone unto evil, that they may bring forth good works,
and not tares. Ioh. 15.1, 2. 1. Cor. 3.9.

God is present every where, but yet not with all alike.
AS a sound or noise is hard more of some, and less of other some, being of
equal distance from it, as they be of quick or dull hearing: So albeit God
be present with all things, yet he is in some more plentifully, in some less,
not with partiality, but according to the diversities of their capacities.

The holy Ghost is maker of the world.
AS the Hen is borne of her Eggs, and sits upon them, and so hatcheth her
young: Even so the holy Ghost, was borne upon the waters, sat upon them,
brought forth and hatched all creatures, which are called waters. Gene. 1. 2.
Psalm. 104.30.

God is all sufficient perfection.
1 EVen as the Sun, although it enlightneth all the world, yet does it not
loose any of his light: So God now after that he has made all things, is not
any whit hereby the less powerful or perfect.

2 Even as any King or tyrant, when he grants unto one, that which he has
taken away from an other, may be said to play the part, partly of an unjust,
and partly of a liberal man: Even so God, if using his power only, he had
restored man, it had been on the one part derogation to his Justice; and on
the other part, too much had been granted to mercy: Therefore it was needful
to find such a way to save man, that these four properties in God (without the
which God could not (be) or be called God) might stand together, and consist
in the highest degrees: Namely, most high or perfect power, Perfect
righteousness, Perfect mercy, and Perfect wisdom.

God draws out some goodness, even out of the wicked.
LIke as if thou come into a Smiths or Ioyners shop, and see many tools,
some crooked, some bowed and hooked; and some sawed in: Now in this case, thou will not condemn the Smith or Ioyner of unskillfulness, and his tools all to
be naught, but rather thou will acknowledge thy ignorance in the use of them:
So in like manner must we do in beholding the creatures of God in this world:
First acknowledge our own ignorance, Secondly, reverently esteem of the
Creator: and lastly, give him all praise, that he has not placed us in the
number of those that seem confused.

Spiritual Generation.
AS every man by carnal Generation of Father and Mother, is carnally begotten,
and borne into this mortal life: So is every good Christian, spiritually borne
by Christ unto eternal life.

God unchangeable.
1 EVen as the Sun, which unto eyes being sound and without disease, was very
pleasant and wholesome unto the same eyes, when they are feeble, sore and
weak, is very troublesome and hurtful, and the Sun ever all one, and the
self same that it was before: So God that has ever shown himself benign
and bountiful, to those that are kind and tender hearted toward his Saints,
and merciful to those that show mercy unto the same men, when they fall into
wickedness, and grow to be full of beastly cruelty, the Lord shows himself
to be very wrath and angry, and yet still one and the same immutuall God,
from everlasting to everlasting. Psalm. 18.24, 25, 26, 27. Iam. 2.13.

2 As a looking Glass, does show whatsoever thou shall set against it, if
thou show thy self pleasant and mild unto it, it also shows it self mild
and pleasant unto thee; and if thou be angry, and full of wrath and
indignation, thou shall perceive in like manner the countenance of the Glass,
to be as it were furious, and cruel to be hold, whereas notwithstanding, the
Glass is one and the same: So God, whereas he is one, and the self same
immutable and everlasting God, who is a Glass without spot or blemish, and
compared to a gentle Lamb, sometimes to a fearce Lion. Esaias. 53.7. John. 1.29.
Reu. 5.5.

God by his spirit, purifieth us.
AS there can be no fire without warmth or light: So cannot God be by his
spirit in us, or with us, but he will also sanctify and purify us from all
vice and corruption, that he may consecrate us unto God. Romans 8.9.

God rewards his faithful servants, etc.
1 AS a Master, when his servant obey him, and do his will, commands his
steward or governor of his house, to minister unto them all things necessary,
and that nothing be wanting; but if they offend him, and deal unfaithfully
with him, he gives a contrary charge: Even so God, the true and right owner
of all things, of whom the kingly Prophet David says: The earth is the Lords,
and all that therein is: the world, and they that dwell therein: If we do
obey him, and serve him faithfully, and give unto him due honor, he
commands the earth, his ancient steward, to minister unto us great store of
necessaries, and to give unto us, all good, rich, and pleasant things, in due
time; but on the other side, if we disobey him, rebel against him, and be
not afraid to do those things which he forbids us, and will commit we
care not what sin; even with greediness, joy, and delight, then he
commands his steward the earth, to deny food unto us, and to afflict us
with penury, and extreme want, of all those things whereof it was wont to
yield us great abundance; and not to be so bold, as to relieve or comfort us,
until we be converted, and fly unto him, confessing and acknowledging our
sins; from the bottom of our hearts, and most heartely bewayling them,
shall prostrate our selves before the throne of grace, craving and crying for
remission of sins, in the death and bloud-sheading of our Savior Christ
crucified. Psalm. 24.1.

2 Even as a Column or Pillar, is sometime on thy right hand, and sometime on
thy left hand, because thou do change thy standing, sitting or walking, for
it is immovable, and keeps one place: So God is sometime favorable and
bountiful unto thee, and sometime seems to be wrath and angry with thee,
because thou do fall from virtue to vice; from obedience and humility, to
pride and presumption; for in the Lord there is no change, no not so much as
any shadow of change. He is immutable, always one and everlasting. If thou will bend thy self to obedience, and to a virtuous and godly life, thou shall
bu^^ have him a strong rock, whereupon thou may boldly build, a Castle and
Tower of defense: He will be unto thee a mighty pillar, bearing up heaven and
earth, whereto thou may leave, and not be deceived; wherein thou may trust,
and not be disappointed: He will ever be at thy right hand, that thou shall not
fall: He will take thy part, and will mightily defend thee against all thine
enemies, of thy body and of thy soul: But if thou will shake hands with
virtue, and bid it adieu and farewell, and forsaking the ways of God, wilt live
as thou list, and follow thine own corruption, and make no conscience of ought
thou do, defiling and blemishing thy self, with all manner sin and
iniquity, then be sure the Lord will appear unto thee, in his fury and
indignation, from whose Justice and judgments, none shall ever be able to
deliver thee. M^l. 3.6. Iam. 1.17. Psalm. 16.8.

Glory and renoume.
1 LIke as the shadow follows the body, as a companion inseparable: Even so
does Glory, renoume and fame, accompany excellent virtues, worthy gifts, and
noble qualities.

2 As a Smoke, which at the first is great and thick, ascending upward, is
quickly scattered and out of sight: Even so the Glory of the proud men of this
world, by little and little, is obscured, and vanishes clean away.

3 As that fire smoketh not much, which flameth at the first blowing: So the
Glory that brightly shines at the first, is not greatly envied at; but that
which is long in getting, is always prevented by envy.

Not to believe that there is a God.
AS there is no wound more mortal, then the same that plucketh forth man's
heart or soul: So likewise is there no poison or pestilence of greater force,
suddenly in men to kill all faith, hope and charity, with the fear of God,
and consequently, to cast him headlong into the pit of hell, then to deny the
principle and foundation of all Religion; namely, that there is a God. Psalm.
10.4. and 14.1. and 53.1. 1. Tim. 3.16.

Godly men see clearly the light of the word, but the wicked do the contrary.
AS they that have clear and sound eyes, do easily induce the bright light of
the Sun, wherewith eyes that be sore and diseased, are greatly offended: So
virtuous and Godly men, are illuminated, and wonderfully cleared in their
understanding, and the eyes of their minds, with the divine and heavenly light
of the word of God; wherewith the wicked and ungodly, are highly offended; in
so much that they hate the light, and love darkness more then it; and so
growing blinder and blinder every day, at the length they fall and tumble down
headlong into the insaciable pit, of eternal destruction. John. 8.12.

No heaven without the Grace of God.
1 AS the Pilot of a Ship, without the shine of Sun or Moon, cannot take
the Haven of any land: So a man without the light of Grace, cannot attain to
the Haven of Glory, but howsoever he persuades himself, that he casts his
Anchor in a place of safety, it falls out in the end, that he casts it upon
a Rock, where there is no hope of salvation.

2 As those that were out of the Arc, though they had wit, glory, riches, and
learning, were nevertheless drowned in the flood: So no wit nor learning, nor
riches without the Grace of God, can save a man from everlasting perdition.
Gene. 7.21.

Gods favor the safest refuge.
AS young Chickens are in safety from the Hawk and Puttocke, so long as they
straie not from about the wings of their dammes, and when they do straie far
from them, they are easily taken of every vermin: Even so, they that depart
and lead their lives, within the compass and limits of his laws and
ordinances, are most safely kept by him, from the force, inchauntments,
engines, and all the subtle devises of Satan, and his instruments: but if
they forsake God, and not regarding his word, divide themselves from him; by
their sins and iniquities, they must needs fall into the talons and jaws of
that tyrannical Hawk and hound of hell, from whence there is no delivery. 1.
Pet. 5.8.

The Glory of God.
1 AS the Glory of God infinitely surmounteth the body, the soul, the honor,
and all that belongs unto man: So it ought to be in greater price and
estimation with us, and must continually be preferred above all things, and
never be brought into the balance of comparison with them. Exodus 32.32. Romans
9.3.

2 As the want of zeal toward the the Glory of God in all our doings, and
the preferring of earthly things before heavenly, temporal before spiritual,
breeds and nourishes a corrupt manner of profession: So it defiles all our
counsels and works, and carries us headlong to the love of the world, which
is contrary to the pure, vehement, and everlasting love of God. 1. Cor. 10.31.

3 As the salvation of men ought to be dear unto us: So the Glory of God,
which consists, in that his orders in his Church be kept, ought to be much
more dear, that if at any time the controversy could be between his Glory
and our salvation, our salvation ought to fall, that his Glory may stand.

God would all to be saved.
EVen as an earthly Father, is in such wise affected toward his children, that
he would have every one of them, to come to thriftinesse, and be honest and
worthy successors to him of his goods and substance; and yet notwithstanding,
being made frustrate of his hope, finds the stubbernnesse and disobedience
of them, whereby they also at the length, do cast themselves with great
ignominy into destruction, and into some infamous kind of punishment: Of this
Father it may be said, that he has brought up children kept to this so great
mischief, (not that the will of his purpose, was not far other) but that the
children through their own rebellion, have brought this mischief upon
themselves: So God verily, would have all men (made after his own image) to
be saved; but if any of these being rebellious, will not embrace his word,
and by faith be converted, but delighting themselves wholly in sensuality,
pleasures, and vanities, do die in their wickedness: these, God suffers to
perish, that they might sustain the just punishments, as well of their own
offenses against the law of God, as also of their contempt of obtaining
salvation through Christ. 1. Tim. 2.3, 4.

No man has seen God at any time.
AS the children of Israel could not behold the shining face of Moses, when he
had talked with God on the mount, for the exceeding brightness thereof, but
covered with a Veil, where through they did behold him: So no man has seen
God at any time, or can behold the face and presence of the Deity and Godhead;
but so far as it is both veiled, and revealed by the body and human flesh
of our Savior Christ. Exodus 34.34. John. 1.18. 1. Tim. 6.16.

One God in Trinity.
1 EVen as a Margarite in every part shining alike, which if it be defiled or
fouled on one part, loses all his beauty: So the Trinity, is but one God,
and if one person be dishonored, all three being but one God, are dishonored.

2 As one Sun serves to give light to the whole world, and one soul is able
to rule, and quicken the whole body, whereas notwithstanding, neither the Sun
created the world, nor the soul the body: So much more one God shall be able
to rule and maintain his own work, which with so great wisdom and power,
he alone did create, unless we will make the work greater then the Creator,
or charge the incomprehensible of God with any imperfection.

Why God denies us our petition.
AS sick folks are denied many things which they require, because they be
often hurtful unto them: So God denies us many things which we ask of him,
because they are not good for us.

Hearers of the word.
1 AS desperate patients, which at no hand will practice the good Physic
given them, because they see their Physicians something sickly and crazie: Or
as those men that being as blind as a beetle, yet do most willingly refuse the
true and faithful directions of their appointed guides, because (as they
think) they have a blemish in one of their eyes: Even so, such are those
Hearers of the word, who say they will not believe the Preacher, say what he
can and will, because he does not practice himself, that which he preaches
to other.

2 As al those excellent creatures of God (so high, so singular, so pure, so
precious, so beautiful, and the same so shining) were first formed every of
them by the word of the Lord, from that unfashioned, that dark and confused
Chaos, are not therefore contemptible, but rather most highly to be esteemed,
as apparent testimonies of the incomprehensible majesty, goodness, wisdom,
power, and providence of God: For example, Wine, which is so friendly to
nature, such a strength to the weak, such a solace to the sorrowful, and many
ways so medicinable for men, is not therefore to be despised, because it is
broched, from a warped, a wooden, or a wormeaten barrel: Or as Milk which is
such a strength unto nature, so wholesome for diet, and every ways so
wonderful in working, is not therefore to be misliked, because it is drawn
from an hayrie, a fat, or fleshie bag: Or as Roses, which are most seemly in
sight, so sweet to smell upon, and so meet for medicine, are not therefore
to be rejected, for that they grow up among pricks, among brambles and
briers: Or as an Electuarie, which comfort nature, purges corruption, and
restores to health, is not therefore to be forsaken, because it is made of
vile and bitter confections, or brought out of a loathsome box: Or as Silver
and Gold, which are such singular treasures, so glittering in sight, and every
way most necessary for men's uses, are not therefore to be abhorred, because
they are tried forth of the lowest Element, which is the earth: Or as precious
stones, which are so seemly in show, so rich in value, and of such singular
operation; are not therefore to be loathed, because they are commonly brought
forth by filthy and venomous beasts: Or as silk, which is most precious, yet
is for all that spunne by the vilest worm: Or as the body of man, which after
a sort, may be called the final cause of all creatures; the most excellent in
form, the perfectest in substance, and which only was ordained to eternal
happiness, and yet was the same both formed of earth, and fashioned even of
filthy clay; by all which Similies, we may truly conclude, that for so much
as the aforesaid matters are not to be vilely esteemed, notwithstanding they
do proceed from such vile and filthy beginning: Even so much less may the
word of the Lord be rejected of any Hearers of the same, being truly
preached, though the life and manners of those Ministers thereof, be never so
much to be misliked of men. Gene. 1.3. etc. Psalm. 33.8, 9. and 148.5. Romans 1.
20. Math. 23.2, 3.

3 As the Physician when he is sick, cannot heal him self, nor has not his
judgment so perfectly as he had before he was sick, but seeks help at an
other Physicians hand: So the lernedst man living (though he be a preacher
himself) as long as he lives, and bears sinful flesh about with him,
shall have many sinful and froward lusts and affections reigning in him, which
blinds his sight, that he sees not his own sins; and therefore it is very
needful, that he should often Hear the Sermons and counsels of others,
although they be much his inferiors. 2. Pet. 1.21, 13. 1. Tim. 4.6. etc. Tit.
3.1. etc. 2. Sam. 12.1. etc.

4 As a Sponge gathers up all liquor, whether it be good or bad: Even so
some Hearers of Sermons, receive all that is spoken good and evil.

5 As an hour Glass, or Condiut, that which in an hour runs in, the same
in an other hour runs out again: So likewise some Hearers forget that in
one hour, which they heard and learned in an other.

6 As a vessel that receives liquor, which being powered out, the dregs
remain: Or as a Sieve that retains and keeps the good Corn, and casts
out the chafe: Even so some Hearers of the word preached, do reject and
neglect the wholesome and profitable doctrine, and keep in mind that which is
not so necessary and profitable.

7 Even as a Dog (being otherwise but a filthy beast) has a tongue very
medicionable for many malidies: And as the Dragon (though he be very cold of
body himself) yet for all that, there proceeds a fire from his mouth for the
heat of others: So likewise some preachers, notwithstanding they be lewd in
life, and key cold in godly conversation, yet for all that, they may have such
a tongue, as may prescribe a very sovereign salve for the surfeiting of their
Hearers souls, and they may also have such a mouth, as may kindle a fire, to
consume the corruptions of their Hearers, and so also inflame them in newness
of life, and therefore to be heard willingly.

8 As a famished man, who does never refuse any wholesome food prepared for him
by his Host, though his Host himself will not taste thereof: And likewise a
very sick patient, which never rejects an healthful medicine, though his
Physician does minister the same with a Leprous hand: Or as a miserable beggar,
will not forsake a fair piece of Silver or Gold, though it be proffered him
in a filthy fist: And like as unto an imprisoned Rebel, who will never reject
the Princes pardon, though it be brought him by a most leaud ribald: Or as a
sorrowful distressed Caitiffe, which willingly would hear any joyful news,
notwithstanding the messenger which brings the same, be a very ungracious
varlet: So there can be no more dainty diet provided for Christians, then the
food of their souls; there cannot be a more healthful medicine be made for
Christian Hearers of the word, then that which amendeth their spiritual
maladies: Nor there can be a more golden gift given unto them, then seven
times purified Gold of the sacred Scriptures, rightly divided; neither can
there be any more wel-commed pardon proclaimed to men, then that which
contains the free forgiveness of sins: And there cannot a more happy
news be published abroad, then that which concerns the inheritance of
everlasting life: Notwithstanding, the Preacher himself be careless, be
Leprous, be filthy, be beastly or vile; yet the godly Hearer will not forsake
this heavenly food, or make light account of this wholesome medicine; lightly
esteem this Gold, or reject this pardon; think scorn of this news, but
feed hungerly upon it; apply it in time, lay it up in his heart, yield all
reverence unto it, and delight only therein, as in the very joy of his soul.

9 As a poor Prentise that is very desirous to learn his occupation thoroughly
in every point, (who notwithstanding his Master does daily revile him, call
him Ass, and dolte, yea and sometimes does surely swinge him) yet will he
accept the same in good part, and by no means be driven from learning the
mystery of his Trade, because it brings in the end a pleasure with profit:
So likewise every Christian Hearer of the word, should be so addicted to the
love thereof, that neither respecting some outrageous affections, nor yet
weying at all the disordered words which unadvisedly pass from some Preachers
mouth; but (regarding rather the matter in hand) should wholly fix their minds
thereon; assuring themselves, that albeit the same seems sower at the first
to flesh and blood, yet in the end it will bring quiet rest to their souls.
Mat. 11.29. Hebr. 12.11.

10 As the Anuile or Stithie, the more it is hammered, the harder it is: So the
most Hearers of the word now a days, have their hearts so hardened in sin, and
their consciences so seared up with an hot iron, that the hammer of Gods word
cannot break them in pieces, nor zealous preaching approach to the quick, as
it did before in the Apostles, etc. Psalm. 95.8. Romans 2.5. Ephe. 4.19. 1. Timo.
4.2. Iere. 23.29. Act. 2.41. and 8.12.

11 As it is the beastly nature of some Horses to kick at his keeper, which
prouides him prouender: So is it the mark of a degenerate mind, for any man to
murmr at the just reprehension of his Pastor.

12 As a Glasse-windowe receives in the light so soon as it shines, but
withstandeth every tempest or shower that beats at the same: So should every
Christian Hearer, be ready to receive the light of the truth, when he
hears it preached, and be likewise as careful to withstand and reject
every error or false Doctrine, that does slip from him, which will after
move a tempest in his conscience by the sense of Gods judgment.

13 As a Riddle or Syue, lets the clear water issue forth quite, and
keeps only the Chafe or the mud that swimmeth aloft: Or as a dainty and
delicate Dog, which when one offers him a good morsel of meat, will
scornefully cast his head aside and catch a Fly: So in like manner the
malicious Hearer, whatsoever good morsel of Doctrine or instruction shall be
proffered him by the Preacher, the same shall surely fall to the ground, but
if any vain or unsavory matter, shall slip from him, whereby he may
sustain any reproach, that shall be sure to be catched and marked, and to be
cast in his teeth, etc.

14 As the Thistle, which if it be stroked vpwardes, will not lightly molest a
man, but being stroked downwards does prick him: So surely many Hearers of
the word preached, so long as their Ministers do Preach pleasant things, they
seek not to stir them at all, or be displeased with them, both so soon as
he begins to rub them a little on the gall, and to touch them home to the
quick, then they kick and storm at the same. Esaias. 30.10. Ierem. 11.21. Amo.
7.12. Mich. 2.11. 2. Tim. 4.3.

15 As meat, the more a man receives, the more it distempereth, if it be not
digested: So the more a man learneth, and the more he Hears, the greater is
his sin, if he grow not by it.

16 As the Auditors of Ezechiel, did willingly come and sit before him, and
Hear him, but they iested at his words, and would not do as he taught them:
Even so, many will give Preachers the Hearing, but with their mouths they jest
it out, and make no more reckoning of their Sermons, then they do of a Fiddler
and his song, and not so much. Ezech. 33.30, 31, 32.

17 As Naash the Ammonite said, who would make a covenant with the men of
Iabesh Gilead, upon condition that he might put out all their right eyes, and
bring all that shame upon Israel: So likewise many Hearers of the word, will in
effect say to the Lord, we are content to be thy children, and to hear thy
Preachers, and thou shall be our Father, so that we may have what we will,
say what we will, and do what we will. 1. Sam. 11.2.

18 As where the word is not preached, there the people perish: So where it is
plentifully delivered, and the people negligent in Hearing of it, and not
obeying it, there is deep damnation and utter destruction shortly to be looked
for. Zepho. 3.1.

19 As stony grounds mingled with some earth, are commonly hot, and therefore
have as it were some alacrity and hastiness in them, and the Corn as soon
as it is cast into this ground, it sprouteth out very speedily, but yet the
stones will not suffer the Corn to be rooted deeply beneath; and therefore
when Summer comes, the blade of the Corn withers, with roots and all: So
likewise is it with those professors and Hearers of the word, who have in
their hearts some good motions by the holy Ghost, to that which is good; they
have a kind of zeal to Gods word, they have a liking to good things, and they
are as forward, as any other for a time, and they do believe; but these good
motions and graces, are not lasting, but like the flame and flashing of straw
and stubble; neither are they sufficient to salvation.

20 As they that have any bodily diseases, if they refuse the Physic ministered
unto the^, reap no profit at al, albeit the Physician offer them medicines a
thousand times: Even so the Preacher of the word, shall do no good by his
preaching, unless his Hearers and auditors, attentively mark, and carefully
practice the same.

21 As the wicked and ungodly in old time, when they were reprehended by the
Lords Prophets, for their sins and wickedness, did either deny their fault
committed, as Kaine, and Gehesie. Gene. 4.9. 2. King. 5.25. Or else they were
angry, and used reproachful words, and sought reuengement: As king Herord unto
John Baptist. Mark. 6.17. The Elders to Steven. Act. 7.57. Or else they
craftily and covertly excused themselves as Saul did. 1. Sam. 15.20: Even so
do the wicked and ungodly Hearers of the word, when their sins and
wickedness are spoken against, and laid open by faithful Preachers; whereas
contrariwise, the godly do acknowledge and confess their faults when they
are reprehended, as David, 2. Sam. 12.13. Ezechia, Esaias. 38.8. And as the men
did that heard Peter's Sermon, Act. 2.37.

22 As children that are of such heavy sad moulde, as that they are never
moved with mirth, nor with the crying of other children: Even so such is the
dullness of a number of people in Hearing of the word, who are no more moved
with the judgments of God to fear, nor allured with the sweet promises of
God to love and like, then if they were so many stocks or stones. Mat. 11.16.

23 As the fruitfulness of the earth, when the rain does fall upon it, and
when it yields to them that labor in it, fruits for them that dress it, is
a testimony of Gods good blessing upon it: Even so, when men profit by the
labors which is bestowed upon them in the preaching of the word, it is a
testimony of Gods good blessing upon them. Hebr. 6.7. Romans 1.20. Act. 6.7.

24 As he that looks his bodily face in a Glass, and by and by departs
away about other business, and forgets his fashion and form: Even so such
are the forgetful Hearers of the word, which never practice that which is
taught them. Iam. 1.23, 24, 25.

25 As in the time of Ezechiel, those people that came to offer sacifice, might
not go out of the same door whereby they came in: So those that come to Hear
Gods word, should not come forth again unchanged in their affections, which
were evil. Ezech. 46.9.

26 As the Cock did crow three times before Peter repented: Even so the Lord
has much to do with us, before we profit effectually by the Hearing of his
word. Math. 26.45.

27 As the next way to purchase favor with Princes, is to honor their person,
and fulfill their commandments: So likewise the chiefest way to have Gods
favor, is to honor his majesty, and to do his will revealed unto us in his
word preached. Preach. 8.2.4.

28 As where the dead carcass is, thither do the Eagles resort: So when Gods
word is truly taught, to that place should Christians repair to Hear it.
Math. 12.42.

29 As when the dam feeds her young, every Bird gapeth, and strugleth, and
stretches the neck to receive the food: So when we come to Hear Sermons,
every man must reach and stretch out his heart to receive the word preached.
1. Pet. 2.2.

30 As the Eagle continually soareth till she come to the highest: So also
Christians must still increase in knowledge, through and by the Hearing of the
word, till they come to perfection. Hebr. 6.1.

31 As Pharaohs ill favored Kine, which devoured the fat Kine, but yet
remained as ill favored and lean as they were before: So likewise many that
have Heard Sermon upon Sermon, now the space of 36. years, are yet never the
more reformed for all their Hearing, but as lean in knowledge and godliness,
as they were before. Genes. 41.3, 4.

32 As a Carpenter that should square all by his Rule, but sticks it at his
back, and works all by aim: So many have heard much preaching, and remember
many things, but yet make no profit or practice of it, so that it had been
better that they had never heard. Ioh. 15.22.

33 As Bees passing over other things, take pleasure only in flowers, and
forsaking the rest, do crop them: So likewise some Hearers of the word
preached, do only desire to have their ears fed with fine phrases, delicate
flowers of eloquence, dainty Similies, pretty comparisons, and pleasant
Histories; as for sound Doctrine, they contemn it, and hate to have it a
bridle for their lusts, a reproouer of their vanities, and a Glass to see
themselves in; they seek rather after flatteries and fables, and they loath
the truth, which should do them good. 2. Tim. 4.3. Act. 17.21.

34 As God in some part, did rebuke the Sons of Ely for their wickedness,
but yet they would not obey; and the reason is there set down, because the
Lord would destroy them: Even so in like manner, howsoever we may not judge of
any man's person, yet this may be said, that if men will not learn, but remain
ignorant still, and refuse to Hear the word of God preached when they may, or
if in Hearing they will not obey, it is a fearful sign, that God will at
length destroy them. 1. Sam. 2.25.

35 Like as when a Tumpet is sounded in a man's ear, and he lies still, not
stirring at all, he is certainly dead: So surely, when the trumpet of the
Gospel is sounded in the ears of our hearts, if we awake not out of our
sins to newness of life, we are no better then dead men before God.

36 As it is very requisite, that a Pastor set over a congregation, should be
continually resident to Preach unto them, and Chatechise them, at the least on
every Saboth, and not to leave them to strangers, whose voice they know not:
Even so every Christian Hearer of the word, ought ordinarily and usually to
Hear such a Pastor, and not to go from him on the Sabbath day, especially, if
he be desirous to grow and increase in faith and knowledge.

37 Like as in times past, those trees which did bear fruit, might not be cut
down: So those Christians which have a care to lead a virtuous life,
according to the prescript rule of Gods word, are not in danger of S. John's
Axe; to wit, of the judgment of God for sin. Deuteronomy. 20.19. Math. 3.10.

38 As of many men, coming into a Gold-smithes shop, one buyeth a chain of
Gold, an other a costly ring, some a rich Jewel, and some buy plate cunningly
and curiously wrought, and some one among the rest, stoupeth down, and takes
up a black cole, which he turns and tumbleth in his hands, til it foul and
make black his fingers: Even so, very many do come to the Church, to Hear
the word preached, and do learn and bear away, exceeding good and heavenly
lessons, and do gather great strength to their faith, and much comfort to
their souls, and peace to their consciences; and some again do come without
any good purpose, intending to take some occasion to quarrel with the
Preacher, and to mark if any thing fall from him unwisely, indiscreetly, or
barbarously, wherewith they may sport themselves, and scorn him: such as they,
came with wicked purposes, and cauilling minds, so they depart with hearts as
hard as Adamants, seared consciences, and brazan faces, so bloudlesse, that
they cannot blush, far worse then when they came.

39 Like as when a man casts an handful of Corn upon a very hard and smooth
path, it is all one, as if it were cast upon a pauement: So also through the
custom and deceitfulness of sinning, the devil has made the hearts of some
Hearers, unmeet to receive the heavenly seed of the word of God. Math. 13.4.

40 As the men in the old world, were disobedient to Noe, and contemned the
preaching of righteousness: So many faithful Noes Preach the word sincerely;
but alas, it falls into the hearts of many, but as good seed into evil
ground, and therefore either brings forth little, or else no fruit at all;
the contempt whereof was then, and so is now, the cause of many plagues. Gene.
6. tot. 1. Pet. 3.20. and 2. Pet. 2.5. Math. 13.3, 4.

41 Even as hunting Dogs, never leave searching till they have found out the
wild beast in one place or other: So careful Hearers of the word, must never
leave searching, till they have found the word, and never leave asking, till
they understand it.

42 As Honey which is naturally sweet, makes those things sweet, wherewith
it is mingled: Even so such is the lively nature of Gods word, in the soul of
a diligent Hearer of the same.

43 As the ignorant Plowman going in the field, trampleth and treads upon
precious herbs, but when the skillful Hearborist and Physician comes there,
who knows the virtue of them, they wounder at them, and gather them for their
use: Even so it is with ignorant and careless Hearers, and readers of the word
of God; but it is otherwise with diligent and careful Hearers and readers
thereof.

44 As there are many degrees before the Grapes come to be Wine, as that they
bud, flower, come into clusters, ripen, etc. So are there before a Hearer be
fit for God, as that he Hear the word preached and read, and that he lay it up
in his heart, and practice it in his life.

45 As a sick body which says to the Physician; prescribe me what you will,
but I will take what I list, he shall perish for all his Physician: So in like
manner, such Hearers of the word of God, as say to their Preacher, say what you
will, we will never believe you, but do as we list, and as we think good;
such shall surely perish, and go to the devil, for all their Hearing, without
speedy repentance. Ioh. 3.18. and 5.24.

Hearing of the word, necessary to all.
1 AS a young child after he is borne, stands in need of nourishment, that
life may be both preserved and increased: Even so, he that is begotten anew by
the seed of the word of GOD, must yet be fed by the same word, that he may
get strength, and spiritual increase, till he come to some good measure of
perfection. Ephe. 4.16.

2 Like as none will refuse a present, or gift that is sent from a Prince,
although the bringer thereof be never so simple a body: Even so likewise, none
ought to refuse to Hear Gods word, although the Mininister be never so homely
that preaches it, because he is sent of God.

3 As the Razor, though it be tempered with due proportion of Steel, yet if it
pass not by the Grind-stone, or Whet-stone, is nevertheless oftentimes unapt
to cut; yea though it be made once never so sharp, if it be not often
whetted, waxes dull: Even so, there is no man so ripe in forecast, ready in
policy, sharp in Judgment, fervent in love, earnest in truth, zealous in
Religion, who although he has profited well by Hearing of Sermons, is
therefore so sufficiently instructed, that he needs to Hear no more; but
rather in truth, stands in need often, from time to time, to Hear of
advertisement, counsel, and direction, by the Preaching of the word.

4 As a tree, or a branch of a tree, that has no deep rooting, but either is
covered with a few Moules, or else lies in the water, at the season of the
year brings forth leaves and blossoms, and some fruit too, and that for
one or two, or more years: Even so one that is an Hearer of the word, may
receive the word, and the word as seed, by this general faith may be somewhat
rooted in his heart, and settled for a season, and bring forth some fruits in
his life; peradventure very fair in his own and other men's eyes; yet in
deed, neither sound nor lasting, nor substantial. Luke 8.13. etc.

5 As Corn and herbs do die and wither, if they have not the first and
latter rain, and moisture in due season: So likewise faith and godliness,
must needs perish and decay in those, which have not often the heavenly
watering of Gods word, to refresh them withal. Deuteronomy. 11.14. and 28.12, 24.

6 As fire goes out for lack of wood: So is faith extinguished in us, for
lack of the preaching of the word of God, and earnest and hearty prayer,
whereby it is maintained.

7 Like as one man may not believe for an other, and as one cannot be saved by
the faith of another, whosoever he be, if he himself do not believe in proper
person: Even so, one man may not Hear the word Preached for an other, in such
sort as it may profit him, if he himself do not Hear it in his own person.
Romans 10.14.17.

8 As a man may the better both spy his spots, that he may wash them, and
also set his attire in the better order about him, if for that purpose he
diligently view himself in a Glass: Even so, he that is careful to avoid
that which he should not do, and to execute that which he ought to do, has
very great help by Hearing the word preached, and by imprinting of it in his
mind. Iam. 1.23.

8 As iron except it be used, does become rustie: So the soul, except it be
often exercised with Hearing and reading the word, it begets sin.

Humility.
1 AS the leaves, wherewith the stem of the Lilie is set from the root to
the top, by little and little, as they grow up to the top, wax smaller and
smaller: So the godly, as they grow higher in preferment, wax Humbler, and
smaller in their own sight.

2 As the Valleys ordinarily are more abundant, and bring forth more fruit
then do the mountains, by reason that being more low, they receive more
commodiously all the dew and fatness, which falls and descends from the
high hills: Even so it behooves, that every Christian be more and more low
and Humble in his own eyes, if he will that God endue and replenish him with
his graces; the which can find no place in him that presumes any whit of his
own virtues. 1. Sam. 15.17. Esa. 66.2. Iam. 4.10.

3 As they that go or walk in a plain way, are not in so great danger to
fall, as they which go upon the ridge of houses, or upon the top of some high
mountain: Even so, they that will be humble and have no opinion of them
selves, they go a great deal more safely and surely, then they which have
proud hearts and lofty looks. For the way that leads to life is straight.

4 As sheep by nature are meek, innocent, and harmless: Even so, such as be
good Christians, ought to be Humble and meek, and rather to suffer wrong then
do any; and not to be cruel like Lions, ravenous like Wolves, wily like
Foxes; leacherous like Goats; filthy like swine; or to show themselves in
behavior, like other savage and wild beasts.

5 Like as the Sun being high at noone, causes short and small shadows, but
being low in the Morning or Evening, it causes the same to appear both broad
and large: So by how much the more a man is endued with virtue and Godliness,
by so much the less, desires the boasting, and advancement of himself;
whereas on the contrary part, one endued with the smacke and smell of virtue,
will straight crack, brag, yea and make thereof his boasts.

6 As Eggs that be full, do sink in the water, but those that are empty, do
swim above: So he that is adorned with true virtue and learning, will not so
much brag or boast himself, as he that is otherwise.

7 As no man is so thankful for health, as he that has been in continual
sickness: Even so, no man feels the mercy of God, that is not truly
Humbled in his own sight.

8 As it is honesty for a man when he is bidden to a feast, to be removed
higher then he offers to sit, rather then to be removed lower: Even so
Humility in our dealings, brings Honor and estimation. Luke 14.9, 10.

9 As proud persons stay themselves upon their own strength; that is, stay
upon a reed, and upon the Ice of one nights freezing, and are like unto
smoke that mounteth up on high, and so in going up, is scattered and consumes
to nothing: Even so the Humble man, is a Rock, or a square body, which is
always stayed, on which side soever it be turned.

10 As Brass or Copper does make a greater sound, and is heard, further off
then Gold, whereas notwithstanding, Gold is far more excellent then it: So
eloquence joined with knowledge, sounds louder and farther, then Humility
coupled with charity; and yet such Humility is far better, and more
excellent then it. 1. Cor. 8.1. and 13.1.

11 As the high hills after much Tillage are often barren, whereas the low
Valleys by the streams of waters passing through them, are very fruitful:
Even so the gifts of God, joined with a swelling heart, are fruitless, but
joined with love and the grace of Humility, they edify.

12 As a tree, the more deeply it is rooted in the earth, the taller it
grows, and mounteth the higher: Even so a man, the more humble and lowly that
he is, the more and higher does the Lord exalt him. Math. 7.17. Luke. 1.52, 53.
Iam. 4.6.

13 As a building is so much the firmer and stronger, as the foundation and
groundwork of the same is laid lower and deeper: Even so the groundwork of
Christian Phylosophie, is unfeigned Humility; and the deeper that the same is
laid and settled in our hearts, the surer and more permanent, will the building
of our religon be. Luke 14.11. and 18.14. Math. 23.12.

14 Even as we see sometimes two men about to go into some sumptuous and
stately Hall or house, through a very low and narrow door, the one stouping
and bending himself, does pass through and go in without harm; the other
stout, not stouping nor bending at all, but preasing in with great force,
hurts his head, and falls backward: Even so such a stately and princely
place is the kingdom of heaven, the habitation of the Saints of God, whose way
is very straight, as Christ affirms, and the door thereof, is low and
narrow: So that, that man which humbles himself, and stoupeth low, does enter
into that most stately and princely house, of the King of heaven; but he that
is puffed up with pride, and swelled with insolency, cannot get in at that
gate, he falls to the ground, his pride does throw him backward. Math. 7.13,
14, and 11.29. and 18.3, 4.

15 As spices smell best, when they are smallest beaten: So are a Christians
good works more acceptable to God, when they are lessened by Humility.

16 As pride and good conscience can never go together: So Humiliation, is the
beginning of all grace and religion; and such as have knowledge in Religion and
many other good gifts, without Humility, are but unbridled, unmortified, and
unreformed persons.

17 As the Valleys are more usually fertile then the hills, for that the
fatness of the earth is more easily carried thither by raines and showers: So
must it be with us, if we will be filled with the graces and blessings of our
God, we must be Humble, low, and plain as the valleys.

18 As that great Orator Demosthines, sometimes spoke of pronunciation, who
being demanded what was the first, second, and third, especial point of
Rhetoric, answered always. Action: So may we likewise say of true
Humility, that it is the principal part of Christianity, and as it were all
in all, yea the life and soul thereof, so that it be true, entire, and
unfeigned.

19 As the heavier the burden is, the more it presses down: So likewise the
more, and the more heinous that our sins be, the greater is, and ought to be
our Humiliation.

20 As it is in the parts of holiness, the more they are practiced by the body
in the life and action, the more they are confirmed and increased inwardly in
the soul: So the more that a man gives himself to the use of all the outward
exercises of Humiliation before men, the more does he humble himself in the
sight of God.

21 As trees growing on the top of hills, have a rough bark, crooked knots,
long bows, and therefore unmeet for any building, until they be fallen,
pilled, squared, drawn home, and can do nothing of al these themselves: So
likewise we, as long as we be wandering in the mountains and wild woods of
this world, being highly minded, and in great wealth or authority above
others, as on an hill; we have froward proud minds, and not meet for Gods
house, until we be Humbled, and made lowly in our own sights, and fall flat
down at Christ's feet, and have the rough bark of our old Adam pulled off,
and our crooked affections cut away, be mortified, and drawn home by the
preaching of his word, and working of his holy spirit. 2. Cor. 3.5. Ioh. 6.44.

Hypocrites.
1 AS the cotton head of the herbs Lysimachus, Fodefoote, Dandelion, and
Fleabane, which a blast of wind carries clean away: So likewise the Religion
and zealous profession of Hypocrites, when a little trouble or persecution
arises, are then carried clean away.

2 As the small herb Biscort, has smooth and plain leaves like unto herb
Patience, but in the earth has a crooked root: So many bear a smooth
countenance, and a fair show outwardly, seeming to take all well, which
inwardly, have a crooked, and an evil heart in meaning.

3 As the small Celendine, springs and flowreth, at the coming of the
Swallows and Summer birds, withers at their departing: So many men
professing Religion, rise at the warm prosperity of some, and fall away at
their departure, into the stormy winter of adversity.

4 As the Holeworte, with the solid root, and Holeworte with the hollow
root, never grow together, the one by the other, in the same garden: So
Hypocrites and hollow-hearted Christians, will ever be among the sound and
sincere Christians in the same Church, though the faith of the one grows not
with the other, but dies: but it is otherwise in the Church invisible.

5 As the sound rooted Holeworte is always the smaller, the hollow rooted
Holeworte, the greater: So Hypocrites are commonly greatest in worldly matters
and substance, and the greatest in worldly things, are commonly hollow-hearted.

6 As Silkwormes after they have for a time brought out their silk, at the
last, turn into Moathes or Butterflyes; so some having done good in the Church
for a time, fall afterward, and become vain persons; and sometimes (with the
Silke-wormes) consumers of that good which they have wrought.

7 As the most Dodders, have properties according to the herbs whereon they
grow, being hotter when they grow on hot herbs, then upon cold: So many
are zealous or cold in Religion, according as their Masters are, upon whom
they hang, and also cool with them.

8 As the herb Oleander, makes a goodly and beautiful show, yet has
scarce one good property, but is deadly to the users of it: Even so be
Hypocrites.

9 As the herb Horsflower, or Melampyrum, has seed like to wheat, yet is
hurtful to Corn: So likewise are Hypocrites to godly Christians.

10 As the herb called horned Clauer, after it has once borne seed,
perishes, both branch and root: So shall Hypocrites do.

11 As the wild Caroline thistle, is of the receivers, found hot of operation,
yet by nature is cold: So many evil men, to others seem hot for a time in
profession, yet have cold hearts within them.

12 The Mulberie tree is counted the wisest of all trees, because it only
brings forth his leaves, after the cold frosts be past, so that it is not
hindered as other trees be; but in Christianity, he is but a fool and an
Hypocrite, that professes not openly till dangers be past, and till he may
do it without loss or hinderance.

13 As the flower of Periwincle, Milkworte, and Lysimachus, is pleasant to
behold, yet without savor: So Hypocrites make a fair show, yet unsavory in the
nostrils of the Lord.

14 As the small Tornesell, when it has made a show for a time, with white
Velvet leaves, and yealow flowers, it fades away, without bringing forth any
fruit: So Hypocrites, when they have made a fair show for a time, fall away,
without bringing forth any fruits of godliness.

15 As Mousetayle, and Adders-tongue, flower in April, and are ripe in May,
and shortly after, the whole herb perishes in the pride of the year: So
many people at the beginning of Religion, make a great show, but fall away
long err troubles come, even in the midst of the Churches prosperity.

16 As the seed of Mercury is commonly lost before it be ripe: So many leese
their Religion before it come to perfection.

17 As the stinking Coriander brings forth a sweet seed: So an Hypocrite,
and wicked man, sometimes utter good words.

18 As a wooden leg set to the body, is no member of the body: Even so a
Christian, who does only in show and name, profess Christ, such a one is no
true member of Christ's mystical body, but an Hypocrite.

19 As there needs no more but one pin or prick, to pearce a Bladder, and
to make all the wind therein enclosed, incontinently to come forth: Even so
there needs no more, but one very little tentation, to pull the vizard from
Hypocrites, and to discover them to every man, who shall know after that they
be tried, that there was nothing but a color, and an imagination of all the
reputation of righteousness and virtue, which they had gotten amongst men.
Romans 10.3. 2. Cor. 3.5. 1. Cor. 2.14.

20 As sea wormwood, if it be in it natural and proper place, is of a very
strong smell, salt, and of a most strange and bitter taste; but if it be
removed into gardens, or grounds naturally helped with sweet waters, it does
maruellously alter, and yet Sea-wormewood still: So the wicked in their own
company, etc. are most ungracious etc. but coming into the Church, where the
sweet streams of Gods word run, they seem greatly changed for a time, and
yet wicked men still. 1. Sam. 2.12. etc.

21 As the herb Biscort, though it have straight and smooth leaves, yet is
rightly called by that name, because the root in the earth is crooked and
writhen: So though many make outwardly a fair profession, yet the Lord
condemns them as wicked; because he sees their heart within to be wickedly
set.

22 As the yellow Wolfes-bane, flowreth in Winter, and yet a venomous and
naughty herb for all that: So many make a fair show even in adversity,
yet evil men for all that.

23 Even as some Birds hatch other Eggs, forgetting their own; in like
manner Hypocrites hatch other men's discredit upon little or no ground; but
forget their own lives, that are full of gross sins and hypochrisies.

24 Like as a good and a fair cloak being large, so covers a man, that many
things may be carried under it, and conveyed cleanly, which we would be loath
and asham d to have seen: Even so Hypocrites craft and deceit, hides and
covers their untruth, which to be plainly seen and perceived, they would
be ashamed. 1. Pet. 2.16. 2. Cor. 4.2.

25 As drunkards err, go astray, and are not able to guide and direct
themselves in their way: Even so shall it be with wicked Hypocritical Priests,
Prophets, and Ministers, for they shall fail in vision, and stumble in
judgment, as by experience may manifestly be seen by many. Esaias. 28.7.

26 Like as when we see Tares to grow in the Corn fields, amongst the
Wheat, till Harvest, which cannot without some hurt to the Wheat, be rooted
out before: So wicked Hypocrites and other evil men, of whom there is hope
that they may be converted, shall be always in the outward account of the
Church, till the end of the world. Math. 13.29, 30.

27 Like as graves, upon which lie fair stones, costly engraven with
Imagerie, and having inscriptions in brass, and the Arms of them that lie in
them, fair set forth, and blazed by Hearauldes cunning, having within them
nothing but a rotten stinking carrion: Even so Hypocrites, which outwardly bear
a glorious show before men, and but inwardly before God, are most foul,
filthy, and loathsome. Math. 23.27, 28.

28 Even as Mariners, which are carried with the course and force of winds,
being in an Haven, will not disanchor, nor depart out of the Haven, without a
prosperous wind, blowing to their very good liking: So Hypocrites do look,
that the people should shout and clap their hands, in token of their great
praises and commendations they seek for, and hunt after vain bruites and
reports, without which, they are disposed to do nothing well. Math. 6.2.5.

29 As a piece of Wax, the nearer it approaches and comes to the fire, so
much the more the heat of it appears in melting it: Even so in like manner,
the holiness of God, may better be known in the revolt of Hypocrites,
approaching unto him by honorable offices in his Church, and profession of his
word, and so he may be the more glorified of the people in such judgments,
and also so much the less will he suffer their corruptions, but will punish
them more sharply. Leuit. 10.3. 2. Timo. 4.10.14, 15, 16.

30 As a thick Wood and goodly grove, giving great shadow, very pleasant to
behold, does delight the eyes of the beholders so greatly, with the variety
and thickness of flourishing trees, and pleasant plants, that it seems to
be ordained only for pleasures sake; and yet within, is full of poysonfull
Serpents, ravening Wolves, and other wild, hurtful, and cruel beasts: Even
so, an Hypocrite, when outwardly he seems holy, and to be well furnished with
the ornaments of all sorts of virtues, does please well, and delight much the
eyes of his beholders; but within him, there lurketh pride, covetousness,
envy, and all manner of wickednesses, like wild and cruel beasts, walking and
wandering in the wood of his heart. For fained holiness, is double iniquity.

31 As a Swanne, whose feathers are all white, but her flesh black, white
without, and black within: Even so, he is not to be counted religious but an
Hypocrite, that does cover and hide his foul faults, and loathsome sins,
with a fair and beautiful show of virtue, fayning an holyner, where none is.

32 As the Viper, although she be pestilent and poysonfull, yet
notwithstanding, whiles she is nummed with cold, she may safely be handled,
not because she has no poison in her, but because in her cold and numnesse,
she cannot use it: Even so pernicious and dissembling Hypocrites, do sometime
want opportunity and power, to practice and to put in execution, their wicked
and detestable treacheries.

33 As the skin of a Fox is of some value, and in request, but the flesh is
nothing worth: So outward shows of holiness, are highly esteemed with
Hypocrites; but cleanness of the heart, and inward purity, is of them no whit
regarded.

34 Like as an Apple that is very beautiful without, but is rotten within: Or
as a goodly tall Tree that flourishes, and is full of leaves, but yet
fruitless: Even so such is an Hypocrite, who would seem to be that he is not,
and hates to be that he seems. 2. Tim. 3.5.

35 As the Ostrige being a great and mighty foul, has wings, but does not
fly, neither is lifted up from the ground with them: So very many men in the
world, do seem to be carried up to heaven, upon the wings of their
ceremonies, but are in deed, in heart, mind and desire, fast nailed to the
earth.

36 As the Kite being a most greedy and ravening foul, mounteth exceeding
high, so that you would think she touches the gliding clouds, and as she
flies, does spread her wings; and yet when she is at the highest, she has
her eyes fast set and fixed below in the earth, prying and spying to catch, (if
she can) some poor Chicken, or there pray within her talens; in deed she
flies high, but never looks up toward heaven, but altogether down toward
the earth: Even so, thou shall see a number of (...), faining a certain
sanctimonie, counterfeiting much holiness, who, although they are thought with
the contemplation of heavenly things, to be ravished and taken up into the
clouds, yet they mind nothing less then true godliness, neither any thing
more, then earth and earthly things. Their study is for worldly honor, their
greatest carking and care is, for rich and large revenues, for dignities,
Princes favors, and worldly wealth: Such men turn their backs to heaven, and
fly from God, and so being disappointed of that light, which they seemed to
(...) for, they are wrapped in palpable and most dangerous darkness.

37 As Brass is a metal of red color, and has a certain likeness of
Gold, but is indeed Brass, and not gold: Even so, such are Hypocrites, which
under the shape and color of Religion and holiness, do cover a Chaos, and
confused heap of all wickedness and abomination: Such men, when they seem
best, are then worst; for of all wickedness, there is none more pernicious,
then that of ^^e^^s, which when they are most bent to deceive, they handle the
matter so, that they seem to be honest, virtuous and godly men.

38 As he that has a painted Ox, and hunteth and follows for Part^idges, is
not an Ox; but under the shape and likeness of that simple creature, lies in
wait for the pretty fine Birds, that he may take them, and kill them: So
likewise an Hypocrite, that with a counterfeited and fained holiness, will
color and cover impiety, wicked purposes, or whatsoever is against the word
and will of God, (...) not a just man, but under the color and shape of
godliness and honesty, seeking the praise and glory of the world, he casts
in his head, and works by degrees, the ruin, decay, and undoing of his
neighbors, that he may compass their goods, lands, and possessions, and gain
some honor and dignity among men. 2. Tim. 3.5.

39 Even as the swiftist Hawks, going about to seize upon, and to take the
Bird that flies as it were in the top of the air, does not by and by, when
she first sees her, fly directly toward her, but rather at the first, with
fetching of a compass, does seem to forsake, and to despise her, and to draw
and to fly from her, but at the second or third flight, she goes toward her
in the air, with a wonderful force, and incredible swiftness, to take her in
the air, and to rend her in pieces: Right so do Hypocrites behave themselves;
for at the first to see too, they will seem to thee, not to regard, but to
contemn the riches and promotions of the world, but then they coin and
counterfeite a simplicity, fouling for a greater matter, then yet they see
present, and reaching at some higher advancement, and greater dignity, then
that present time and occasion does offer; but at the second or third flight,
when every thing does answer their expectation, thou shall peceiue, that
withal speed and greediness, they will lay hold upon those things, which
thou thoughtest they had contemned. They do not wish or desire any thing more,
neither can any thing more highly please them, then the very selfsame things,
which they once made the world believe, they detested and could not abide
them. These are double hearted men, they have wicked lips, and hands that
work iniquity; they be those sinners that go two manner of ways, and
everlasting woe is their reward. Math. 2.8.

40 As Painters, which have a greater regard to the colors and shadows of
Images and Pictures, then unto the substance of the same, and contemning the
inward parts, they bestow all the wit, skill, and cunning they have; in
expressing and painting out, a bare shadow, and outside of the thing, and the
more they deceive the eyes of them that behold it, the more excellent men are
they judged: Even so Hypocrites, do some deeds, which to see too, are very
good works; but nevertheless, they keep their hearts, minds, and wills,
divided and separated far from God: These things, to wit, their hearts,
minds, wills and purposes, they steal from the Lord, and do bestow them upon
the world; they regard not God, they seek only to please men: in the action
of virtue, they have no respect unto virtue it self, but only and barely to
the show and shape, or likeness of virtue. Romans 12.1. and 6.4. 1. Cor. 5.7,
8. Ephe. 4.24.

41 As the Herb of the Sun, so called, because it windeth it self about
the Sun, in the morning very early; it beholds the rising thereof; and all
the day, it even follows the course of the Sun, ever turning the leaves
toward the same, but the root, it never changes, stirs, nor moves, it
has that still, fast fixed within the earth: So likewise Hypocrites will seem
to follow the Son of righteousness, Christ Jesus, but it is only in
leaves, and outward shows, for their roots, that is, their hearts, are far,
and fast within the earth, where in deed their treasure is. Math. 6.21.

42 Like as Apple Trees, which in the sweet and pleasant springtime; will be
well stored, and full of goodly blossoms, and will give a frank offer, and a
large promise of much fruit, but when the fruit is looked for, and should be
gathered, there is none to be had; they were but bare leaves and idle
blossoms: Even so, such are Hypocrites, who will lift up their hands, eyes and
voices toward heaven and God; and with such godly green leaves, will make a
fair flourish and a beautiful show, but their hearts and affections, are
surely set upon earthly, vain, vile, and transitory things; and are as far
from God, as heaven and earth are distant one from an other. Esaias. 29.13. Math.
15.8.

43 As a Rushe or grass, without moisture withers and dries up: Even so the
Hypocrites, because they have not faith moystned with the grace of God, perish
and vanish away. Job. 8.11.

44 As the Doer of Gods will does abstain from evil, because it is contrary
unto the will of God, and does good, because he is constrained with the love of
him, which is only good: So the Hypocrite contrarily, abstaineth from evil,
for fear of punishment, and does the thing which seems good, not constrained
with the love of God, but moved of his own will, by desire of praise, or hope
of reward. Math. 7.21.

45 As an Actor in a Comedy or Tragedy, which sometimes resembles Agame^non,
sometimes Achilles, sometimes their enemy Hector, sometimes one man's person,
sometimes an other: Even so an Hypocrite will counterfeit, and seem sometimes
to be an honest and just man, sometimes a religious man, and so of al
conditions of men, according to time, persons, and place.

46 As the Ostrich has things like wings, and would make one believe that she
could fly, but cannot: So an Hypocrite will resemble and make a great show of
that which he is not.

47 As Stage Players, are not taken for them which they be, but do put on, and
represent a strange person, and hide that under a personage, which they are
not: So the Scripture by a Metaphor, calls such Hypocrites, as by external
gestures and deeds, boast themselves for Saints, when for all that, their mind
is profane and wicked; that is, when the outward man appears meek as a
sheep, when the inward man, is ravening like a Wolf. Mat. 7.15.

48 As the King that exacted of his debtor ten thousand Talents, did
nevertheless, frankly forgive the whole debt to him which had nothing to pay,
but flied unto the mercy of his Creditor: So the Lord says unto the proud
Hypocrite: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Mat. 10.17.
to the end that the Hypocrite descending into himself, might confess his
filthiness, and poverty, and so crave pardon; which had he done, he had heard
with the sinful woman; Thy sins are forgiven thee. Luke 7.48.

49 As it is easy to know a piece of Gold from a piece of Brass, when they
come both to the Anuile, and to be stricken with the hammer; for Brass will
not be handled; but when it comes to the beating, it breaks, and makes a
sharp dinne and yrkesome; and Gold sounds sweetly, and is pliable, you may
stretch it out, both in length and breadth; in thin and fine leaves as you list:
So in like manner, when an Hypocrite comes between the Anuile and the hammer
of affliction, he brasteth with impatience; he murmureth, cries out, and
lamenteth in blasphemies against God, whereas a faithful Christian praises
God, gives him thanks, and lays out his heart, submitting himself
willingly under the Lords hand that strikes him.

50 As the Viper has a smooth skin, finely spotted without, but most
poysonfull within: Even so an Hypocrite, has sugered words and fair speech,
but a deceitful heart.

51 Like as the Viper, when she goes to the water to drink, casts out her
poison; and after she has drunk, receives the same again: So likewise an
Hypocrite, when he presents himself to be partaker of the Lords Supper, will
counterfeit much holiness, and seem to be religious, and upright in life and
conversation, but afterward he returns to his vomit, and continues in his
wicked course.

52 As a Rush cannot grow without moystnesse, so can not the Hypocrite, because
he has not faith, which is moystned with Gods spirit.

Heretics.
1 AS one being bitten with a mad Dog, shall not only run mad himself, but
also with his contagion shall infect others: So they which have conceived any
pernicious Doctrine or Heresy, will not only themselves be infected, but also
with their infection, utterly mar and defile others.

2 As the wind does not carry away the sound and good Wheat, but the light
chafe, neither does a storm ouerturne a tree fast and soundly rooted: Even
so, no more does every wind of Doctrine, carry away true members of the
Church, but the chafe and rotten members; as Heretics, ignorant persons,
Hypocrites, fantastical heads, and newfangled men, etc.

3 As unconscionable Vintners, mingle their Wine with water: So Heretics,
corrupt the truth, and mingle their own conceits with it.

Hypocrisy.
1 AS it avails a man nothing at all, to the ease and relief of his
poverty, to have false coin in his purse, it must be good current money,
otherwise it does further endaunger himself, and opens a gap to his utter
destruction: Even so, a fair tongue, with a foul heart, is false coin, it
will help no man; if he say, he hates sin, and yet loves it in his heart,
for in so doing, he condemns himself, how many, and how good prayers soever
he makes.

2 Like as little children will fear and be greatly afraid at bugges, and
without fear, thrust their hands into a candle or fire: So likewise, many men
will be afraid to commit the less sins, yet make no scruple at all, at
great sins; as the Papists do, who will not stick to blaspheme the name of
God, and yet make a conscience of sins; as the breach of any the Popes
decrees, etc. Math. 22.23.

Hardness of heart.
1 LIke as we feel our sickness by contrary life and health: Even so
Harness of heart, when it is felt, argues quickness of grace, and softness
of heart; but contrariwise, when Hardness has so possessed the heart, that it
is never felt, this is dangerous in them, who have their consciences seared
with an hot iron, who by reason of custom in sin, are past all feeling;
who likewise despise the means of softning their hearts. Esaias. 65.17. Zach.
7.11. Ephe. 4.19.

2 Like as if the clearenesse of the Sun, do happen to shine upon the eyes
of him that is blind, his eyes are not made clearer thereby, but rather more
dimmer: Or if one do shout, or speak loud in the ears of him that is deaf,
his hearing is nothing thereby quickened, but rather more dulled: Even so, if
any man shall propound and speak the truth to him, whose heart is Hardened, he
is not made the better any thing at all by it, but afterward conceiueth more
Hatred against the truth. 2. Cor. 2.16. Act. 19.9. Exodus 9.34.

3 As it is dangerous to the state of his body, whose vein being stricken by
the Physician, sends forth no blood: Even so dangerous is his condition for
his soul, that has his heart smitten by the word of God, but shows no
tokens of repentance.

4 As in some kind of sickness, a man may die languishing: So likewise, where
Hardness of heart reigns wholly and finally, a man may descend to the pit of
hell, tryumphing and rejoicing.

5 As we are careful to fly the infection of the bodily plague: So much more
careful should we be, to fly the common blindness of mind, and Hardness of
heart, which is the very plague of all plagues, a thousand fold worse then all
the plagues of Egypt.

6 As there is nothing harder the^ the Adamant stone, especially that which is
had in the Indians, which in firmnes, hardness, and value, exceeds the rest,
which yet is said to be subdued and mollified with the warm blood of a Goat:
So likewise the heart of man, being Hardened through the continuance and
Custom of sin, will not be mollified, bridled, nor tamed, neither with the
blood of a Goat, nor yet with the blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus,
which gave himself a sacrifice for us, upon the Altar of the cross, and there
bestowed his blood, that he might mittegate and appease our wild minds and
prick to the quick, our hard and senseless hearts; and to open unto us the
way to the attaining of eternal life, and everlasting salvation. Esaias. 48.4.
Iere. 5.3.

7 As a stone preaseth to his center: So an Hard hearted man, is preasing
toward hell. Exodus 15.5.

Hatred.
1 LIke as love bears good will even to the dead, and wishes them alive, and
would (if it were possible) stay them from death which are condemned to die:
Even so Hatred, seeks to fley the living, and deemeth them unworthy of life,
which have offended never so lightly.

2 As the fire does consume that substance, whereby it is nourished: Even so
Hatred, consumes the heart wherein it has been misled.

3 As the Moath does gnaw the garment where it is bred: So Hatred gnaweth the
heart, wherein it was conceived.

4 As a Be stingeth and pricking an other, does loose his sting, and can
neither make Honey, nor live but a small time after: So the heart pricking an
other with the sting of Hatred, does loose many sweet virtues, and kills it
self.

Man's Heart naturally corrupt from the womb.
1 AS a Tree, whose root is rotten and infected with venomous sap, brings
forth none but corrupt and naughty fruit: Even so from man's Heart, which is
corrupt, and naturally infected with the contagion of sin, can proceed
nothing that is good. For that which is born of the flesh, is flesh. Gene. 6.5.
and 8.21. Psalm. 14.1.3. and 53.1, 3. Romans 3.10. etc. Mark. 7.18.21, 22.

2 Like as a Wolf cannot engender but a young Wolf; and a Serpent a young
Serpent; and even as we do not leave off or cease to hate a young Woolfe,
although that he has not yet eaten or woried any sheep: Or a young Serpent,
notwithstanding that he has not yet cast forth his venime, but do judge him
worthy of death, because of the perverse nature that is in them: So ought we
to esteem and think, that God has no less occasion to hate and condemn us,
even from our mothers belly, because of our peruersitie, and natural malice
engendered with us. And though the Lord should damn us eternally, he should
do us no wrong, but only that which our nature meriteth and deserves. For
although that the young Infant, has not yet done any work, which we may
judge to be evil and wicked, since that he has not yet the understanding,
discretion, nor the power to do it, yet it follows not therefore, but that
the peruersitie and malice, which is natural in man, has already his root
in him, as one part of his paternall inheritance, the which cannot please God.
For although that it brings not forth her fruits; yet they do remain
still there, as in their root, which will bring them forth in his time: As the
venime is already in a Serpent, although that he bite not, and so the nature
of a Woolfe in a young Woolfe, how harmless soever he seems to be.

3 As a Seal cannot be Imprinted in an Adamant, which by reason of the
hardness thereof, will not yield: Even so the Heart of man, is by nature so
hard, that it will not yield, until it be wounded and bruised by the spirit
of God, by the preaching of the law. Ezech. 11.19. Romans 2.5. Psalm. 51.17.

4 Like as when the Adamant is beaten to powder, it will then receive any
print: Even so, when the Lord shall bruise our Hearts, and batter our
affections, and take the sense from them, then they will (no doubt) receive
some impressions of Gods anger and vengeance.

5 As Wax melts with the heat of the fire: So the Heart of man, faints
with the greatness of troubles and vexations. Psalm. 22.14.

Our Hearts must be elevated daily to heaven.
1 AS those that keep Clockes, use every day once at the least, to pull up
the plummets, least their weight should draw them down so far, that the
course of the Clock should be hindered. So in like manner, we must set apart
sometime of the day, for the eleuating and raising up of our minds to heaven, by
meditation on Gods word and prayer, least our Hearts should so far descend
through the weight of the cares of this world, that our course in godliness
should be hindered and stopped.

2 As the Mariner on the Sea, does cast out the best Jewels, and most precious
things, if they ouer-loade his ship, and put it in danger of shipwreck: Even
so we in this our pilgrimage, must cast from us the most precious things we
enjoy, if it be our eye, or our hand, if they hinder us in the race of
godliness, and do press us down, so that we cannot go on chearefully as we
ought. Mat. 5.29, 30. and 18.8.

Husband the head over his wife.
1 LIke as the head sees and hears for the whole body, rules and guides
the body, and gives it strength of life: Or as Christ does defend, teach, and
preserve his Church, and is the Savior, comfort, eye, heart; wisdom, and
guide thereof: Even so must the Husband be head unto his wife in like manner, to
show her like kindness; and after the same fashion to guide her, and rule her
with discretion, for her good, and preservation, and not with force and
wilfulness to entreat her. 1. Cor. 11.3. Ephe. 5.23, 24, 25. etc.

2 Even as the Master is to counsel his servant, and likewise to hear the
good counsel of his servant, as Naaman heard his servant. 2. King. 5.13, 14.
So in like manner the Husbands duty is to counsel and admonish his wife, yet
so, as that when he fails in duty, he is to hear her good counsel and
admonition, either concerning heavenly matters, or worldly affairs, she
notwithstanding considering her estate and condition under him, and in
humility, confessing her self to be the weaker vessel.

3 As when a Lute or other musical instrument, two strings concurring in one
tune, the sound nevertheless is imputed to the strongest and highest: Even so,
in a well ordered Household, there must be communication and consent of counsel
and will, between the Husband and the wife; yet such, as the counsel and
commandment may rest in the Husband. Gene. 3.16. 1. Pet. 3.1. Col. 3.18. Ephe.
5.22.

4 Like as the Church must depend upon the wisdom, discretion, and will of
Christ, and not follow what it lists: So must the wife also rule and apply
her self to the discretion and will of her Husband, because the government and
conduct of every thing rests in the head, and not in the body. Ephe. 5.24. 1.
Cor. 14.34. Numb. 30.7.

5 As it were a monsterous matter, and the means to overthrow the person, that
the body should, in refusing all subjection and obedience to the head, take
upon it to guide it self, and to command the head: So likewise were it for
the wife to rebel against the Husband.

Hypocritical heretics.
1 AS the Card-thystle or Teasell, has Celles and Cabbins like the Honey
comb, and in them, first white flowers, but after their falling away, a bitter
seed: So the wicked have their Sinagoges, and a fair show of words, but in
the end bitter fruits.

2 As the heads or knoppes of Card-thystle, are hollow within, and for the most
part having Worms within: So the chief ringleaders of the wicked, have
hollow hearts, and commonly the worm of conscience gnawing them.

Hiding of faults.
AS they are very hardly cured, which have no sense nor feeling of their
disease; for example, those that have the Lethargy, and the Frenzy: Even so
none are more hardly brought to goodness, then they which do Hide their
faults.

The Husband and wifes duty.
1 AS the ancient Counselors of King Saloman, gave wise advise and counsel
unto Rehoboam King of Israel, to the end that he might win the love and
good liking of the people; speak kindly unto them (said they) and they will
serve thee for ever after; which counfell not being followed, great
inconvenience and mischief after befell unto him, etc. Even so likewise, if
the Husband be desirous to procure the love of his wife, and to win her to
God; or if the wife would also procure the love of her Husband, and win him
to God; then they must draw on one an other with sweet and gentle words, of
love, speaking kindly one to an other: because gentle words do pacify anger,
as water quenches fire; but if they shall use taunts, or words of reproach,
and despite one against an other, much hurt may ensue thereof: For a little
leaven, sowreth the whole lump. 1. King. 12.7. etc. Prou. 15.1.

2 As the spiteful Jews, which hated the Lord Jesus, would not vouchsafe to
give him his name, when they talked of him, or with him; but to show their
utter dislike of him, they used to say: Is this he, or art thou he that wilt
do such a thing? Is not this he? etc. Again whither will he go, that we
shall not find him? They would not say: Is not this Jesus Christ? Or the Son
of God? This is a most despightfull kind of speaking, and does bewray
abundance of malice, that was hidden in their hearts: Even so it sometimes
falls out betwixt the Husband and the wife, betwixt the Father and the Son,
betwixt the Master and his Servant, etc. That they could speak dutifully one
to an other, but contempt and disdain, and anger, and malice will not suffer
the one to afford unto the other their names and their titles, least they
should be put in mind of those duties, which these names require; where out
Satan sucketh no small advantage: Whereas many times, the very name of a
Husband, or Wife, Father or Son, Master or Servant, etc. does greatly so
much help to persuade the mind, and to win the affection; yea the very
mentioning of these names, do oftentimes leave a print of duty behind in the
conscience. Ioh. 7.11.15.35.

3 As the mistress Be, abides always in the Hiue, and will not suffer any
Bees to be idle; and those Bees that should work and labor without, she
sends them to their work, and whatsoever any of them brings home, she
marketh, receives, saves and disposes it, until the time come that it must
be occupied; and when the time comes, that it must be occupied, then she
distributeth every thing according as reason requires; and those Bees that
abide within, she causes them to weaue, and make the fair Honey combs after
the best manner; and she takes care that the young Bees be well fed and
orderly brought up; but when they come to that age, and to that point, that
they be able to work, she sends them out with one, the which they follow
as their guide and Captain: Even so a good House-wife, must abide within the
house, and those her servants which must work abroad, she sends them to
their work, and they that must work within, she sends them to it; and such
provision as is brought in, she receives it, and that which must be spent of
it, she parts and divides it, and that which remains of it, she lays
it up, and sees it kept fafe, until time of need; and she is careful that,
that which is appointed to be spent in a twelve month, be not spent in a month.

4 As he that pours water into tubbes full of chincks and holes, thinking to
fill them, loses his labor: Even so the Husband that provides things
necessary for house, keeping, shall avail little, except the wife carefully
save and keep that which is provided and brought home.

Heaven.
1 AS our clothes when they wax old, we change them: Even so Heaven and
earth, and all that is in them, shall be changed. Psalm. 102.25, 26. Hebr. 1.12.

2 As smoke vanishes and passes away: So likewise Heaven and earth and all
that in them is, shall vanish and pass away. Esaias. 51.6.

3 As we see many weak men for a prize, to enter into combat, or Iusts
against a stronger then themselves, and though they be overcome, yet not to
give over till the last breath: So must we for Heaven, strive to excel in
godliness, those that have greater gifts then we, and never give over.

Houses of the wicked.
1 AS Cages do ordinarily serve for keeping of Birds: Even so the Houses of
wicked and ungodly men, do ordinarily serve for inuenting of deceits. Iere.
5.27.

2 As for the most part, Cages are full of Birds: So the dwelling places of
the wicked, are replenished with all manner of guiles, whereby they become
great and rich.

Hell vanquished and overcome by Christ.
AS a City or Town, that is sacked, rased, and beaten down, even to the
ground, and which is ploughed, sown over with salt and Harrowed, is able to
recover it self, or to harm the enemies that have served it so: Even so
Christ our Savior, has given such a conflict and overthrow unto Satan by his
death, that he has so bruised and broken his head, and has gotten such a
conquest and victory over all the power of Hell, that now it is no more able
to hurt the children of God; for whom, Hell only is overcome; and unto them
this victory is gotten; Hell having still his full power over the unfaithful.
Judge. 9.45.

The Lords Hosts is mighty.
1 LIke as Fishers with nets and hooks, catch fish in great number: Even so
shall they, that God stirs up to execute his Judgments against any people,
catch and destroy great plenty of them. Iere. 16.16.

2 As floods ouerflow and destroy all: Even so they by whom God plagueth any
land, or people, do spoil all. Ierem. 47.2.

Horrer of sin, brings remorse of conscience.
AS the Thief or wicked person, cannot be brought unfeignedly to confess his
fact, before it be made known, and he himself attached to appear before a
Judge, to be condemned for the same: So likewise the case stands with every
one of us, who by nature are no better then thieves and murderers before the
Lord, that we can by no means be brought in truth to confess our sins,
before the monstrousness, and ugly shape thereof, with the pain and penalty
due thereunto, be set before our own conciences, and we as it were summoned
before Gods Judgment seat, to be condemned for the same. Iere. 2.26, 27.

Vain is the Help of man.
AS Heath in the dry and desolate wilderness, where no habitation is, is apt
and good for nothing, and yet easy to be consumed with fire: So also the man
that puts his trust in man, and makes flesh and blood his strangth and
defense, and passes not on the Lord, shall not see any good, but shall perish
together with his Helps. Ierem. 17.5, 6.

Holydaies.
LIke as the Children of Israel, when they had made a molten Calfe, and offered
burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings, did then ordain a Holy Day,
which they spent in eating, drinking, and pastime; which corruption they took
from the Egyptians: Even so likewise our Holy Days, which came from popish
Idolaters, and idolatrous Papists, are for the most part, spent and consumed in
idle pastimes, in much vanity, and belly cheer. Exodus 32.5, 6. 1. King.
12.28. etc. 1. Cor. 10.7.

Holiness.
AS the greater riches that a man has, the greater is his gain, desire and
increase of riches: So the more Holiness that any man has, the more carefully
ought, and the more fruitefully may he labor in increasing it. Philip. 3.13.

Hearts of strong men.
AS the Heart of a woman faints and yields in travail: Even so the Hearts
of strong men, faint, when God will be their enemy, afflict and scourge their
country. Iere. 49.24.

The unrecoverable destruction of obstinate Hearers.
AS an Earthen pot so broke to pieces, that a sharde of it cannot be found fit
for any use: So shall the destruction of such be, whose ears cannot abide the
truth, but will needs have their Preachers flatter them in their sins, and
foster them in their errors. Esaias. 30.10, 14.

Humility ought to go before dignity.
1 AS some Birds before they fly out, and mount on high, stoop down with
their heads, and touch the ground with their bills: So every man, before he
be advanced to any high dignity, ought to show great Humbleness of mind,
and a casting down of himself.

2 Like as Wheat, the weightier, sounder, and better it is, the lower place it
desires, and seeks: Even so the Humble man, the wiser, and more gracious
that he is, the more pleasure and delight he has in Christian Humility and
lowliness. But the proud man being lighter then the wind, lifts up, and
extolleth himself above all things: Whereupon it comes to pass, that he
peruerteth all the Laws of God, and man, for that sovereignty sake, which he
falsely imagines, to belong unto himself. Luke 14.10. 1. Cor. 4.7.

Not proud, but Humble men, do profit by reading and hearing of the word of
God.
1 AS the bough of a Tree, the fuller it is of fruit, the waightier it is, and
the greater and more plentiful fruit it bears, the lower he stoupeth, and
Humbles himself the more; but the proud man, like a fruitelesse and barren
bough, lifts his head on high, not seeking the profit and good of his soul,
but the idle praises of men, and the vainglory of the world.

2 Even as if any man would steadily look upon the bright Sphere of the Sun,
he should become blind, because the weak sight of the eyes, is not able to
abide so great a brightness: So, whosoever trusting to his own wit, shall
cast the eyes of his mind, upon the wonderful and unspeakable brightness of
the secrets of God; he shall be overthrown of the same, and the sight of the
mind being blinded and put out, he shall never attain to that which he would,
because the great and hidden mysteries of the most high God, cannot be
comprehended by man's wit, being puffed up with pride; or else there should be
no difference between God and man, if man of himself, could attain unto the
secrets of Gods eternal majesty, sealed up in his blessed word, and not to
be opened, but by the mighty power of his most holy spirit. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Psalm. 25.14. Esaias. 66.2.

The Lord Humbles us in this world, that he may may exalt us in the world to
come.
AS he that would have a little flame of fire, to mount and rise up on high,
first keeps it low, and holded it down, with the force of a Fan, and the
gathering together of much wind: Even so God, presses us down, and keeps us
low, that he may lift us up, and exalt us on high; he throws us down here
in earth, that he may exalt us in heaven; and lays many times disgrace upon
us in this world among men, that we may be gracious in the world to come,
with himself, his Angels, and his Saints.

We are Heirs, not through works, but through grace.
1 AS an earthly Father, does give unto his children according to their deeds,
that is, inheritance to them that are obedient, and disheriteth them that be
disobedient: Even so God our heavenly Father, promises inheritance to his
children, but those which of children are made obstinate and enemies, he
suffers not to enjoy the inheritance. Romans 4.5, 6, 8.

2 As it is manifest that the children of an earthly Father, are neither
children nor Heirs through desert of their works: So after the same sort, the
children of God, are neither made children nor Heirs, because of their works,
but through the grace of adoption, which is received by faith alone;
notwithstanding either of them both, give unto his children according to their
deeds. Romans 6.23.

Humanity or gentleness.
LIke as pride oppresses love, provoke disdain, kindles malice,
confounds Justice, and at length subuerteth states: Even so Humanity
stirs up affection, augmenteth amity, maintains love, supporteth equity,
and most soundly preserves Cities and countries.

Quiet Hearts.
EVen as a quiet, calm, and pleasant water, will show unto us, if we look
into it, the very image and likeness of our selves, as it were a Glass, but
being moved, stirred and troubled, it does not so: So likewise our own
Hearts, if they be quiet, and not troubled with horrors, nor distempered with
fears, will plainly show us what we be; so that we may easily know our
selves, and not be deceived: but being filled with fears, tossed with
terrors, and ouer-whelmed with troubles, they cannot do so. John. 14.27. Psalm.
55.4, 5.

Heart of man.
1 AS a pot full of sweet liquor, if it be made hot, and boiled upon the
fire, will drive away flies, that they will not come near it; but if it be
cold, the flies will by and by go into it, and it will receive them, and they
will corrupt and consume it: Even so the Heart of man, if it be inflamed with a
true and sincere love of God, will not receive into it, those dangerous
temptations which are continually flying about it, but will remove, and drive
them far off, and give no place unto them; but if by reason of slothful
idleness in heavenly things, and for want of a godly courage, it grow cold in
the love of the Lord, the^ is it obuious, and wide open to all temptations, it
barreth out none, it receives all; none are rejected, be they never so wicked;
all are embraced, entertained and welcome; then is it a receptacle of all
abominations; as Idolatry, blasphemy, murder, Adultery, and whatsoever is
wicked, mischievous, and damnable.

2 Like as if thou shall cast into a Censer, odoriferous and sweet Pomander
balls, the whole house will be filled with a sweet savor and pleasant
perfume; but if thou shall cast into it, Brimstone, or some such matter, all
the house will be full of most horrible stinch: So in like manner, if thou
shall put into the Heart of some man, good and wholesome counsels, and shall
instruct him with godly aduertisements, and shall open unto him the fountain of
the truth, thou shall bring to pass, that there shall proceed out of his
Heart, a great savor of a most sweet smell; but if thou shall fill him with
evil and wicked counsels, and shall persuade and draw him to impiety, hatred,
treachery, and al abominations, thou shall be the cause of an intolerable
stinch; there shall come out of his Heart, a most poysonfull savor, wherewith
not only his own Heart, but the whole house wherein he is, and all the common
wealth where he abides, shall be hurt, infected and poisoned.

3 Like as if one cast into an hot burning Furnace, wood and sticks, that be
sear and dry, and ready to burn, there will arise and burn out, a most pure
and clear flame of fire; but if he shall cast into the same Furnace, green
sticks, wet, and stinking Rushes, or some other such matter, they will burn in
deed, but the Chimney and whole house will be filled with smoke, and will be
even black, by reason of the thick darkness, which proceeds of the foul
and stinking smoke: So the Heart of man, is a furnace continually burning, if
thou will nourish it with cogitations, and heavenly meditations of the love of
God, there will appear and shine out of it, a pure flame and bright light of
true and unfeigned love to God and man, but if thou will chearish and maintain
it, with thoughts and devises of self-loue, the^ it will be full of vile smoke,
stinch and darkness. Romans 1.21.

4 As the Sun rises first, and then the beasts arise from their dens, the
fowls from their nests, and men from their beds: So when the Heart sets forward
to God, all the members will follow after it; the tongue will praise him, the
foot will follow him, the ear will attend him, the eye will watch him, the
hand will serve him, nothing will stay after the Heart, but every one goes like
hand-maides after their mistress. Prou. 23.26.

5 Like as that woman that would have her dough leauened, and lays her dough
in one place, and the leaven in an other, where one cannot touch the other,
loses her labor: Even so he which would have his Heart sanctified, comforted,
and enlightened, and will not give it to God, which should do it, greatly
deceives himself, because the tempter then comes, and takes them asunder,
and seazeth upon the Heart, because he finds her alone.

6 Even as Dina was deflowred, when she strayed from home: So is the Heart,
when it strayeth from God. Gene. 34.61.

7 As Abraham when he was bid to offer his Son, rose up betime and left his
wife at home, and never made Sara privy, least she should stop him, being
more tender over her child like women, then the Father is: So we must give our
Heart to God, before the flesh hear of it. Gene. 22.6.

8 Like as if Abagaile had consulted with Nabal, whether she should have
supplied David with victuals or no, when he sent; the myzer would never have
given his consent, who scolded so soon as he heard of it; therefore he went
alone, and gave that which he asked, and never told her husband what she would
do, least he should hinder her, which sought her welfare and his too: So we
should steal our Hearts from the world, as the world steals them from us,
and transport them to God, when the flesh is a sleep. 1. Sam. 25.18.

9 As no man sits upon two seats together: No man hunteth two games
together: No man iustleth with two Spears together: So he that has two
Hearts, if he have a true Heart of the one, he will have a false Heart of the
other. Iam. 18. Luke 10.13. Eccle. 2.13. 1. Sam. 5.2. Act. 4.32.

10 As there be two colors, red and blew, in one Rainbowe: So there must be
two affections, joy and sorrow in one Heart.

11 As a bright and shining resemblance, or image, may be seen plainly in a
clear and pure looking Glass: Even so does the face (as it were) of the
everlasting God, shine forth and clearly appear in a pure Heart. Math. 5.8.

Health to be sought for of God.
1 AS a good Physician or Surgion, will first remove the cause, ere he begin
to heal: Even so he that enterpriseth his Health, must first of all go unto
Jesus Christ, the Physician of the soul, that the cause may be removed, then
Physic has virtue and power to heal, and not before. Luke 8.43.

2 As the virtue attractiue, to draw Elisha from his work, was not in Elias
cloak, but in the power of the word: Even so the virtue of healing, is not in
the Physicians, nor any thing they take in hand, but in the Lord of life. 1.
King. 19.19, 20.

The Husbands duty to his wife.
1 AS a Crystal Glass is a precious and profitable vessel, yet brittle,
which a man does more carefully take heed of the breaking of it, then of some
earthen or tin vessel, the one being more base, and the other more strong:
So also the Husband, ought to have such regard of the frailty of his wife,
that he may bear with her, and entreat her with gentleness and discretion,
that he may use her as a precious vessel, to his comfort and joy. 1. Pet. 3.7.

2 As in a great stormy wind, a man lappeth his cloak about him, and holds
it fast for fear of loosing, but when the wind is down, and the weather
calm, he lets it hang easily: So when Husbands will as it were perforce,
wrest away their wives infirmities, many of them will obstinatly resist; yet
contrariwise, by sweet words and loving exhortations, they might be won
voluntarily to forsake them. 1. Sam. 1.8.

3 As it is mere folly for a Husband to praise and commend his wife in
company: So is it as dangerous to check and reprove her before witness.

4 As God created the woman, not of the head, and so equal in authority with
her Husband: So also he created her, not of Adams foot, that she should be
trodden down and despised, but he took her out of the ribbe, that she might
walk jointly with him, under the conduct and government of her head. Gene.
2.21.

5 As God has testified his singular goodness unto man, in creating him an
helper to assist him: Even so the Husband, ought to consider in how many sorts
she is to him a helper, to pass over this life in blessedness. Genesis 2.18.

High minded men.
AS the Hawk is then lost, when trusting to her wings, she ryseth and
mounteth too high: Even so do vain and proud men, then fall from God, when
with their own wit, reason, and wisdom, only, and alone, they will
understand the deep mysteries of God, as though the counsels and wisdom of
Gods eternal majesty, might and could be comprehended, with the reason and
wit of man. Romans 11.20.

High estate of life dangerous.
AS a tree set upon the top of a mountain, is mightily shaken, and easily
rent up by the roots, with every blustering blast and storm of wind: Even so
man in this world, the more and Higher he is exalted, the more and greater
dangers is he subject unto. Luke 1.52. Iam. 4.6. Math. 7.17. Luke 6.44.

Hope.
1 AS a man passing through a very swift flood, does not look down to the
water, least it should make him giddie, and so be in danger of falling, but he
has his eyes fixed on the bank or shore that he goes over unto: Even so a
Christian passing through the waves of the troubles of this world, lifts up
his eyes to heaven, beholding there with a spiritual regard, the quiet bank
that he shall come too by Christ, not respecting the troubles and torments
that he is in; which troubles and torments the wicked do respect; and that is
it that casts them into desperation.

2 As the whole use of the Anchor is, to hold fast the Ship in one sure and
certain place, (notwithstanding all tempests and waves beating against it)
because it enters into the very depth and bottom of the Sea, there taking
fast hold. Even so the principal use of Hope, is to enter into the heaven of
heavens, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and to hold fast our
souls there with him, notwithstanding, all the waves and tempests of Satan,
sin, and condemnation, do beat daily and continually against them.

Ingratitude of base borne persons and others.
AS the Iuie sticking to the boughs of trees, is so by the others help
exalted; and yet as it were by a flattering and ouer-hard embracing, does
either kill, or much hinder the growing of the trees: So base borne persons,
that be promoted in honor, by the help and familiarity of them that be
noble, do yet oftentimes oppress them, by whose help they have ascended, and
have been advanced.

Imperfections, do not make God to refuse us.
1 AS a Father casts not away his children, because they are sick,
crooke-backt, blind, or maimed of hand or foot, or otherwise counterfeit and
Imperfect, but handles them more tenderly, and deals more softly with them,
then with the others, respecting their debilitie and feebleness. Or as men
cast not away Wine, though it have lees or grounds; nor cast away Gold
howsoever it be covered with dust: And as a husbandman refuses not land,
though it be ouer-grown with brambles and briars, but will use the greater
diligence to stock it, and to plough it, hoping by his labor, that it will
bring forth fruit plentifully: Even so God likewise, will not refuse and put
us away, because he sees many Imperfections and infirmities in us; nay,
rather that is an occasion, that he will take the greater pity upon us.
Psalm. 103.13.

2 As we looking aside through a Glass, be it blew or yealow, or of any other
color, all the things we see, seem to us to be of the color of the glass,
through which we did behold them: So God also, beholding and looking upon us in
his Son, we seem to him to be of his color, (notwithstanding our manifold
Imperfections and wants) and we have the appearance and brightness of his
innocence and righteousness, which causes, that in seeing, and touching us,
he thinks, he sees and touches his own natural Son: Even as old Isaac
did in handling Iaacob. Gene. 27.21, 22.

Infirmities, why God suffers them in the best.
LIke as a Judge deals with us in some criminal process, who will give an
enlargement, but yet with condition, or as they say with a quousque; that is,
till, the the time that he calls it back, and puts him in his former
estate, wherein he was before, if it happen that he fall into any new fault
again. The Judges do this to keep them always in fear and diligence, to
do their duty, and to stop them from taking too great liberty: So likewise
God does with us, when he will pardon our sins, and set us at liberty, leaving
us notwithstanding a great sort of Infirmities and Imperfections, which may
always serve him, to charge us, and for matter to call us to a reckoning, when
we would wind out of that bondage, and boast our selves abroad of the
goodlinesse of our reason and loyalty.

Right Justice is to be judged by the authority of Gods will.
AS often as there is any malefactor and wicked person to be punished, they
which be appointed to be the Judges, 'doo declare unto the Prince his wicked
fact, and so look for a writ from him; and that being had, they do see the
pains prescribed therein, to be executed upon the malefactor. Now if the
Judges or Officers, do any thing contrary unto that, it is taken for a great
offense and rebuke done against the authority and jurisdiction of the Prince,
and they escape not clear withal: Even so it is a much more Just matter
before God, that none be put to death contrary or besides his will and word,
who is the only Lord of life and death.

Ignorance.
1 AS men that dream, and wake again, who when they are a sleep, think to
have found some great treasure, and have a great joy in it; but after their
waking, they see that all is vanished like smoke; whereupon they vex and
grieve themselves: So likewise men slumbering in the night of Ignorance, think
that they are righteous before God, but they are grieved when they find that
this is a dream, which passes through their spirits, and vanishes as soon
as they be awake, and are delivered from the darkness of Ignorance, wherein
they were a sleep and buried.

2 As in the night by reason of the darkness spread upon the earth, all things
are hid and covered; which causes that we cannot discern and discover the
spots which we have in our faces; but when the light begins to appear, and
that we take a Glass to behold our selves therein, then they are discovered,
and show themselves: Even so likewise, during the time that we are covered with
darkness of Ignorance, the vices that dwell in us, are hidden there; and
oftentimes we think, being leprous and deformed, that we are beautiful and
perfect; but our eyes being open, and illuminate by the spirit and grace of
our God, and taking the Glass of the Law, therein to behold the state of our
nature and our life, the^ we begin to know the great and grievous imperfections
that are in us; and we at once loose the opinion which we had conceived before
of our own righteousness and virtues, and perceive what danger we were in
before.

3 As men sometimes enquire for them, amongst whom they do stand: So some are
Ignorant in that which is so plain, that all others know it, and they can
hardly avoid the knowledge of it.

4 Like as the day and the night is all one to those that are blind: Even so is
superstition, Idolatry, and the preaching of the Gospel, to those that are
Ignorant of the means of their salvation.

5 As they that love not the light, hide their doings in the dark, so as it
is a manifest token, that their own consciences bears the^ witness, that
their doings be naught: So likewise they that love and choose rather Ignorance,
then the knowledge of Christ; it is a manifest token that they loath to see the
filthiness of their own works. John. 3.19, 20.

6 As he that goes in the dark catches a shrewd turn before he woteth of it:
So he that walks in Ignorance, runs headlong to destruction, when he least
thinks of it.

7 As Lot was so long loytering and trifeling in Sodom, that the Angel was
feign to pluck him out with violence: Even so certainly, unless the Lord by
the good means of his providence, should pluck us out of Ignorance and
darkness, wherein we use such trifling, and plunging, and delaying, that
scarce one of a thousand would be saved. Gene. 19.15, 16.

8 As the light of Godly knowledge increases virtue: So the darkness of
Ignorance, is a hinderance to all goodness.

Immoderate study.
AS the field overmuch dunged, is burned, and withers away: So Immoderate
study and learning, does utterly dull and make blunt the students brain.

Injury.
LIke as if any do offer any Injury or bodily harm to a Dove, or a sheep,
or to any innocent creature, though it be unto death, yet they will not make any
resistance: So likewise, if any Injury or wrong be done to the faithful
servants of God, they will patiently suffer it, without any resistance, etc.

Instructers of children.
1 AS the good ryders, do first bring their horse to be obedient unto the
bridles: So they that Instruct children, must first exhort them to obedience
and humility.

2 As Hannah made Coats for her Son Samuel, who served in the house of God:
So likewise parents and masters, ought to array their servants and children
with the godly ornaments of wisdom and knowledge, which is from above. 1.
Sam. 2.19. Prou. 4.9.

3 Like as a man will sow his ground with the best seed, and plant his Orchard
with the best fruit, because he looks for the greater and more gainful
increase in the time of gathering: So in like manner, men loving their children
as well as they do other commodities, ought also to train them up in the best
things, which are found in the discipline, knowledge and faith of Christ; and
so doing, they should not only escape many a secret grief, and bitter
mischief; but also bless the Lord with great ioyfulnesse, when they find
this fruit of their education, in knowledge of these good things: Namely,
their children to be a comfort, refreshing and honor to their gray hairs, and
their servants necessary helps before them, in all good causes and matters of
honesty, truth, Justice, and mercy. Gal. 6.7.

Inconstant men.
1 AS the beast Hienae, and the beast of Egypt (now called the Mouse of Indie)
be sometimes males, sometimes females: So many be so Inconstant, that now they
be friends, now foes, now Papists, now Protestants, now hot, now cold, now
wise, now foolish, etc. Reuela. 3.15, 16.

2 As the Reed is shaken too and froo, with every little small wind: Even so
such is the Inconstancy and mutabilitie of the common people, whom every
small trifle does cause to alter their mind and Judgment. Math. 11.7.

Judges.
1 AS the beam with balances, does bow toward that part, wherein is the
greater weight: So some Judges favor them most, whose gifts be greatest, and
not whose cause is best. Job. 15.34. Deuteronomy. 16.19. and 27.25. 1. Sam. 12.3.

2 As they which desire with heed, and more surely to see, do shut the one
eye: So a Judge, to the intent that he may discern according unto Justice and
equity, ought not to be partial, or given to the respect of any person, but
ought to have one single eye, which is to be set and placed upon Justice and
equity in every matter, and not to regard either persons or rewards. 1. Sam.
8.3. Esa. 1.23. and 33.15. Psalm. 15.5.

3 As a white or painted Wall, the bravery whereof, serves for no profit, but
for a mere show: Even so such is the profit that comes to the commonwealth
by those Judges, which sitting in place of Justice, do wrong to men contrary
to the Laws. Act. 23.3.

4 As a Judge must not wrong one for another sake: So must he not unjustly
favor one, because an other has displeased him. Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. Prou. 24.23.

5 As the Lion though he be the King of beasts, yet at length is made a pray to
small Birds; and then is that saying verified: Better is a living Dog, then a
dead Lion: Even so Judges and Rulers, although they be great in authority, yet
at the last, they are but a bayt for the small worms. Eccle. 9.4.

Idleness.
1 AS water, though it be never so clear and fair, fresh and comfortable, yet
if it stand still in a pit or hole, or be kept long in a vessel, whence it
has no issue, it will rot and smell, and be unwholesome: Even so it fares
with children, yea and with all the Sons of Adam, if they be Idle, have
nothing to do, and no way to bestow their wit, they will rot, and prove
unwholesome, and devise mischief, all the day long. Prou. 28.19. 1. Timo.
5.13. 2. These. 3.10, 11.

2 As labor and exercise of body in one man; industry and diligence of mind
in an other man, are sure forts and strong bulwarks of Countries: Even so
Idleness and negligence, are the cause of al evil; for an Idle man's brain,
becomes quickly the shop of the devil.

3 As in all natural things, there is one thing or other, which is the spoil
of it, as the canker to the Rose, the worm to the Apple, and the Caterpiller
to the leaf: So the common spoil to all youth, is the contrary to pains and
travail, which is Idleness. Ezech. 16.49.

4 As the traiterous servant, while his master is a sleep and all things at
rest, sets open the door for the thief to enter in upon him, and spoil
him at his pleasure: So Idleness, while we are not aware, lying soft upon the
pillowes of security, opens the door for the devil to enter into us, with
full swing, to the destruction both of body and soul.

5 Like as while men slept (says the Evangelist) the enemy came, and sowed
Tares among the Wheat: So the fittest time, that the devil can find to work
upon us, is when we are Idle, for that is the sleep of the soul. Judge.
16.1. etc.

6 Even as a firebrand, drawn from the fire, and lying still, waxes cold, and
by little and little dies, and is extinct, but being moved and put to the
fire, burns and flameth: Even so, an Idle life, does by little and little
extinguish virtue; but being will exercised, it does kindle and increase the
same. Job. 5.7. Math. 2.1. etc. 1. Cor. 3.8.

7 As Idleness breeds poverty and beggerie, in very many which might live
well, and in good sort, with diligent and faithful labor: So is the same very
dangerous in those that be rich, and feel no smart nor want in this life, for
whiles they give themselves to foul Idleness, voluptuousness does overcome
reason, and they are snared and taken in the deadly trappes of the deceitful
flickerings of the world, and are poisoned with carnal pleasures, and fleshly
delights, which do bear them fair in hand for a little while, but at the
length do deceive them, and leave them in shame and confusion. Gene. 3.19. 2.
Thessa. 3.10.

8 As the earth when it is not tilled, or trimmed, does breed and bring
forth briars, brambles, nettels, and all noisome and unprofitable things: So
Idleness in man, does breed and brood in him, ungodly thoughts, and wicked
cogitations of all sorts, and does allure, hale, draw, and even drag him, to
do those things which are so odious in the sight of God, that he must either
most earnestly repent that he has done them, or else, he must die eternally
for doing of them.

9 As by the pumpe of a Ship, water does often secretly get in and increases,
so that through the negligence of the Maryner, the Sip is drowned: So by
Idleness, wicked thoughts, and concupiscences, are multiplied in our hearts,
till at length our souls are in great danger.

10 As the Crab-fish (as Pliny says) when he sees the Oyster lie gaping
against the Sun beams, puts a Pible into the mouth of the Oyster, and so
gets out the fish: So likewise when we lie Idle in security, the devil
steals into us.

10 Like as in a standing water, worms are engendered and bred: So likewise in
an Idle body, are engendered Idle thoughts; and therefore we must always be
doing of some good works, that the devil may find us always well occupied
and exercised.

11 As by experience we see, that those children which have been brought up in
learning and virtue, prove honest and profitable for the commonwealth: Even so
contrariwise, those children which have past their time in sloth and
Idleness, prove dishonest and hurtful to the Church and Commonwealth.

Ignorant men.
1 AS those people will never come to the Physician to be healed, which think
not themselves to be sick: So likewise there are no people more unapt to be
taught, and lightened of God unto salvation, then those which think they
understand, and see of themselves, when in very deed they are altogether
Ignorant, and for lack of understanding, be overwhelmed and snared in the
darkness wherein they were borne, and so wallow themselves therein
continually, to their utter destruction. Psalm. 95.10. Esaias. 59.10.

2 Like as that man, that is Ignorant of the principles and rules that
appertain unto the Science or Art that he professes, can never come to the
end, skill, or perfection, that his profession requires: Even so the end of a
Christian man, is eternal life, and his profession is to know and learn the
principles and rules that most plainly and sincerely, leads him unto this end
of everlasting felicity. For he that is Ignorant of the means, is Ignorant of
the end; and being Ignorant of the causes, must needs be Ignorant of the
effect. John. 17.3. Esaias. 1.3. and 5.13. Prou. 1.28, 29.

3 As he that will be a Physician, must learn the precepts that teaches
Physic; and he that would be a Musition, must learn the rules of Music:
The Orator, the rules of Rhetoric: The Ploughman, the rules of Husbandry;
and so every man the rules that belong to his profession, or else he shall
never profit in his Science or Art, nor be accounted a Craftes-man, that
knows not the principles of his craft: Even so no more (before the majesty
of God) is he to be accounted a Christian, although he be baptized, and
braggeth never so much of the name of a Christian, that perfectly knows not
the duties belonging to a Christian man. 2. These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 3.12.

4 As no man will be content to entertain and give wages to a servant, that
professes ^^^selfe in words to be a Husbandman, and yet neither knows, nor
can do any part that belongs to husbandry: Even so we may not think, that
God will allow or like of such men, as outwardly in words profess themselves to
be Christians, by saying, they hope and believe well; and yet are Ignorant, and
not able to render a reason of any point of Christianity. Leuit. 4.2.

5 Like as the Physician cannot communicate his health, to, and with his sick
patient: Or as the living man cannot divide or depart his life, with the dead
body of an other man, but every man enjoys his own health, and lives with
his own life: So, the knowledge that another man has, profits not him that
is Ignorant and unlearned, but every man must know and learn himself, the
grounds and principles of Christianity, if he will be saved.

6 Like as if a child be borne and brought up in a dungeon of a prison, and
grow to some years, never seeing light, if one tell him of trees and
mountains, and Birds, and other ceatures, he cannot tell what he means: So
likewise it is with us, which are borne in blindness and Ignorance, we know
not what heavenly things mean, till we be told and showed them, by the light
of the Scriptures.

Justice of God in desertions.
LIke as if a Magistrate, give a man for a just cause to be hanged, he does
but Justice: So likewise God, if he for our disobedience, give us up to Satan,
he does but justly. Now if the hangman do misuse him grievously, there is no
fault in the Judge or Magistrate, but in the malice of the hangman: So
likewise no fault in God, if the devil do cruelly handle us, being given
over unto him.

Infirmity of falling, diminishes not the grace of Christ.
THough God forgiueth and pardons not sinners, because they should sin: Yet
does not infirmity of falling, diminish the grace of Christ, where faith with
repentance works. Romans 6.15.16. etc.

All must appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, but yet diversely.
1 LIke as some do come to the Assizes or Sessions, there to receive their
Judgment, and condemnation; other some also come to give evidence against
them, and to aid and assist the Judge in the execution of his office: Even so
after the same manner shall it be at the last day: For the reprobate, ungodly,
and merciless, shall appear there, to receive their deserved condemnation;
but contrariwise, the faithful shall then with the Angels, come to assist and
wait upon their Judge Christ. Math. 18.28, 29. etc. Math. 19.28. Luke 22.29.
1. Cor. 6.2, 3.

2 As at the bar of an earthly Judge, the malefactor is brought out of prison
and set before the Judge, and there examined: Even so in that great day, shall
every man without exception, be brought before the Lord to be tried. Romans
14.10. 2. Cor. 5.10.

Idolatry.
1 LIke as if men take and account it for a despite and a great reproach, to be
termed and named an Idol: Even so, much more will God our heavenly Father be
offended, if any shall call Images the likenesses of God.

2 As the breach of wedlock, and defiling of the marriage bed by filthy
Adultery, is a most wicked and detestable sin: So likewise is Idolatry, a
most shameful and execrable thing, when as the honor and glory due to the
living God, is profaned and given to an other. Iere. 16.11. Ezech. 6.4. 2.
King. 17.4. 1. Cor. 10.14.

3 As it cannot be otherwise, but whereas the air is corrupted, there must
follow pestilence, and infection of the blood: So where the mind is not purely
persuaded of God, must follow this gross and censible Idolatry, that would
honor God in an Idol.

The Lord and his people are inseparably Joined together.
AS a man girdeth himself with his girdle: Even so God tyeth his people to
himself. Iere. 13.11.

Incorporation with Christ.
1 AS the Imp or grass is translated from his native tree, to grow in an
other: So we, as many as be true Christians, are translated from Adam to
Christ, and from being Gentiles, to be of one body with the posterity of
Abraham. Romans 6.5. Romans 11.17.

2 As men graffe, to that end, that the Verdure of the stock, may correct and
amend the taste of the fruit, that it may be the more pleasant to the eater:
So Christians should have their corruptions, corrected and amended by Christ,
and his spirit working in them, that they may the better taste to God.

3 As the Graffes live not by his natural Juice, but by the Juice or moisture,
received from the root of the stock, whereinto he is graffed* So we that
are true Christians, may live by the power of Christ's spirit working in us, or
rather Christ lives in us. Gal. 2.20.

Justice of God.
AS far as the great mountain exceed the rest of the earth: So far does
the Justice of God exceed and excel the righteousness of any creature. Psalm.
36.6.

The reward of Iniquity.
AS ploughing, reaping, and eating the fruit, do successively follow one an
other: So he that plougheth wickedness, shall reap Iniquity, and eat the
fruit of lies. Esaias. 28.24. Prou. 22.8.

Ingratitude of the Church.
AS a Vine planted, which neither for choice of good ground, neither for any
other thing, which the hand of the Husbandman might do to it, can justly
complain of any want; and yet deceives the Husbandmans expectation, and
makes him to loose, both pain, labor, and cost: Even fo such is the
unkindness of people oftentimes, who would be counted for the people of God,
and whom God has diligently called to the knowledge of himself by the
preaching of the word, and yet proceed in impiety and ungodliness. Esaias. 5.1,
2.

Image of God.
1 LIke as when so often as a man thinks of some known man being absent, he
does as it were draw in his mind the proportion of his body, which he
beholds, thinking of him that is absent out of the mind, as when a Painter
draws with his hand, the portraiture of that body, whose Image he painteth;
to the intent that the painted Image may represent as much as may be, the shape
of him that is absent: So likewise when the Scripture says, that man was
created in the Image and after the likeness of God, we must diligently mark
how far he is said to have been so made, and that there was in him, whereby
he did resemble the excellency of his Creator, and did as it were represent
God himself in a Glass. 1. Cor. 11.7. Ephe. 4.14. 2. Cor. 3.18.

2 Like as a bodily Image, which represents unto us the face of a man, ought
lively to set before us all his lineaments and proportions, that by the
counterfeiting or engrauing, we might conceive, whatsoever might be seen in
him, which the same represents: Even so the Image of God, must through the
same likeness, set before our senses, a certain understanding of the knowledge
of God. Gene. 1.26, 27. and 2.7. and 5.1.

The Incommunicable properties of the Godhead.
AS the soul of man is wholly in the head, and wholly in the feet, yea wholly
in every part; and yet the soul cannot be said to use reason in the feet, or
in any other part, but only in the head: Even so, though all the persons of
the Godhead, be one and the same essence, yet do they really differ each from
other in regard of the peculiar manner of subsisting; and therefore man's nature
may be assumed of the second person, and not assumed either of the Father, or
of the holy Ghost.

Justice.
1 AS the root of a tree being utterly rotten, the boughs cannot bud and
flourish, nor bring forth pleasant fruits in their due time: So Justice
being violated, it cannot be, that peace can flourish, and bring forth so
plentiful fruits as she is wont to do.

2 As the Image of Nabuchadnezzar, although it had an head of fine Gold, yet it
fell, and was broken all to pieces, because it had feet of clay, which being
touched with a stone, overthrew the whole invention: So Justice many times
falls to the ground, because, although the Princes which are rightly called
the heads of their countries, be very excellent Iusticers, and many as it were
of the purest and finest Gold of virtue, yet the ministers of Justice are
earthen, and do bend their hearts and minds to nothing, but earth and clay,
and sometimes with gifts and rewards, they are carried every way; for gain
they will sell Judgment, and so break the neck of Justice. Dan. 2.32, 33.

3 As there is no assurance of fair weather, until the sky be clear from
clouds: So there can be in no Commonwealth, a grounded peace and prosperity,
where there is not informers to find out offenses, as well as Magistrates to
punish offenders.

4 As a Physician cannot see every secret grief, but upon reuealement, may
apply a curable medicine for a hidden disease: So many can discover a
mischief, which the magistrate sees not, but the Magistrate alone must
remedy the same.

No sound Judgment can be given of a man, until he be thoroughly tried.
AS a Wall all whited on the outside, is not easily perceived, whether it be
made of stone, or of clay, unless it be smitten, and tried with a mallet, or
some other instrument: So a man garnished outwardly with good things to see
too, is not by and by Judged, and presently discerned, whether he be a man of
patience, of charity, and other virtues, unless he be first smitten and tried
with the mallet or beetle of obloquies, slanders, afflictions, troubles, and
temptations.

Inventions of men.
AS hey, wood, and stubble, put to the fire, are brought to sudden consuming:
So the Inventions of men, not stablished by the word of God, cannot bear the
trial of the holy Ghost, but they by and by fall away and perish. 1. Cor.
3.12, 13.

Inconstant men.
1 EVen as the delicate Balance of a Goldsmiths is moved with every little
weight, so that with one grain laid upon it, it falls downward: So with
every thing, whether it be luckie or unfortunate, we are wont to be greatly
moved, and do suddenly change our purposes: Sometime we exceed in mirth,
and by and by we are overwhelmed with sorrow; we are even now praising men to
the skies; and presently we hurl them down from heaven, with our tongues,
and thrust them into hell: We love men, and hate them; we save men, and kill
them, all with one breath; now we choose virtue, and by and by vice.

2 As the Camelion changes his color, according to the thing whereupon he
sits: So we likewise at every temptation do change our minds, and are
driven from our purposes and determinations, and our wicked lusts, and
ungracious thoughts of our hearts, do force and drive us, even whither they
will.

3 As the Camelion will be changed into any color, save white: So an
Inconstant man is most apt and prone, to all kind of vice, but to no virtue.

The Joy of the elect.
1 AS the people rejoiced exceedingly, when Saloman was crowned King: Even so
much more shall the Joy of the elect be, when they shall see Christ the true
Solomon, crowned with glory in the kingdom of heaven. 1. King. 1.40.

2 As the wise men, which came from the East to worship Christ, when they saw
the star standing over the place where the Babe was, were exceeding glad: So
likewise much more shall the Elect rejoice, when they shall see Christ, not
lying in a Manger, but crowned with Immortal glory in the kingdom of heaven.
Math. 2.1.9, 10.

The Joys of heaven endless.
LIke as if the whole world were a Sea, and that every thousand years
expired, a Bird must carry away or drink up one only drop of it; in process
of time it will come to pass, that this Sea though very huge, shall be dried
up; but yet many thousand millions of years must be passed before this can be
done: So likewise if a man should Enjoy happiness in heaven, only for the
space of time, in which the Sea is in drying up, he would think his case most
happy and blessed; but behold the Elect shall enjoy the kingdom of heaven,
not only for that time, but when it is ended, they shall enjoy it as long
again, and when all is done, they shall be as far from the ending of this
their Joy, as they were at the beginning.

The general day of Judgment.
1 AS the Husbandman diggeth up all unfruitful trees, pareth off all rotten
boughs, weedeth out Cockle and Tares, and casts them into the fire: Even so
God will serve them, that he shall find empty of good works, and without Oil
in their Lamps. Math. 25.1, 2. etc.

2 As the Husbandman appoints his servant to purge his flower, and with the
Fan he separateth the good seed from the chafe: Even so God shall send his
Angels to hi^ flower, that is into this world, and they shall carry the good
seed, to wit, the faithful, into everlasting barnes; but the chafe and
dross, that is the ungodly, shall be thrown into a Furnace of fire, where
shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth.

Illumination by Christ.
1 AS the lights of heaven which we see placed in the firmament, for signs;
and to distinguish times, days, and years, do give light unto them which are
on earth: So Christ does Illuminate his Church, and gives watch-words by his
precepts, whereby it may know how to fly from the anger to come.

2 As the eyes of our body are not always Illuminated of the Sun alike, but
the higher and nearer they come to it, the more they perceive the force of the
brightness and heat thereof: Even so our souls, the higher and nearer they
approach to Christ, the more clearly they are Illuminated by him.

Sound Judgment necessary.
AS the eye is the sight of the body, to guide and lead it in the right way,
and if it be clear, the body cannot go amiss: Even so the Judgment is the
eye of the mind, which being sound, true, and framed according to Gods word,
then are our affections right, the actions and motions of our mind right, and
good in Gods sight, as far as man's weakness can comprehend.

Our Journey to heaven.
1 AS Travelers that be upon their Iourneys, do not abide in those Hosteries
or Innes where they are well used, lodged, or entertained, and where they find
plea^^nt Gardens, walks, or such other intisements; but after their bait, or
in the Morning, do pass on their way: Even so we, albeit God in this life,
give us goods, honors, houses, and other carnal commodities: yet we must
remember that we are travelers, and must not stay, but go forward on our
Journey toward heaven; yea and in case we be afflicted, with sickness,
poverty, or any other calamity, yet must we still think, that we are upon
our Journey, and therefore taking comfort, say: Peradventure we shall be better
to morrow. 1. Cor. 7.29. etc.

2 As they who are to depart from a foreign land toward their own country,
do prepare things necessary for their Journey: So must we likewise provide
that which is expedient for the happy performance of our Journey, toward our
heavenly Country.

Unbelieving Jews.
AS that dry skin, which a Snake does cast, to renew her age, has in it, the
shape, likeness, and prints of eyes, and that thin rind also, wherewith the
eyes of the Snake are covered, and yet in deed has no seeing eyes: So the
wicked and unbelieving Jews, did seem to have eyes, but in deed they were
blind, and Idle and empty skins, and rindes without sight; they were men, but
not of God; they had eyes of the flesh, but none of the spirit; they could see
creatures, but they had not one eye, to behold the Creator: And as for Christ;
they had no more sight nor knowledge of him, then they had of the Sun and
Moon, when they were yet in the wombes of their mothers. John. 9.29.

The Infirmities of godly Fathers, are set down in the Scripture, for our
comfort and instruction.
EVen as they which first sailed in the Seas, gave proper names to dangerous
Rocks, and perilous places, where they hardly escaped with their lives, to the
end that their posterity by such marks might shun shipwreck, and pass
safely away; calling places diversely; as the Sage bed, the Lauender bed; with
other like names best known to Sailors. Or as Carters use to set up some bush,
or other like mark, in that place where their Waine or Cart stuck fast, for a
warning to the^ that come after: So likewise have the godly Fathers, as the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, furthered us by their falls and
Infirmities, and by their experience, taught us to eschew many incombrances,
which they because they brake the Ice first themselves, could not foresee. 2.
Sam. 11.2. etc. John. 18.17.25, 27. Gal. 1.13. Luke 15.12. etc.

Infidelity.
1 LIke as the Moulde, which is blind to see things on earth, cannot see the
stars in heaven: So he which will not believe God concerning things on
earth, cannot believe him, concerning heavenly things.

2 Even as a subject or tenant, disclooning his king and Lord, and relying
himself upon a new master, even one who is a deadly and professed enemy to
his first master, does incontinently deprive himself of all those farms,
lands, houses, preferments, and commodities whatsoever, the which he did enjoy,
whilst he lived in alleagance to his Lord: So the case stands with man, when
as by Infidelity he falls from God; for then he loses all manner of
blessings, belonging either to his happiness, or to his holiness; yea it is
impossible, that a man should either love, fear, honor, or obey God, from
whom he looks for neither good nor evil, and therefore Infidelity is to be
accounted the root of all evil. Hebr. 3.12.

Gods Judgments not regarded of many.
1 AS lightning breaks the clouds, and the sudden light does not so much
illuminate, as dull the sight of the eye: So many feeling the hand of God, are
rather dulled then moved forwards to heaven.

2 As skillful Physicians in curing diseases use certain degrees; first they
begin with gentler sorts of salues, and if they do little good, then they lay
sharper remedies unto the wound; for if medicines do not heal, the iron does
heal; those which the iron heals not, the fire does heal; but such as the
fire does not heal, those are incurable: So God does sometime reprove man's
wickedness, by his word; if that does not help, he corrects with
sickness, infamy, and Imprisonment; if these profit not, he inflameth the
fire of his Judgment in the minds of men, and makes them aghast and amazed
with the terror of everlasting torments; if neither that can heal their
cankor, he leaves them quite as incurable, and gives them over into a
reprobate mind, so that they have neither a right Judgment to discern things,
nor any sorrow at all, by reason of the filth of wickedness, wherein they
wallow.

Isntrumental cause of preaching.
AS a builder must have not only an exquisite skill in building, and an
ability to accomplish his skill, and faithfulness to perform it, and meet
matter or stuff to work upon, but apt Instruments also or tools to try
forth and fashion the building: So likewise a Preacher must not only have the
spirit of God to direct him in preaching, and utterance to publish the same,
and faithfulness for the performance thereof, and matter to practice upon, but
fit Instruments, also to proportionate the work very aptly in every point;
namely Logic, and Rhetoric, with other artificial helps; which be (as it
were) the Isntrumental, and causes of preaching.

Rash Judgment condemned.
AS it is the point of great rashness, and a thing disallowed of all men, even
in worldly affairs, for one man to condemn another before he have heard him:
Even so it is great folly for a man to give his Judgment upon spiritual
matters, before he has well weighed and advised of them. Act. 18.21. and
21.14. Romans 1.10. and 15.32. 1. Cor. 4.19. Psalm. 115.3. Prou. 18.13.

Knowledge of God, how it is attained unto.
1 AS our natural eyes have power to discern the things of this world by the
Sun, that we daily see: Even so the Knowledge of God, that we hope to have
of him, must come by grace, through the light of him, that can lighten our
understandings, and open the eyes of our minds; otherwise we shall rest in
continual darkness, if our inward eyes receive not light by that supernall
Sun.

2 As there is great difference betwixt the viewing of a man in a dark or
dim Glass, and the sight of him face to face, in a bright day: Even so is
there much more difference betwixt our present Knowledge of God, in this life,
and that which shall be in the life to come. 1. Cor. 13.12.

3 Like as when a man goes to buy or borrowe some Candles, and bringing them
home, being within night, yet keeps them vnlighted, receives no comfort nor
benefit by them: Even so, if a man have Knowledge in the word of God, and yet
his heart and mind is not enflamed, and kindled with the love of the truth, his
Knowledge will not profit him to salvation.

Knowledge of God.
1 AS he that diggeth for treasure, casts the earth from him, and makes a
deep pit, until he find that which he seeks: Even so he that seeks the
Knowledge of God, must castaway all earthly affections, and wholly pry into
heavenly affairs. Prou. 1.4, 5.

2 As great and rich Treasure is many times hid in an homely earthen vessel:
So it pleases God to put the precious Knowledge of himself, and his truth,
into poor, weak, and frail men. 2. Cor. 4.7.

Knowledge may be increased always in the best.
LIke as he that uses the hand and help of many Physicians, though he be
always under the cure of some, can never come to perfect health: Even so, such
as do always seek, and ever learn, yet for all that, they never come to the
Knowledge of the truth. 2. Timo. 3.6, 7.

Knowledge and belief in gross.
1 AS a man may carry fire about him in a flint stone without heat; and
perfumes in a Pomander without smell, except the one be beaten, and the other
chafed: Even so such men as Know and believe in gross, the mysteries of our
faith, that there is a God, which rewards good and evil; that he is terrible
in his counsels upon the sons of men; that there is a hell for sinners, a
heaven for good lyuers, a most dreadful day of judgment to come, a strait
account to be demanded, and the like. All this they Know and believe in
general, as merchandise wrapped up together in a bundell; but for that they
unfold not these things, nor rest upon them in particular, for that they let
them not down into their hearts, nor do ruminate on them with leisure and
attention; for that they chew them not well in mind by deep consideration, nor
do digest them in heart, by the heat of meditation, they remain with them,
as a sword in his scabard; and do help them as little to reformation of life
(for which they were revealed) as a preservative in their pocket never applied,
can help their health. And thus they bear the general^ Knowledge of these
mysteries locked up in their breasts, as sealed bags of treasure, that be
never told nor opened; and consequently, they have neither feeling, sense, nor
motion thereby.

2 Like as it may be that one man may know an other man by sight, whom yet in
deed he knows not thoroughly, because he understands not what affection he
bears toward him: So men Know naturally, that there is a God, but what his
will is, or what is not his will, they do not know. Romans 3.11. John. 1.18.

A godly King.
1 AS breath is necessary for the body of man: So also is a godly King to the
people whom he governs Lam. 4.20.

2 As the roaring of a Lion is fearful: So the wrath of a King is terrible.
Prou. 19.12.

3 As a thief taken in stealing with the deed doing, is brought to open
shame: Even so Kings and Princes, and nations, putting confidence in Idols, and
yet deceived in finding no help in them, in time of their distress, are put
to manifest shame and confusion. Iere. 2.26.27.

Means of Knowledge.
AS light endures not always, but darkness succeeds: So the times and
means to get Knowledge, endures not always; but we are to use them, whilst
God does give them. John. 12.35.

The Kingdom of heaven.
1 LIke as Merchants can be well content when they see Pearls of great price,
to bestow all their substance and wealth on them, hoping to be great gayners
thereby: Even so, much more godly Christians ought not to spare any earthly
treasure, or to forbear any cost, for the attainment of that most precious
pearl the Kingdom of heaven. Math. 13.45, 46.

2 As he that finds a Treasure in an other man's ground, cannot justly enjoy
the same, except at his great charge, he first strain himself to purchase the
soil: Even so the Kingdom of heaven, the heavenly riches, cannot be had but
of them, which (if need so require) can be content to forgo all their
worldly wealth for it. Math. 13.44.

3 As we do naturally love the body more then the soul, and the goods and
commodities of this temproall life, more then the treasures of spiritual
riches: So we seek first the things that concern this present life, and as
for those that belong to the Kingdom of heaven, we seek after them but
seldom, slightly, and as it were for a fashion. Math. 6.36.

4 As all they that are possessed with righteousness, peace and joy of the
holy Ghost, which Saint Paul calls the Kingdom of God, are certain to enter
into heaven: So it is in vain to pretend to enter into the Kingdom of God,
which is in heaven, unless the Kingdom of heaven, which is the gate, be
first in us; that is to say, if we have not the true knowledge of God, and of
his Son Jesus Christ, a liu^ly faith, a fervent charity, unless we increase
in sanctification of body, of soul, and of mind; unless in our selves we do
feel a good conscience conjoined with peace and joy in the holy Ghost, and
unless we be regenerate in newness of life. Romans 14.17. John. 3.3. 1. Cor.
6.9.

5 As where there be two gates to a Town, it is not enough that we enter the
first, unless we also pass through the second: So is it not enough that we
being members of the Church, using the holy ministry, which is as the first
gate to the Kingdom of heaven, unless we thence proceed to the second, in
living as true and lively members of the Church, declaring the effects of the
holy Ministry by the testimonies of our faith, mortification of the old man,
newness of life; in brief, by daily amendment of life.

6 As when winter is over, the nearer that the Sun draws unto us, the more
does the earth being warmed by the heat thereof, fructify; and the longer that
the days are, the more work may we do: Even so the nearer that the kingdom
of heaven does draw unto us, by the coming of Jesus Christ, especially by his
ascension into heaven, the more should we be heat in the love of God, and
charity to our neighbors, to bring forth the more fruit of holiness, and be
the more addicted to all good works.

7 Like as it is commonly said; that the Cat would fish eat, but she would not
her feet weate: Or as Balaam wished, that he might die the death of the
righteous, and that his end might be like theirs; but yet he would not obey the
will of God: Numb. 23.10.19. etc. So in like manner, many do wish and be
desirous to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but yet they will not do the
will of God; neither labor, nor take any pains, for the means; that is, the
preaching of the word of God, whereby they may come by it. Mat. 7.21. and
19.16. etc. Luke 13.24. Math. 11.12. Luke 16.16. Ioh. 6.27.

Knowledge.
1 AS that man that has received abundance of wealth at his master hands,
does notwithstanding steal from him, and rob him of that which is his own,
is more worthy of death, then he that had no means to help himself: Even
so is it with him, on whom the Lord has bestowed Knowledge, and yet according
to the same, will not join obedience; for obedience is the Lords, and he that
fails herein, robs God of his honor.

2 As he which has Knowledge, shall (if with the same he join not obedience)
have greater punishments, then he which has less Knowledge: So also he that
has less Knowledge or none at all, and will not labor for understanding and
spiritual wisdom, shall surely feel those torments, wherewith the other was
afflicted, on whom the Lord bestowed more Knowledge. Luke 12.47, 48. Mat.
7.21. Romans 12.2. Ephe. 5.17.

3 As Wine without the mixture of water, does trouble the brain, etc. So
Knowledge without love, does make a man proud.

Knowledge and sight of our selves.
1 AS salt is made of Sea water, but so long as it is in the Sea, it is not
salt, it must be taken out of the Sea, and placed upon the dry land, that
being in salt pits, where the Sun may shine, the air blow upon it, the water
may be thickened, and so converted into salt: Even so this world is a Sea, so
long as we live in the world, tossed with the ebbings and flowings of the
worlds inconstancy, and overwhelmed in the bitter waters of the sins, and
wicked practices of the same, we are as yet no salt; we must go out of the
world, and enter into the land, to wit, into our selves; and take a just view
of our own imbicilitie, and have a due consideration of our own miserable and
wretched estate, that the Son of righteousness may thrust out his beams,
and the wind of heavenly grace, may blow upon us, and so we may be turned into
an admirable and wonderful salt; that being seasoned our selves, we may be
means, and the Lords instruments, to season others.

2 As our eyes which do behold heaven and earth, and other innumerable
creatures of God, do not see themselves, but looking in a Glass, by that
mean, they perfectly see themselves: So we do not see and consider our own
frailty and brickle estate, but if we will set before our eyes, the glass of
the remembrance of death, and the true Knowledge of our selves, beholding
diligently this clear Glass, we cannot choose but very plainly see our
selves, and what we be. Iam. 1.22, 23, 25.

Kings.
AS in a sudden casualtie of fire, or in a City surprised, there is great
fear: So profane and supersticious Kings and their Counselors, when the
voice or doctrine of the Gospel is heard, do tremble for fear, and do
mortally hate the same, as the firebrand of sedition in a commonwealth, and as
the looseness of discipline. Psalm. 2.2.

Love of the world.
AS a Nurse that weaneth her child, from the love and liking of her milk,
does annoint her Teate with Alloes, Mustard, or some other such bitter thing:
So our merciful Father, to the end that he may retire and weane us from the
Love of worldly delights, uses to send us tribulation, and affliction, which
of all other things has most force to work that effect, as we see in the
example of the prodigal Son. 1. Cor. 11.32. Luke 15.12. etc.

Gods Love.
1 AS a sure friend, is not known but in time of need: So Gods goodness and
Love, is never so well perceived, as it is in helping of us, when we cannot
help our selves. Psalm. 41.11.

2 As Adams fall did serve to manifest Gods justice and mercy, the one in
punishing, the other in pardoning of sin, which otherwise we had never
known: So the troubles of the Church, serve to manifest, first our deserts, by
reason of our sins; Secondly, our weakness and inabilitie to help our
selves; and thirdly, the Loving kindness of the Lord our God, in saving and
defending, that so we might be truly thankful, and return all the praise and
glory to God, and none to our selves. Romans 9.22, 23.

3 As a Father keeps his Son and heir short, without any money in his
purse, or any thing else at his own will, till the time come that he shall
inherit; and in great wisdom he does it, for if his Son should have the
inheritance presently, he would wast it, and spend it vainly: So God deals
with his children; and for no other cause, both in singular wisdom and Love;
that they may say afterward: By this I know that thou Love me, etc. Psalm.
41.11.

Life variable and troublesome.
1 AS the Sea by tempest is sometimes troublesome, and then is quiet and calm
by fair weather again: So the Life of man, sometime is oppressed with sorrow,
and extreme necessity, and sometimes it flows with joy and wealth at will.

2 As a flower so soon as it blows and is ripe, is cut down, or very
shortly gathered: So likewise is the continuance of a man's Life. Job. 14.2.
Esaias. 40.6, 7.

3 As the beauty of a flower suddenly fades, and is quickly gone: So likewise
is all the glory and graces of all flesh. Psalm. 103.15. Iam. 1.10, 11. 1. Pet.
1.24.

4 As now the Sun is shadowed with clouds, and by and by shines forth
bright: So likewise the Life of man is subject to change. Job. 8.9.

5 As Vapors appear for a little while, and afterward vanishes away quite
out of sight: Even so the Life of man is quickly vanished and gone. Iam. 4.14.

6 As wind suddenly passes away with a blast: So also suddenly passes the
Life of man. Job. 7.6, 7.

7 As there is no way so plain, but it has many turnings, and by-pathes, that
unless a man take good heed, he may wander and go out of his way: Even so the
Life of man, has many by-pathes to walk in; so that unless he take great
heed, he will easily wander out of the right way.

8 As there is no way but it has a beginning, so it has an ending: So
likewise the Life of man, as it has a beginning, so also it has an ending.

Lover of virtue.
AS some Lovers do much delight in the pale color, of her whom they Love: So
the Lover of virtue and godliness, does nothing abhor the banishment of
sincere Christians, neither the poverty of sound professors, nor yet the
condemnation of the faithful Saints of God.

Learning.
1 AS the Bird brings all kind of food unto her young ones neast, and is
nothing the better her self therefore: So some do only Learn, that they may
immediately teach, not seeking thereby to amend, and make better themselves.

2 As vessels that are to be filled, are bowed, and made apt to receive the
liquor that is powered therein: So ought a Learner, to accommodate and apply
himself, that nothing of that which is profitably spoken, do escape him.

3 Like as in meats, one, and the self same dish is diversely set forth,
according to the invention of the dresser, and appetite of the eater: Even so
in Learning, one and the self same point is diversely handled, according to the
discretion of the writer, and capacity of the reader.

4 Like as choice and good Wine loses his verdure and strength, if it be put
into a vile and vnpure vessel: Right so, a good word or sentence, if it be
spoken of an evil man; or Learning if it chance to a wicked man, takes none
effect.

5 As the Diamond enchased and set in Gold, gives a far brighter gloss,
then if it were set in lead, iron, or other baser metal: Even so the love of
godliness and virtue, planted in a Learned man's breast, brings forth far
greater and more excellent fruit, then if an unlearned man enjoyed the same
graces.

Lying of God and his truth, most offensive.
AS he sins most grievously, which deceives traveling men, by showing
them a contrary way: Even so, much more hainously offends he, that in
matters of Religion, doctrine, and godliness, do bring men into errors
through Lying, because he does thereby, as it were thrust them out of the
kingdom of heaven. Ezech. 13.6, 8 10, 19. Iere. 23.25, 26, 35. and 14.14.
Esaias. 9.15, 16. 1. Cor. 15.15. Iam. 3.14.

Lords Supper.
1 LIke as in the person of Christ, his manhood was seen on earth, and his
Godhead being not at all seen, did notwithstanding great and wonderful
things, without any changing, or confounding of natures: Even so in the Lords
supper, we see the bread and Wine, Christ's body we see not, which
notwithstanding works in us.

2 As the body of the Suns light above, is in it self whole, albeit it be
dispersed hear beneath: So likewise Christ in heaven above is whole,
notwithstanding he suffers us in his supper, each one to be full partakers
of his body and blood, when he gives himself unto us, and yet without any
diminition at all of himself, when he offers himself unto us which are
weak; without being enclosed in us, when he is received of us; and without
any dishonor at all to his majesty, when he comes into our small cottage,
and will have our hearts to be his Temple and dwelling place.

3 Like as the forbidden fruit, which Adam and Eve did eat in the Garden of
Eden, by Satan's provocation, procured their death: Even so that heavenly Manna
which Christ has appointed for our spiritual food in his supper, does bring
unto the worthy receivers thereof, everlasting life. Gene. 2.17.

4 As the sick man, the weaker he knows himself to be, should so much the
more earnestly desire meat, both to receive nourishment, and to refresh his
strength: Even so, so far off it ought to be, that our weakness should
keep us from the receiving the Lords supper, that it ought rather to spur us
forward to come unto it, that by it, we might be strengthened in faith and
repentance.

5 As the word of God is all one, whether it fall upon the evil or upon the
good, surely it is all one in the minds of the hearers: So the Sacrament of the
Lords body and blood is all one, whether it be received of the good or of the
evil; and as the Gospel in it self is the power of God to saving, and it
does also save; but it is not al alike to the unbelieving, as it is to the
believing: So the Sacrament is of it self the body of Christ, but to the
wicked which do contemn it, and to them which do receive it unworthily, it is
far otherwise.

6 As a mother having brought forth her little one, does not forsake it, but
nurseth and brings it up: So Christ having ordained Baptism to be as a
seal and pledge of our spiritual new birth into his Church, did institute the
holy supper, to the end that by participation in his body and blood, we might
the more be strengthened in this assurance, that Christ is ours, together with
all his benefits, and so feed our souls spiritually to life everlasting.

7 As a little wax, powered upon other wax, is made all one with it: Even so
they that receive the Sacrament of the Lords supper, worthily abide in Christ,
and Christ in them.

8 As the Child when he comes to age, is bound to honor his parents, not
only for his begetting and bringing into this life, but also because they have
fed and brought him up, and still do continue the same duties unto him: Even so
should it be with us, whom God has as it were begotten into his Church
through our Baptism, and to whom he has since in his holy supper ministered
the food of our souls, in the Communion of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ; for not only our spiritual new birth by Baptism, but also the
spiritual food which that good Father gives unto us in his holy supper, do
bind us to honor him; yea, and should thereto mightily induce us, considering
that for food of our souls, he has delivered his only Son Jesus Christ
to be crucified for us.

9 Like as if any man had a child so sick, that nothing could serve for his
food and recovery, but precious Pearls confected or preserved, this child
should be much bound to love and honor his parents, that for his relief, had
not grudged at such cost and expenses: Even so we shall deserve great reproof
of our heavenly Father, who feeds us in his holy supper, not with pearls,
but with the very flesh and blood of his Son Jesus Christ, in case we should
make no account to please him by amendment of life; withal considering, that
as there is no comparison between pearls and the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, so the spiritual life of our souls, is without comparison, much more
excellent then the life of our bodies.

10 As meat and drink ministered unto the body, do maintain the life,
motions, and senses of the body: So from the communion in the body and blood of
Jesus Christ, which is the food of the soul, must proceed the spiritual and
heavenly life, cogitations, affections, words, and deeds.

11 As it were a strange case, if the body by eating and drinking should
gather no sustenance, and consequently, want all motions, sense and bodily
operation: So were it a monstrous matter, that the soul communicating in the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, should gather no spiritual food, that might
bring forth newness of life, and holiness in words and deeds.

12 As the hololy supper is the table of Gods children, the faithful, and
members of the Church of Jesus Christ: So the communicating thereat, is a
solemn protestation that we are the children of God; true belieuers, and
members of the Church of Christ; and that so we separate our selves from the
profane, worldly, and vicious people, and do purpose to live holily
righteously, and religiously, as it beseems the children of God, and
faithful members of the Church: Such therefore as communicating in the holy
supper, do not nevertheless amend their lives, but walking after the world
and the flesh, are given to swearing, whordome, drunkenness, gluttony,
covetousness, deceit, fraud, ambition, pride, envy, hatred, backbiting, with
other like vices, and corruptions, do show themselves counterfeits and
hypocrites; do eat and drink their own damnation, and do horribly
scandalize and offend the Church, whereof they should be members together with
the doctrine that they do profess.

13 As Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the mark of Gods children: So is
there nothing that can more mightily induce us thereto, then the use of this
holy Supper.

14 As the bread made of many kernels, is but one bread: So we that
communicate in the bread and Wine of the holy supper, are one body, under one
head Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 10.17. and 12.12.

15 As bread has this property through Gods blessing given it, to feed and
strengthen our natural bodies in this life: So likewise the body of Christ
being represented effectually unto us in the Lords supper, by that bread, has
the self same property, touching our souls, to strengthen and to nourish
them spiritually.

16 As Wine does comfort and make man's heart glad: So our full joy and
spiritual comfort is, to be found in Christ alone.

17 As our diet is then full, whole, and perfect, as it were, when it
consists of these two things, Bread and Wine, or Drink: So we must know that
the fullness and perfection of all spiritual nourishment is to be found in
Christ alone, and no where else, whilst that he is become, as well the drink,
as the meat of our soul, not only in this double sign, helping our
infirmity as it were, but also teaching us to seek the heavenly refection and
nourishment of our souls, fully and wholly in Christ, and no where else.

18 As the Bread is made of many grains, and the Wine of sundry and several
Grapes, and yet all make but one Bread and one Wine: So all the faithful should
be instructed thereby, that though they be several and distinct persons one
of them from an other, as the members in the body are, yet they al compacted
together, make but one body. Romans 12.4, 5. 1. Cor. 10.16, 17.

19 Like as when dry Wax is put into that which is melted, it is presently
mingled, and united with it: So we are united to Christ by faith, in worthily
receiving the mysteries of his body and blood in the Sacrament.

20 Even as we are by the blood of Christ cleansed, and by the holy Ghost in
Baptism, regenerated: So we being cleansed, and regenerated, are spiritually
fed, and nourished, by the benefit of the body and blood of Christ; rightly
using the Lords supper, according to his own institution.

21 Even as there is no liberal hearted Gentleman, that makes a feast, but
he is desirous that his gestes should have a lusting, greedy and hungry
stomach: Even so our heavenly Father is desirous, that all men, that are
bidden to this heavenly feast, should be partaker of the mysteries of his body
and blood, should have hungring and thristing stomachs; which hunger and
thurst, must be of the soul, and not of the body.

Love of our neighbor.
AS he that Loves the Lord, does altogether surely and thoroughly depend upon
him in firm faith, and clear conscience; and therefore does neither admit any
other Gods, nor serve Idols, nor dishonor his name, nor profane his Saboths:
Even so he that Loves his neighbor as well as himself, will neither contemn
his parents, nor hurt or harm his neighbors, nor defile his wife with
Adultery, nor steal his goods, nor falsely witness of him, neither yet covet
any jot of all that is his; but will heartily seek his commodity, as his own.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Math. 22.37. Mar. 12.30. Luke 10.27.

God Loves his children.
1 AS we will take any thing well at his hands, of whom we are persuaded that
he Loves us; for the assurance of his Love swalloweth up, and sweetly
sends down all the rest: if he teach us, we take it; if he admonish us, we
are contented; if he reprooueth us, we put it up; if he jest with us, we are
not grieved; yea, if he smite us, we are not offended, all is taken in good
part, because they come from Love, who never did hurt his beloved: So likewise
God deals with his children, he teaches them when they are ignorant; he
corrects them, when they go astray; he admonishes them, when they are
unruly; he reprooueth them when they transgress; he threatens them, when they
are stubborn; and he smites them, when there is no remedy: But yet in his
favor and mercy, he teaches, corrects, reprooueth, threatens, and
smites his children, that they might not be damned with the world. If he
wounds us, his favor is Oil to cure our wounds; if he sends floods, and
Seas of troubles, the assurance of his favor, is like Noah's Arc to bear us
up from drowning: If his wrath shall burn like fire, his favor is water to
cool the heat, whereof Dives in hell could not get a drop: If he send
sickness either of body or mind, the assurance of his favor is a present
remedy, like the brazen Serpent; if he send sorrow over night, his Loving
favor shall bring joy in the Morning, and a joyful tidings like; Son be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee: If he chide us, his favor that he
bears unto us, will not suffer him to chide for ever: If his wrath be kindled
against his children, his favor puts out all again; if he sets us up as
marks to be shot at, he sets his favor before us; with the assurance
whereof, we are defended as with a shield. Psalm. 5.12. and 103.13.

2 As a Fathers anger, is rather Love then anger, and his correction is to be
counted rather a Love token, then a punishment: So in like manner is Gods anger
toward his children which fear him, and keep his covenants: and therefore his
correction is a Love token and no punishment. 2. Sam. 7.14, 15. Psalm. 118.18.

3 Even as when Jesus wept over Lazarus, the Jews said, Behold how he Loves
him: Yea, though he suffered death to cast him into his grave, the common bed
of all flesh, yet behold how he Loved him: So in like manner may Gods children
say, when the Lord corrects or reproves, or afflicts them, yet mark how
he Loves us, entreats us, and wooeth us; and when we see this, we must
needs say: Behold how he Loves us. Ioh. 11.35.

4 As Sechem deferred not to do all that was required of him, for the
obtaining of Dinah, because he Loved her: So also when we stand in need of the
Lords help, he deferreth not to help us, because he Loves us. Gene. 34.19.

5 Like as when Joseph's brethren came to Egypt to buy Corn, Joseph knew them,
and spoke roughly unto them, and bare them in hand that they came as spies: So
the Lord deals with his children many times, when they come to him for such
things as they want, he knows them well, but makes himself strange unto
them, and speaks roughly unto them, by seeming to deny their request; yea
sometimes by increasing their sorrow and affliction, as Jacob striving with the
Angel for a blessing, received a blow on his thigh more then he looked for.
Gene. 42.7. Gene. 32.24, 25.32.

6 Even as it was said of Joseph, that he took Simeon from them, and bound him
before their eyes; now all this while Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew
not him; for if they had known it had been their brother Joseph which Loved
him, no doubt they would have borne any thing at his hands: So likewise if we
knew our troubles to come from our Father which Loves us, we would willingly
bear any thing at his hands. Gene. 42.8.

7 Like as when Benjamin must go, then Jacob thought he had been robbed of
all his children, but he found Joseph, Simeon, and Benjamin, and all again at
the last: So Gods children in the end find all, when they think they have lost
all.

8 As they went home, hue and cry came after them for Joseph's cup, which was
in policy conveyed into their brother Beniamins sack, search was made, they
thought themselves clear: But when it was found in Beniamins sack, they were
worse appaide then they were before; whereupon Benjamin must stay by the
reckoning, and answer the matter, this passed all the rest: Even so does the
Lord many times find out sin by us, when we think all is well, and then
things go worse and worse with us, (as we think) and yet still the fear is
greater then the hurt, for God Loves us. Gene. 44.1. etc.

9 Like as Judah hereupon drew near to Joseph, and said; Let me speak but one
word in the ears of my Lord; and so tells him a long story of the whole
matter, from the beginning to the ending; as though Joseph all this while had
known nothing of the matter: So we oftentimes in the grief of our hearts,
power forth many things and great complaints, which the Lord knows well
enough.

10 Even as after many trials, it is said that Joseph could no longer refrain
before all that stood by, but cried, Have forth every man from me: Which being
done, he wept and cried, so that all heard him, both of the Egyptians and
Pharaohs house; and at last his Love brake forth like the morning light, and
ouerfloweth after long restraint, as a stream (whose course is stopped)
ouerfloweth the banks, and so he utters himself, asking if his Father were
alive? But his brethren could not answer him, for they were astonished at his
presence: Full little did they think that Joseph had been so hear them, they
did not once dream of any such matter, or of any such man: Even so the hand of
God is many times in tempering of afflictions to the godly in Love, for their
good, when they think full little upon it. Gene. 45.1. etc.

11 As Joseph said to his brethren, I am your brother, whom ye sold into
Egypt, come near I pray you unto me, be not sad nor grieved with your selves
that you sold me, for it was Gods doing, for your preservation. Afterward they
and their Father, and all his house came up, and had Egypt to inhabit: Even so
after the like manner, after many trials God deals with his children, he
utters himself unto them, and puts them in good remembrance of their
injuries done to his Majesty; he freely forgiueth them, and gives them the
inheritance at the last; which is more then they deserve, and more then they
desired, and more then they looked for, by which they are assured of Gods great
Love and favor unto them. Therefore let us be content with patience, to bear
what trial so ever our loving God and merciful Father shall think good to
lay upon us.

12 As Iehoram said to Iehu, when he marched in his fury, Come thou
peaceably? As if he should say, if thou come peaceably, march as furiously
as thou will: So let us say to our God: O Lord come thou favorably, and in
Love against us? Then come as terribly as thou will. Shoot thine arrows, and
spend them all upon us, beat us to powder, take all away, and in this life do
with us what thou will, so thou do assure us of thy favor. 2. King. 9.20,
22.

13 As the birth of the child into the world, swalloweth up all the pangs and
pains of the Mother in forgetfulness, which went before the birth: So
likewise we, if after our manifold afflictions and sorrows for Christ his
sake, we bring forth the assurance of Gods favor here, and of eternal life
hereafter being dead, let forgetfulness devour and consume all the rest.

Law of God.
1 AS some mark by the way side, may well direct us, and show us which way to
take: So the Law of God, may well lead us, and not teach us the way that we
must take and walk in; but it cannot give us strength and courage to go
through, if we be weary; neither enable us to come to the place whither we
would go.

2 As a Physician and Surgeon, coming to a sick man to heal him, opens the
vein, and takes away blood from him, not to the end to make him to die, but
as a remedy, appointed for the recovery of his health and safety: Even so
the Law pearceth our Impostume, and sometimes makes a great hole in it; but
neither to the end to kill us, nor to hurt us, but to bring us into a good
order, to the end we may be the more easily healed. Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.24.

3 As a chaste Virgin, soiourning and dwelling with harlots in the stews, who
although she be chaste her self, yet can she not win those to chastity, with
whom she is conversant, but prevails nothing, and so is weak: Even so the
Law, although of it self it be good, holy, and just, yet in carnal men it
does nothing less then make them good, and so it is weak and feeble: And so
likewise the Gospel, as it is written in Paper and Parchment, and is preached
by man's voice, is weak in those that be void of Gods spirit; but it is the
power of God to salvation, only to those that believe. Romans 7.12. Romans 8.3.
Romans 1.16.

4 As a pleasure or good turn may be said to be the cause of ingratitude, and
prosperity the cause of envy, but yet improperly: Even so the Law, because it
brings transgression and wrong doing, and that not of it self, but by our
fault; for it requires obedience, but it finds us doing amiss, and so it is
the cause of transgression, but improperly. Romans 7.7, 8, 9. etc. Gal. 3.19.

5 As Christ rising from death, is free from the grave; Peter delivered from
the prison, was free from the prison: The sick of the Palsy from his bed; the
young man from his Coffen; the maiden from her couch: And yet the grave, the
prison, the bed, the Coffen, the couch, did remain still: Even so the Law is
abolished, when we are not subject unto it; the Law is dead, when we are dead
unto it; and yet it remains still.

6 As he that has an inward disease or corruption in his body, although,
because it appears not on the outside, he be careless of the danger, yet
when the same is launced, and that he perceives the inconvenience and peril
ensuing thereby to his body, he will then be desirous of the Surgeon: Even
so the launcing of our sins, by the preaching of the Law, will cause us (being
otherwise careless) to seek remedy in Christ.

7 Like as the sum of our faith is comprehended in the Creed of the Apostles:
Even so the Law of God, is the direction and rule of good works.

8 Like as if a man were bound to pay a thousand pounds to his Creditor which
he owes him, although this creditor did demand this debt of him, and he were
not able to satisfy him, or pay him, yet the Creditor should not do unjustly
to ask him his thousand pounds; For when the King did ask of his servant, the
ten thousant Talents that he did owe unto him, he did not unjustly, or
wrongfully: Even so all the whole Law of God, is nothing else but a
commandment, whereby we are commanded and bidden to pay that unto God, that
we owe unto him: For we are bound of duty to love God, with all our hearts,
with all our souls, and with all our strengthes, and our neighbor as our own
self; for we are debtors (says the Apostle) but not unto the flesh; shall we
say then that God is unrighteous, or that he does unjustly, in asking that
thing of us, that we do owe unto him of bounden duty? But rather that he does
most justly, godly, and righteously, to demand such things of us. Math. 18.24.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Romans 8.12, 13.

9 Like as this consequence is nothing worth: Money does not justify, or make
a man righteous, therefore it is unprofitable; the eyes do not justify,
therefore they must be plucked out: The hands make not a man righteous,
therefore they must be cut off: So likewise is this naught also: The Law does
not justify, therefore it is unprofitable; for we must attribute unto every
thing his proper effect and use.

10 As the Raven was sent forth before the Dove: So the Law was given before
the Gospel. Gene. 8.6. etc. Ioh. 1.17. Luke 16.16.

11 As the Raven by nature is a foreteller of death: Even so the Law before
hand, enjoined the penalty of death to Adams transgression. Gene. 2.17.

12 As the color of the Raven is black, and full of melancholy: Even so it is
the effect of Gods Law, to bring a black day upon the reprobate. Joel. 2.2.
Math. 22.13.

13 As the Raven brought no tidings of the waters abating from the earth: Even
so the Law tells us not that the wrath of God is appeased for our offenses.

14 As there belongs first knives and launcers to open that wound which is
full of corruption and rottenness, even to the bottom, and then sharp and
bitter salve to draw out the corruption, and to eat out the dead flesh thereof,
before there come any healing plaster near it; the nature whereof, is to
close up and skin the upper part of the wound, which afterward breeds great
inconvenience, and makes the wound far more dangerous: Even so it fares with all those which are wounded with the venomous dart of self-love, which wou^d
being choked with the corruption and dead flesh of covetousness, and pride,
and yet will use no other medicine for the curing thereof, the^ that pleasant
healing salve of the Gospel; which if they knew in truth how little the same
did profit them, before such time as the sharp launcing knife of Gods Law, had
opened the wound, and the bitter salues of his judgments, and sharp
threatenings, eaten out the rottenness thereof, they would go an other way to
work, and use a more sounder diet for the obtaining of health, although it be
very tedious and sharp at the first. Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.24.

15 As a Schoolemaister serves not for his Sholler continually, but till such
time as the Scholar may grow to some good ability to go forward at his book
by his own study: So the Lord fears his people with the Law, not always,
but till such time as they have sufficiently learned to know themselves, and
therefore to fly from themselves to Christ Jesus, who freeth them from the
curse and condemnation of the Law. Gal. 3.24.

16 Even as a Rule directs the Artificer in his work, and keeps him from
erring in any practice: Even so the Law and commandments of the Lord; are a
rule to guide us, and to show us wherein we err from the right way.

17 As a Line declares the straightness or crookedness of the tree: Even so
the Law and commandments of God, laid to our actions, declare how much we
wander and go astray.

18 As a band does knit and hold many things together; or as of many linkes is
made one chain: And as by the sinews, our joints and parts of our natural
bodies, are tied and bound together: Even so by Law, the politic body of a
commonweal, is united and knit together as one, for the preservation of
peace, in the profession of one true everliving, and ouer-ruling Lord.

19 As among all other ordinary accidents, that are incident to the
prosperity or adversity of mankind, there is nothing in earth that more fully
proportioneth the joys in heaven, then Music, and Marriage; to hear the
one, we leave our meat and drink; and to be joined to the other, we leave
Father and Mother: Even so among all ordinary instructions, incident to the
earthly felicity of mankind, there is nothing that more fully proportioneth
our condemnation to be just, then the Law; nor any thing that more fully
proportioneth our salvation to be in Jesus Christ, then the Gospel: In the one
we hear thundring^ Earthquakes, lamentations, mournings and woe; in the other,
nothing else but sweet voices, pleasant songs, and instruments of Music, all
proportioning and perpetually pointing our marriage with Christ Jesus, in whom
we are freed from the curse and threats of the Law, and al other inconveniences
whatsoever.

20 As a Scholar is in subjection to his Schoolemaister, till he become
learned, and then he is set at liberty: So in like manner, the Law has
performed the office thereunto appointed, when by it we have learned to know
and see, and acknowledge our infirmities, corruption, sinfulness,
unrighteousness, and to fly unto Christ, to be justified by faith in him.

21 As Honey by nature is very sweet, but seems very bitter to some sick
and distempered bodies: So does the Law seem burdensome; but this comes not
by nature, but through our weakness.

22 As the debtor not being able to pay his debt, was freely forgiven: Even
so the Law in the act of justification is utterly idle; as that which is
neither the cause, nor a part of our righteousness, as it is wrought of us.
Math. 18.23, 24. etc.

23 Like as if I owe a man a hundredth pound, and be bound to pay him at a
certain day, if I do then pay it, albeit mine heart be never so grudging and
unwilling thereto; yet have I fulfilled the Law, and discharged my bond, so
that there shall no process or judgment pass against me: But Gods Law
requires a thing to be done with a cheerful and a well willing heart and
mind, and even of pure love; for if I do it, either for fear or unwillingly,
that shall be imputed unto me for sin: If I do it for fear, (...) do I it
not of love, but rather hate both the thing (...) I do, and also the Law that
constrains me to do it; and if I do it unwillingly, then would I do the
contrary, and so would that there were no such Law, neither yet any God, that
should judge me in so doing; and seeing that God judges me after mine heart
and will, then must he needs condemn me, for I would do contrary unto his
Law and will: yea and do wish in mine heart contrary to that which I do in
mine outward deed.

24 Like as if I see a poor man which is not of ability to do me any
pleasure, and nevertheless does all his diligence to seek my favor, and
would with heart and mind give me some acceptable present, if he were of power,
being also sorry that he cannot perform his will and mind toward me: Now if
there be any spark of humanity or gentleness in me, I will count his good
will, as well as though he had in very deed performed his will; for his ability
extends no further; if his power were better, better should I have: Even so,
seeing we are not of power and ability to perform the Law of God, and yet
bear a good heart toward God and his Law, bewayling our imbicilitie, that we
can do him no further pleasure, then will God recount us, not as his enemies,
but as his dear children and beloved friends.

25 As after sleep the body being awaked, it is fresh, lusty, strong, and
courageous, to do his work: So likewise after the fearful threatenings of
the Law, when we hear the glad tidings of the Gospel, that God will be our
Lord and dwell with us, the mind is comforted, strengthened, and moved up to
do his duty.

26 As a man is judged and known to be waking, when he can do the office of a
man, as talk, work, write, or such like: Even so is man awaked out of the
sleep of sins, when he lives in charity, fears God, and walks according to
his Law in his vocation.

27 As we see in judgments here amongst us, there is a royal seat set where
the Judge sits, he that is accused stands at the Bar, holds up his hand,
hears his Indictment read, witness is brought against him, and he iustl^
condemned to death: So likewise we shall see Jesus Christ the righteous Judge of
the world, that will not be bribe^ sit in his seat of majesty at the last
day, and all the company of Angels about him, and we shall stand at the harre
as accused and indighted for breaking that righteous Law of his word; the devil
which intised us so to do, shall bear witness, that to be true; yea and our
own conscience also, with the fear of that fearful sentence (Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, etc.) shall make us to tremble. Math. 25.31, 32, 41.

28 Like as he which cannot esteem and discern his sickness, or the
grieuousnesse of his disease; the same must of necessity have a negligent
care, of seeking forth a remedy, and a wholesome medicine for the same: Even
so, he which learneth not to acknowledge his sins by the Law, the same
doubtless, knows not how to embrace grace by the Gospel.

Learning or virtue of transgression, but improperly.
1 AS the Date tree is most hard to be climed, having yet fruit most pleasant:
So likewise the entry or way unto Learning and virtue, is most uneasily, when
as yet they have fruit all pleasant and profitable. Prou. 3.13, 14, 15.

2 Like as nature has hid very deep in the ground stones precious, and of
much value, but others of no virtue, are every where to be found: So things
of estimation, and price, as virtue and Learning, are known but vn^^ few, nor
they will not be obtained, without great labor and study.

3 As he which hungereth, or thirsts, can do nothing, unless they quench
his appetite and desire: So all things ought we to lay aside, until we do
obtain Lear^ing and wisdom.

4 As the best Wine soon loses his taste or color, if it be powered into a
vessel filthy and impure: So is good Learning more then lost, if it happen to
a naughty man, for he will use it most peruersly, to serve his gain and
appetite.

To Live well, is to die well.
LIke as Balaam wished, and had a great desire to die the death of the
righteous; but he would not immitate them in godly conversation: Even so all
men wish for a happy end of life, but few care to Live virtuously, and
honestly, which doubtless is the ready way to die well. Numb. 23.10. Act.
8.19, 20. and 19.13.

The Law our Schoolemaister to bring us to Christ.
1 LIke as the Schoolemaister reproves his Scholars, whereby he grieueth them,
and makes them heavy, and yet not to the end that this bondage should always
continue, but that it should cease when the children are well brought up and
instructed accordingly; and that afterward without any constraint of the
Schoolemaister, they should chearefully enjoy their liberty, and their Fathers
goods: Even so they which are vexed and oppressed with the Law, do know that
these terrors and vexations shall not always continue; but that thereby they
are prepared to come unto Christ, which is to be revealed, and to receive the
liberty of the spirit, etc. Gal. 3.24.

2 As the duties of a Schoolemaister, be especially three; First, to teach his
Scholars; Secondly, to frame their manners; And thirdly, to punish offenders:
Even so the Law of God, first teaches us concerning God, that there is a God,
and what manner of one he is, and what manner a one man's nature is by
creation, and what was that Image of God, or original righteousness in man;
namely, agreeableness to the Law of God: It teaches also of sin, and the
penalty of sin, of the last judgment, of the resurrection of the dead, and
life everlasting of outward discipline, or honest government of manners; with
many such other things: Secondly, it frames our manners, in this outward and
civil conversation of life; and it is a rule of life, or good works, in which
those that are borne again, must show their obedience to God: And thirdly, it
chastises us, with the threats of Gods wrath and endless damnation, and it
punishes us with death, sickness, and other miseries, all which are Sermons
of the Law, concerning Gods dreadful wrath against sin. Gene. 1.26, 27. and
2.7.

3 As a looking Glass does neither wash, nor make him fair that looks
therein, but gives occasion, either to seek for water, or else for some other
thing, that may make him fair and clean: Even so the Law, shows unto us
our sins, and makes known unto us our miserable estate and wretchedness;
and how that there is nothing good in us, and that we are far wide from all
manner of righteousness, and so drives us of necessity to seek
righteousness in Christ, as to the Physician and fountain of all salvation,
who only, has by his death taken away sin and death, and delivered us out
of the prison of the Law.

4 Like as in the night, by reason of the darkness spread upon the earth, all
things are hid and covered; which causes that we cannot discern and discover
the spots which we have in our faces: But when the light begins to appear,
and that we take a Glass to behold our selves therein; then they are
discovered and show themselves: So likewise during the time that we are
covered with the darkness of ignorance, the sins and vices that dwell in us,
are hidden there, and yet oftentimes we think (being leprous and deformed)
that we are beautiful and perfect; but our eyes being once opened and
illuminated by the spirit and grace of our God, and taking the Glass of the
Law, therein to behold the estate of our nature, and our life; then we begin
to know the great and grievous imperfections, and wants that are in us; and so
at once, we loose the opinion which we had conceived before of our own
righteousness and virtues, and so are forced to fly to Christ for remedy,
etc.

Laws like to copwebs.
AS little Flies are fast tied and easily snared in the copwebs, but the Drones
and great Flies break and escape through them: So likewise poor and mean
men, are fast wounden and holden in the penalties and dangers of Laws; but
Lords and men in great authority, daily break Laws, and are not corrected:
So that the weakest goes to the walls, and the worst may, holds the candle.

Labor lost.
AS a wife by long suite obtained, sometimes much molesteth her husband: So
some men with great Labors and charges, purchase that thing, which afterward
is their only care and vexation.

Appearance of Learning amongst inferiors.
AS the Ship lying in the Haven or river, seems huge and great, but being in
the maine Sea, it shows both slender and small: So diverse, which be but simple
and mean, in some places, appear to be wise, excellent, and Learned, whereas
amongst their betters, they appear, base, simple, and plain.

Lamenting for trifles.
AS if you forbid children one play of game, then they straight do cry, and
weep, not regarding any other kind of pastime: So diverse kind of men, will so
Lament for a trifle, or small displeasure, that thereby they make all other
commodities and pleasures altogether unpleasant.

Labor.
LS the Mariner, when he perceives a storm or tempest to be near, he first
calls upon God by earnest prayer, that he may safely attain to the wished
haven, and then strikes his sails, and uses all good means which he
supposes needful for the same: Even so we must so trust to the providence of
God, that we also use our own industry in all good means and sort convenient.

The Love of God, in giving his son for us.
LIke as if a man give a penny, having a great deal of money in his purse, is
not so much, as when he gives it, having but it only; As when Zerephath gave
Heliah the handful of meal, having no more for her self and her son: Even so
the wonderful great Love of God toward mankind, appeared in this, that having
but one only Son, and not many Sons, he would vouchsafe to give him for a
ransom, for the redemption of us most wretched and vile sinners. 1. King.
17.12. Iere. 6.26. Amo. 8.10. Ioh. 3 16. 1. Ioh. 4.9.

Love.
1 AS a Candell wastes it self, to give light unto others: Even so a good
Christian ought to spend his life, for the benefit of others.

2 Like as in the building of a house, one stone is bound and fastened to
another with mortar: Even so in the spiritual building of Christ, one
Christian man is joined to another by Love.

3 As fire goes out, if it be not mainteyned with wood: So likewise Love
grows cold, which is not mixed with good works.

4 As the fire without wood turns to ashes: So does ^oue without works, take
an end, and finish.

5 As hatred is the cause of contentions among men: So likewise Love covers
faults, either by reforming them, or by winking at them. Pro. 10.1^.

6 As the rod of Moses turned into a Serpent, devoured the serpents of all
other rods: Even so the Love of God must devour the love of all other things.

7 As that is the hottest fire which warmeth them that are furthest off: So
that is the most fervent and perfect Love, which forsakes none, though they
be never so far off, neither friend nor foe, that may be loved, but
imbraceth all in him, who never does forsake, unless he be forsaken.

8 As envy, hatred, or malice, moves us to reproach and disdain our
brother, when he displeases or offends us: So in like manner, Love hides
and pardons the faults, which he commits against us, though they be never
so many. 1. Pet. 4.8.

9 As a King is honored in his image: So God in man, is both loved and hated;
he cannot hate man, who loves God; neither can he Love God, who hates man.

10 As fire cannot be hidden in flax without some flame, nor Musk in the
bosom, without smell: Even so, neither can Love be hidden in the breast,
without suspicion.

11 As a cold stone by lying three or four hours in the warm Sun,
gathers heat: So the Love of God shining upon our souls, ought to kindle
us, both to love him and all men, for his sake. Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh. 4.16, 19,
20. Ephesians. 24 Romans 5.8. and 13.10. 1. Cor. 13.1. etc.

Lying.
1 AS he sins most grievously that deceives blind men, or traveling men,
by showing them a contrary way: Even so much more heynously offe^^deth he,
that in matters of religion, doctrine, and godliness, do bring men into
errors through Lying, because he does thereby as it were, thrust them out of
the kingdom of heaven. Eze. 13.6, 8, 10. Iere. 23.25, 26. 1. Tim. 4.2, 3. Esa.
9.15, 16.

2 As the devil is the Father of lies: So Lying is an evident token of his
children. Ioh. 8.44.

3 As uncomely as magnificall talk is for a poor fool: So unmeet is Lying
and untrue talk for a Prince. Prou. 17.7.

Learning.
1 LIke as in meats, the wholesomnesse is as much to be required as the
pleasantness, so in reading or hearing Authors, we ought to desire as well the
goodness as the eloquence.

2 Like as a field, although it be fertile, can bring forth no fruit, except
it be first tilled: So the mind, although it be apt of it self, cannot
without Learning, bring forth my goodness.

3 As men in nothing more differ from the Gods, then when they are fools: So
in nothing they do come near them so much, as when they are wise and Learned.

The Law points out true bliss, but furthereth not the certainty of it.
LIke as if a man should show a needy body a bag of Gold, upon the top
of a high Tower, and yet not ^end him a ladder wherewithal he might clime up
to the ^op and fetch down the bag: Even so does Gods Law ^nely point men to
the sovereign good, without showing us how we may come by it, seeing that no
man fulfil^th the Law.

The fruits of Liberty, are by good right, required of Christians.
AS he which does commit sin, is the servant of sin: Even so he which is
delivered by Christ, will be no more bond, but free, and therefore will not
take upon him the yoke of bondage. John. 8.34. Romans 6.20. Iam. 2.12.

How we must behave our selves in Lending to Artificers and laborers.
AS charity does not require that we should give of our goods freely, to them
that are strong, lusty, and able to work and labor: So necessity urging
Artificers and Laborers, and they desiring to borrowe any thing of thee, then
thou must obey the rule of Christ, and Lend without looking for a recompense in
the like, or in any other kind of duty. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11. Luke 6.35, 36.
Esaias. 58.7. Prou. 19.17.

Gods Liberality.
AS the fire ministers light to a multitude, and yet is minished, or consumed
thereby: Or as in a candle of which many other candles be light, the light is
not thereby in any wise diminished or hurt at all: Or as one supper does not
refresh or suffi^e many as well as few, but the the voice of one Preacher
teaches as well a hundredth as one: Even so God bestows innumerable benefits
upon us, and yet his Liberality is not hindered therewith.

Godly Life.
1 AS when Moses had conuersed and been with God forty days upon the
mountain, at his coming down his face shined and glistered with the heavenly
glory: So will it be with us, by then we have for twenti^ or thirty years,
been conversant in heaven, we shall become heavenly and spiritual, both in
word and deed. Exodus 34.69.

2 As by experience we see, that when a country man has dwelled some twenty
or thirty years in the Court, he forgets his country speech, and course
of Life, and grows to be as good a Courtier as if he had been borne in the
Court: Even so our earthly talk and communication, our worldly course of life,
and the corruptions of the flesh, that bear but too much sway in us, do but
over manifestly show, how little we are conversant in heaven, and consequently
do testify, that we account our selves Burgesses of earth, and not of heaven.

3 As the rough tazle or thistle does make the cloth smooth: So does a
straight and strict kind of Life, make the conscience more quiet.

It is our duty to communicate at the Lords supper.
AS they who living in fornication, and will not marry, least thereby their
fornication, which they are not minded to give over, should be the more
grievous, as being converted into Adultery, are in a woeful state: Or as
they, who hating their neighbors, when they say the Lords prayer: Our Father,
etc. do leave out this petition; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us; and so refuse to ask forgiveness for their
transgressions, and seek to continue in hatred against their neighbors, are
worthy double condemnation; one in respect of their hatred that they continue
in; the other for their sins, for the which they ask no forgiveness: Even
^is, they that forbear the holy supper, in respect of their bad consciences,
do pronounce sentence against themselves; namely, that they deserve double
death: First for their sins, which they continue in wicked consciences: And
secondly, they separate themselves from the communion of Christ, in whom only
is the fullness of life.

Lust and pleasure.
1 AS Pills that are outwardly fair guilt and rolled in Sugar, but within full
of bitterness: Even so Lust and pleasure, is no sooner hatched, but repentance
is at hand, holding her by the head, ready to supplant her; for pleasure and
sorrow are two twins. Esa. 38.17. Gene. 3.6.

2 As a painted Sepulcher, fair without, but within full of mortal infection
and stench: Even so Lust and pleasure, is presently turned to sorrow and
tears, and flies and slideth away, leaving rather cause of repentance, then
occasion of remembrance. 1. Tim. 5.6. Esaias. 22.12, 13, 14.

3 As he that companieth with Millers or Colliers, shall hardly escape free from
blacking or meal: So likewise shall he hardly escape Lust and pleasures, that
haunteth with those that are given to follow their Lusts and pleasures.

4 As green wood laid upon the fire, albeit at the first it resists, yet in
the end does burn and is consumed: So is it with him that frequenteth those
that give themselves to Lusts and pleasures, albeit at the beginning he
resists the evil, and for a while falls not thereinto, yet by continual
haunt, he finally falls in with them.

5 As it is unnatural to kindle fire with water: So is it impossible for Lust
and pleasure to breed in a penitent heart, that sorroweth for sin. Joel.
2.12, 16.

6 As Agis, the last King of the Lacedaemonians, was in his youth given to all
Lusts and pleasures, but being established ruler of the land, he quite gave
them over, and showed such an example of temperance and sobriety, that the use
of pleasures quayling among his subjects, they also addicted themselves to
sobriety: Even so we Christians, albeit before the knowledge of the truth, we
wallowed in the Lusts of the flesh, yet being now raised to this honor and
estate to be made kings and priests, yea even the children of God, ought now to
be the more estraunged from all Lusts and pleasures, to the end, that after our
example, all others may renounce the same, and immitate our sobriety. Romans
13.14. Hebr. 11.25.

7 Even as a Snayle by little and little, creeps up from the root of a tree
unto the top, as she goes consuming the leaves, and leaves nothing behind
her, but foul and filthy slymish steps: So likewise Lust and pleasure, if we
consent unto them, will creep into our souls and bodies, and will deprive them
of all ornaments of virtue, and will leave nothing behind, but a foul guilty
conscience, and reproach to us and our posterity.

8 As Wine and drunkenness make a man senseless, etc. So Lust and pleasure
peruerteth the sense, and weakneth the soul.

9 As Fevers or Agues, the heat or cold whereof, though they be internal, yet
are they more extreme, and more painful to be endured, then the coldest or
hottest season of all the year: So likewise there is no fire whatsoever, whose
heat is so forceable, as is the schorching flame of our own Lusts and
concupiscences.

Liberality to the poor.
AS householders, if they keep their Corn in their Barnes all the year, the
vermin will consume it, and so it will decrease; but if they sow and scatter
it in the field, then they receive increase thereof: So likewise if we do not
scatter and bestow our wealth and riches on the poor and needy, God will
rather decrease them, then increase them. Math. 6.19. 2. Cor. 9.9, 10. 1. Timo.
6.17. Hebr. 6.10. and 13.16.

Married folks, are one a help to the other.
LIke as in the parts of a man's body, there is a mutual help and
participation of the one toward the other: Even so ought it to be also among
Married folks, the one ought to be an eye, ear, mouth, hand, and foot to
the other: In trouble, the one must be the comfort of the other. In adversity,
must the one be the others refreshing; yea, and in all their life, must the
one be the help and succor of the other. Gene. 2.18.

Man.
1 LIke as God has created all things in the world for Man's use and service:
Even so he has created Man alone for his glory. Act. 17.24, 25.

2 Like as al things in the world serve Man, and are subject to man: Even so
ought Man to be subject to the Lord, and to serve him, and for this end man was
created. Act. 17.27, 28, 29.

3 As things that be naught worth are still thrown out, cast away, not fit for
any good purpose, but to be rejected and trodden under feet: Even so is Man a
thing of naught. Psalm. 144.4.

4 As the excellent and noble Hawk, called a Faulken, upon the fist of the
fouler, seeing a pray flying on high, does by and by spread his wings, and
offer to break the strings, wherewith she is holden, and to be gone after
the pray; but if she be hooded, she neither sees the pray, nor is any whit
moved: Even so Man, whose nature far excels all other living creatures,
thinking upon the things that are above in heaven with God, and with the eyes
of his mind, beholding eternal bliss, and endless felicity, he is inflamed
and pricked, with a great and wonderful desire, to attain unto the same; but
if he be hooded with ignorance, spiritual blindness, and a love of this
world, he will never be touched with any heavenly motion, nor any whit moved
with any right love of God, nor once turn so much, as an eye of his mind,
toward heaven nor God. Psalm. 42.1, 2. Phil. 21.23.

5 As the Crocodile is a creature of an incredible bigness, and yet has his
beginning of a very small and little Egg, and is known only to Egypt, and to
those Countries which are watered with the river Nilus, and in this thing is
very admirable, that no living creature, that has so small a beginning, as of
an Egg, does grow to such an exceeding bigness: Even so such a one is Man,
when he forgets his original, and the foul matter of his beginning, waxes
insolent and proud; and yet in this one thing he is more admirable, that being
molded out of the earth and dust, he will make his heart a nest for pride and
all abomination, to build and to dwell in. Gene. 2.7. and 3.19. and 18.27.
Job. 4.19. and 10.9. to. 13. Psalm. 146.4. and 78.39. Esaias. 40.6, 7, 8.

6 As the earth by his natural course is borne downward, and is lowest of all
Elements: So Man borne by the talent and motion of his flesh, is beyond horse
and mule, and is by the Prophets warned to learn wisdom by the Swallow, by
the Ant, by the Spider, by the Ox, by the Ass, and almost by all the beasts
in the field.

7 Like as if a beggar, who has not a ragge to cover him, will notwithstanding
brag that he is the greatest Man, and the richest in all the country, and in
all assemblies, is not ashamed to take the highest place; every Man would judge
such a man worthy to be whipped: Or if there were a thief, who being convicted
of many great crimes, notwithstanding would be so shameless, and so stately,
that he would not humble himself before his judge, nor any other Man, he
deserves without any pity, to be punished with all severity: Even so in like
manner, if Man (dissembling his beggarly estate, his vice and ignorance) will
presume that he is wise, rich, virtuous, he does by this means make him self
unworthy of Gods mercy, whereof he should participate, if by an humble
confession of his misery, he would seek for it.

8 As a vessel cannot be known whether it be whole or broken, until it have
liquor in it: So can no Man be known what he is, before he be in authority.

Man wholly corrupted.
1 AS we say, not the essence of the Lodestone does draw iron, but the
properties thereof: So likewise the whole nature of Man is corrupt, not in
respect of the essence of the soul or body, but in respect of the qualities.
The soul is corrupt, not in respect of the essence which is spiritual, but in
respect of the qualities, which be in the soul. Psalm. 24.4, 5. Ephe. 4.22, 23,
24.

2 Like as if a Man being fallen into a pit, should rather be inquisitiue how
he fell in, then how to come out: Or as a Man deserves to be counted mad and
unwise, that has his house on fire, and will stand thinking how it came, and
not rather labor to quench it: Even so he may be counted a foolish Man, that
is more careful to know how he became wholly corrupted through original
sin, then to know and learn, how rather to come out of it, and so escape the
danger of it.

Masters duty toward their Servants.
1 AS the Centurian, who had many servants under his authority, and they were
all at his beck and commandment, most ready to obey him in any thing that
he set them about; and this good order he brought them too, by reason that his
said servants were dear unto him; that is, he made a special reckoning of
them, and was as a father unto them: So likewise all Masters are in conscience
bound to esteem and account well of their servants, and to use their
authority that they have over them, mildly, and Christianly; and then, if
their servants do perceive that they are dear unto their Masters, so may the
Masters in time work them like wax to their own mind: except they be such
as have sold themselves to work wickedness. Ephe. 6.9.

2 As Masters and Dames do love and cherish cattes and dogs, which have
been brought up any long while in their houses: Even so much more they ought to
love and favor their servants that have done them long and faithful service.

3 As it is impossible that he that has no skill in Music, can make an other
man a Musician: Or as it is hard for a Scholar to learn, that thing well,
that his Master teaches ill: Even so it is impossible that a Master that is
naturally negligent, should make his servant diligent.

Marriage ever esteemed, for increase of the Commonwealth.
AS he is counted no good Gardener, that being content with things present,
does diligently proine his old trees, and has no regard, either to impe or
graffe young fettes, because the selfsame Orcharde (though it be never so well
trimmed) must needs decay in time, and all the Trees dye within few years:
Even so, he is not to be accounted half a diligent Citizen, that being content
with the present multitude of Citizens, has no regard to increase the number
by lawful Matrimony.

Mercy.
LIke as he that is without compassion in beholding an other man's wounds, shall
have no body to pity him, if at any time he be hurt himself: Even so, he
that with pity does raise up his neighbor being fallen, shall have many to
relieve and comfort him, if he himself fall into any calamity. Iam. 2.13.
Mat. 5.7. Romans 12.8. Prou. 3.3, 4. and 14.22, 31. and 16.6. and 19.17.

The Misery of worldlings.
1 LIke as we see the Mules of Princes go all the day long, laden with
treasure, and covered with fair clothes, but at night shaken off into a
sorry stable, much bruised and gauled with the carriage of those treasures:
Even so, rich men that pass through this world, laden with gold and silver,
and do gaull greatly their souls in carriage thereof, are dispoyled of their
burden at the day of death, and are turned off with their wounded consciences,
to the loathsome stable of hell and damnation.

2 As we be justly moved to pity, by beholding the momentany miseries of men,
and the distressed state of their bodies, being consumed with sores and
sickness, and even at deaths door: Even so much more ought we to be grieved
at the most fearful state of worldlings, for the eternal misery of their
souls, not dying, but being already clean dead in sin, and yet living in
that state, which leads to unspeakable torment, and the hot burning furnace
of the wrath of God.

Mercies of God.
1 AS a river continues running still: Even so the Mercies of God do daily
light on the faithful.

2 As the river has a swift course: So the Mercies of God help at a pinch.
Psalm. 46.1. etc.

3 As a river is deep: Even so the Mercies of God are great, neither can the
bottom of them be sought out of any man.

4 And as the river has this property (as has also all other water) to
bind, and therefore does not the earth dissolve, because (as the Philosopher
says) the water binds it in: Even so the Mercies of God do bind us unto
himself, or else we should dissolve and become Satan's sink and puddle.

5 As a beggar will never go forth a begging, until such time as he can
have provision, or maintenance at home: So we will never come to Christ for
Mercy, so long as we see any goodness in our selves. Psalm. 32.4.

6 As a spark of fire is in comparison able to dry up all the water in the
Sea: Even so no more is all the wickedness of man, unto the Mercies and
mercifulness of God.

7 As no man is so thankful for health, as he that has been in continual
sickness: So no man feels the Mercy of God, that is not truly humbled in
his own sight.

Man's nature to be mortified.
1 AS the seed of right Artichoke, if the point of it be not broken, brings
forth the prickley Artichoke or Thistle: So the best Man's child, if his
corrupt nature be not mortified, will bring forth nothing but ungodliness.

2 Knecholme growing of it self, brings forth fruit, but being planted, it
brings forth none: But Man's nature, if it be suffered to grow of it self
is unfruitful, but being planted in Christ, becomes fruitful in good
works.

3 The superfluous moisture of Elecampane being dried up, it comes fittest
to his full virtue, and is hot in the third degree; but though the superfluity
of evil be mortified in us, yet we our selves will never come to our first
perfection, except we be quickened by Gods spirit, etc.

A Mind troubled.
1 LIke as a great and deep wound cannot be touched with ones hand, though
never so softly, but with some grief to the party: Even so a troubled and
wayward Mind, hard to please, thinks scorn of every thing, and is offended
with the least word spoken.

2 As the sicke-man cannot away with the sight of his wife, blames the
Physician, is grieved at his friend that comes to visit him, and yet being
gone, is displeased again at their departure: Even so is the wavering way and
trade of life, and the wandering and inconstant mutabilitie of the Mind, which
seldom does arrive at the quiet and desired port and haven.

3 Even as they are queasie stomacked, and are disquieted with vomiting, do
leap from one Ship to an other, that they might find some ease thereby, until
they perceive themselves nothing the better, but yet do the same still, that
they did before, carrying their vomit (as we may say) still about with them,
where ever they go: So in like manner, they which ever anon, choose now one,
and now an other trade of life, do rather entangle themselves in cares and
troubles of a discontented Mind, then be discharged and rid there from.

4 As it sometime falls out, that one receives an injury, is grieved, and
studieth to revenge; an other being author of a wrong, rejoices at other men's
harms, and fecks to keep him still under, whom he has once oppressed: Even so
is the Mind it self, at war with it self, and through contrary and
repugnant affections, is rent, and in a manner torn in pieces.

Magistrates duty to their subjects.
1 AS that medicine is more to be allowed, which heals the parts of a man's
body, then that which utterly burns away the same: So is that Magistrate more
to be praised, which by correction causes evil doers to amend, then he which
by death and execution utterly takes the same away.

2 As God is above all men, the soul more excellent then the body; and the
kingdom of heaven more precious then earthly treasures: So likewise does the
chief and principal end of the Magistrates charge and office, consist in the
establishing and maintaining of the purity of doctrine, in the holy ministry
and service of God, the holy administration of the sacraments, the invocation
of Gods name, the order of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Romans 13.4. 1. Chro.
15.1. and 22.6. and 2. Chro. 14.3. etc. and 15.8. etc. and 17.6. etc. and 29.1.
etc. and 30.1, 2. etc. and 31.1, 2. etc. Dan. 3.24. etc. Psalm. 2.10.

3 As inferior Magistrates ought not to shrink from equity and Justice,
notwithstanding the commandments of their superiors: So is it as great an
oversight in the superior, for fear of displeasing his inferior, to make any
wrongful or unlawful decree. Dan. 6.9, 25. etc. Iere. 38.5. Math. 27.25.23.

4 Like as when fire has taken a house, men use to pull it down, and to cast
it to the earth, least it should fire also the neighbors houses: So must the
Magistrate pluck down, and punish the transgressor, least the heat of Gods
wrath be kindled, and consume all the people. Numb. 35.32, 33. Iosu. 7.12. etc.
Deuteronomy. 13.10, 11, 17. and 21.1. etc. Iona. 1.15. 1. Cor. 10.6. etc. and 5.4. etc.

5 As it is great rigor to condemn to death, a man that by mischance kills
one: So is it a mercy condemned by the Lord himself, to pardon him that
wilfully commits murder. Numb. 35.11, 12. Numb. 33.16, 17. Exodus 21.12.

6 Even as too much cruelty and severity of a Prince, does make his subjects
to fear him with hate: So also does general good will and gentleness make
them to love him, and to fear least he should be taken from them, or incur
any mishap.

7 As Princes and Magistrates, have their laws, statutes and ordinances,
wherewith to contain their subjects in their duties, in the time of peace: So
should they take order for good government in the wars, to the end their just
wars, may justly and hoisly be prosecuted. Deuteronomy. 20.1. etc.

Mean estate of life is safest.
AS men being in deep Caves, are never stricken with thunder or lightnings: So
the base, low, and Mean estate or degree, is most at ease and in safety.

Ministers.
1 AS a Mule that is gotten between a Horse and a she Ass, is neither Horse
nor Ass: So some Ministers, whiles they endeavor and study to be as well of
the Court, as of the Spirituality, and to be as well civil Magistrates, as
Preachers of the Gospel, are in deed neither of both.

2 As a Physician may persuade his sick patient, to take medicine, and tell
him the danger, if he will not receive it, but he cannot compel him, and yet
oftentimes the sick party is forced by his parents and friends to receive it:
Even so it is the office of a Minister and Preacher, to persuade by all good
means, his parishioners to abstain from all notorious sins, but to compel
them, he cannot; but the magistrate may and ought to do it. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19,
20, 21.

3 Like as that woman which takes a child to nurse, and feed for hire,
although she should pray for it one part of the day, and sing it an other part
of the day, and should wash it, and keep it as clean as possibly could be,
the third part of the day, and yet should given no milk, nor feed it, but
suffer it to die for hunger; nevertheless for all her singing, and saying,
washing and praying, she were a murderesse: Or as if a watchman were hired of
the Citizens, to watch the City, and should leave his place, and go into the
City, and help the Masons to build the Walls; or be occupied about some
other affairs, which he had no charge off, and in the mean time, the enemies
should come and kill some within the City, in thus doing, he should be
guilty of their death: Even so that Minister, that takes a Congregation to
feed, who although he be diligent in reading his service, singing of Psalms,
ministering the Sacraments, or else occupied about some affairs of the
commonwealth, and shall leave undone the most principal part of his calling,
which is preaching, and Catechizing, and so the people perish for want hereof;
in thus doing, he should be a soul murderer, and guilty of all those that
thus perish. Ezech. 34.2. etc. and 33.2, 3. etc. Iere. 23.1, 2. etc. Zach.
11.17. John. 10.1. etc.

4 Like as Cooks, who commonly are occupied in preparing of banquets, have as
much feeling and seeing of the meat, as any other; and yet there is none that
eats less of it then they; for their stomachs are cloyed with the smell and
taste of it: So in like manner it may come to pass, that the Minister which
dresseth and provides the spiritual food, may eat the least of it himself;
and so laboring to save others, he may be a reprobate. Mat. 7 22. Act. 1.16,
17. 2. Timo. 4.10. Hebr. 6.5.

5 Like as if Ministers cannot answer one thing of a ^housand, if God should
enter into judgment with them, in respect of themselves: Even so much less
will they be able to answer the Lord, for every soul that dies, belonging
to their charge, which will be required at their hands, dying I mean the
spiritual death, for lack of spiritual food. Job. 9.3. Ezech. 3.18.

6 As there cannot be a greater treasure or Jewel in a Christian
commonweal, then an earnest, faithful, and constant preaching Minister of
the Lords word: Even so can there not be a greater plague among any people,
then when they have one for their Pastor and Minister, that is either a
Nonresident, a blind guide, a dumb Dog, or an hypocritical hireling.

7 As a just and righteous man regards, and is merciful, even to the very
beast that does him service: Even so much more Ministers, ought to have a great
care of the souls and salvation of those people, committed to their charge.
Prou. 12.10. Act. 20.28. Col. 4.17. 1. Pet. 5.2, 3.

8 As a Lawyer may not expound the Law, as he thinks best himself, but he
must expound Law by Law; and as the tenor of the writings do require: Even so
a Minister of the word, may not expound Scripture after his own humor, and as
best likes him, but he must do the same by Scripture, and as the tenor of
the same will suffer him, and according to the meaning of the holy Ghost.

9 Like as a careful Householder, knows every thing in his house, and what is
necessary for every one: Even so a careful Minister does watch over his
flock, that he may know every man, his conversation and manners, and so may
Ministers comfort where it is needful, and reprehend the blame worthy.

10 As there be diverse sorts of Candles, some of Rushes, which give a small
light, and are soon forth; some of Week, but will not burn, unless they
be often snuffed; but the best sort are of Cotton, and burns dearest: Even
so there be diverse sorts of Ministers in England: As first reading Ministers,
and these give no light at all, and therefore to be cast out: Secondly, such
as be turne-coates, and time-seruers, as King Henry's Priests, Queen Mary's
Chaplains, who also do more harm then good, without great compulsion; but
the best sort are zealous and painful Pastors, who are the true lights and
Candles. Math. 5.14. John. 5.35. Reave. 1.20.

11 As Birds fall not into the snare, where no Fowler is: Even so God
reuealeth not his secrets to his people, but by his Ministers. Amo. 3.5, 7.

12 As a Candle that is lighted, ought not to be put under a bushel, but set
upon a Candlestick, that all they that come into the house may see light by
it: Even so the Ministers of the word, ought not to hide their gifts, but so
plainly to set forth the light of Gods most holy word, that every man in
the Church, may thereby be guided and directed in his calling. Psalm. 18.28.
Mark. 4.21. Math. 5.15, 16.

13 Like as Aarons rod (being before withered and dried) by divine virtue
became green again, budded and brought forth good and wholesome fruit: Even
so likewise it is meet, that such as be called to the Office of the
Ministry in the Church of God, should show forth the fruits of virtue and
good works in themselves, and by wholesome doctrine also instruct others under
their charge, to do the like; and to show forth their sound and lively
faith, by good and Christian acti^ns. Numb. 17.8.

14 As the pains of a woman in childbirth, is great and wonderful: Even so
the pains, toil, and grief of body and mind, which true and faithful
Ministers of Christ take and suffer, to form and fashion Christ in them, that
pertain to their charge is excessive great. Gal. 4.19.

15 As natural Fathers do make no spare of labor, travail, and toil, to
get and lay up in store for their children: Even so the true Ministers of the
word, ought to take great care, pains, and to make no spare of themselves, but
to bestow themselves, and all their gifts fully and wholly upon their flock,
to win them to God, who has made them Fathers over his people. 2. Cor.
12.14, 15. 1. These. 2.11.

16 As fishers do oftentimes catch with their nets, great store and plenty of
fish in the Sea: Even so when it pleases God to bestow his graces in
abundance, then his Preachers by the preaching of his word, shall catch great
store and variety of men's souls, and so convert them to God. Ezech. 47.9, 10.
Mark. 1.17.

17 As the Apostles, when they had labored all night in fishing, and caught
nothing, yet in the day time they cast out again, at the commandment of
Christ, and so enclosed a great number: Even so godly Ministers, are never to
despair, though they do not see that they win any by the word; yet God will
bless their labors, when he sees it good. Luke 5.5, 6.

18 As Hiram bestowed much labor upon the material Temple: Even so should
Pastors and Preachers, take much pain with the people of God, which are his
spiritual temple. 1. King. 7.13, 14. etc.

19 As the Israelites, might not plough with an Ox and an Ass: So only those
Ministers must instruct the people of God, who are able to teach them. Deuteronomy.
22.10.

20 Like as the runners look ever to the mark, and the Champions employ all
their shifts and practices to smite their adversary, and start not aside with
blind braides, ne beat the air with rash strokes: Even so every man in his
vocation (but specially the Ministers and teachers of the Church) ought to
choose out wisely the means that lead straight to the right end; and in
exercising the same, to use diligence and continuance, that they may in the
eternal life, attain the promised reward of their diligence. 1. Cor. 9.24, 25.

21 As hired servants will not tend men's sheep and cattle longer then there
is money and profit coming to them for it: Even so such Ministers which serve
in the Church of God, if their end be their own profit and promotion, then
they surely give over, and change their copy when days of prosperity fail,
and when storms and persecution for the word begin to grow. John. 10.12, 13.

22 As a careful Householder is not only content with provision for the
present time, but provides aforehand, and has by him store of things
needful, both old and new, as well for his household, as for the entertainment
of his friends: Even so he that is a Minister in the Church of God, ought by
long study and meditation aforehand, to be thoroughly furnished and stored with
all manner of doctrine and comforts, needful for every sort of men. Math. 13.52.

23 As that is counted the life of men, wherein they most delight and rejoice:
So that is a good Ministers life, to see his flock stand fast in the Lord. 1.
These. 3.8.

24 Like as a Nurse does favor, and with all mildness softer and cherish her
children: Even so ought a Minister with all kindness and lenity to cherish
his flock. 1. These. 2.7.

25 As a Soldier takes wages of them, for whom he fights, and goes on
warfare: Even so a Minister of the Gospel, may lawfully receive maintenance at
the hands of them to whom he preaches the Gospel. 1. Cor. 9.7.

26 As a Soldier pressed forth to the wars, entangleth not himself in other
civil affairs: Even so a Minister which is Gods Soldier, ought to keep
himself free, from all such things as might hinder him from his calling. 2.
Timo. 2.4.

27. As one candle cannot light an other if it self be put out: So likewise a
Minister and Preacher, shall not inflame others with the love of God and
godliness, himself being void and without the same love and godliness. Job.
21.17. Luke 22.32.

28 Like as the Trumpet sounds out aloude to give soldiers and seruitors
warning to prepare and put themselves in a readiness, for that which they are
appointed for: Even so much more should godly Ministers strain their voices
and cry aloude, both to Princes and people, to show them the dangers that are
imminent and at hand, for their sins. Esaias. 58.1.

29 As the Trumpetter that is set to watch for the coming of his enemies, is
guilty of the blood and death of the Citizens and people, if through his
negligence, and for want of warning by his Trumpet, the enemy steal up, upon
them, and make slaughter and havoc of them at unawares: Even so the Ministers
of the word also, if the people perish in their sins, for want of continual
admonition and calling upon to repent, their blood will be required at their
hands. Ezech. 33.2. etc. and 3.17.1^ 19.

30 As the wrestler obtains not the crown o^ garland, except he strive for
it according to the Laws of wrestling: So likewise Ministers, are not to look
for any reward, except they do their diligent endeavor, to do their duties
faithfully. 2. Timo. 2.5.

31 As workmen that labor faithfully and painefully in their calling, are
worthy to have their hire and wages well paid them: Even so much more such
Ministers, which labor carefully in the Church of God, for the salvation of
souls, deserve to have the reward allotted and appointed them for their
pains. Math. 10.10.

32 Like as a man that has meat and drink enough, but no stomach to digest
it; and so the more he eats, the more it turns to his hurt: Even so such
Ministers as make no conscience of sin, do by Gods just judgment prove
devils; as the example of Judas manifests: for the more knowledge a man has,
the more wicked he is if he want grace. Mark. 14.44. John. 6.70.

33 As a lump of Wax, if it be kept from heat, or from the fire, it keeps
his own form still, but if it be held to the fire, it melts and run
abroad: So Ministers, who by reason of their callings come near God, if they
be lumpes of iniquity, and live in their sins, they shall find that the
corruptions of their hearts, will melt abroad as wax at the fire. Iere. 15.19.
Esaias. 6.5.

34 Like as if a Nurse should take a man's child to bring up; and yet never give
it milk, in so much that the child dies for hunger; she for thus doing is a
murtheresse: Even so it is with him, that takes upon him the charge of Gods
people, and never feed them with the milk of Gods word, or else so seldom,
that their souls do famish; he is the murderer of them, and has betrayed
them into the hands of their enemies; and shall be condemned ^or them, as a
traitor unto God, unless he repent.

35 Like as a charitable and godly master, sometimes gives a good Alms, by
the hand of a lewd and wicked servant: Even so God (if it seem good to him)
by the Ministry of an evil Minister, can draw the ungodly, to know, love and
fear him.

36 As the Snuffers and tongs, which were in Salomons Temple, wherewith they
did snuff the Lamps, were of most pure Gold: Even so the Ministers of the
Gospel, who are bound to reprove and check the sins and iniquities of
others, ought to keep themselves blameless, and unspotted of the world. Exodus
37.23. Esa. 58.1. 1. Tim. 3.2. Iam. 1.27.

37 As he which hoordeth up, and hides his Corn, that it may not help and
succor hungry souls in the time of dearth, is grievously cursed of men,
women and children; and contrariwise, he that in a famine and great dearth,
does bring forth his Corn, and sells it, is highly praised and prayed for of
the people: So likewise that Minister and Preacher, deserves sharp and rough
reprehensions, which will not impart his knowledge and skill, to the hungry
and thirsty souls, of the children of God; and on the other-side, he is
worthily praised, which opens unto them the Garner of divine doctrine, which
teaches and preaches, and does faithfully exercise the office of a watchman.
Prou. 11.26. Ezech. 3.17, 18. and 33.2.

38 As learned and skillful Physicians, with the bitter potions, and sharp
medicines, which they minister unto their patients, do mix some sweet and
pleasant thing, to win those that be sick, the more willingly to receive
them: So Ministers and Preachers of the word of God; being learned and godly
wise, ought (if need be) to temper their bitter and rough reprehensions, with
a sweet and comfortable doctrine, and so of sharpeness^ and mildness, to make
a sovereign and wholesome medicine, to heal the spiritual griefs and diseases
of their hearers.

39 As the Priest that serves and wayteth at the Altar, is worthy to live
upon the offerings; and the Soldier that ventereth, is worthy his wages: And
the Husbandman that toyleth, is worthy the harvest; and the shepherd, that
feeds a flock, is worthy to be fed with the milk, and clothed with the
wool: So questionless; that Minister that preaches not, is worthy no
offerings; the Soldier that fights not, is worthy no wages; the husbandman
that loytereth, is worthy of weeds, and the shepherd that feeds not, can
with no good conscience require either the milk or the fleece; but his due
reward and just recompense is punishment, for by his default, the sheep, the
people of God, are hunger starued and destroyed of the Wolf.

40 As the words of a Lord Chauncellor, are said to be great, because it comes
f^^m the King: So the words of a Minister are said to be g^^at, because it
comes from God; thence the preachers are said to be the mouth of God, and their
words a two edged sword. Exodus 4.11, 12.

41 As God said to Joshua: Whosoever will not obey the words of thy mouth, shall
die: Even so, he that obeys not the words of Gods holy Ministers, shall surely
die. Ios. 1.18.

42 As the Gospel is to be preferred before the Law, for the worthiness of
it: So the Ministers are to be preferred before the Prophets for their
worthiness.

43 As they who dress much meat for others, taste some themselves, and as
nurses, who chew meat for young children, suffer some to slip down into their
own bellies: So the Ministers of the word, who study day and night how they
may be setting before the eyes of the people; the ugly and filthy shape of
sin, should themselves be great^y inamoured with it; that they who labor to
affright others with the fearful judgments of God, should stand in some awe,
and that they, who inflame others with the love of God, should heat
themselves; and in brief, that all the doctrines, exhortations, threatenings,
and promises, which they propound to the people in the name of God, should
redownd to their own profit and edification.

43 As it is meet that the Steward of a great family should be wise and
discreet, in such sort, that he have a respect to every man's age, ability,
and disposition, and to give and distribute to every one of them accordingly:
So likewise it is very requisite, that Ministers who are the disposers of the
blessed word of God, should have a special kind of dexterity, wisdom, and
good discretion, whereby he may skilfully and fruitfully divide to every one
their portion accordingly. 1. Cor. 4.1, 2. 2. Timo. 2.15.

44 As a Father bears a ten^^r affection to his daughter: Even so a godly
Minister, has a loving heart and tender affection to his people, which are
members of the Church. Lament. 2.11. 1. Cor. 4.15.

45 As the mouth of the Ox was not to be musled, that treads out the Corn.
Deuteronomy. 25. So the Minister of the Gospel, must be provided for. 1. Cor. 9.9, 10.

46 As the Candle that is carried in a Lantern, shall light many Candles, and
yet loose no part of his own light, be the wind never so boisterous; but that
Candle that is open to the weather, a little puff of wind, or one drop of
rain will put it out, that it can neither give ligh^ to others, nor to it
self: So in like manner, that Minister that takes heed to learning, and
continues therein, and he to whom the word of God is a Lathorne, and a light
shall help himself and others; when he that ventureth without it; shall put
out his own light, and the light of others also. 1. Timo. 4.16. Psalm. 119.105.

47 As it is to be seen and read in the Gospel, that not every one that
says unto me Lord, Lord, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, but they which
do the will of my Father (says Christ) which is in heaven: Even so is it
often said, that a hood makes not a Muncke, neither rounding or powling,
neither yet a long Gown, or a square Cap or Tippet, makes a true Apostle or
Minister; but he is counted to be the assured Minister of Christ, which both
is able and can by sound doctrine, exhort and comfort the gaine-sayers thereof;
and also does diligently go before the people of God, by good example of life,
and virtuous conversation.

48 As it is the duty of Judges, which do sit in judgment, as concerning
matters of life and death, to shut the one ear to the accuser, and to reserve
the other for him that is accused, after the example of great Alexander: So
likewise it is the part of Ministers, to be ready to make answer to every
question of the Law of God; for he that is ignorant in Gods Law, he may assure
himself, that he can by no means be Gods Minister.

Mind.
1 AS we use not the troubled water, until it be cleared again: So must we
not use our Mind, being moved and angry, but suffer it first to be pacified.

2 As out of the vessel which is filled with liquor, the ^yre is expelled: So
out of a Mind replenished with ver^ue and godliness, all kind of vanities be
void.

Member of Christ, falls not finally.
AS a man's arm taken with the dead Palsy, hangs by and receives no heat,
life, or sense, from the rest of ^e Members, or from the head, yet for all
this, it remains still united and coupled to the body, and may again be
recovered by plasters and physic: So after a grievous fall, the child of God
that feels no inward peace and comfort, but is smitten in conscience with the
trembling of a spiritual Palsy for his offense; nevertheless in deed
remains before God a member of Christ, which shall be restored to his former
estate, after true and unfeigned repentance.

Memory.
AS the leaves of a book which is sildom used, will cleave fast together: Even
so the Memory waxes dull, if it be not often quickened.

A Mind ruled by reason.
AS the ship which has a strong ankor, may safely stay in any haven; So
likewise a man which has his Mind ruled by reason, will live peaceably and
quietly in any region of the world.

The Mind of man.
1 AS Trees planted and set by the waters side, seem fair and pleasant,
adorned with store and variety of fresh and green leaves: So likewise does
the Mind of man (being garnished with godly knowledge, and moys^ned with the
water of Gods divine spirit) flourish and shine with the bright beams of
virtue, and spread abroad his boughs, both of faith toward God, and also yield
forth the fruit of Christian works toward his neighbor. Psalm. 1. 3. Esaias
17.8.

2 As the eye of the body, although it behold all other things, yet it cannot
see either it self, or some other part^ of the body, even those which are
nearest unto it; So it fares with the Mind of man (the eye of the soul) it
ranged over the whole world, above the highest heavens, an^ beneath the bottom
of the earth, and yet it is a stranger (...) home, most ignorant of the own
estate.

3 As we see in running Rivers, that the force of the water is greatly
diminished, when as the current thereof is turned into several little streams;
and that both the heat and light do loose much of their virtue, when as they
are dispearsed abroad into large and open places: So likewise it happens to
our Minds, when as they are applied unto several studies, which sometimes are
contrary one to the other; so that we thinking (through an ambitious desire) to
do many things, in the end effect and bring to pass nothing as we should do.

4 As Porke betokens uncleanness, from which we must abstain; and beasts
did signify that beastly affections should be killed: So the Mind and will
must be renewed, that it may allow, choose, and do such things as please God.

5 As the body being always oppressed with labor, loses his strength, and
so perishes: So likewise does the Mind of man, oppressed with the cares and
pleasures of this world, loose all her force, lust, and desire, that she had to
the rest to come, of eternal life; and so dies not only the death of sin,
but hastes what she can, to hate and abhor all virtue.

6 As a ship having a sure Ankor, may lie safe in any place; So the Mind that
is ruled by perfect reason, is quiet every where.

Merit or desert, not to be looked for, for well doing.
1 LIke as if one say, the Prince has bestowed a great Office upon such an
honest man, this betokens ^ot wherefore, but upon what manner of person the
Prince ^estowed it: Even so in like manner, if we say that God will ^iue glory,
the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting life, ^o them that walk uprightly;
this teaches us, what manner of men the Lord will give the inheritance unto,
but not for what cause moving him, he will give it unto them. Eze. 36.22. Math.
18.27. and 25.34. Luke 17.7, 9, 10. Gal. 1.15. and 3.18.

2 As he which is wicked and does wickedly, hurts himself, and not God: Or
as he that has the health of his body, and does by good diet keep and
preserve it, does he therefore deserve any reward at the Physicians hands?
Verily no: for he does it not for the Physicians profit, but for his own: Even
so likewise, he that by the gift of God has obtained the health of his soul,
and by his grace, does the things that belong to the preservation of the same;
shall we say, that he does Merit or deserve any reward at Gods hand, because
that he is made such by his grace and gift, and does now through his help,
aid, and assistance, keep the same grace, for his only profit and
commodity, either by earnest belief, or by unfeigned love, or by assured hope,
or by well doing, and patience in adversity and trouble, etc.

3 Like as if any man that has a state, or interest for term of years, and a
taking of profit in a piece of ground, by another man's liberal grant, do
also claim to himself the title of propriety; does he not by such
unthankfulness, deserve to loose the very self possession which he had? Or
like as if a bond Slave being made free of his Lord, do hide the baseness
of the estate of a Libertine, (who is made free by maumission, and not by
birth) and boaste himself to be a Freeman borne; is he not worthy to be
brought back into his former bondage? Even so, althoug^ good works proceed
from the grace of God, ye^ they do please him, and are not unprofitable to the
dooers of them, but rather they receive for reward, the most large benefits of
God; not because they deserve, but because the goodness of God, has of it
self appointed this price unto the^: But what spitefulness is this, that men
not contented with that liberality of God, which gives undue rewards, to
works that deserve no such thing, do with ambition full of sacrilege,
endeavor further, that that which is wholly of the liberality of God, may
seem to be rendered to the Merits of men?

Murderer of souls.
LIke as if a Nurse should for wages, take in hand to nurse a young child, who
either having no Milk, or having milk enough, would give it none, but suffer
it to die for hunger; in thus doing she were a Murderesse: Even so that
Minister that takes a flock to feed by Preaching and Catechizing, who either
has no knowledge, to perform this duty, or having sufficient knowledge, but
yet is Nonresident, and absent from them, and so suffers the people to
perish for want of instruction, such a one before God, is a soul Murderer.
Ezech. 33.2. etc. and 34.2. etc. Iere. 23.1. etc. Zach. 11.17. Esaias. 56.10, 11.

Marrying.
1 AS they that purpose to plant any thing, do first consider the nature of
the ground, in the which they mind to plant: Even so much more should men,
that entend to Marry, have respect to the nature and condition, but
especially, to the soundness of Religion of the woman, of whom he desires to
plant Children, the fruits of honesty, and welfare. 2. Cor. 6.14. etc. Deuteronomy.
7.3.

2 Like as that Husbandman does with diligence Till that ground, which he has
once taken to Farm, although it be never so full of faults, as if it be dry,
if it bring forth weeds, though the ground cannot bear much weat, yet
through good husbandry, he wins fruit thereof: Even so in like manner, he
that has a froward or irreligious wife, must have care and diligence, to
instruct and order her mind, and courteously apply himself, to weed out by
little and little, the noisome weeds of sin out of her mind, with wholesome
precepts out of Gods word, that in time, he may feel the pleasant fruit
thereof, to both their comforts. For, (as it is commonly said) A good Jack,
makes a good Gill.

3 Like as a man having one hand, or one foot, if by any means he get
himself an other, may thereby the more easily lay hold on what he lists,
or go whither he will: Even so he that has married a Christian wife, shall
more easily enjoy the healthful pleasures, and profitable commodities of this
present life. For in trouble, the one is a comfort to the other; in adversity,
the one is a refreshing unto the other: yea and in all their life, the one is a
help and succor to the other.

Ministers that have more livings then one, are never true teachers.
1 LIke as a Dog, which as long as he holds a bone in his mouth and
knaweth it; so long he holds his peace, and cannot bark: Even so, as long as
Ministers have this bone of pleasant riches, and superfluity of living, they
will neither deal faithfully nor truly with the word of God, nor yet carefully
discharge their calling.

Magistracy, and Ministry, not to be sued for.
1 LIke as it is meeter that the diseased seek to the Physician for counsel,
then that the Physician should go about to seek for the sick: Even so he that
knows himself, fit either for Magistracy, or Ministry, any dignity or
Office, should rather abide till he be called thereunto, then seek for it
himself. Exodus 18.21.

2 Like as a governor of a Ship, is not chosen for his riches, but for his
knowledge: So should the chief Magistrate in every City, be chosen rather
for his wisdom, and godly zeal, then for his wealth and great possessions.

3 Like as a battered or crazed Ship, by drinking in of water, not only
drowneth her self, but all those that are in her: So a ruler by using
viciousness, destroys not him self alone, but all others besides that are
under his government.

4 Like as a good Musition, having any key or string of his Instrument out of
tune, does not immediately cut it off, and cast it away, but either with
straining it higher, or slacking it down lower, by little and little causes
it to agree: So should Rulers rather reform tansgressours by small
corrections, then seek to cast them away for every trespass.

The Ministry of the word.
1 AS all men know, that the good estate of the body, does chiefly consist
herein, that the meat wherewith it is nourished be well dressed, and made fit
for the receiver, not raw, offensive, or mingled with any hurtful thing: So
without question, the health of the soul does chiefly depend on the Ministry
of the word, that it offer ^o the Church nothing, but that which is both in it
self good and sound, and also made fit for the present estate of the hearers.

2 Like as most men are curious about the dressing of their bodily meat, which
is soon turned to filth, and so cast away, as a most loathsome thing; yea
which together with the belly, for the which it is prepared, shall be
abolished: 1. Cor. 6.13. So surely much more it is to be wished (and the
contrary greatly to be wondered at) that men would be likewise as careful in
providing for themselves, wise and cunning Cooks, able to prepare a right, the
sacred word of the everliving God, wherewith their souls are, or ought to be
fed to eternal life. But alas men spend their whole care time, and substance,
about the one: To wit, the filling of their bellies, and the feeding of their
bodies; and are altogether careless of the other; thinking no cost sufficient
for the one, and every penny that is bestowed on the other, clean lost.

Mind diseased and sick.
1 AS the sick body cannot away with neither heat nor cold: So a sick Mind,
is neither pleased, with wealth nor woe.

2 As unto them that are sick all things are troublous, they loath their
meats, blame Physicians, and be angry with their friends; but health being
restored, they delight in things again: Even so unto a sick Mind, each life
i^ loathsome, but to a sound Mind, no trade of life is misliked.

3 They which be sick in body, will give themselves to rest, they will keep
good diet, and send for the Physician with speed. But they that be diseased
in Mind, do abhor all rest and remedy.

4 Like as if the fountain be muddie and corrupted, nothing that is pure can
proceed from the same: So if the Mind be infected with evil affections, it
will corrupt a^ that proceeds from the same.

5 As children, and they whose stomachs are queasie, cannot abide bitter and
unpleasant potions, though they be wholesome; but rather like sweet things
best, though most hurtful: Even so wicked men, fools, and they whose souls
Satan has bewitched, like better of them that sing Placebo, speak
(Placentia) sowing pillowes under their elbowes, and do flatter them; then
they that tell them the truth, and find fault with their sins.

6 As a good stomach turns all that it eats into good nutriment, and a bad
stomach turns all that it eats into raw humors: Even so a good Mind,
conuerteth all that it hears, and all that it sees, and all that it feels,
unto some profit; but a bad Mind, makes a temptation of every thing. Romans
14.14. Tit. 1.15.

7 As a field, although it be fertile, without Tillage cannot be fruitful:
So the Mind of man, without the word of God, and heavenly instruction, must
needs be barren, and can bring forth no effects of faith, nor fruits of
godliness.

8 Like as if one drink or eat, sleep or labor too much, it hurts the
corporal health, which cannot be preserved, but by a mediocritie in all
things: So likewise may we say of the Mind, which surely is not in health, if
it be either too hautie, proud, or presumptuous, or too base, low, and
submisse.

9 As the air is cleared, with the brightness, and shine of the Sun, and when
the Sun is down and set, the air is covered with darkness: Even so the Mind
of man, when it ^s purged and cleared with heavenly wisdom, fought and ^rawn
out of the word of God, does shine most excellent^y, and sends forth a pure
and perfect light of Christianity, which may easily be discerned, to proceed
and come from God himself; but being without that true light, it is
overwhelmed with an horrible, and fearful darkness, and gives out nothing,
but filthy mysts, and stinking vapors, which do spring and rise out of the
corruption, and rotten nature of man, and even from hell, and Satan himself.

Murder.
1 LIke as if a subject deface the arms of his Prince, it is counted an
injury so great, that it shall be revenged and punished as Murder, for that
this in like sort tends to the confusion of all order: Even so he that
defaceth the image of God by Murder, which is Imprinted in men, such an
outrageous villain, deserves double punishment.

2 As it is good for man's body, betimes to cut off a rotten member, least the
sound part be drawn to it: So likewise it is profitable for the safety of
human society, to take out of the way, Murderers, noisome and hurtful
Citizens, least the corruption of one, by little and little creep into the
whole body of the society.

3 Like as if such tyranny should be used against any natural woman, as
violently to pull her infant from her breasts, cut the throat of it in her
own bosom, and compel her to receive the blood of her own dear child into
her own mouth; all nations would hold the fact so abominable, that the like
had never been done in the course of nature: Even so, no less wickedness
commit they, that Murder and shed the blood of Gods children, upon the face of
their common Mother, the earth.

Mercy of God to be appealed unto.
LIke as that woman did, who when she stood arrayned at the Bar before
Alexander the great, and wa^ (according to her demetites) condemned, she then
said I appeal from thee o King: Alexander wondering at h^^ said; thou art a
mad woman; do thou not know that every appellation is from a lower Judge
to a higher, but who is above me? Then said she, I know thee to be above thy
Laws, and that thou may give pardon, and therefore I appeal from Justice to
Mercy, and for my faults I crave pardon: So likewise must we do, when we
look into the perfect law of Gods word, and see him ready to condemn us for
our sins, and our conscience witness that we have deserved death, we must
appeal from Justice, and our deseruings, unto his pardon and forgiveness; and
both call and trust to be partakers of that salvation which he has purchased
and offered to the whole world; for his Mercies do pass all our miseries, as
far as God is greater then man, and his pardon can forgive all that call on
him in true faith. 1. King. 20.30.31, 32. etc. Math. 18.26, 27. Luke 7.37. etc.
and 15.21. and 18.13. 2. Chro. 33.12, 13.

Insufficient Ministers.
1 LIke as if a man should feign himself to be a Physician, and had no skill
at all in Physic, and yet should take a sum of money to heal a sick man,
and after should run away, or if he tarried with the sick man, and neither
did him any good, nor could do him any, were not this apish Physician a
thief: Even so that Minister, that takes upon him to be a Minister, and
takes wages of a people to do those duties that belong unto a Minister to
do, that is, faithfully to Preach unto them the word of God, and diligently to
Catechize them; but yet either does it not, or cannot do it, such one is in
deed a thief, and a Church robber, etc. Ioh. 10.1. etc.

2 As in a Commonwealth, he is not to be borne with, that would justify
false and counterfeit money or ^oyne: So likewise is he to be reproved,
condemned, and rebuked not a little, which will justify an ignorant, a lewd,
and a counterfeit Minister, because he does approve such coin for good, as
never came out of the Lords consistory, which no good or faithful Christian
ever did. 1. Cor. 9.14, 16. 1. Tim. 3.13. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.

3 Like as none that is a good subject to his Prince, not only will not
traffic with counterfeit coin, but moreover will do his endeavor to have it
defaced, and openly nailed upon the post: Even so every true servant of
Christ, will not only be far off from dealing with any such wicked and
counterfeyt Minister: but moreover, will do his best in all godly manner, that
such a one may be forced to take some other calling upon him, etc.

4 As a blind man groping for the wall, when he knows not how to come by a
guide, is in great distress: So likewise such ignorant people as are destitute
of faithful Ministers, and not knowing by whom to be guided by found
instruction, are in a most fearful state. Esaias 59.10. and 56.10, 11, 16. Act.
8.31. Matthew. 15.14.

5 As Vinegar is to the teethe, and smoke to the eyes: So is a wicked, idle,
and insufficient Minister to the people, dulling their senses, and blinding
them with ignorance. Zach. 11.17. Matthew. 5.13. Ioh. 10.13.

6 Like as it is impossible for an evil man, drowned in all kind of vices, to
enter into the heavenly Paradise: Even so it is for the leacherous, covetous,
arrogant and stout stomacked, and insufficient or unpreaching Pastor or
Minister, to make his people and parishioners, chaste, humble, and meek, and
fit and able to embrace the kingdom of God. Psalm. 50.16, 17. Prou. 29.18. Ier.
23.1, 2. etc. and 48.10. Romans 2.1. etc. Luke 22.32. and 12.42. etc.

Mystery of the Gospel.
AS the virtues of water Betony, Penniwort, sea Chick-weed, Blew-bells, wild
Elder, dames Violets, Golden-flower of Perowe, read Lillies, bastard
Hiacinthes, Talpia, are yet unknown; what marvel then, if heavenly things,
and many Mysteries of the word be hid.

Ministers must be able to confute the enemies of Gods truth.
1 LIke as they which builded again the material and stone wall of the earthly
Jerusalem, had not only the Trowell in one hand to build withal, but moreover
the sword in the other, to beat back their enemies which assaied to hinder the
work that was in doing: So in like manner, those men who^ the Lord has
appointed to build up this spiritual Jerusalem of his, the Church of God, it
behooves them, not only to hold fast the word of truth to edify withal, but
moreover they must be of ability, through the plentiful knowledge of the
word, to confute and confound all their gaine-standers. Nehe. 4.17, 18. etc.
Ioh. 17.17. 2. Cor. 6.7. Ephe. 1. 13. Colloss. 1. 5. 2. Tim. 2.15. Iam. 1. 18.
2. Tim. 3.16, 17. 2. Timo. 2.25.

2 As the Proclamation is the Princes who first set it forth, though it be
afterward published again of the Crier: So the word is Gods, who first uttered
the same, though it be rehearsed a new of any learned writer.

3. And as he that calls the Kings Proclamation, repeated by the Crier, the
Cryers proclamation, had need of a favorable Interpreter to save him from
rebuke: Even so, if any shall avouch the word and authorities of Gods Spirit,
repeated of learned men, to be their authorities, had need of a very partial
hearer, to quite him from blame.

4 Like as if a man were sent on a message from his Prince, and by the way,
should hear his message repeated of one of his fellows or more, if when he
comes to do his message, he should say: thus says my companion; or thus
says my Lord the King, and my companion together; what might we think of such
one in so saying? In like manner they which take so much pains to allege the
words of the Lord, or the sum and meaning of them under the name of learned
writers, or join God and men togegether, as cospeakers, to make the matter
sufficient, as though otherwise it were not enough; for they are unwise to
think that men will regard what man says in such matters.

5 Like as if any Noble man of wisdom and credit, should be called to
witness the truth in any doubtful matter, which he well understood, and
having declared the whole truth, the party that requires the same should
answer thus; I would the rather believe this that you have said to be true, if
so be that I might hear some of your servants to witness the same: In this
doing, might not this Noble man, well think that he were greatly abused, that
could not be credited, unless his men should also testify thereof? Even so,
how can the Lord take it in good part, seeing he has so often in his word
commanded that we should speak nothing unto his people, but that which
comes from his mouth, without any other additions, and has sufficiently set
down in his word, the whole truth, both what is needful for us to do, and
what to leave undone; and yet many will not believe him, unless they hear
Heathen men, and other learned writers, to witness the same? 1. Pet. 4.11.
Deuteronomy. 18.18. Iere. 9.1. King. 22.14. 2. Chro. 17.7, 8, 9. Ezech. 3.4, 17. and
33.7.

6 Like as if a Scholar will not believe that which his master has taught
him; unless his schoole-fellow will say it is so; this fond opinion of the
Scholar, makes not the teaching of his Master insufficient: Even so when a
man will not believe that the word of God does teach, or refell and confute
this or that, unless the Doctors do so expound the same; yet this proves not,
but the Scripture of it self is sufficient to do it, though he make not so
much account thereof. Esaias. 59.21. Hebr. 4.12. Iere. 23.29, 22. Psalm. 19.7, 8.

Ministers must obey Christ.
AS no Ambassador can have any higher authority, then is limited and
expressed by plain words in his Commission by the Prince, or whosoever it be
that grants it; and as every one of the Commissioners, to whom a
Commission is directed, have that authority which in their Commission is
mentioned, and no other: Even so in the Commission that Christ gave to his
Apostles, every one of them ought obediently to observe their masters
commandment, with his authority given to them, and not to break it, and go
beyond the bounds and limitation of it.

The duty of Ministers, both to seducers, and the seduced.
LIke as parents, when their child is hurt with the biting of a Dog, are wont
to pursue the Dog only, but the weeping child they bemone, and speak fair
unto it, comforting it with most sweet words: So likewise godly preachers must
be impatient, zealous, sharp and vehement, in condemning and detesting the
false iuglings, deceits, of the Authors of false doctrine, and maintainers of
sects; but contrariwise, they must with all mildness, good affection, and
gentle speech, behave themselves ^owardes those that are mysled, gone astray,
and fallen through weakness, and so to reclaim them. Gal. 6.1.

Men's devises.
LIke as if a wicked servant do take upon him to serve his Master with
wholesome food, should mingle therewith some secret poison, to annoy him
withal, deserves due punishment, according to his demerites: Even so as
displeasantly, shall the confused minglings, and foolish devises of Men, be
taken of the Lord, in making mixtures of their own devises, with his worship
and service.

Men's traditions.
1 AS when the natural Sun is darkened with clouds that do arise from the
waters, and from the earth: Even so our Savior Christ, which is the true Son
of righteousness, is wonderfully darkened with the mysts and clouds of Men's
traditions and dreams, so that many times, his comfortable light is clean
taken away, from the eyes of our souls and consciences.

2 Like as if the Sun be darkened, the Moon of necessity must loose her
light: Even so when the cheerful light of the true Son of righteousness is
taken away by Men's inventions, and superstitious doctrine, and Popish
traditions, without all doubt, the Church must utterly loose her light; it must
needs be without all heavenly understanding and knowledge; it must needs be
in horrible darkness, and in the shadow of death.

Moderation of worldly care.
LIke as a traveler in his journey, is troubled with care, for nothing but
that which shall be necessary for him in his journey: So we in the
pilgrimage of this life, must be careful for nothing, but that which may
benefit us in our journey to life everlasting.

Man of no continuance.
1 AS a dream, smoke, vapor, a puff of wind, a shadow, a bubble of water,
hay, grass, herbs, flowers, leaves, a Weauers shuttle, dried stubble, are
things of small account, and less continuance: Even so the glory, beauty,
magnificence, strength, and wisdom of Man, is nothing else, then vain,
britle, transitory and ruinous; unless it be sustained, vpholden, and
vndershored by the heavenly power of the sure and eternal word of God. Psalm.
73.^^. Job. 20.8. Psalm. 103.14, 15. Job. 7.6, 7. and 8.9. and 13.25. and 14.2.
Hos. 13.3. Iam. 4.13. Esaias. 40.6. Iam. 1.10. 1. Pet. 1.24.

2 As the Birds when they fly, do guide themselves with their tails, and
the Ship is guided by the stern: So we should look to our tail, namely, that
we are but dust and ashes.

Men known by their doings.
1 AS the goodness and badnesse of trees are discerned, by the goodness and
badnesse of their fruits: Even so Men, especially such as take upon them to
be teachers of others, are discovered by their well or evil doings. Math.
7.16.

Moderation in millitarie discipline.
LIke as in Vintage time, the Grape gathering cannot be so clean, but that
some be left behind; nor the shaking off of Olives so precisely done, but that
some Berries remain, either among the leaves, or in the top of the tree: Even
so in the doleful massacre, and lamen^ble destruction of the people, there
should not be made such a general sweepe-stake, but that some should ^ee left
and reserved under hope of mercy. Esaias. 17.4, 5.6, 10. Iere. 49.9.

Men by nature cruel.
LIke as wild and fierce beasts, are often by industry of man tamed, and
loose their desire to hurt: Even so Men by nature are glad, and desirous one of
an others hurt, till God work an alteration in them by his holy spirit, and
so reform them. Iere. 10.14. Esaias. 11.6, 7, 8. and 65.25.

Mothers ought to nurse their own children.
AS every Tree does nourish that which it brings forth: So likewise it
becomes natural Mothers, to nourish their children with their own milk.
Math. 2.14. Gene. 21.7. Exodus 2.8, 9. Iud. 13.4, 24. 1. Sam. 1. 23. 1. Timo.
5.10.

Men mere natural.
AS the Moon decreasing, has her open side hanging downward; but increasing
and gathering light, has her opening up toward heaven: So likewise Men mere
natural, have their hearts set only upon earth and earthly things; but men
regenerate, have the open side of their hearts ever toward God, heaven and
heavenly things.

Godly Meditations.
AS a flint smitten against iron or steel, does drive out sparks of fire: Even
so godly Meditations of heavenly things, draw out of hard hearts, some
warmenesse, and as it were, fire of the love of God. Psalm. 39.3.

Marriage of it self is good.
AS drunkenness is not to be referred to Wine, which is the good and wholesome
creature of God, but the fault is to be imputed to the excessive bibbing, and
over great greediness of man, who abuses Gods good creature: Even so Marriage
of it self is good, but many use not well the thing that is good; and
therefore they feel^ the smart of their foul abuse worthily.

Malicious.
AS the Spider weaueth her web of that which she has within her self: So
the Malicious, can frame flaunders of their own brains, though they have no
matter to work upon.

Mean estate of life is safest.
LIke as they that dwell in valleys, and in deep and low habitations, are not
lightly hurt by any lightning: Even so that state of life, that is low and
Mean, keeps and maintains it self, most sure and with least danger,
against all manner of storms.

Ministers that save others, are often reprobates themselves.
1 AS they that builded the Arc for Noah's safeguard, were yet drowned
themselves: Or as they that were curious workers of the Sanctuary, for the
Lord to dwell in, were yet shut out themselves: Or as they that made the Arc,
the Tabernacle, and the mercy seat upon it, to shadow and to defend other,
and yet not themselves shadowed or defended therewith: Or as the Jews, who
cried; The temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the Lord, when they most
of all profaned and defiled the Temple of the Lord: Even so such are those
Ministers, who teach others the right way to heaven; but wanting the graces of
Gods spirit, yet cannot find the good and perfect way for themselves to be
saved. Gene. 7.1. Exodus 25.8, 10, 11. Nehe. 3.1. etc. Iere. 7.4, 5. Romans 2.17,
18. to. 24. 1. Cor. 9.27.

2 As firebrarnds and wood, being kindled and set on fire, do give light and
warmth unto others, which are cold and in darkness, but are wasted and
consumed them selves, so that others receive the benefit, and they the loss
and spoil of themselves: So an unlearned and ungodly Minister, whiles without
repentance or remorse of conscience, he delivers the word and ministers the
Sacraments unto others which are prepared, know what they do, and do
reverently hear the word, and worthily receive the Sacraments, does only
hurt himself; the rest receive comfort by the word, and are edified by the
Sacraments; they are saved, though he perish.

3 As the whetstone does good, and sharpeneth many Instruments, but yet
co^sumeth it self: Even so many Ministers, save others, and condemn
themselves, through want of faith and Christian behavior.

4 As a deformed Painter may make a fair picture: So an evil Minister, may
save others, though he condemn himself.

Ministers must Preach, according to the state of their people.
AS he is said to be an unskillful Physician, that ministers a Purgation to
cleanse idle humors, when he should minister a potion or ointment to strengthen
and comfort them: Even so is he said to be an unskillful and an indiscreet
Preacher, that takes in hand to comfort and strengthen his auditorie, when they
should be sharply reproved, and corrected.

Malice.
AS the herb Mint, does much hinder and let milk to be turned into cheese:
Even so the Malice of the heart, does let benevolence to increase and grow.

Good Manners in the Church.
AS the material Sanctuary had his outward ornaments, as Gold and Silver,
precious stones, silk, purple, fine linen, and such like: So the spiritual
Sanctuary which now consists not of wood and stone, but of the souls of
Christians, besides religion, which is the inward beauty, it must have also
the outward ornaments, which are good Manners and comely behauior, that nothing
may be wanting unto the due honor and dignity thereof.

Man may not accuse God of unrighteousness.
LIke as if a child of eight or ten years old, hearing a Philosopher
discourse of the greatness and course of the Sun, should argue against him,
and maintain that the same were no greater then a Platter, neither of any
swifter pace then a Snayle; the Philosopher would not stand upon the delivery
of the reason of his discourse unto him, because the child could not be capable
to conceive it, but he would tell him, thou art yet a child: Even so is Man in
comparison of God, infinitely less in knowledge, then is a child, in comparison
of the most excellent Philosopher in the world; and therefore he ought not to
reason, strive, or dispute with God, why he either electeth some to salvation,
or reprobateth othersome to damnation. Romans 9.19. etc. Job. 9.3, 32. and 38.2,
3.

Man's estate in this life.
LIke as it cannot be, that they which sail on the Sea, should be void of
all care: So it is impossible in this life, but a Man should be subject to many
cares, anguishes and vexations.

Merciless Men.
1 AS beasts are not eaten, until they be dead, boiled, or roasted: Even so
Merciless Men, whilst they live, will do no charitable deeds or works of
mercy to the poor, until death has the^ in his pot, and there boil them after
his manner; only at their death, in their last testament, they will perhaps leave
some Legacies to be given when they be dead, but death must be sure of the^,
before ye pore be sure of a penny: It were better done by much, to relieve the
poor with their own hands, in their life time; it is not amiss that they do
good then, but it were better done before. Ezech. 16.49. Prou. 14.31. and
19.17. and 21.13. Math. 5.7.

2 As oftentimes young children; the more the Father does cocker and dandle
them, the less they care for him; and if he say unto them, I will have this or
that done, none so ready to bid him command and do it himself, as his own
children: So it many times falls out with us: God our heavenly Father has
blessed us, and blessed us again, and yet when he says; I will have you to be
merciful and pitiful to your needy brethren, like stubburne children, we
sit still, and stop our ears, as if we heard not. Math. 9.13. Prou. 11.17.
Luke 6.36. Mich. 6.8.

No difference of Men after death.
AS Trees growing in the wood, are known, some by difference of their trunkes
or bodies, some by the properties of their boughs, branches, leaves, flowers,
and fruits, but this knowledge is had of them, whiles they stand, grow, and are
not consumed; but if they be committed to the fire and turned into ashes, they
cannot be known; for it is impossible, that when the ashes of diverse kinds of
trees, are mingled together, the tall Pine Tree, should be discerned, from the
great and huge Oak; or the mighty popler from a little low shrube; or any one
tree from an other: Even so Men, whiles they live in the wood of this world,
are known, some by the stock of ancestors; some by the flourishing leaves of
their words and eloquence; some in the flowers of beauty, and some in the
fruits of honesty; many by their savage ignorance and barbarousnesse; and some
by their mild lenity and kindness; but when death does bring them into dust,
and has mixed and mingled them al together, then their ashes, earth and dust,
cannot be discerned or known; for when the ashes, and dust of all, are mingled
together, then shall there appear no difference, between the mighty Princes
of the world, and the seely poor souls, that are not accounted off; of the
learned and unlearned, betwixt rich men and beggars, or between the wise and
the foolish.

Man is borne to love God.
1 AS Birds of all sorts do desire the air, fishes seek for water, and the
fire of the earth, mounteth and flameth up toward the Elementall fire; and all
things seek their place, and center, and do tend toward the same: Even so we
ought to seek after our God, who is our only rest, our center, and only God.

2 As floods and ryuers, with great force run into the Sea, because they came
out of the Sea: Even so we ought to love God, and to aspire toward him, and in all feruencie of love, to draw near unto him; who is that unmeasurable Sea of
all goodness, from whence we came, for he has made us after his own
similitude and likeness. Gene. 1.26.

3 As we are bound to keep the precepts and commandments of God: So are we
most strickly bound, to love, honor, and obey himself.

4 Even as the Horse is ordained to run, the Ox to plough, and the Dog to
hunt: So is Man borne, above all things to love God.

Mass.
AS an harlot who sets her body to sale, does paint her self to all
lasciviousness, and uncleanness; does scrout her self with rings and Jewels,
and puts on costly apparel, therewithal to allure to her self companions,
whose substance she may wast away: Even so that whore of Babylon, called the
Mass, comes abroad, set out as it ^ere with Gold and Jewels, whilst she
does use certain holy lessons, and songs out of the word of God, whereby she
does easily deceive the ruder sort, and the simple, who deceived with the
outward show, do think her to be a very chaste virgin, who indeed is a most
filthy harlot, hurting her companions, more then the vilest harlot that may be.

Unlearned Ministers are not to be admitted, until they be fit.
AS an Egle, so long as her young ones, be not very fledge and thoroughly
feathered, she does not suffer them to go out of the neast, and to fly
abroad, but after they be perfectly winged, and in their beauty and strength
of their feathers, she throws them out of the nest, that they may fly, and
exercise their wings and feathers, and use them to the end wherefore they have
them: Even so our Savior Christ, that heavenly Eagle, after his resurrection,
commanded his Disciples to stay at Jerusalem, as it were in a neast; and not
to depart thence, until in the day of Pentecost, he had filled them with the
grace of the holy Ghost: and then he commanded them, that passing through the
world, and traveling through diverse coasts of the earth, they should publish
abroad, and spread far and near, the Gospel of his kingdom. Act. 1.4. and
2.2, 3, 4. Math. 28.19.

The Mysteries of Gods word, are not to be opened to the wicked.
AS a Merchant that is expert and skillful in his profession and faculty, will
not open, nor show his rich^ wares, and costly merchandise, unto those whom he
well knows will not buy them, which do come into his sho^ or warehouse,
either as curious persons, or as crafty spies and subtle searchers, not with
any purpose to buy, bu^ to do some evil; and calls unto him, only thos^
whom he knows to be very willing and desirous to buy: Even so the Lord his
manner is, not to open his heavenly Mysteries, and the deep secrets of his
sacred, and most holy word, unto them, whom he perceives, and sees plainly,
to seek after them vainly and curiously, or with a wicked mind, and corrupted
purpose, to search them out, to the end they may tread, and trample them under
their feet: and does call them only to the true knowledge of his Laws and
ordinances; and does instruct and teach them, whom he is sure will profit them
selves and others thereby. Matthew. 7.6. and 12.38, 39. Luke 23.8, 9.

When Man in trouble, seeks for comfort from the world, he seeks for life
in the house of death.
AS the blood in the body of a Man, being corrupted with a poisoned Arrow,
does by and by fly to the heart, even seeking, and hoping as it were, to
find some remedy and help there; and yet does even so soon as it touches
the heart, find death, where it sought for life: So Men, when they are sore
pressed with calamities, do make the world their first refuge; and whiles they
seek for succor and comfort of the world, they find no better thing than
death, where they thought to have found life: experience does teach them, that
they sought for life, in the house of death; and for a medicine there, where ^o
good thing is to be had.

The necessity of the Magistrate, and a preaching Minister.
AS the wall within and eke without, is made ofsquared stones, between the
which, the less stones are con^eined, to make the building up: Eue^ so the
preaching Mi^ister within the church, and the Magistrate in the common weal,
should support and uphold the meaner sort, in due obedience.

2 Like as the Soul in excellency, surpasses and exceeds the body: So
does the office of the Preacher, which principally is occupied in instructing
of the soul, deserve to be preferred before all such functions, as concern
only the body, and the direction and ordering of the outward life of man: out
of which office of a diligent Preacher, springs and issues the true outward
obedience unto the civil Magistrate: who as he compels, the Preacher
persuades: as he constrains, the Preacher allureth: as he forces with the
sword, so the Preacher draws voluntarily by the doctrine of the word.

Means must be used.
1 EVen as Noe, though he knew he should be saved, did not neglect the Means, but
made the Arc as God commanded: So also we, though we be persuaded o^ our
salvation, must notwithstanding use those Means tha^ God has appointed and set
down for the same, in hi^ word.

2 As God is able to keep in health whom he lists either without food,
physic, or any such means, from death of the body: So likewise is he able
to deal wit^ the soul, but yet he will have his appointed Means vse^ as the
hearing of his word preached, Catechizing, and the partaking of the Sacrament.

3 Like as when a certain King makes this Proclam^tion, that of a company of
rebels or malefactors, tho^ who coming into his presence, have his scepter
reach^ out unto them, shall live; the rest shall have the Law pass on them;
yet he keeps himself within a stro^ Castle, the gates being fast shut:
hereupon many of the malefactors casting off their old and filthy apparel,
(...) dress themselves in the best manner they can to come before the king:
When they come to the place of his abode, they find no entrance (save only a
few of them) yet they that stand excluded, are better to be admitted, then
they who con^emning the Kings offer, never look toward him; and yet in truth,
they that stand nearest to the gates, do no more deserve life, neither are any
more capable of it, or any nearer unto it, for ought that they themselves can
do, then they who be a hundred miles off: So God bids all cast off their
sins, their corrupt dispositions and lives, and to come and seek to him for
grace; yet they do not by this Means deserve, nor can by any Means compel
God to admit them into his favor, and to touch their hearts with his spirit:
All should use this Means, and hope to obtain grace; yea none can hope to
obtain grace, who do not use this Means; yet some use the Means, and do
not obtain; and others obtain, not using the Means; yet the Means is
carefully to be used, and necessary to be known.

4 Even as we must be diligent to do all good works, and not put our trust of
salvation in them; but say, when we have done all those things which are
commanded (...), we are vprofitable servants, Luke 17, 9.10: So likewise we
must use always lawful Means to defend our selves, ^^d yet say: Our help is
in the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth; for he has
ordained such ^eanes to save us by, and works by the same our deli^erance when
pleases him; and sometimes to show his ^ower, he delivers us without such
ordinary means. ^sal. 124.8.

Mortification.
AS the Arc was to Noe a grave, and yet the way to save him: Even so he that
will live everlastingly, must be Mortified and die to his sins. Gene. 7.1.
etc.

Mourning for our sins.
1 AS the Eagle feeling his wings heavy, plungeth them in a fountain, and so
renews his strength: Even so after the same sort, a Christian feeling the
heavy burden of his sins, batheth himself in a fountain of tears, and so
washing off the old man, which is the body of sin, is made young again, and
lusty as an Eagle. Luke 7.44.

2 As Peter's faith was so great, that he lept into a Sea of waters to come to
Christ, Math. 14, 28, 29. So also his repentance was so great, that he lept
into a Sea of tears, when he went from Christ. Mark. 14.72. Luke 23.63.

3 As it is an Idol and no God, which has eyes and sees not: So he is rather
an Idol shepherd, then a godly Pastor, which has eyes and weepeth not, more
or less, one time or other in preaching to the people. Iere. 9.1. Act. 20.31.

4 Even as the Olive tree, is most abundant in fruit, when it distilleth; So
likewise a Christian, is most plentiful and powerful in prayer, when he
weepeth, and Mourns for his sins.

5 As salt vapors arise out of the Sea, which afterward are turned into a
pleasant shower: So out of a sinful sorrowful soul, does arise sobs and
sighs like salt vapors, which immediately are turned into a sweet shower of
tears.

6 As a Quail flies over the Sea, feeling himself begin to be weary,
lights by the way into the Sea, the^ lying at one side, he lays down one wing
upon the water, and hold up the other wing toward heaven, least he should
presume to take too long a flight, at the first he wets one wing, least he
should despair of taking a new flight afterward, he keeps the other wing
dry: Even so must a Christian man do, when he lays down the wing of fear
upon the water to weep for himself, then he must hold up the wing of love
toward heaven, to rejoice for Christ, and the other of sorrow for himself.

7 As a Hind goes not still forward in one way, but iumpes cross out of one
way into an other: Right so a Christian, in Mourning for his sins, must iumpe
cross, from himself to Christ, and then back again from Christ to himself.

8 As Hanna wept for her barrenness: Even so have we great cause to weep for
our sins, seeing we can conceive nothing but sorrow, and bring forth
iniquity to death. 1. Sam. 1.5.

9 As Tamar wept being defloured by her brother: So likewise we have greater
cause to weep, seeing we commit spiritual incest and Adultery, daily with
the devil. 2. Sam. 13.19.

10 As Hagar wept being turned out of Abraham's house: So this ought to be the
greatest cause of weeping unto us, that our life is no life, because we never
cease from sinning, while we are here pilgrims and strangers, exiled and
banished out of our Fathers house in heaven. Gene. 21.14.

11 As the virgin Marie wept so sore for the death of her Son Jesus, as though
her tender heart had been stabd and pearst through with a sharp sword: Even
so, there is nothing in the world that ought to cause us to be more sorrowful
then this, that Christ being blessed in himself, ^as cursed for us; being
exalted in himself, was imbased for us; being justified in himself, was
condemned for us; being a live in himself, was dead for us.

12 As a Ship being neither too heavily burdened, nor ^o lightly bala^ced,
fears neither waves nor winds, but sayleth safely to the haven: So we being
neither too heavy for our own sins and miseries, nor too light for Christ's
mercy, but joining, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. Luke 23.28.
Both together shall neither be drowned with waves of desperation, nor puffed
up with the winds of presumption; but we shall sail safely in the Arc of
Noah, upon the sea of this world, till we arrive at the haven of all happiness
in heaven.

13 As a Father pittieth his own child, and if he see him cry, does what he
can to still him, and takes out his hand-kercher, and wipes the infants eyes
himself: Even so after the same fashion, God our heavenly Father, will with
his own holy finger, wipe away all tears from our eyes, and take us most
lovingly by the hand, and lead us out of the house of Mourning, into the house
of mirth; then though we have sown in tears, yet we shall reap in joy.
Psalm. 103.13. Reave. 7.17. Psalm. 126.5.

Natural thing.
AS the salt water being for drink unprofitable, yet susteineth and bears
up the Ship, better then the sweet, which for drink is more apt and meet: So
every Natural thing has his own use, whereunto if it be applied, then it
works his effect.

Good Name.
1 AS fire once kindled, is soon preserved, but being extinct, it is not
easy to kindle the same again: So is it easy to defend a good Name, but if
it be once blotted and lost, hardly shall we restore it again.

2 As the Lord by the eight commandment, binds our hands, as it were with a
manacle or hand shackle, from stealing, robbing, or any ways diminishing of
our neighbors goods: So also by the ninth Commandment, he bridleth our
tongue, that we should not hurt or impair the good Name, credit, or estimation
of our brethren; but by love to uphold and maintain the same. Prou. 22.1.
Eccle. 7.3.

3. As a precious Ointment, being poured forth, casts out and spreads
abroad, a sweet, a fragrant, and an oderiferous sm^ll, far and near: Even so
the good Name and fame, of such Christians as are anointed with the holy
Ghost, does cast out and spread it self, far and near, very sweet to the
nosthrils of the Almighty; and very delightful to the members of Christ.
Cant. 1.2. 1. Ioh. 2.20, 27.

Noble men, and householders.
1 LIke as the Sun in the Firmament, gives light to all the regions round
about him, and by his bright appearing, expels the darkness; comfort and
cheareth the world: So likewise should Noble men; Magistrates, Gentlemen,
Ministers, and householders, labor to banish sin, and corrupt Religion, and
be a lantern of godly life, to comfort and shine to others, that they might
direct their lives; after their good ensamples. Phil. ^.15. Math. 5.16.

2 As Cyprian let no day pass, without reading of Tertullian, nor Alexander
without reading of Homer, nor finally, Appelles without some line proportioned:
So is it meet, that no degrees should loose any opportunity or occasion,
granted to the meditation of Christian Religion, but rather being taught by
the example of the Emperor Constantine, would repose their whole study in the
word of God. Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. Iosu. 1.8. Psalm. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 3.11, 12, 13.

Neglect of heaven, for earthly things.
LIke as if a Golden game of inestimable value, should be proposed for such as
would run, and could win the same, and when the course or race were begun, if
some should step aside and follow after flies or feathers, that passed in the
air, without any regard of the prize and gole proposed; who would not marvel
and take pity of their folly? Even so is it with men of the world, who are
placed together in a course or race, and that the kingdom of heaven is
propounded unto us for the game or prize, but few endeavor to enter therein;
and why? For that most men do step aside, and leave the mark: Most men do
run awry, and do follow feathers up and down in the air; most men do pursue
vanities, and hunt after pleasures, and do weary themselves therewith, until
they can neither run, nor go, nor move their limbs any further; and then,
for the most part, it is too late to amend their folly. 1. Cor. 9.24, 25, 26,
27. Psalm. 4.2, 3. Iere. 2.13, 18.

The Name profits none, in whom virtue is n^ (...)
1 AS neither they yearly reuenue^ ^or the glorious titles and Names
^^^^cessors, and to descend of noble parentage, makes men noble and renowned
indeed, unless they themselves be godly, honest, and wise: Even so, neither
the godly Names, no nor yet the faith and virtue of Fathers, avails wicked
and ungodly children any thing at all, unless they repent, and become
faithful as their Fathers were. John. 8.39. Math. 3.^. Gal. 3.7.

2 Like as those children which are named and called by, and after any of the
names of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, or by the Name of other Saints, man or
woman, are not any thing the better, because they have such godly and Christian
Names, unless that they do immitate and follow them, in faith, virtue and
godly behavior: Even so on the other side, they that be not called by such
Christian Names, as are mentioned in the sacred Scriptures, are not in respect
of their Names any thing the worse, having an assured faith in the merits of
Christ his death, passion, and bloud-shedding, and leading their lives
agreeable to the same. Joshua. 10.3. Daniel. 1.7.

To what end proper Names were given us in baptism.
LIke as infants in times past amongst our ancestors, had their Names given
them, when they were Circumcised, to this end that the Circumcised might be
admonished, by the calling by their Names, at what time and place they had
their Names given them; and should think that they are written in the number
of the children of God, and joined in league with him, and made partakers of
the covenant: So after the same manner, must we remember that have had proper
Names given unto us at our baptism, for this use and end, both to distinguish
betwixt man and man, and also to put us in mind, that we are by grace adopted
to be the Sons of God, and received into his favor; and therefore that we
are Gods own, and as it were his goods and riches, as they which bear his
Name as proper unto him. Luke 1.59. and 2.21.

Wicked Neighbors.
LIke as Thorns cannot be touched nor handled, except men's hands be fenced
with hedging gloves: So are wicked Neighbors very cumbersome, except a man be
well defended, and take great heed unto himself. 2. Sam. 23.6.

The Nobility of ancestors, nothing auailable to those that are loose and
lewd of life.
1 AS it profits not a River, to flow from a pure and clear fountain, if it
self be foul, filthy, and unwholesome: Even so, the Nobleness of Fathers
and the honor of elders, and ancestors, does nothing pleasure at all their
Sons, when they themselves degenerate from their Noble and honorable
parents; bragging only of their Nobility, and chalenging their honor; but
despising their virtues, do show themselves wicked, loose, and lewd of life:
For he that is not Nobled, for some worthy acts of his own, nor renoumed by
reason of some famous virtues, known and found to be in himself, there no
honor in very deed is to be looked for; seeing there is nothing in himself
that is good, but only a vain, and proud challenging of the worthiness and
excellency of other men. Esaias. 1.4. Ezech. 16.3. Ioh. 8.39, 42, 44.

2 Even as Aesops Iay, being clad with the fair feathers of other Birds, did
namely take unto himself a beauty, but being discovered and stripped of all,
for a reward was thoroughly scorned, and was turned into his old black gown,
when every bird had taken from him his own feather: So they, that make their
boast of the Noble acts of others, and do vaunt themselves, of the dignity of
their predecessors, and do usurp unto themselves the Nobility of ancestors,
themselves being naked of all virtue, and utterly void even of common honesty,
temperance, and sobriety, are constrained many times, with great ignominy and
shame, to put off other men's vesture, and with no small disgrace to forgo their
usurped hono^^ It is therefore a thing far more honorable and worthier
commendation, that a man nourishe, and be famous with his own virtues, and
just deserts, then to borrow his praise and honor of others. Men are fitly,
though not naturally called the Sons of them, whose deeds they do, and
whose vices or virtues they immitate.

Obedience to God, the whole duty of man.
1 LIke as amongst Archers, there is but one only mark, whereto they must
direct their arrows to shoot well, and yet many means to miss, and shoot
short: So is there but one only holiness, whereunto we must aspire and seek
after, which is a settled desire, fully resolved wholly to obey God; but there
are many kinds of vices and means to disobey him, and to withstand his will.

2 As it is a common practice of sick men, when they make their wills, on
their death beds, in the very first place to commend their bodies to the
grave, and their souls to God, that gave them in hope of a better ^^urrection:
and all this is well done; but afterward they bequeath their goods gotten by
fraud, oppression, and forged cauillation, to their own friends and
children, without making any recompense or satisfaction; but alas this should
not be so. Even so Obedience that goes with good conscience, must be performed
to all Gods com^^undemens without exception; and if it be done but (...) some
alone, it is but counterfeit obedience, and he ^^^t is guilty in one, is
guilty in all.

Obedience of Christ's death.
LIke as (by the determinate counsel of God) the Obedience of Adam, conveyed
it self (by natural propagation) from him to all his offspring forever: Even
so on the other side, the Obedience of Christ's death, appertains fully to
all those, that are spiritually begotten of him by a lively faith.

Original sin.
1 LIke as Corn how clean soever it be purged from the chafe and straw, if
it be fowne, will nevertheless spring up again, both with straw and chafe:
Even so in like manner, how clean so ever the children of God themselves, are
purged from their sins by the blood of Christ, yet their children
notwithstanding, do grow up with the seeds of all sin in them.

2 As a great house is dark, having but a little window, and not because there
is any fault in the Sun that shines into it: Even so we are evil of our
selves, and not by any fault that is in God. Psalm. 5.4.

Old men ready to embrace superstition.
LIke as young Children that want reason and discretion, will catch at the
burning candle, which if the^ knew that it would hurt them, they would not do
i^ So likewise Old men, and Old women, will soonest be drawn into
superstition, because it has a glitterin^ show; which they would not do, if
they knew the h^^ that it brings to their souls. Col. 2.23.

One manner of sinning in the godly, and another in the ungodly.
AS a wicked man, when he sins in his heart, he^ueth full consent to the
sin: But the godly thou^ they fall into the same sins with the wicked, yet
the never give full consent, for they are in their minds, wills, and
affections, partly regenerate, and partly unregenerate; and therefore their
wills, will partly abhor that which is evil. Romans 7.22. Math. 26.69, 70,
71, 72.

Offenders ought to be reproved, and admonished.
1 AS he that sees a murderer and stands by, and gives him the looking
on, without giving forth any thing, to show him his disliking of the fact, is
worthy to be accounted accessarie to his murder: Or as he that sees a blind
man running into a pit, and neither stays him from running into it, neither
yet helps him out being fallen into it, but lets him there be drowned, is
guilty of his death: Even so is he to be accounted, that sees his brother
kill his soul by sinning, and will not endeavor to do what he can by
rebuking him, to stay him from so doing. Hebr. 3.13. Leuit. 19.17. Gal. 6.1.
Ephe. 5.11. 1. Thessa. 5.11, 14.

2 As one member is ready to help an other, as the hand is ready to pluck
out a thorn or thistle, by the dilection of the eyes, even out of the least
toe: So godly Christians ought to be ready, by admonition and repre^ension, to
pluck out sin and error one out of an over, and that as speedily as may be,
least they be like Caine. ^ Cor. 12.14. Gene. 4.9.

3 Like as if there be a Moate fallen into the child's eye, ^he Mother thereof
will take and bestow great pains, by ^^iping, and blowing, and licking to get
it out, and all this ^hee does of love to her child, because she knows that
^he moate would in time be noisome, perilous, and do ^^ch harm to her child's
eye: Even so if there were that ^he in Christians, one toward an other, that
ought to be, ^^y could not but do their best endeavor by admonition, and
reprehention, one to help an other, to get out the least more of sin and
error, that their brethren are infected with. Math. 7.4.5.

4 As Physicians do oftentimes cut off a rotten member, least it corrupt and
putrify the other members: So it behooves men of authority, if they will
preserve the Commonwealth in safety, to root out of it, all those that do
give themselves, even with greediness, to beastly behavior, and to rotten
conditions; as theft, Adultery, fornication, murder, blasphemy, treachery,
treason, and such like; least the rotten ones, destroy them that be sound; and
the wicked and rebellious crew, draw the better sort to disobedience.

5 As it behooves, to reward well, those that be profitable members, and such
as do live in the fear of God, and due Obedience: Even so it is no less
necessary and needful to reprove the wicked, and to give them their deserved
punishment.

Original corruption, is the root of all sin.
1 AS a Serpent yet young, or yet vnbrought forth, is full of poison, and cannot
afterward (when time and occasion is given) but bring forth the fruits
thereof: Even so we, though we showed not the fruits of sin (...) soon as
we were borne, nor long after, yet were we ful^ of natural poison; from whence
all wicked deeds do^ spring, and cannot but sin outwardly, as soon as we^
are able to work (be we never so young) if occasion b^ given.

2 As an Adder, a Toad, or a Snake, is hated of us, no^ for the evil it has
done, but for the poison that is in i^ and hurt which it cannot but do: Even
so we all we^ hated of God, for that natural poison which is conce^ued and
borne with us, before we did any outward evil.

3 Like as the evil which a venomous worm does, makes it not a Serpent, but
because it is a venomous worm, therefore does it evil, and poysoneth: Even
so do not our evil deeds make us evil first, but because we are of nature
evil, therefore we do evil, and think evil, to eternal damnation by the
law, and are contrary to the will of God in our will, and in all things
consent unto the will of Satan.

Old men's example.
1 LIke as Ly^sters and Dyars, do die most often that color, which they
perceive most men do delight in: Even so young men do most studiously haunt
and embrace that, which they see Old men and Counselors have in most
estimation.

2 As an Old man in years and experience, is beyond them that are young and
green headed: So he ought in life and example, as well as in counsel to
instruct others; for when he falls into folly, he hurts himself greatly
with his sin, and other more with his example.

3 As fire, when it breaks out of compass, and order, is more perilous in
Old buildings, then in new houses: So misdemeanour, covetousness, leacherie,
pride, drunkenness, and blasphemy, is more offensive, and does more harm in
Old age, then in green youth.

Order to be used in reforming the Church or Commonweal.
AS he that roweth in an eye for the getting out of a moate, where a beam is
sticking, there is small hope ^^at he shall clear that eye, but rather do
more harm ^o it then good: Even so they that go about to reform ^^e Church
or Commonweal of small faults and offenses, and leave great matters
unreformed, deal very disorderly, and without wisdom and due consideration
Math. 7.5.

The Office of God, what it is.
1 LIke as toward the obedience of a Prince, it profits much, if in this
sort a man know what the King is; to wit, if he know what the Kings doings,
purpose, duty, and Office is: Even so it is profitable for a Christian, if he
know that the Office of God is, to be maker and preserver of all things; such
a one as without him, nothing can be, neither yet continue. 1. Timo. 4.10.
Esaias. 46.3, 4.

2 As it helps not the sick patient to know the name and shape of the
Physician, if he be ignorant that he is a Physician: Even so it avails a man
nothing, if he know that there is a God, his name, and his being; if he know
not that he is the maker, savior, and governor of all things, and so know
not the same, wherefore he ought to pray unto him. Heb. 11.6.

Many Offices cannot be discharged.
AS he that comes to a heap of Corn, the more h^ seems to take up in his
hand, the less he may: Eue^ so he that coueteth many Offices, either in the
Church o^ Commonweal, shall be able to discharge none well.

Pitiless Oppression.
AS a raging Rain beats the Corn down, and washes away all before it: So
when one poor man Oppresses an other, commonly it is without pity or
me^cie. Prou. 28.3.

We do Obey God, in obeying them to whom he has made us subjects.
LIke as in the house which is well ordered, all thin^ be directed, unto the
only will of the good man (...) the house, (for unless it should be so, the
good order (...) estate of the house could not continue) so that ther^ one
conformable will in all, and through them all, which is derived from the
good man of the house, into all the family, as from the head, to the members of
the same one body, and yet after a certain degree, some be preferred ^boue
others, whom the rest of the people, inferior in age; or in condition, is
subject unto, and do Obey them, because of the will and order of the good man
of the house, whereby he does give authority unto them whom he sets above
the rest in his house; which be then well Obeyed, if by that obedience, there
be nothing derogate be diminished from the superior will and power of the
good man of the house: Even so in like manner it stands with the case of our
obedience to God, who is the chief ^ing and householder in this world, whose
only will is in (...), and of all specially to be regarded; and in case he
has ^ade us subject unto none, we be not bound to Obey ^y living man; but in
case there be any to whom we must be subject, that cannot be any other ways
but by his will; so that we must of necessity Obey them, unless we will show
our selves to be out of all order.

Offense.
AS a Traitor that clippeth the coin of his Pince, makes it lighter to be
weyed, but never the worse to ^e touched: So he that by sinister reports,
seems to ^^paire the credit of his friend, may make him lighter a^ong the
common sort, who by weight are oftentimes ^eceiued, but nothing impaireth his
good name with the wise, who try all Gold by the touch stone.

There sorts of Officers needful in the Church.
LIke as we see that in trimming of the material Vine, there be diverse
laborers; for some cut away the branches that be void, some underset and lay
abroad the Vine, yea some pare away the old earth, and lay new to the root;
which offices be also so necessary to the Vine, that that if any of them fail
or want, it will either let or hinder, or utterly destroy the growing of the
Vine; for unless the Vine be cut, it will wax wild; except it be raised up
and laid abroad, weeds and nettles will soon over grow it; and if the root be
not fatted with new and fresh dung, it will wax barren with feebleness: Even
so, no less needful in Christ's Church be these three Officers; to wit,
Magistrates, Ministers, and Laborers; for it becomes Magistrates not to
suffer wrongs and thefts, oppressions and injuries to be done, and to
maintain Gods law; and them that be the Preachers thereof; yea and to see the
land kept from insurrection, and invasion of foreign enemies; it also
appertains to the Ministers and Preachers to labor faithfully, to weed and
cut away the void branches of sin, with the sword of Gods word; and to
Laborers, it belongs to work and labor bodily, and carefully, to get out
of the earth bodily sustenance, both for themselves and others: All these
estates be so needful to the Church, that none may well be without other; for
if Magistrates, and men to govern the people by law^ and wisdom, should
want; then thieves, and wicked livers would so increase, that no man could live
in peace and if Preachers should want, then the people would wax wild in all
vice and sin through ignorance, and f^^ default of knowledge of Gods word*
and so perish eue^lastingly: And if Laborers and Artificers, should b^ lacking
in the Commonwealth, then both Magistrat^ and Ministers, should become
Husbandmen, Laboure^ and handle crafts men; or else must die for want of
nat^ral food.

2 Like as if there were but one Horse, or one sheep in the world, yet if he
had Corn and grass, as nature and kind has ordained for such a beast, he
would live well enough by himself, without any help of other of the same
kind: But if there were but one man in the world, although he had all the good
and wealth therein, yet for want of other he would die, or at least he would be
worse then if he were not living.

Principles are necessarily to be known.
AS in a Pothecaries shop, where the knowledge of such things is set forth and
professed, it is a great shame, if common and no less profitable simples
should be unknown: So in a Church or family of the faithful, where the
knowledge of such matters is professed, it is great shame, if common and no
less needful Principles should not be well and rightly understood.

Persons of men in Christianity, not to be regarded.
AS Echium, or Tipers, Buglosse seed, is like a Serpents head, yet brings an
wholesome herb, and remedy against Serpents: So a man uncomely may have good
graces, and be an help to men against the wicked.

Prudence and providence in worldly affairs.
AS in times past, it did suffice, if men were not hurt or annoyed by brute and
wild beasts, but afterward ^en use them for their gain and commodity, as
to be ^ouered with their skins, to feed on their flesh, and to be ^ealed with
their gall, or inward parts: So ought we not ^^ely to beware least our enemy
do hurt us, but also to (...) him for our utility and profit.

Princes and Magistrates, are especially to eschew vices.
1 AS the Eclips of the Sun, is the cause of death and destruction: So is an
error or vice, which is an Eclips of virtue in a Prince, a great calamity,
and a pernicious plague unto the people; and presageth the like fall in the
apish immitating multitude.

2 As the Heart when he can find no pasture, is poor and bare of flesh, and
void of strength, when he is hunted and pursued: Even so are the Princes and
Rulers of those countries, which by the just judgment of God are oppressed,
and ouerrun with foreign nations. Psalm. 42.1.

3 As a great branch cut from a tree, brings down a number of small ones
with it: Or as a great Prince comes forth of his Palace, a multitude do
follow him: Even so do subjects ordinarily follow the example of their Prince
and Magistrate, whether good or bad; for whatsoever he does, it seems that he
commands it. Deuteronomy. 17. 16. etc. Iosu. 1. 8. 1. Sam. 2.30.

4 Even as from the Sap of a tree, does proceed that strength, wherewith the
boughs do flourish and bring forth fruit: So from a godly Prince, and
magistrate, such justice, virtue, and godliness, do proceed, that thereby all
the people are mightily moved to true Religion, aright worshipping of God, due
obedience, and honesty of life and conversation.

5 Like as when in man's body, the Heart does not impart unto the members, the
vital spirits, but the artiries are stopped and shut up, and the blood forsakes
the veins, it is a sign of death; and that the party in this case, is either
already dead, or else he will die shortly: Even so when kings and Princes of
the earth, are tyranical toward their loyal subjects, withdrawing from them
pity, mercy, love, and liberality; it threatens and does prognosticate the
ruin of their kingdoms; but through the mercy, clemency and love of Princes,
their kingdoms do mightily flourish, and the Princes themselves, do enjoy
great tranquillity, security, and peace. Prou. 20.20. Esc. 10.3.

6 Even as among the pretty sweet Bees, that Be only which leads and rules
all the rest, either has no sting, or at the least, does not use it: So
clemency and mercy agrees with none more in all the world, then with a Prince.

Prosperity and wealth, makes not a man truly happy.
1 AS children do much wonder, and praise those players, which on the Scaffold
be apparelled in pide and peevish garments: So fools they be, that will deem
them happy, who be laden either with wealth, or brave attire.

2 Like as we see horses, when they be much pampered, to kick, to be fierce,
and not to abide the rider: Eue^ so Prosperity, makes men drunken, and as it
were brings them on sleep; and no marvel, for as the common saying is,
Fullness ingendreth fierceness. Dan. 4.1. Psalm. 30.6.

3 As a morning cloud, that at the Sun rising, vanishes away: Even so shall
the Prosperity of the wicked be.

4 As the Grass on the house top, which for lack of root, withers before it
can grow up to be mowen, or to serve to any other good use: Even so is also
the flourishing Prosperity of such men, Cities, and lands, as by manifold
wickedness, provoke Gods wrath and indignation against them. Psalm. 37.1, 2.
and 129.6, 7. Esaias. 37.27.

Preachers of the Law when need requires, are no disturbers of the peace of
the Church.
AS the skilful Physician, who giving a sharp purgation to his surfitted
patient, which for a time does disquiet all the parts of his body, may truly
be accounted a distemperer of his patients health: for even as a purgation,
notwithstanding it makes much rumbling in the patients bowels, and seem for a
time, to disease all the members; yet afterward procuring perfect health to
his body, cannot therefore in truth and in deed, be called the disquietter
thereof: So surely, those Ministers, notwithstanding they minister some bitter
purgation out of the word, to such silly poor patients in Christ, as have
surfeited long upon some points of Idolatry, and superstition, whereby also
their ignorant minds, and weak consciences are much disquietted for a time,
yet (for that they procure in the end their former health, and seek only to
restore them a right to their perfect liberty in Christ) they cannot therefore
be truly termed disturbers either of the outward or inward peace of the
Church; but rather the faithful defenders thereof; for that they do daily
admonish their people to conform themselves to the right manner of serving and
worshipping God, according to his word; and to beware of such stinking Garlike
and Onions of Egypt, as naturally they are apt to surfeit upon. Numb. 11.4, 5.

Patience.
1 AS in playing tables we know not what cast shall happen, but that which
happens, is the players part to play well: So what things shall happen in our
life, is not in us to appoint, but that which happens, is our duty by
Patience, to accept and use well.

2 As the Apostles did wait with Patience for the promise of Christ, for so
soon as he was ascended into heaven, they came straight to Jerusalem, where
they continued ten days, till the holy Ghost was sent: So likewise must we
prescribe no time to the Lord, but Patiently wait for those things which we
want. Act. 1.11, 12. and 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

3 Even as the Husbandman, laboring in tilling and sowing their fields, do
patiently look for fruit: So the godly ought by Patience to look for the end
of faith, which is the salvation of their souls. Iam. 5.7.

Preacher.
1 AS one piece of wood cannot possibly kindle an other, unless the same be
first kindled it self: So likewise no Preacher, can inflame his hearers with
the love of Religion, which is not first inflamed himself with the love of the
Lord, and a care of his glory, nor convert, or teach an other rightly, that is
not truly converted, and taught himself, etc. Luke 22.32. Romans 2.21.

2 As the abundance of fruits, or as a plentiful harvest, procures the
paineful ploughman to labor afresh, and with a future hope, to put his hand to
the plough, to bend his back to the burden, and most willingly abide the brunt
of every blast, because he sees such store of fruits from his former
labors: So surely every godly Preacher, perceiving his former practice to
bring forth such profit, he is pricked forward to labor more diligently in
his calling, accounting those pains his only pleasure, and making those his
careful hearers, his daily delight, saying: Lo these are the trees of
righteousness, these are the planting of the Lord, in whom he is glorified,
etc. Prou. 11.30. Esaias. 61.3.9.

3 As the young Crab-fish (being checked on a time, of her elder, for going so
crokedly) said, first go you straight before us, and then we will the
straighter follow your steps: So if the Preacher will have his hearers to do
and practice, that which he teaches them, then he himself must do and
practice that which he teaches them, that so his good behavior may be their
ensample; otherwise, they will cast his own dung in his face, and say,
Physician heal thy self. Luke 8.16. and 11.33. 1. Pet. 2.12. Math. 23.13.
Mal. 2.9. Luke 4.29.

4 As those foolish Carpenters, who (building and preparing the Arc, for the
sauegard of Noah and his family) were drowned themselves in the flood: Or as a
grinding-stone, which (by giving an edge to the tools) yet becomes it self
more blunt then before: Or as a Candle, which (by giving light to others) is
consumed it self: Or as a Mearestone, which directs the poor traueillers
aright in their viage, but yet it stands still it self at a stay: Or as that
miserable Husbandman, that sells away al his best Corn, but keeps the
refuse to himself: Or as Cyrus the foolish Wine seller, sold others of the
best Wine, and did drink the lees and dregs himself: Or as a firebrand,
which kindles and sets other wood on fire, but it is consumed and burnt it
self: Or as a sick Captain, which may give his Soldiers good counsel,
though himself be unable to strike a stroke: Or as an Alabaster box, which
contains very precious ointments, for such as are sick, but feels it self
no savor thereof: Or as a Library full of singular good knowledge, for such as
are desirous to learn, but has neither use, nor profit thereof it self: Or
as a gilden Cup, full of very wholesome Wine, for the comfort of those that are
dry, but yet it remains it self a thirst: Or as a foolish Minstrell, which
sings one thing with the mouth, and harpeth an other with his hands: Even so
that Minister that gives good counsel to other, but follows it no^
himself; that builds up with one hand, but breaks down with the other;
which Preaches soundly, bu^ lives lycentiously: which reprooueth others for
stealing, and yet steals himself; who blames others for Adultery, but yet
breaks wedlock himself: who condemns the ill doings and dealings of
others, and yet does the same things himself: Such a one, may as sure
himself, that (without speedy repentance) he shall never escape the
judgments of God. Gene. 6.21. Math. 14.38, 39. Luke 17.26, 27. 1. Pet. 3.20.
Gal. 2.18. Psalm. 50.17, 18. Romans 2.21, 22, 23.

5 As there is but one only means to salvation for all, whether Prophet, or
Apostle, Preacher or people, Jew or Gentile, bond or free, or of what condition
so ever: So surely, those are the best kind of Preachers in deed, which deliver
the doctrine of Christ, with some experience and feeling thereof in themselves;
which verily adds a marvelous efficacy and force to that doctrine
delivered. Gal. 2.6. Ephe. 6.9. Col. 3.25. 1. Pet. 1.17.

6 As the sick man seeks not a Physician eloquent, but expert and cunning:
So of a Preacher, there must not be required a phrase of speech, adorned, and
affected, but plain, wise, and for edification.

7 Like as some men entangled in over many turnings, ^oo make a short way very
long: So likewise some Preachers, in teaching trifling questions, and matter
that edifieth not, does greatly hinder his hearers from profiting in wisdom
and knowledge.

8 As a blind, sore, and wounded eye, which cannot direct and lead the body,
is rather a blemish, and a bur^en to the natural body, then a commodity: Even
so a man allowed, and appointed to be a spiritual Pastor and Preacher, which
has not the knowledge and grace to Preach the Law and the Gospel, is but a
blind and sore eye, not able to direct and guide the spiritual body, the
people of God, of whom he takes charge of. Mat. 6.23. (...) 15.14. Act. 8.31.

10 As a family, or household, left without a guide, or Steward, waxes
disordered; as Scholars wanting a Schoolemaister, cannot be learned; as a ship
destitute of a guide, is unlikely to be preserved: Even so the state and
condition of such Churches and parishes, are most woeful and lamentable, which
are deprived and lack true and faithful Preachers, who are the Lords
stewards, to dispose his secrets; the Lords Schoolemaister to teach his people;
the Lords vnder-guides, to direct his flock of sheep, into the sheep fold of
Christ Jesus. Prou. 29.18. 1. Cor. 4.1. Math. 28.19. Ioh. 10.16.

11 As the Surgion is accustomed first of all to lay to a sore very sharp
playsters, and after the wound being open, then those that be more gentle: Or
as a Father seeing the corrupt manners of his child, first corrects them with
stripes, and afterward comfort him: Even so must the Preacher of the word
deal with his auditorie after he has denounsed judgments, and threatenings,
h^ must then minister comforts and promises.

12 Like as there be two duties or properties belonging to a good shepherd;
to wit, first to feed his sheep and secondly, to preserve them in safety
from Wolue^ and Foxes: Even so a good Pastor and Minister of Christ^ sheep,
first ought to feed them with the fodder of pu^^ and wholesome doctrine of
Christ; and secondly, to d^fend them form Wolves and thieves, that is against
fal^ deceivers, etc. Act. 20.28. Ioh. 21.15, 16.

13 Like as the Fountain, though no man draw of does still send forth his
springs: Or as a river, though ^ man drink of it, yet does it keep his
course, and flow nevertheless: Even so it behooves him that Preache^ the word
of God, to do what lies in his power, thou^ no man give any attentiveness, or
have any care to f^low the same. Iere. 7.27. Ezech. 2.3. and 3.9, 11, 17. and
^3.^^^4.

14 Like as that man, which goes about to cut down a tall and mighty Cypres,
being barren, unprofitable, and a middle tree, that other fruitful plants,
which are lette^ and hindered through the noisome shadow of it, may increase
and prosper, does not despair, though at the first or second blow, he fell it
not, but by little and little, he strikes with the Axe, until at the length
he lay it along: Even so a Preacher of the word of God, although he see no
profit follow his preaching, no faults amended, no sins abated, yet for all
that, he ought not to despair, to faint, and to hide his Talent in the
ground, but ^^her he ought to continue his preaching, and never give over,
that at the length, with the two edged sword of the pure word of God, he may
new and fell down the ^^^ge and monstrous tree of sin, and all abomination;
^^d that the new plants of virtue, holiness, and righteousness, may grow,
prosper, and increase.

15 Even as the precious stone called a Iacincte, is tur^^d and changed with
the air, (for in a clear air, it (...) bright, and in a cloudie season, it
is darksome, and not (...) pleasant:) So the Preachers and reachers of the word
^f God, in their teaching and preaching, ought to frame ^^emselues, to meet
with the manners, ages, and qualities fill their hearers. 1. Cor. 2.^. and 3.1,
2. etc. and 9.19.

16 As one and the same medicine, is not used and mi^^red to all that be
diseased and sick, but diverse medi^^^^ according to their diverse diseases: So
likewise one ^^d the self same doctrine, is not agreeable to all hearers; ^^e
reaching therefore and preaching of the Ministers Christ, must be so ordered
and divided, that having ^^rs and sundry hearers, whose cases differ much, and
are not all alike, every one may have his several portion, that not one,
through want of discretion in him, go empty away.

17 As a diligent and learned Physician, before he minister any Physic to his
sick patient, ought not only to seek out, and to know the disease of him,
whom he purposes to cure, but also his manners, his usual behavior, the
nature of his body, and his qualities: So also a godly wise Preacher of the
word, must do his best endeavor, to know the infirmities, manners and
dispositions of his auditorie, that spiritual Physic fit and meet for every
one, may be ministered in due time.

18 As the people were rowzed, and stirred up to wars, and to celebrate
certain days, wherein sacrifices were offered up unto God, by the Priests,
in the founding of Trumpets: Even so every Preacher of the word of God, ought
to call upon sinners, to remove their Tents from this wicked world, and the
manners and fashions of the same; and so much as in him lies, to bring the
people that are blinded in their sins, and falling from God, out of their
errors, perils and dangers, and with all their force, and skill, to move and
stir them up, to be that in deed, which true Christians does require. Numb.
10.2, etc. Joel. 2.1. Esaias. 55.6, 7. and 58.1. Reave. 18.1.

19 As an expert and skillful Husbandman, does first draw out of his fields or
lands, and pulls up by the roots, thistles, briefs, brambles, and all other
venomous and wild weeds, and afterward commits unto them his good seeds:
Even so a wise and skillful Teacher of the word of God, ought first to root
out sin and vices, and to till as it were, the minds of his hearers; and as
much as in him lies, to draw and pull out of them, both root and rind of all
manner of evil and wickedness; and to prepare and make them meet, to receive
the good seeds of the holy word; and to sow in them those things, which being
rooted and grown up, may bring forth, both pleasant, profitable, and
plentiful fruits. Ezech. 16.2. etc.

20 As a Sine or a boulter, wherewith meal is sifted or boulted, which sends
forth the finest flower, and best of the wheat, and keeps the bran and worst
to it self: Even so that Preacher, which instructs others with wholesome
doctrine, and does so stain and blemish himself, with vile and naughty
vices, that his life and doctrine be opposite, and clean contrary the one to
the other, so that it is seen and perceived of all, that there is no agreement
between them. Exodus 28.30. Psalm. ^5.20. Ezech. 18.8, 9.

21 As the looking Glass does show very plainly, to them that behold in, the
likeness of such men or women, ^ore before it, that they may dress and trim
themselves, and yet does not see it self. So that Preacher or Master, which
very copiously and eloquently does teach others, virtue and and all good
things, and yet himself given to sin and wickedness, he does in deed teach
others, but he teaches not himself. Romans 2.1, 21.

22 As the sower does fill his hand, and so casts it abroad upon the ground,
not setting in seed by seed, or choosing a place for every seed, but where it
lights: Even so the Preacher does cast forth the word among the people, and
look how the ground is into which it falls, so does a prosper; for men's
hearts are the ground upon which the word is cast; and every one has a heart,
upon whom the feed is sown. 1. Math. 13.3.

23 As God commanded his Priest Aaron, to have the ^^east plate upon his heart;
the Vrim, and Thummim, the one signifying light, and that other perfection,
meaning also by Vrim knowledge, and by Thummim holiness: So does he hereby
declare what virtues are requirred in a Preacher; to wit, knowledge and
understanding in the word of God, and godliness in living, manners and
conversation.

24 As the Cock in the darkness of the night, foretells the light to come:
So the Preacher in the darkness of this present world, foresheweth the light
of the joys of life everlasting to come.

25 Like as when a man lies in his dead sleep, cannot awake except some noise
waken him, or some other call him: So in like manner we cannot arise out of
sin, except the spirit of God, or his Preachers, which are his watchmen, with
often crying unto us, awake us up. Esaias. 58.1.

Proud through honor.
1 LIke as Bucephalus, the horse of Alexander the great, being vnsadled, would
receive on his back the horse keeper, but being adorned with Trappers and
Barbes, he would suffer none other then Alexander himself to ride him: Even
so many being poor and base, will suffer many things, which they being in
prosperity would despise and contemn.

2 As a tree set upon the top of a mountain, is mightily shaken, and easily
rent up by the roots, with every blustering blast and storm of wind: Even so
man in this world, the more and higher he is exalted to honor, the more and
greater dangers is he subject unto. Luke ^.52, 53. Iam. 4.6.

Preparation of the heart, before holy exercises.
LIke as honesty and civility, requires that our body be well ordered and
settled, when we shall have talk and communication with men of more honor then
our selves: Even so it is much more meet, that our mind be very well disposed,
when we shall pray, and speak before God, in the sight of his Angels.

Persons of men not to be regarded in judging of virtues, etc.
AS the little precious stone, is but a small thing, yet is it esteemed above
all huge and greater stones: So a little man, but of excellent wit, is more to
be regarded, then the long, large, and dull dolte.

Papists like the old heretics.
LIke as if the Physiton should say to two men of one age, of one disposition,
and sick of one disease, that the medicine that heales the one, will kill the
other: Even so the Papists think they are greatly injured, when they be
compared to the heretics, the Datians, who denied matrimony to all men; but
they prohibit it only to the order of their Ecclesiastical Ministers; as
though they condemned not matrimony, because they deny it not to all, but to
some; but the Scripture is altogether against them. Gene. 1.28. and 9.1. and
2.18. Leuit. 21.7. 1. Cor. 7.2, 9. 1. Timo. 3.2. and 4.3. Hebr. 13.4.

The Pastor not above the Prince.
1 LIke as if the King should command his Guard to keep his Nobles out of his
Court or Palace, yet were not the Guard superior, or above the Nobles: So
though the Pastor, should restrain and keep the Prince from receiving the
Communion, it cannot hence be concluded, that the Prince is inferior to the
Pastor, as Doctor Bilson truly says. Page 222.

2 Like as if the Prince do yield to the instruction of his Pastor, out of
Gods word, this yielding is to be accounted to God, not to his Pastor, for the
Pastor as Minister in Gods steed, does speak unto him: So when by the
commandment of God, any Church censure is exercised against a Prince, it is
God, and not the Pastor that does it. 2. Cor. 5.20.

Peace of conscience.
1 AS all men naturally in Adam are corrupt, so all men naturally have corrupt
and defiled consciences, accusing them and arraigning them, before Gods
judgment for their sins; in such wise, that every suspicion of death, and
fear of imminent danger, makes a natural man stand aghast at his wits, and
knowing not what to do; but by faith in Christ, the Christian is persuaded of
remission of his sins, and so the disquietnesse of his conscience is
appeased, and he has an inward Peace in all extremities, which cannot be taken
from him. Hebr. 10.22. Romans 5.1. and 15.16.

2 As he that drinks quenches his thirst: So likewise he that thirsts
after the Peace of conscience with God, and righteousness to be allowed at
his judgment seat finds it, and quuencheth his thirst by drinking of the
blood of Christ. Ioh. 6.54, 55.

3 Even as after great showers and storms of rain, the air is cleansed and
cleared: So, after great troubles, sorrows, afflictions, and temptations,
cleanness of heart, quietness of mind, and Peace of soul and conscience do
follow.

Precepts of godliness.
LIke as to the sick persons, there is not only ministered medicines, but there
be also Precepts or diets prescribed unto him to follow, least the operation of
the medicine should be hindered: Even so Christ commanded that his Precepts,
which do serve to the following of true godliness, should be laid unto them
that be baptized, least they should fall from his grace, unto the Sacrament
whereof they be admitted and consigned.

Plague or Pestilence.
AS the Lion is a most ravenous and cruel beast, who teareth all other beasts
in pieces; especially, then when she has young; the she Lion spares (as they
say) no pray: Even so, the Plague or Pestilence, spares no sorts of men.

2 As there is none comparable in strength to the Lion: Even so the Plague or
Pestilence of all other diseases, is most strong and deadly, and brings down
to the earth, as well the strongest, as the weakest.

3 As the Lion is a beast of a most hot and fiery nature: Even so is the
Plague; for the infected, complain much of their extreme burning.

Praising God.
1 AS in a Garland, it suffices not, that the flowers be fine, unless the
hands of him that makes it, be fair and clean: Even so in Praising God, it
is not sufficient that our words be godly and religious, unless our hearts
agree with our words.

2 As nothing is more tedious and displeasing to the ears of a good Musition
then gerring of strings: So nothing in the ears of the Lord, can be more
displeasing, then not to sing and utter Praises unto him, with understanding.
Deuteronomy. 32.1. Judge. 5.1. etc. Luke 1.46. Psalm. 98.1. and 103.1.

Prince or Pastor.
1 AS the flowers of Sysynriehion be many, whereof one always is open, that
stands at the top: So though in a Commonwealth or Church there be many, or
all good men, yet they which are in the chiefest places, as the Prince and
Pastor, must be most vigilant.

2 Like as the Sun shines not more unto the rich, then unto the poor, but
is unto all alike: So a Prince or Magistrate, ought not to have respect unto
the person, but unto the cause or controversy. Exodus 23.3. Leuit. 19.15.

3 As a Horse for the leanness is not to be blamed, but the horse-keeper: So
the rudeness and ignorance of the people, is to be imputed unto their Prince
and Pastor.

4 Like as a little Wart or blot, is sooner perceived in the face, then a great
bunch or wound in the other parts of the body* So a small offense is evident
and seems great in a Prince, or Preacher, whose life the whole people do
behold.

Praises by an other.
1 AS the pleasant tickling, or rubbing of other men, do more delight us, then
our own: So it is more commendable to be Praised by those, who be neither of
our kin, or familiarity. Prou. 27.2.

2 As they must not be tickled, which of their own nature, are over much
given to laughter: So must they not be Praised, who of themselves are prone to
desire Praise.

3 As we are warned to take heed of a perilous place, or else therein
circumspectly to behave our selves: So ought we either not at all to Praise
our selves, or else to do it moderatly.

Power or ability.
1 AS Prophirius the Serpent, having much poison, yet for want of teeth can
an^oy none: Even so many do imagine mischief, but for that they lack Power or
ability, they do no hurt.

2 Like as the marriage of man and wife is of God, but the abuse of wedlock is
not of God, but of the devil: So likewise all Power is of God, but the abuse
of Power, (...) not of him. Romans 13.1.

Proud and obstinate.
1 AS certain lightnings do melt both brass and iron, when as they leave soft
wax vnannoyed: Even so Gods might, or the Kings power, do worthily suppress
and beat down the Proud and obstinate, that the meek and humble, they most
favorably and graciously do use. 1. Pet. 5.5, 6. Luke 18.14.

2 Like as Tempests when they arise, and lightning, quickly and with a trice,
hurleth down and ouerturneth mountains and the highest trees: Even so does
the Lord bring down with a breake-necke fall, the Proud, hautie, arrogant, and
insolent, which set themselves against God, and seek the spoil of those that
be quiet and godly. Esa. 2.12, 13. Psalm. 29.5. etc.

Painful labors.
AS the Rose, a flower of all others most pleasant, is gathered upon rough
briers or brambles: So of diligent and Painful labors, comes at the length
pleasant profit, and great gain.

Parents.
1 LIke as the Ape does with embracings, wel-neare kill her young whelps: So
some Parents, through immoderate love, and overmuch chearishing, do utterly
spoil and mar their children.

2 Like as when the head is well and sound, and also the stomach pure from
hurtful humors, the body is commonly well affected: B^ so where the head of
any f^^ily, or household, is religious and sound in faith, and fears God, it
commonly goes well with all the household; for according to the common
proverb: As the old Cock croweth, the young learneth. Such a Father, such a
Son. Like Mother, like daughter. 2. Sam. 13.28, 29. Ezech. 16.44. Es^^. 24.2.

Perverse manners, a cause of good laws.
AS the most sorest sickness, do cause the most effectual medicines to be
made: So through the occasion of Perverse manners, good and lawdable laws be
ordained.

Popish Priests.
AS the Magicians, Witches, and Sorcerers, knowing their doings to be but
mere guile and deceit, yet will they with certain prescribed ceremonies and
dotings, amaze the minds of their inferiors: So some Popish Semenarie Priests
(blinded in ignorance, and all void of good learning and godliness) go about
to entangle the rude and simple people, with a sort of superstitious
ceremonies, thereby to make them more subject unto them.

Poetry.
1 AS in slaughter, massecres, or murder, painted in a Table, the cunning of
the Painter is praised, but the fact it self, is utterly abhorred: So in
Poetry we follow elocution, and the proper form of words and sentences, but
the ill matter we do worthily despise.

2 As in those places, where many herbs meet for medicines do spring, there
also grows great plenty of herbs, unwholesome and naught: So in Poets and
Poetry, are sundry things worthy and good, but therein, some other things be
very pe^stiferous poison.

3 As in our feeding, we seek not only pleasure, but also health: So is the
like regard to be had, in reading of Poetry, and profane writers.

Poison.
A Wicked sentence mixed with things profitable and pleasant, is like unto
Poison put into meat.

Preaching little avails without Christ's spirit.
AS the crowing of the Cock, was not sufficient to move Peter to tepentance,
until Christ, in token of favor toward him, looked back upon him: Even so
Ministers may Preach to the people, but unless Christ open and mollify their
hearts, and work by his spirit in them, they cannot receive profit by their
hearing. Luke 22.60, 61. John. 6.44, 65. 1. Cor. 3.6, 7. Act. 16.14. Iere.
31.33. and 32.40.

Praise or honor.
AS every manner of Crown, is not ordained, nor fit for every Victor, and
he that vanquisheth: So some kind of Praise or honor is not meet for all men.

Praise.
AS they which give unwillingly, seem to have but little themselves: So they
which Praise other men slenderly, seem desirous to be Praised themselves.

Preaching.
1 AS sentence was given by God, that S. Paul should appear at Rome, and not
perish with his company in the Sea: It now being impossible that he should
perish, or any of his company; notwithstanding he yet truly said; that they
could not be saved, unless the Mariners did abide in the Ship: Even so it is
impossible to take God his sheep out of his hand, is truly said;
nevertheless it is yet impossible for them to be saved without Preaching and
continuance of feeding by the word of God; for as that (namely the continuance
of the Mariners in the ship) was the ordinary means to save their lives, and
to deliver them from shipwreck: So this (namely continuance of Preaching,
Catechizing, and often feeding by the word) is the ordinary means to deliver
us from spiritual destruction. Act. 23.11. and 27.23, 24, 25. Act. 27.31. John.
10.29.

2 Like as meat does not nourish (I mean the Preaching of the word of God,
the food of the soul) unless it be received, and by faith we receive it;
it cannot cherish us, unless it be digested, and by the heat of faith it is
concocted; it cannot profit us, unless it be kept in our hearts, and by faith
we retain it; it does no good, unless we have life, and the just shall live
by faith: So that it is most requisite, that we labor by earnest prayer to
attain unto faith, whereby we may be perfectly nourished with this meat, the
Preaching of the word of God. Haba. 2.4. Romans 1.17.

3 Like as the profane and wicked people, have wit enough to say, that if a
man be fallen into a ditch, or brook, he may cry long enough, Lord help me,
Lord help me, if he do not endeavor and strive to come out, by taking hold of
such things as he may escape and clamber up by: And yet are they not so wise,
as to consider the means by which God in mercy, does reach forth his mighty
arm unto them, to draw them out of the puddle and mire of sin; and to save
them, which is, only by the Preaching of his word; but this they do not seek
to lay hold of. But contrarily, they cast themselves headlong into the snares
of temptation, by joining in fellowship, with the workers of iniquity. 1. Cor.
1.18, 21. Romans 1.16. and 10.17.

4 As there is not a greater blessing given of God to any nation or people,
then the gift of his holy word, there to be sincerely taught and preached: So
likewise no greater curse from God, can be laid upon any nation or people, then
when the word of God, and the true Preaching thereof, is taken away from them.
Amo. 8.11, 12.

5 As there is much difference betwixt a drawn plat, and the builded house,
betwixt the figure and the thing figured, the natural, and the thing
presented: So is there much more difference betwixt the hearing of a Sermon
preached, and the reading thereof afterward in writing; for the heart is more
moved by hearing the word preached, then read.

6 As the Hen clocketh and calls her chickens together, and lovingly
spreads her wings to keep them under, and to protect and defend them, from
all things that would hurt or harm them: Even so the Lord most lovingly, by
the continual Preaching of his holy word, does call men to the embracing of
his mercy. Mat. 23.37.

7 As Christ when he raised up dead men, did only speak the word and they
were made alive; and at the day of judgment, at his voice, when the trumpe
shall blow, all that are dead shall rise again: So it is in the first
resurrection; they that are dead in their sins, at his voice uttered in the
ministry of the word, shall rise again.

8 As Christ raised three from the dead; Iairus daughter newly dead; the
widows Son dead and wound up, and lying on the Hearse; Lazarus dead and
buried, and stinking in the grave; and all this he did by his very voice: So
also by the Preaching of his word, he rayseth all sorts of sinners, even such
as have lien long in their sins, as rotting and stinking carrion.

9 As the days of our life, they arise with the Sun, and go down again
with it: So the day of our salvation, it springs in the Preaching of the
Gospel, and it is shut up again with the ceasing of that voice. Math. 4.16.

10 Even as a fruitful field brings two kinds of fruits, for man's bodily
sustenance, whereof one must be dressed, sodden, baked, or roasted, etc. the
other may be eaten raw as it comes from the ground: So Gods word has two
kinds of food for the soul; whereof the one must needs be dressed, and minced
as it were by Preaching, and rightly dividing it, the other may be understood
and digested by reading.

11 As a Mother does not give her child a whole Nut in the shell, but breaks
and cracketh it, and so gives it the kernel: Even so must a Minister do with
the word, and open it by plain Preaching.

12 Like as they that refuse Pearls, because they are brought and offered unto
them, in homely and base vessels; or as they that had rather sit in the dark,
then to have a light brought them, unless it were put in a Silver
candlestick; or as the baker that refuses good and pure wheat, because of
the baseness of the bag, in which it is brought; may all be accounted fools:
So in like manner, such men as refuse to hear the Preaching of Gods word,
because it is preached by simple and base men, in regard of the countenance of
the world, are much deceived.

Prayer.
1 LIke as in worldly things it makes no matter, concerning the sustentation of
our bodies, where we eat, or drink, so it be wholesome, profitable, and
convenient: So in Religion, it skilleth not where any man prays, so that his
Prayer be devout, zealous, and godly, in spirit and truth. 1. Timo. 2.8. Ioh.
4.21, 22, 23, 24.

2 Like as if a man should tell a tale before a King, he had need chiefly to be
careful (if he intend to speed of his suit) that he do not only speak that is
true, but that he do also behave himself after a modest and comely manner in
telling of his tale, without either gazing about, or running into by matters:
Even so, much more ought we to have regard (when we speak unto God) that our
speech and Prayer be so adorned and garnished with all circumstances of good
means and behavior, that it may be acceptable, to the eyes and ears of Gods
majesty, not suffering our hearts to be carried away, with wandering thoghts,
and worldly imaginations, or otherwise occupied, and to forsake him in the
midst of our Prayer; For how shall God hear us, when we hear not our selves*
Or how would we have him to remember us, when we do no whit remember our
selves? This is even to watch with our eyes, and to sleep with our hearts.

3 Like as the comeliness of a Father, is to give unto his children all such
things, as becomes a Father to give; and so the seemelinesse of a Prince, is
to deal favorably with his subjects, in those things which are seemly and
meet for a good Prince to do; for like as it falls out diverse times, that
children do unadvisedly ask some things of their Fathers, and the subjects of
their Prince, which cannot be granted, to save the countenance and comeliness
of the person, of whom they be requested: Even so also it falls out
oftentimes, that we do ask those things of God by Prayer, which he cannot
as God give unto us, with the countenance and comeliness of God.

4 As none that is a suter to any other, will do or use any thing, which might
offend or hinder his suit: So no man that uses Prayer, will flatter himself,
in any thing, that may or will displease God, to whom by Prayer he moves
suit, when, and so often as he prays.

5 Like as it happens oftentimes, that those that be sick, do wish and
desire to have of their Physician those things, that be unwholesome and
unprofitable for them: Even so many times, we desire by Prayer of God, some
things which (if they should be given us) would be to our great hurt and utter
ruin, and which are contrary for us. Math. 20.20, 21, 22. 1. John. 5.14. Iam.
4.3.

6 As men do eat and drink, which is a mean ordained of God, for the
conservation of their lives, not looking thereby to lengthen their days above
their bounds, which already the Lord has appointed, but as becomes them, to
use that means, which he has ordained to serve his providence: Even so do
the godly (as men not curious to know Gods providence, further then he
reuealeth it) use Prayer, as a mean, by the which he is accustomed to work
many of his childrens desire; that according to his good will, he may dispose
the same.

7 Like as a loving and well manered wife, will not take upon her to ask any
thing of her husband at all, but that which she hops he will take in good
part, and do of his own free will, although she had spoken nothing thereof;
and when she knows what her husbands will is in things, she gladly talks
with him thereof, and accordingly as she sees him disposed to do, she will
often desire him to do it: Even so the godly Christians, which unfeignedly love
God, in that they know his wisdom, and will is best, cannot forbear, but
often pray and talk with him, and desire him to do that, which he knows is
best, and which they know also he would do, if none should ask or pray for the
same.

8 As Rebecca, when two twins strove in her womb, was troubled and said, why
am I so? Wherefore she went to ask the Lord, namely by some Prophet: So when
we feel this inward fight, betwixt the flesh and the spirit, the best thing
is, to have recourse to God by Prayer. Gene. 25.22.

9 As the children of Israel, by compassing the City of Ierico seven days,
and by sounding Rams horns, ouerturned the walls thereof: So by serious Prayer
and invocation of Gods name, the spirit is confirmed, and the Turrets and
Towers of the rebellious flesh battered. Ios. 6.34. Math. 26.41. 1. Pet. 4.7.

10 As the preaching of the word, serves to declare and to convey unto us Gods
graces: Even so in Prayer we come to have a lively feeling of the same in our
hearts; for it is the key, whereby we open the treasures of God, and pull down
his mercies upon us. Psalm. 106.23. Ephe. 6.18.

11 Like as if a man be to come before an earthly Prince, he will order
himself in apparel, gesture and word, that he may do all things in
seemelinesse and dutiful reverence: Even so much more are Christians to order
themselves, when they are to appear before the living God in Prayer. Eccle.
5.1.

12 As a child cannot without blushing call him Father, whom he cares not
continually to displease through his lewd conditions, neither can his Father
delight in such a child: Even so with what face dare any man in Prayer, call
God his Father, whom he makes no conscience to offend and displease most
rebelliously by word and deed.

13 As that City, which is not fenced with Walls, may be easily brought under
subjection of the enemy, because it wants that which should withstand the
force and encounters of the enemy: So likewise the devil will easily bring
our souls in subjection unto him, and with no great pains, lead them to all
kind of lewdness; unless they be fenced by often and fervent Prayer unto God.

14 Like as the Sun gives light to the body: So Prayer gives light to the
mind; for as it is dangerous for a man never to see the Sun: So it is much
more perilous for a Christian man never to pray.

15 As trees bring forth no fruit, unless they receive Sap and nourishment
from the roots: Even so we can never increase in godliness, unless we be
continually watered by our Prayers.

16 As thieves and robbers, beholding a man flourish his sword about his ears,
will not then set upon him: Even so the wicked spirits, seeing us fenced by our
Prayers, will straightway give back, and leave us unassaulted.

17 As waves of water are tossed and carried away by force of wind: So likewise
he that prays without faith, must needs be carried of every forcible
affection, and therefore cannot look to obtain his petitions. Iam. 1.6, 7.

18 As women prevail with men in their suits by great importunity: Even so
godly Christians by Prayer without ceasing, do obtain their requests of God.
Luke 18.3, 7.

19 Like as the poor Captive is always creeping to the prison door, often
laboring to get off his bolts and fetters, and to escape out of prison: So
likewise must we always creep to the Lord for his spirit by Prayer, to free
us out of this bondage and prison, of sin and corruption; and every day come
nearer the prison door, looking when our blessed Savior will unbind us, of
all the fetters of sin and Satan, and fully erect his kingdom in us.

20 As a Mother that carries her child in her arms, if it cry for the Dugge
and suckes the same, it is alive; but being observed many days together, if
it neither cry nor stir, it is dead: So in like manner, it is an infallible
note of a true child of God, to cry to his Father in heaven by Prayer; but he
that never cries nor feels himself stirred up to make his moan to God, is
in a miserable case, and he may well be thought to be but a dead child.

21 Like as we see green wood, lying in the fire sobbing and smoking long
before it will burn: Even so no doubt all Gods children, do feel a strife and
combat in their spirits, in many of their Prayers. Esaias. 38.41. etc.

22 Like as every Fencer or florisher, proves not a valiant and courageous
man, when he comes to fight in good earnest: Even so no more are those
Prayers found effectual, neither can such men speak a word to the purpose,
when affliction has laid hold on the^ in deed; whereas a true Christian, never
shows his manhood nor his cunning in this weapon of Prayer, more then when he
is to fight for life and death; and the greater the danger is, with so much
the stouter courage is he endued. Psalm. 32.6.

23 As he that truly loves, delights in nothing more, then in the often
talking, and conference with him whom he loves: Even so where there is true
and unfeigned love unto God, there is a burning desire by often Prayer to talk
with God; so as no peril nor danger, no not of loss of life, can stay or
hinder it; as may appear by Daniel. Dan. 6.10.

24 As the more wood is laid on the fire, the greater is the flame: So likewise
is the continual talking with God by Prayer, a great increasing of our love
toward him; as on the contrary, the seldomer we common with him by Prayer,
the more does our love toward him from time to time abate and slake, until in
the end, it be clean quenched.

25 As a certain kind of Serpent, when he comes to drink, does vomit up al
his poison: So a godly Christian, when he comes to pray, must banish and cast
away, all anger, malice, and hatred of his heart.

26 Like as the Ship, with prosperous wind is speedily carried in her course:
So our Prayer is more profound, and is better hard when our minds are fervent
with some desire. Psalm. 17.1.

27 As Elizeus did cast salt into the waters of Jericho to make them sweet: So
must we salt and season our Prayers with tears, to make them fauorie and
delightsome to God. 2. King. 2.21.

28 Like as if men of great and lofty spirits (who to God are as silly worms
creeping on the earth) stand so much upon their reputation, that (as it is
recorded of the Senators of Rome in old time) they think it a great disgrace
unto them, that any man should say, that he had in vain asked help at their
hands: Even so much more will God, the great king of heaven and earth, who is as
able as the richest, and as willing to give as the frankest, yea and has as
great care, (and that not without cause) of his glory, as any man has of his
worldly worship and renown, think scorn that any man should say, there is no
help for me in God, I have in vain afflicted my soul, humbled my self at
his footestoole by Prayer, cleansed my ways in his sight, repaired to the
place of his presence, and called upon him; there is nothing to be hoped for or
gotten at his hands.

29 Even as the Smith strikes the iron while it is hot, and fit to receive
any form or impression: So God, although he could imprint his grace in the
coldest, hardest, and flintiest disposition of the heart, yet he rather does
it, when as the affections of men are stirred up and enflamed, either by the
ministry of the word, and public Prayer (during the which, regeneration is
ordinarily wrought in men) or else by some private Christian exercise, as
reading the Scripture, and serious meditation, but especially by praying, and
singing Psalms to God; in the time of the which actions, it pleases God
sometimes to send his spirit into the hearts of his elect.

30 Like as a medicine or plaster cannot heal a wound, if there be any iron
sticking in the same: So in like manner, the Prayer of a man profits him not,
as long as there is sorrow in his mind, or hatred in his breast; for if charity
want, all things be void.

31 Even as a child, when he fears any evil or harm toward, runs to his
father for help and succor: So in like manner the children of God, they run
to God by Prayer in all their dangers and distresses. Gene. 16.11. and 21.17.

32 As a loving Father in regard of his ignorant, and sometimes negligent child,
does give him things unasked; but not to the rebellious: Even so God, does
oftentimes bestow his graces and benefits upon us, without Prayer.

33 As parents rather take pleasure to hear their children stammer, then to
hear some other speak eloquently: Even so does the Lord take pleasure in the
Prayers of his Saints, because in Christ he takes them for his children.

34 As the knowledge of God, ought not to be imperfect or doubtful: So Prayer
should not be faint or slack, without courage or quickness.

35 Like as he that is in prison desires ever to be delivered, whether he be
eating, drinking, or sleeping, and as he that is sick desires always to be
whole, even so does every Christian man pray continually, yea even when he
seems not to pray, for Prayer consists not in much babbling. Math. 6.7. But
in spirit and verity. John. 4.24. and in vehement desire of the heart toward
God.

36 As a Son being pinched with any grief or want, does straight way run
to his Father for relief: So do the faithful in the manifold miseries, and
crosses of this present life, seek for help at the hands of their heavenly
father by Prayer. Ephe. 5.1.

37 As the exercising of the body, does not only preserve it in the natural
vigor, but also increases strength of it, and keeps it from sickness: So
by the daily use of Prayer, we shall find that the Lord will increase in us
all spiritual graces, far above our own expectation, or the opinion of any
other. Ephe. 6.18.

It is no Presumption to be assured of our salvation.
1 LIke as if a king should make a promise unto some one of his servants, whom
he favors, and the same party should answer again, I stand in doubt of
your promise, or I hardly believe the performance of your promise; might not
the King well think himself greatly dishonored, to have it doubted, whether
he be a man of his word? But if he should swear for the Performance of his
promise, and yet the party would not credit him, he would never put that up,
or suffer such an injury: Even so after the same manner, it must needs
follow, that seeing God has bound himself both by promise, and by oath, that
it is great presumption, for us not to believe him; yea it is all one, as to
think that God may lie, or that he may be forsworn, which is horrible
blasphemy. Hebr. 6.17, 18.

2 Like as it is al one, if a man be condemned for treason, to have his pardon
sent him, being but one man alone, or having a great sort more condemned unto
death with him, as if a general pardon be sent for them all: Even so it is
betwixt God and us, we were all condemned, he has sent a general pardon, to as
many as believe his promise; which he offers, and sends unto all in
general, as he also offers and sends unto every one in particular;
saying that whosoever believes and trusts in Christ, shall be saved; God
therefore has told some men, that is such as believe, that they shall be
saved; and such as doubt of his promise, and his oath, that they shall be
damned: So that it is no presumption to be sure and certain of our salvation.
Mar. 16. John. 3.16, 17, 18. and 5.24. Act. 15.11.

Pure mind.
AS the Sun is not defiled, by shining upon a puddle or dunghill, but does
rather dry up, and drive away the stinch: Even so a Pure and chaste mind,
strives against the uncleanness of the world, and overcomes it, but is not
defiled it self.

Proceeding in Religion.
LIke as the young child must not look to be fed always, with the Teate or
pappe, but as it grows in years, so to feed on stronger meat: Even so good
Christians, must not content themselves to have learned the principles of
Religion, but they must labor also to Proceed and come to perfection, by
learning the substantial and higher points of Religion; and not to be like
truants, always sticking at one lesson. Hebr. 5.13, 14. 1. Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.

Prayer must be made to God alone.
LIke as if a King would send out a Proclamation, that all his subjects,
whenever they had any suit or trouble, should come to himself, and let him
understand their case, to the intent to win his subjects favor, and to make
known his good will toward them; then that man might well be counted
foolish, that knowing this, would seek and sue to some Noble man, to get him
to speak to the King for him; and this King might justly be offended and
displeased at him for so doing: Even so it stands betwixt God and us, who
has commanded us to call upon him in the day of trouble, so he will deliver
us; and therefore those that make Saints their mediators, do rob him of his
honor and glory, that is due unto him, etc. Psalm. 50.15.

Profession abused.
AS we do not condemn the Art of Physic, because some Physicians have
given poison for Apothicarie drugges, but those that abuse the Art: Or as we
do not condemn the Art of Navigations, because some have made shipwreck; but
their want of knowledge, that have so done: So in like manner, we may not
condemn the Profession of Christianity, because some making show of
Christianity, have committed grievous sins; but they that have abused the
good Profession.

Pacifiers of other men being angry, must not be angry themselves.
AS the Surgeon (in healing them that has the toothache) does not so
sorrow for the others grief, as he does rejoice for his own health, but is
indifferent and pleasant: So he which goes about to remedy an others anger,
ought not to be moved himself, but pleasantly to handle the sick mind of
his neighbor.

Prosperity or adversity, make not a good or bad man.
AS we may not take it for a sure token, and good argument, that the doings of
wicked men do please God, or that they be in the favor of God, because they
have good and prosperous success in their affairs: Even so we may not
condemn the godly, because they sometimes want necessaries and be in
adversity; for if the success be evil, the cause is not therefore
straightway evil; neither if the success be good, is the cause therefore
straightway good: Yet no doubt, there is great difference between the having
of a good cause, and the having of an evil cause. Job. 21.7. etc. Iere. 12.1.
etc. Mal. 3.14, 15. Psalm. 37.1. etc. 2. Cor. 11.25, 26. Gene. 39.20. Judge.
20.21, 25. 2. King. 24.1. etc. Iere. 27, 19, 20.

Performance of Gods Commandments.
LIke as if a Debtor were bound to pay a thousand pounds, which he owes unto
his Creditor, though the same Creditor did demand this debt of him being due,
and yet he were not able to satisfy or pay him; yet this Creditor should not
do unjustly to ask of his Debtor his thousand pound: Even so no more is God
unrighteous, to ask and require of us the Performance, and due observation of
all and every part of his commandments at our hands, although we cannot
satisfy it accordingly. Math. 18.24.

Prayer before holy exercises.
LIke as a man diseased in his body, seeks, and takes the counsel of a
Physician, that by receiving a medicine of him, he may recover his health, and
so have a good stomach to his meat: So we (whenever Gods word goes
against our stomach, and that our souls loatheth it) must by Prayer seek to
Christ our heavenly Physician, that he may make our souls to like of Gods
word, which is the bread of salvation; least we starve for want of the same.
Ioh. 4.14. and 6.27.

Preaching required before the receiving of the Sacraments.
1 AS the print in Wax is more fitly received, and fully expressed, when the
wax is wrought and warmed first: So likewise the effect of the Sacrament, of
the body and blood of Christ, is more lively felt and seen, when the people
repair and resort thereunto, with minds and hearts well instructed, Catechized,
prepared, and thoroughly examined.

2 As it is a good conclusion, that for so much as Peter in that he is a man,
is borne to have, and by common course of nature has two legs, therefore
John and Thomas, and all the rest have so: Even so, for so much as John
Baptist, by reason of his ministry, had need first to preach, then to baptize;
it follows, that all others that have that ministry committed unto them,
must do the like. Mat. 3.1. etc. Act. 19.4, 5.

Preparation needful before the receiving of the Lords supper.
AS it is very convenient that he that will hear the word fruitfully, should
prepare himself before to hear: So likewise is it very needful for him that
will receive the Lords supper comfortably, that he should by examination, be
Prepared before the receiving thereof; for this Preparation both before hearing
and receiving, is as it were a kind of Physic; for preparatiues are ministered
always before Physic, otherwise it would do no good, but hurt: So unless
examination go before the Sacrament, the party seals up the threatenings,
which are written against him, instead of the promises which are made unto him;
for the Sacrament is a seal, and therefore seals good or evil, as every
other seal does. Romans 4.11.

Promises of God.
AS it is a fancy of the Physicians, that he which carries Mugwort in his
bosom, will not be weary in his travail: So also it is a truth of the Lord,
that he which carries the sweet Promises of the Gospel in his heart, shall
not faint in his troubles.

Private Prayer, reading, meditation, and conference at home.
1 LIke as most men be careful enough in making their provision, curious in
marking what is wholesome or hurtful for them, precise and constant in keeping
their hours for dinner and supper; yea and willing to keep themselves to some
kind of meat: So contrariwise, many refuse the food of their souls, as a
fruitless and unsavory thing, which chiefly consists in the pure use of
Gods public worship, and partly in holy Prayers, meditations and readings in
private; although the most part be content, for some carnal respect, to show
themselves in the public assemblies, yet few there are that are careful to
redeem the time, and to make himself (by Private reading and meditation,)
more fit to reap fruit by the public ministry of the word and Sacraments.

2 As they, who through error, prejudice, or self-loue, are so adicted to
their private studies, that they dispose or neglect the public ministry,
shall (without speedy mercy from God) fall into diverse fond opinions, and
dangerous errors, and pine away in their ignorance and sins: Even so to
little purpose is our hearing of Sermons abroad, if there be not a settled and
constant course of private Prayer, reading, meditation, and conference at home.

3 Like as natural men, who are most greedy of the world, will not (miss
scarce once in a year) their ordinary hours of eating and drinking: Even so,
much more ought Christians, not to be fickle or unfaithful, in forgetting and
omitting the times of reading, and praying unto God, meditation and conference
at home.

Providence of God.
1 LIke as when the staff or cruch of an aged man is taken from him, he
thereupon falls: Even so when Gods blessing is taken from our bread and
sustenance, which is as the power of nourishment, and staff of our bread, and
food, it becomes unprofitable, and ceasseth to nourish.

2 As a shadow does protect and defend us from the beams and heat of the
Sun: Even so God does protect us from dangers. Psalm. 91.1.

3 Like as in high and defenced Towers, we are safe from the enemy: So
likewise by the Providence of God we are in safety from our foes. Psalm. 3.4.

4 Like as in a Clock there be diverse wheels, whereof some be moved slower,
some faster, and yet all are directed by one handle: So also in this world,
though there be many creatures, and have diverse actions, yet they are all
guided and governed by one, and the same Providence of God.

5 As Philip the Father of Alexander the great, being reproved for that he
slept too long in the Morning, considering the multitude of those affairs
which he had daily to dispatch; answered, that he might safely sleep, so long
as his Lieutenant Antipater was awake: So in like manner may we rest at our
ease, so long as the heavenly eye of the Poruidence of God, which sees all
things is open, and careful to guide us and our affairs, whenever we commit
them into his hand. Psalm. 3.3, 4, 5.

6 As Gods Providence does first work and bring to pass good things;
Secondly, it permits evil things to be done; but then thirdly, it
directs and orders, all things both good and bad in his own glory, and to
the salvation of his children: So God turned Adams fall to the manifesting of
his own glory, and to Adams good; for by this means, had Adam experience of
Gods great and infinite mercy, and might say: By this I know that thou
fauourest me, because thou forgauest me, and did not suffer the Devil to
triumph against me. Psalm. 41.11. So all the slips and falls of Gods children
are turned to their good, in as much as by them they are made more fearful of
sin, and more watchful over their ways; as the child is fearful of the
Candle, when he has once burnt his finger in the flame. Romans 8.28.

Popery.
AS a stick that has line long in water, will very hardly burn when it
comes to the fire: So likewise those that are plunged in the dregs of
Popery, will hardly be set on fire, with the zeal of Gods spirit.

Faith and Gods Promises must be joined.
LIke as the Spear and shield, sword, helmet, and dagger, are not profitable
weapons unto him that cannot use them, or will not, when good occasion is
offered: Even so the Promises of God, do nothing profit them, that cannot
rightly apply them, and will not believe thereon, or will not use them.

Papist craft in composing their Prayer.
AS Rat-catchers use to take good bread, cheese, and butter, and to mingle the
same with poison, or Rats baine; the good bread, cheese, and butter is nothing
else, but to allure the Rats, to eat the secret and hidden poison, to their
destruction: Even so the Papists in the beginning of al their Prayers, they
say: Almighty and everlasting God; and at the latter end of their Prayers,
they say: Through Jesus Christ our Lord; but between the beginning and ending,
there is set in, the merits, passions, sufferings, intercessions, and
meditations of Saints, that through through them, their sufferings,
bloud-sheddings, merits, and holiness, we should obtain heaven and life
everlasting, to our salvation, etc.

Parents.
1 AS arrows are an excellent weapon of defense, to a strong and a mighty
man, that can shoot them with courage: Even so children godly brought up, are
a special protection and defense to their Parents. Psa. 127.4.

2 As the strong man's quiver, the better it is furnished with chosen shafts,
the better defense he has: So likewise the more godly children that Parents
have, the greater is their joy and happiness.

3 As arrows are at the commandment of the owner to be used: Even so
children are at the commandment of godly Parents.

Peace and prosperity.
AS a building set up with vntempred mortar, the mortar crumbleth and washes
away with every storm: Even so is the Peace and prosperity, that false
Prophets promise the people, and preach unto them out of their own hearts,
when God has not sent them. Ezech. 13.10, 11.

Eternal Punishment.
AS there is no comparison betwixt the painted fire, and the true fire: So
there is none betwixt the Punishments of this present life, and that to come;
for the torments of the life to come, are eternal, and unspeakable.

Lying Prophets.
AS Dawbers that dawbe walls, with mortar which was never tempered, cannot make
those walls continue, for that the mortar crumbleth away: Even so false and
lying Prophets, that speak in the name of the Lord, that which he never
commanded them, cannot make their words true, or to come to pass as they have
promised. Ezech. 22.28.

The Pride of Idolaters.
1 AS the morning deawe, soon after the Sunnerysing vanishes away: Even so
the strength, glory, prosperity and Pride of the Idolaters, is by God soon
brought to naught. Hose. 13.3

Papists.
1 AS the Jews alleged that they had plenty of all things, when they served
the Queen of heaven: Even so likewise our Papists say and allege, that it was
a merry world, when yet they were plunged over head and ears in Idolatry,
and then they had 24. Eggs for a penny. Iere. 44.17.18.

2 As the Philistines when they had put out the eyes of Sampson, did then lead
him whither they would: So likewise the Papists, when they had subtly put out
the eyes of the people, in taking from them the light of Gods word, and the
Gospel of Christ; they brought them where they listed, and made them believe
what they would. Iud. 16.21.

3 Even as Vipers do eat out, and tear in pieces the b^llies of their
breeders, that themselves may get out: So, not the Jews only, but the Papists
also, do mangle and tear in pieces the law of God, and do rent, and corrupt
the words and doctrine of the holy Prophets of God, even as it were a belly and
bowels, that they may creep out, and escape, from a lively, perfect, and a
saving faith; and that they may be confirmed in their errors, heresies, and
infidelity.

4 As the Jews have from time to time, slain the gracious and wise Prophets
of God: Even so the Papists now, where they bear any sway, of rule and
authority, do most cruelly torment and murder the Saints of God.

5 As Mice will be still in the house, but never be acquainted with the master
of the house: Even so such are Papists, for they will draw near unto Christ
with their lips, but deny him with their deeds; they will kiss Christ with
Judas, and give him gentle outward entertainment; but it is for thirty pence,
or thirty pound vantage, or money, more or less.

6 As the children of Israel grudging, and murmuring against God in the
wilderness, when any temptation arose, and would go back again into Egypt,
died in the wilderness, and were not suffered to enter into the land of
Canaan: Even so such are all Papists, unfaithful, and fleshly livers, who are
superstitious, and cannot abide to have their Idolatries and lewd lusts
restrained and reproved by the word of God, to worship him, according as he
has appointed, but would go after strange Gods, worshipping him after their
own inventions; all these (unless they repent and be converted) shall not
enter the kingdom of God; but shall lie in the wilderness, that is, a place
of everlasting trouble and vexation. Numb. 11.1. etc. Psalm. 78.24. etc.

7 As the Gentiles fashioned their Gods, with what figures they listed: So do
the Papists, to declare God to be strong, they made him in the form of a Lion;
to be vigilant, and diligent, they made him in the form of a Dog.

8 As Mendesij, formed their God Pana with a Goats face, and Goats legs,
and though they did their God great honor, because among them their Heard-men
of Goats, were had in most estimation: So do the Papists who would yet be
counted Christians, paint and porture God, and his Saints, with such pictures
as they imagine in their fantasies, namely God like an old man, with a hoar
head, as though his youth were past, which has neither beginning nor ending:
Saint George with a long spear, upon a jolly hackney, that gave the Dragon
his deaths wound (as the Painters say) in the throat: Saint White, with as
many round cheeses, as may be painted about his Tabernacle: So that there is no
difference at all between a Papist and a Gentile in this Idolatry, saving
only the name; for they thought not their Images to be God, bu^ supposed that
their Gods would be honored that ways, as the Papists do.

9 As among the Gentiles there were some called Augures, that by observation of
the Birds of the air, in their flying, crying and eating, made men believe,
they knew things to come: So likewise some Papists think they can do the
same; as if the Pie chatter, they look for guests: If the Crow cry, they say
we shall have rain; and if the Oule houle and cry, it is a sign of death.

10 As there were some, that by the observation of the stars, took upon them
to speak of things to come, by certain superstitious, and devilish
incantations, which the Persians call Magos, or Inchaunters; the Greeks call
them Philosophers; and the Latinists name the^ wise men: Even so there are some
among the Papists, which be called Soothsayers, or Prognosticators, that write
and speak of things to come; as when Jupiter rules the constellations above,
and is not impeached, nor let by the conjunction of his contrary Planet; we
shall (say they) have a good year and a plentiful: If Saturn, and such as
Astronomers attribute, contrary qualities unto, reign, we shall have
scarcity and dearth of things.

11 Like as Valor. li. 8. cha. 1. writes of one of the Goddess Vesta her
Nuns, that was falsely accused of an unchaste life, desired the Goddess to
clear her innocence in that crime, in some miracle; as she did: The maid
went to the river Tiber with a sieve, and brought it full of water into the
Temple of the Goddess: So likewise there be some Papists, that by the abuse
of Gods name, through the help of the devil, do sometimes work the same, in
healing men and beasts; as in time of Popery, they persuaded some simple and
ignorant people, that this Popish medicine could heal al diseases: Isus, Job,
habuit, vermes, Job, patitur, vermes. In nomine patris and filij, and spiritus
sancti Amen. Lamazabathani.

12 Like as the Lantern holds the Candle, not for it self, but for others:
So Papists have the word, and baptism among them, not for themselves, but for
the true Church of God.

13 Like as if an unchaste wife, should receive many Lovers into her house, in
the absence of her Husband; and being reproved, should answer, that they
were the friends of her husband; and that she kept them only in remembrance
of him: Even so the Papists allege, that they use and worship Images, only
in remembrance of God, having no commandment so to do, but the contrary.

14 As it happens, when we see the clouds move in a dark night, our sight
is so dimmed, that we imagine the stars to go an other way: So the Papists,
not finding any end or stablenesse in the clouds of their errors, are not able
rightly to judge of the truth, but think that the Scripture and all, goes
awrie.

15 Like as Caligula, who bidding many guests, caused to be set before them
golden dishes, and golden cups, and bad them eat: Even so the Papists, have
blindfolded the people, by keeping them from knowledge, and by devising to fill
their eyes with dum shows to gaze upon, and their ears with bare sounds of
words, far from their capacity to reach unto, or profitably understand.

Such have most Profit, as are farthest from great men.
AS the Moon have by so much the less light, by how much it is nearer the
Sun: So have they most Profit and honor, which are far from great Lords and
Princes

Poorness of spirit.
1 AS the first step unto health, is to know a man's disease, because he that
knows his disease, seeks convenient remedy: Even so the first step to the
heavenly riches, is Poorness of spirit, because he that feels this, seek
riches elsewhere. Math. 5.3.

2 Like as sickness is by nature a step unto death, if the Physician help
not: So likewise this Poorness of spirit, would send a man the straight way
to Hell, but that Christ imparted his riches unto us.

3 Like as the Poorness of beggerie, is not only extreme needinesse; but
also the open profession of the same: Even so the Poorness of spirit, is not
only the uttermost want of heavenly riches; that is to wit, of righteousness,
holiness, and innocence; but also the profession of the same want before God,
of whom we desire release of our needinesse, for Christ's sake.

God protecteth the Penitent.
1 AS the root is the foundation, whereon trees are stayed, and whereby they
receive their nourishment: Even so all such as are Penitent and sorrowful for
their sins, and lean only unto the mercy and protection of God, shall
surely prosper, be perdurable and lasting. Job. 29.19. Hose. 14.5.

2 As a City, the Walls and defenses whereof are broken down, is in danger
of every enemy, that is of force and might: Even so a man that has no stay
of his appetite, affections, and desires, is always easy to be spoiled of any
that will seek it. Prou. 25.28.

Obstinate Persecutors unrecoverable.
AS it is a mere madness, for men to go about to feed and chearish the
Dog, that they know to be mad (for they put themselves in danger of his
rage) and yet do him no good: So likewise is it a great folly for a man to go
about to convert them by the word of God, who by plain tokens have showed
themselves to Persecute the truth, not of zealous ignorance, but of wilful and
malicious obstinacy. Math. 7.6.

Preaching makes a separation.
LIke as in a Barn, he that makes clean the Corn with his Fan, does sever
the Wheat and the chafe asunder, and lays up the Wheat into the Garner:
Even so Christ by the Preaching of his word, does disseuer his elect and
reprobate; and his elect, he will take home to himself; and the reprobate he
reserueth to everlasting fire. Math. 3.12. Luke 3.17.

Prosperity makes men rebellious.
AS Cattle the lustier they are kept, and the fatter they are fed, are the
more unruly, and ready to kick against their keepers: Even so is it with
very many men, the more temporal blessings, and worldly commodities, God
heapeth upon them, the more they kick against him, and will be the less ruled
by his Ministers and word. Deuteronomy. 32.15.

No Power against God.
AS an earthen bottell, when it is broken to pieces, the shards thereof cannot
be set together again: So likewise, when God is disposed to punish wicked
people, no man can help or heal them. Iere. 19.10, 11.

2 As water runs and falls away: So shall all hands be weakened, and knees
shall shrink, when God shall punish impiety and wickedness. Ezech. 7.17.

Poverty.
1 AS riches and wealth oftentimes make men to forget themselves, and God too:
So contrariwise, Poverty spurreth men forwards to learn Arts, whereby they
may both help themselves and theirs.

2 As riches for the most part engenders idleness, and contempt of learning,
and learned men: So Poverty causes sobriety, and makes men virtuous and
discreet.

3 As Phidas could make the same Images as well of Brass, as Marble, as of
Euorie: So can a godly man show his virtues and good actions, as well in
Poverty, as riches, and wealth.

Plants.
AS the Gardener does root and throw out of his garden, all such Plants as are
unprofitable: Even so such Plants as God has not planted, shall be rooted out
of his Church. Math. 15.13.

Preachers should be maintained.
1 AS it is reason, that he which planteth a Vineyard should eat of the
fruit thereof: So also it is reason, that he that Preaches the Gospel, should
have a living of them whom he teaches, for himself and his charge. 1. Cor.
9.7.

2 As Soldiers live by their wages, and Husbandmen by the fruit of their
labors, and shepherds by that, that comes of their flocks: So in like
manner the Minister that laboreth in Preaching the word, is to be maintained by
them to whom he preaches.

False Prophets.
1 AS spots deface the things they light on, which ought to be clean: So also
false Prophets and false brethren, defile and stain the society and
fellowship of Christians. Iud. 1. 12.

2 As shipmen cannot guide themselves by wandering stars, without danger of
shipwreck, their course is so uncertain and wandering: So no Christian can
without assured destruction, make such Prophets his guides, as stay not
themselves, upon the only and infallible rule of truth. Iud. 1. 13.

3 Like as Wolves breaking into a flock of sheep, do devour some, and scatter
the rest: So also do false Prophets and false teachers, which creep into the
Church of God, and bring to destruction, those whom they can allure within
compass of their nets, and so divide and separate the rest by discention and
debate. Act. 20.29.

Preachers.
AS they are very welcome, and received joyfully of us, which bring us tidings
of that which we greatly desire: So likewise ought the feet of our Preachers,
to be esteemed beautiful, which bring us the glad tidings of peace, and
reconcilement with God. Romans 10.15.

Persecution.
1 AS the raised waters with great raines, fall suddenly with great rage and
peril of drowning to many: So also are the Persecutions of the Church, if God
do not miraculously rescue it from them. Psalm. 104.6.

2 As in running the course, the agilitie or swiftness of the Horse is known,
the strength of a man in the combat, the savor of many drugs, in rubbing, or
brusing of them, or casting them into the fire: Even so the constancy, faith,
zeal, and other virtues, which God communicates (by his free election) to his
elect, are manifest by Persecutions, which otherwise should be hid. Phil. 4.13.
2. Cor. 12.10.

3 As a most careless Husband, will not in any wise content himself, if his
wife, giving over her body to whoredom, should say unto him, that she
keeps nevertheless her heart unto him: Even so every faithful Christian
ought to shun such false Nicodemites, who to avoid Persecution, will abandon
(by a sacrilege intolerable) their bodies to Idolatry, and so consequently
to the devil; in reserving as they say, their hearts unto God. 1. Cor. 6.19,
20. and 2. Cor. 7.1.

4 Like as in the vineyard of Engad, there is a kind of wood, which if a man
prick it, or cut it, it sends forth a sweet Ointment, otherwise if it be
not cut or pierced somewayes, it does not smell so sweet as otherwise it
would do: So it is with men and Christians that are Persecuted undeservedly.

5 As the Sun, when in the midst of the day he is most highest, is then
most hottest: So likewise Persecution, is the companion of the pure and
vncorrupt Religion of Christ.

6 As the inhabitants of the City of Meros, were accursed by the Angel of the
Lord, because they came not forth to help the Lord, etc. Judge. 5.23. Even so
such as are slack and negligent, to assist the Lord in the time of
Persecution, in not suffering for his sake, shall be cursed.

7 As he which runs at the Glaue, and for a prize or wager, does not look
and fix his eyes on them that stand by, or on such as go this way, and that
way, but he casts his eyes altogether, and bends his force to come first
to the goal, and looks on them that run with him, and that those that are
behind him, may not ouercatch him, and strives that he may overtake those
that are before him: Even so should we do, leave looking at those that will
not chearefully run the race for heavens bliss, by the path of Persecution
with us, and cast our eyes toward and on the end of our race, and on them that
run before us, that we may overtake them; and on them that run after us,
that we may provoke them to come the speedier and faster after us.

8 Like as when a man shoots for a great wager, he will not cast his eyes in
shooting, either on them that rydeth by the way, or upon the standers by, but
rather on the mark that he shoots at, otherwise it were not like that he
should win the game: So likewise in time of Persecution, we must set our eyes
on the mark that we shoot at, even Jesus Christ, who for the joy, which he
sets before us, did joyfully carry his Cross, contemning the shame
thereof, and is now set on the right hand of God his Father. Hebr. 12.1, 2, 3.

9 Even as in times past, the people of Gog and Magog, did sore molest and
afflict the people of God: So in the time of Antichrist, Persecutions, and most
grievous wars shall arise, wherewith the Church of God shall be shaken and
laid waste. Reave. 20.7, 8.

The Pride of man's heart.
1 LIke as Adoni-besecke, did put diverse Kings under his Table, and cut off
their thumbes and toes: Even so man's heart does think basely of all other
men, putting them under their feet, and detracting and diminishing the graces
of God in them. Judge. 1.7. Gene. 16.4. Hester. 1.4. and 5.11. Dan. 4.27.

2 As when two wrestle together, if the one can lift the others feet from the
ground, he will easily give him a fall: So the devil, if he by Pride can lift
up our feet from the ground, he will easily give us a fall.

3 As when Moses and Aaron, threw the handfulls o^ dust into the air, thereof
came botches and biles: Even so when we that are but dust and ashes, are
exalted in the Pride of our heart, thereof comes botches and biles in our
hearts. Exodus 9.8, 9, 10.

God hears not our Prays always.
AS the Physician, who goes on to launch the wound, and hears not the patient
though he cry never so, till the cure be ended: Even so God hear not our
Prayers always, according to our wills and desires, but according as the
things asked shall be for our salvation.

Penitent heart.
AS the beggar is always mending and peecing his garment, where he finds a
breach: So the Penitent and believing heart, must always be exercised in
repayring it self where it finds a want.

Fair Promises.
AS they which have nothing to feed on but the wind, do famish and pine away,
and so perish: So likewise they which are fed with fair Promises, and set
their hope and confidence in the defense of men, are deceived, and left
destitute in their most need.

Perseverance to the end.
1 AS the prize or best game for running, cannot be obtained of any that either
run not, or else give over before they be at the end of their race: So
likewise none can attain the celestial Crown of glory, but they which
Persevere in the right race of Christianity, unto the end. 1. Cor. 9.24.

2 As they which run in a race, having only regard to the reward of
themselves, as light and as nimble as they can, and therefore throw away
whatsoever is heavy, or may hinder their swiftness: So godly Christians in
their course to heaven, having that glory only before their eyes, should
throw sin from them, which like an heavy burden hangs upon them, and
whatsoever else may hinder them in the way and course to life everlasting.
Hebr. 12.1.

People.
AS there is nothing more mooueable and unconstant then waters, and when they
be once stirred up, then they be furious and outrageous: Even so the common
folk or People, are also mooueable and unconstant; and being moved are
outrageous and mad.

People imitate their Prince.
1 AS the Sea (especially that, which is called Mare mediterraneum) is wont to
imitate the air, as if the air be calm, the Sea is very calm also; if the
air be stormy, the Sea also is very stormy: Even so the common sort of
People, in all places for the most part, do follow their Prince; if Princes
be just, subjects love justice; if the Prince be ungodly, they embrace
ungodliness.

2 As a brook does follow the nature of the fountain, from whence it comes:
So People do follow the disposition of their Prince; the fountain being
troubled, the brook is troubled also; and the Prince disquieted, the People
find no peace. Math. 2.3.

The Prosperity of this world.
AS the clearenesse of winter weather, the calmness of the Sea, and
stabilitie of the Moon, do waver, and be suddenly changed: So likewise the
state of wealth and worldly things, has no firmness, no perpetuity, and no
constancy. Job. 8.9. and 14.2.

Physician.
1 AS every one cannot heal a sore, that can make a salve: So every one is
not a Physician, that make profession of physic.

2 As a blind man cannot see the fault of an others eyes: So an unskillful
Physician cannot perceive the defect of the body.

The Pope that whore of Babylon.
LIke as Christ was said to come out of Edome, colored with the blood of his
enemies; noting thereby the revenge he should take of the Edomites: Even so the
Pope the whore of Babylon, is dyed and colored with the blood of Gods
children; yea she is said to be drunk with their blood as with drink; showing
that she makes no more account of shedding the blood of the servants of God,
then the drunken man make of pouring in drink, or the fishes water. Reave.
17.4, 5, 6.

Women Painting themselves.
1 LIke as when a Painter has finished a piece of work, and an other coming
in should thereto set his hand, and lay on other colors, it would displease
him: Even so likewise, much more will God our Creator be offended, when a
mortal woman, whom himself has created, shall by Painting her face, take
upon her to correct the Image and workmanship of her God. 2 King. 9.30.

2 As a woman of discretion, will in no wife mar her natural complexion, to
recover it with slime, or artificial trash: So ought the Husband in no sort to
be consenting to her filthy spunging, proyning, Painting, pollishing, and to
such like follies.

Poor men fear they God never so much, are little set by in this world.
EVen as Doves do love, and delight in houses that be fair whited, and do
willingly frequent sweet and pleasant places, but contemn and fly from
black, foul, and unsavory Cottages: So likewise faithless and untrusty
friends, do hunt and seek after the friendship of those men, by whose wealth
and riches, they may be helped, relieved, and enriched; but men in poverty,
and distressed persons, unable to fill their bellies, to cloth their backs,
or otherwise to pleasure them, with some worldly things, they utterly despise,
they care not for their company, their love, nor friendship, fear they God
never so much.

Papists profess God in word, but deny him in their doings.
AS Rat-catchers, who use to take fine bread, scraped cheese, butter, and some
Sugar, and therewith do mingle Rats baine, to the end to allure the Rats to
eat the secret and hidden poison, to their destruction: So the Papists, in the
beginning of all their Prayers, they say, Almighty and everlasting God, etc.
And at the latter end of their prayers, they say; through our Lord Jesus
Christ: but between the beginning and ending, there is thrust in, the merits,
passions, sufferings, intercessions, and meditations of Saints, that through
them, their sufferings, blood sheadings, merits, and holiness, we should
obtain heaven, and life everlasting, to our salvation. Thus like murderers,
and poysoners of Christian souls, and that under pretense of Gods name, and
Christ's name, they deceive the simple and ignorant people.

Patience in afflictions, a perfect trial of true Christianity.
1 EVen as in a Sea, moved and tossed with great waves and mighty surges, the
Pilots skill and wisdom is thoroughly tried, and his manliness and courage
perfectly seen: So likewise, a man that is godly without dissembling, and
religious without hypocrisy, in the midst of terrible tempests, of great
troubles, when he is thrown up, and hurled down, tossed here, and crushed
there, in a thousand storms of dangers, the^ declares his Patience, his
spiritual courage, and his immovable constancy, in virtue and true
holiness. 2. Sam. 16.5. etc.

2 Like as when a child, being corrected and punished of his Father, suffers
it patiently, his Father has the more pity upon him, and hold his hand, and
cease the sooner; but if the child show himself froward, cry any thing
loud, or murmur and grudge against him, then is the Father the more angry and
fearce over him, and beats him the more sharply: Even so the heavenly Father,
punishes the patient man more easily, and heals him the sooner, but toward
them that murmr against him, he shows himself sharp and fearce.

3 Like as the Bird that is caught with the lime rod, the more she strives to
deliver her self, the more do her feathers cleave and hang to the lime: Or as
the Fish, that is caught in the net, the more he seeks to get out, the more
it windeth it self in: Or as he that is bound with chains or fetters of iron,
the more he strayeth abroad, the more harm he does to himself: Even so,
such as are froward and impatient in adversity, do increase their sorrow, and
hurt themselves the more.

4 As he that has an heavy burden upon his back, the more he strugleth and
strives, shutleth and moves the same, the more does it grieve him: Even so
the more froward and impatient a man is under the cross, the more grievous and
painful is it unto him; for a good heart in adversity, takes away the half
of his misery; and the fear of adversity and pain, before it comes, is
worse then the pain it self, when it comes.

5 Like as in a School of defense, he that shows the most manly touch, and
has won the victory, has the greater commendation and higher honor: Even
so is it much more commendable and a greater honor, to overcome and to subdue
our spiritual enemies, and to have the victory against the assaults of the
flesh, and the devil.

6 As he that forsakes his bodily Master, without a just cause, is taken
before the world for a man that lacks faith, truth, and honesty: Even so
likewise, it is a great point of dishonestie and unfaithfulness, for a
Christian in the time of affliction under the cross, to forsake Christ and his
word, and through impatiencie to work, and do against the same.

7 As when men in warfare lying in camp, will play the sluggards, and be
slothful, and not resist the enemies stoutly and manfully; their friends are
destroyed, their houses spoiled, their vilages set on fire, their dear friends
and neighbors murdered and slain, and their wives and daughters defiled and
ravished, and all goes to havoc, and is full of misery: Even so in the
spiritual warfare, and field, if we yield unto the flesh and the devil, and
resist them not manfully and constantly, we cast our selves into perpetual
danger, misery, and unquietness; but if we fight against the ghostly enemies
stoutly and Patiently, we may the sooner attain to perpetual rest and
quietness.

8 Like as he that is sick, if he will not receive the medicine, because it is
bitter, and sower, it is no marvel nor wonder, if the same man perish in his
sickness and disease; but if he would suffer himself to be handled after
the mind and counsel of the Physician, he might overcome the smart, and have
good hope to be restored to his health again: Even so all right and faithful
Christians, that are Patient in adversity, may conceive a much more steadfast
and sure hope, that they shall attain to everlasting rest of body and soul;
whereas contrariwise, they which remain and continue in their frowardness and
impaciencie, against God the heavenly Physician, must smart for it
everlastingly, both in body and soul.

9 As Poets feign that there is a tree, which for every branch which was cut
from it, would presently send out two, and the more men labor to kill it, the
more the life of it increased: So must men afflicted do, and double their
Patience and virtues by persecution, and not be killed at the first stroke.

10 As a good Soldier that has manfully and carefully done his endeavor in
the battle, conceiueth a certain and sure hope, that his Prince (for whom he
has fought and hazarded his life) will give him thanks, recompense him, and
give him some preferment: Even so when as by constant Patience our faith has
been proved, and found good, then does our hope increase more and more, and
we do conceive a firm assurance, and sure certitude of our salvation.

Proud men.
1 EVen as wild beasts, being about to invade, and to set upon their pray, will
stoop low, and bend themselves, that they may fall, and rush upon it with the
greater force, and more violence: Even so Proud and mischievous men, being
sly and subtle, sometimes will crouch, and bear themselves very lowly, that
under the color of dissembled virtue, they may supplant and deceive the
simple, and godly honest man; advance themselves, and work mischief to
others. Psalm. 10.4, 9, 10.

2 As in a threshing place, Chafe is seen above the Wheat, not because it is
better, but because it is lighter; and whereas it is the viler and of the
lesser value, yet notwithstanding, it gets the higher and worthier place:
Even so in this life, a Proud and vain man, is exalted above the humble and
lowly; not for any worthiness, just desert, or true virtue that is in him; but
for his vanity, and a false opinion that he has conceived of himself; and
whereas he is of very little or no value, yet he puts him self before
others, which are beyond him in virtue, wisdom, and nobility; but the lowly,
though the worthier, and more excellent man, does ever humble himself, not
because he is of less value, but because he has in him, greater weight of
wisdom, understanding, and true nobility.

3 As Hawks trusting to their wings, will fly exceeding high, as though they
would peace the clouds themselves; but for their too high flying, they are
oftentimes lost: So men depending upon the wings of prosperity, being puffed
up and swelled with pride, the higher they clime, the more mischievous is their
fall, and with the greater disgrace, are they hurled down headlong.

Who is said to be Perfect.
1 AS Abraham, because by faith he preferred obedience toward God, before the
life of his most dear and only Son, is said to be Perfect; and the young man
following Christ, if he had preferred poverty, and liberality toward the
poor, before his riches, had been Perfect according to the sentence of
Christ: So likewise every one, which by a true faith, prefers obedience
toward God, before all things of this world, is said in Scripture to be
Perfect: and on the contrary, they which prefer worldly things, their own
affections, honor, glory, pleasures, and diverse other deceits, before
obedience toward God, are imperfect; yea, they do but in vain, glory of the
name of Christians. Gene. 22.2, 3, 4, 6, 9. Mat. 19.21. Iam. 1.4. Gene. 17.1.
Math. 5.48.

2 As all men through Adams fall, have in them by nature, the seeds of all
sin, none excepted; no not the sin against the holy Ghost: So by grace of
regeneration through Christ, all the faithful have in them likewise the seeds
of all virtues, needful to salvation; and hereupon they both can and do
endeavor to yield Perfect obedience unto God, according to the whole law.

God reuealeth his will unto us by Preaching.
1 AS a man if he be of credit, makes the hid thoughts of his heart to be
known by speaking: Even so God, who is the truth it self, reuealeth unto us,
by the Preaching of the Gospel, his counsel, and his will, touching our
adoption and salvation; and confirms this revelation, by the use of the holy
Sacraments.

2 As a Ship is held fast by the Anchor, that it might not be carried away of
the wind: Even so God would that the revealing of his counsel, by the doctrine
and Preaching of the Gospel, should hold us fast, and assure us against all
doubts of our Adoption; yea and to pearce even into the very heavens, with
assurance whereof, our forerunner Jesus Christ, has taken possession both for
himself, and for us.

Purity of soul and body to entertain God, offering to dwell with us.
1 LIke as if a man were certified, that a Prince would come to his house, he
would dress it up, and have all things in good order as might be: Even so much
more we ought to endeavor to Purify and cleanse our souls and bodies from all
sin, that they may be fit Temples for the entertainment of the holy Ghost,
whom Christ Jesus has sent to be our comforter. 1. Cor. 6.9. John. 14.16.
and 16.7.

2 As the Shunamite, was careful to entertain the man of God Elisha, for she
said to her husband: Let us make him a little Chamber, I pray thee, with
Walls, and let us set him there a bed and a stool, a table and a
candlestick. So likewise, much more careful ought we be to entertain God
himself, who is content to come and dwell with us; and therefore we must
adorn our bodies and souls with grace, that he may lodge, and sup, and dine
with us, as he has promised; but on the contrary, if we defile our bodies
with sin, we banish the holy Ghost out of our hearts, and suffer the devil
to dwell in us. 2. King. 4.10. Reave. 3.20.

Professors that seek themselves and not God.
AS the foolish Virgins, went forth to meet the bridgroome, with Lamps in
their hands, as well as the wise, but they never so much as dreamed of the
horn of Oil, till the coming of the bridgroome: So likewise many men live in
the Church of God, as members thereof, holding up the Lamp of glorious
Profession; but in the mean season, they seek only for the things of this
life, never casting how they may assure themselves in conscience, touching
their reconciliation with God, till the day of death come. Math. 25.1, 2. etc.

Patience in all crosses whatsoever, so that we may live with God afterward.
1 AS the Prodigal and desperate Son, who did so humble and submit himself,
that he desired no more to be taken for a Son, but to be put to labor as a
day labourer, and an hired servant, so that he might but only remain in his
Fathers house: Even so whatsoever God sends, we ought to take Patiently, so
that we may but only dwell in the house of God, in heaven with him
everlastingly. Luke 15.18, 19.

2 As that Pilot is to be praised, which can rule a Ship cunningly, not only
in calm weather, but in time of tempests: So he is a good gouerner of
himself, which can do it not only in prosperity, but does also overcome
adversity with Patience.

3 As Noah's Ark, the higher the water and flood was, the higher it did rife: So
must our courage and Patience be in the deepest troubles.

Prosperity most pleasant after long adversity.
AS the spring time, following and coming immediately upon the rough and hard
winter, is the more acceptable, pleasant, and welcome unto us: Or as a battle,
the sorer our enemies do assault and fight against us, the greater is the joy
and triumph at the victory, and overthrow of them: Or as he that has kept
his bed a long time, and lain sick a great season, afterward when he is
recovered, health is a more precious treasure unto him, then ever it was before
that he felt what sickness was; and also such as mourned and were sorry for
his sickness, do receive an infinite joy, and an exceeding rejoicing, at his
restoring unto health again: Even so does God deprive us, for a time of
riches, wealth, prosperity, our natural country, bodily health, and such
other transitory benefits, for this purpose, that when he gives them again
unto us, we may the more rejoice, and be gladder of them. Math. 18.12, 13. Luke
15.22, 23, 24.

Of greatest Pains, greatest gains.
AS Roses, which are the most pleasant flowers, do spring and wax out of
thorns: Even so of hard and great travel, springs the most pleasant fruit.

In Prosperity we must provide for adversity.
AS a waterman or Mariner, will never let out his sail so far, but that he
may soon pull it in again: Even so every man, as long as all things stand
well and upright with him, he ought to foresee, and prepare in time for the
contrary.

Perseverance in Prayer.
AS the Heathnish woman of Canany, al hope and comfort in the remedy and
counsel of man set apart, desires help and succor of Christ; and although
the Lord gives her at the first a rough and sharp answer, yet she is nothing
abashed, nor will not be so answered: Even so hold thou on likewise with this
Cananitish woman; saying and crying still; O thou Son of David, have mercy
upon me; and so shall thou hear at length this comfortable Gospel and
absolution; Thy faith is great, be it unto thee, as thou desire. Math.
15.22. etc.

Prosperity is sometime hurtful.
1 AS it happens to him that is quiet, and at ease, that he falls soon a
sleep, and having an Apple, or any other thing in his hand, it falls, or is
easily taken from him: So the ease of the flesh brings us a sleep in the
world, and causes us to leese the spiritual good things, and to suffer them
to fall to the ground.

2 As the great lake in India called Asphaltites, is never troubled, with any
waves, storms or tempests, but is ever quiet: Even so such are they, which
lead their lives in tranquillity, peace, and quietness, and are never pressed,
nor broken with any calamities, nor tossed and troubled, with any sorrows or
miseries in the world, but are ever at hearts ease, and live as they list.

3 Even as a stranger in a far Country, having and enjoying all things,
serving either for necessity or pleasure, cares little for returning home: So
he which has all things needful for this life in abundance, and at his
hearts desire, little cares for heaven, or heavenly things.

Counterfeit Professors, are most enemies to the Church.
1 EVen as of all the enemies that Judah had, the ten Tribes of Isarel that
were their brethren, and gave an outward profession of the name of God with
them, were the greatest and most dangerous: So likewise among the enemies,
that Syon Gods Church has, the most vehement and bitter, are the false hearted
and counterfeited Israelites, carnal Protestants, Papists, heretics, and
other profane men.

2 As one enemy within the City is more dangerous, then ten without: Even so
careless Professors and profane men, as they have most power to hurt, so are
they furiously enraged against the truth of the ways of God, and being set on
fire to remain in their sin, even sell themselves to work wickedness.

Persecutors are often given over themselves.
AS God in great mercy, stays the rage of our enemies, that they cannot so
spoil and make waste of the bodies and lives of the godly minded, and such as
daily labor and profit in true fear of God, as is like they would: So yet
they remain themselves, even men vowed and given over to the will of Satan,
having their hearts set on those things that are evil, and their feet swiftest
to commit sin. Prou. 1.16.

The three Persons, coequall in eternity.
AS fire is not before heat, and light, no more is the Father, before the
Son and the holy Ghost.

Against Prayer for the dead.
AS they that are departed out of this life, be past our Prayers, being either
in joy or misery: Even so we having no word of God, whereupon faith leans, to
Pray for the dead, cannot but sin in doing it, and that we do it not of
faith. Romans 14.23. 2. Cor. 5.10. Ioh. 3.18.

The godly profit much by cruel Persecutions.
AS a man much moved with anger, and through indignation and wrath, intending
to kill his brother, should throw at him precious stones, goodly Pearls, and
rich Jewels, should not damnifie, nor hurt his brother, because he would
gather them up, keep them, and enrich himself with them: Even so, tyrants
disposed to kill, and with fire and sword to put to death, the Saints and true
servants of God, which do excel in true piety, and unfeigned love to God and
man, do Persecute and torment them, with diverse sorts, and sundry kinds of
true martyrdom, of which things the children of God are glad, and do rejoice,
and grow stronger and richer in Christ, and being thoroughly armed with a godly
patience, they do take and bear Persecutions most quietly for Gods sake,
without murmuring or grudging, even as their cross, wherewith most willingly
they follow their Lord and Savior Christ, and do account such tortures
inestimable riches, and themselves happy, that they be thought worthy to
suffer such things, for the truth sake, and in the Lords quarrel. Act. 5.41.

Peace and unity of the Church.
AS in a true, perfect, and certain Clock, the wheels being tempered, and
in equal and due proportion divided, do perform their courses, and do keep
their several compasses, without iarring, or differing one from an other,
euenly and alike; so that one moving, the others are moved; and one standing,
the rest are still, and stir not; so that, though they be many in number, in
form, fashion, and agreement, they are but one: Even so in a Christian
Commonwealth and Church, there ought to be one, and the selfsame will, and so
great a concord, and likeness of minds, reconciled and drawn together, with
the infringible band of sincere love in Christ, that though in bodies, they be
infinite and innumerable, yet in unanimity, consent, and good agreement in the
Lord Jesus, they should be all as one man. Psalm. 133.1. Luke 1.79. Ephe. 4.3.
Romans 14.17.

Promises made to particular persons, appertain to their successors.
LIke as what league, truth, or Promises of favor soever is made to any King,
in the same is his kingdom contained, and his subjects are also partakers of
the same: So the Promises made to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and David, belong not
to them only, but to their children also, their successors, heirs, people and
subjects. Amo. 9.

Physic commendable.
1 AS pure Corral will receive no coloring: Or as pure Ciuet will never leese
his favor: Even so Physic is so exquisitely excellent, that it need not have
any counterfeit help; and the Physicians have their commission so lawful,
that they cannot be condemned, nor justly disdained.

2 As it is to be proved by Gods word, damnable sin for a man to kill
himself with fire, water, sword, or such like: So likewise it is sin for a
man to destroy himself, in not seeking after Physicians and Chirurgions, when
time and opportunity is offered for recovery.

It is our duty to be present at public Prayer.
LIke as when a whole Burgesses of a City, do come before their Prince, and
with one voice crave pardon for some offense, or beg some grace or favor, the
Prince will be more moved, then if they being absent, some one man should
speak for the whole: Even so when the whole Church assemble together, does
with heart and mind in presence of God, accompany the Prayers, which the
Preacher, as the mouth of the congregation, powers forth, let them be
assured, that those Prayers do penetrate the heavens, and that God is moved
to hear them. Matthew. 18.19.20. Act. 16.13. and 21.5. Zacha. 8.21. Psalm. 65.2.
Joel 2.15.

The duty of the Poor.
AS the prodigal child, having goods, in the wasting of them, gave himself
to the world and the flesh, but having fallen into poverty, thought upon his
fathers house, and returned thereto: So should the discommodities and wants
which the Poor do find in their estates, loosen their hearts from the earth,
and cause them to aspire to the house of their heavenly Father, where they shall
enjoy all spiritual and everlasting treasures. Luke 15.12. etc. Iam. 2.5. 1.
Cor. 4.11. Hebr. 11.24, 25.

The duty of Pastors and Ministers.
1 AS they which shall be saved by the Ministry of Pastors, shall be their
crown, and joy in the day of the Lord; and they which shall win most to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever: So contrariwise, the blood
of such as shall perish, through the negligence of Pastors, shall be required
at their hands. Phil. 4.1. Dan. 13.3. Ezech. 3.17. Hebr. 13.17.

2 As he is known to be a Tailor, that cutteth out and sows garments: he a
Shoemaker, that makes shoes: he a Physician, that imployeth himself in
curing of sicknesses; and so of others: Even so likewise is a Pastor and a
Minister known, in that he preaches and teaches the word of God. 1. Tim.
4.16. 1. Pet. 5.2. Mar. 16.15. 2. Tim. 4.1. 1. Cor. 9.6. Math. 28.19, 20. Ier.
1.6. etc. and 3.15.

3 As the Physician, who ordeineth a potion, which in stead of health,
procures death, is not a Physician, but a murderer: Even so is it with the
Pastors, that do preach lies, in stead of truth. Ezech. 22.27, 28. Iere. 25.
toto.

4 As a Householder cutteth out bread at meal times to his children: So in like
manner, a faithful Pastor must be apt and fit to teach and preach, that
cutting out directly and skilfully the bread of Gods word, so as the Church may
therewith be nourished and edified. 1. Tim. 3.2. and 2. Tim. 3.16. Tit. 1.9.

5 As the office of the Physician consists in two points; first to prescribe
things meet for the health, and to prevent diseases; and secondly, to cure
such as fall into any sickness: So it is the office of the Pastor, in such
sort to accommodate and apply his doctrine, that it may serve to prevent the
snares and stumbling blocks of sin; as also to reprove, redress, and comfort
such as are fallen.

6 Like as the curing of the plague, requires more forcible and violent
medicines, then the preventing thereof: Or as it is necessary to have more help
to pull a man out of the water, when he is fallen in, then to hold him from
falling in: Even so must the Pastor use more sharp and vehement admonitions,
in the raising up of such as are fallen into sin, the^ in preventing the fall:
neither is he to employ himself in his function slightly, and as it were for a
fashion, but (as S. Paul protests of himself) he must be careful, diligent;
and constant in preaching and admonishing. Act. 20.31.

7 As Physicians, albeit when they have tried many receipts for recovery of a
sick person, they perceive no amendment, yet do they not desist from vsiting
him, and continuing the employment of their Art, so long as there is any hope
of life: Or as when a man takes upon him to fell a great Oak, with thirty or
forty of the first blows, it may seem that he loses his labor, because
the tree will not stir, but stand stiffly without stouping; yet in continuance,
it comes at length down, and so shows the effect of the first blows,
conjoined with the last: Even so, the like custom are the Pastors to use for
the soul, as the Physician does for the body, and still to persevere in due
admonitions, exhortations, and consultations, in hope that finally God will
bless their diligence and constancy in this duty.

8 Even as Fishermen do often cast their nets into the Sea, and take nothing,
yet are not discouraged, but cast so long, until they light upon some fish:
So are Pastors, the fishers of men, patiently and constantly to proceed in
their duties, in hope that it will be with them, as it was with S. Peter, who,
when he had taken nothing all the night, yet notwithstanding so much labor
lost, did again cast forth his nets, at the commandment of Jesus Christ,
and took a great multitude of fishes. Ioh. 21.3. etc.

9 As the Husbandmen, when they are disappointed of their expected harvest,
have not any to recompense their loss, but all is gone, both seed and labor;
but notwithstanding, the labor of the Minister does not profit with men, in
respect of their incredulity, yet has he his reward in heaven. Act. 20.26,
27. Ezech. 33.9.

10 Even as the false Prophet, that having endeavored to seduce and divert the
faithful from the truth, but through their constancy cannot compass his
purpose, is notwithstanding worthy to be punished: So likewise the true
Pastors, when they have constantly employed themselves to reduce those that be
strayed, into the way of salvation; albeit in respect of this constancy they
cannot profit, yet are they worthy their hire, and recompense in the sight of
God. Esa. 49.4, 5. 2. Cor. 2.15.

11 As the Springs do not cease from giving forth their waters, or the rivers
their streams, albeit no man come to take up any, or to sail upon them: So
must not the Minister cease from preaching, admonishion and reproouing, albeit
in manner, no man make profit of his doctrine and admonition. Esaias. 58.1. Iere.
1.17.

12 Like as when the Apostles said unto Jesus Christ: Lord will thou that we
command that fire come down from heaven, and consume these Samaritans, that
deny thee lodging, as Elias did? He answered, Ye wot not of what spirit ye
are: Even so, there are some Ministers that think to imitate the Prophets, in
bitter and sharp reprehensions, but they are not led by the like spirit; for
they do it either to purchase a reputation of zeal, and to be thought such as
will spare none; or for some other perverse passion: God (says S. Paul) has
not given to us the spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of sound mind:
thereby showing, that Pastors truly must not fear the appearance of persons,
to dissemble their sins and offenses, but must be strengthened by the spirit
of Christ, to discover and open their wounds, that they may be healed: but to
this power and boldness, they must join on the one side, discretion, and
soundness of mind, whereby to be able to yield a reason of their power and
boldness: and on the other side such love and charity, that their
reprehensions and threatenings, may proceed from a heart, not provoked, bitter,
or flowing with revenge: but as having compassion on such as do amiss, and
seeking by love to reclaim and reduce them, into the way of salvation. L^k.
9.54. 1. King. 1.10. 2. Tim. 1.7. Esaias 59.7, 8. Micha. 3.8.

13 Like as if a sick body, troubled in mind, should spit in the Physicians
face, yet would he not be so displeased, as to forsake and give him over: Or
like as if the nipples of a woman's breast should be so sore, that she could not
suffer her child without great pain to take them, yet would she endure all, to
suckle her child: Even so must Pastors deal with their flocks, though they be
wronged and slandred for the truths sake, eue^ of some of their own people,
yet with p^tience they must bear it, and seek to cure and reduce them, to
amendment of life. 2. Tim. 2.24. and 4.2. 2. Cor. 6.4.

14 Even as when the Physician has prescribed some potion, or other receipt,
for the cure of his ficke patient, returning the next day, he enquireth of the
operation thereof, and feels his pulses, that he may learn his disposition,
and thereafter order himself: So likewise, it is not enough that the Pastor
preach, reprove, exhort, and comfort his charge, but he must also seek to
understand how every member thereof is disposed, and what his preaching and
catechizing has wrought in them. Eze. 3.14. Hebr. 13.17. Act. 20.28.

15 As at a feast, when one that sits at the Table eats nothing, we use to
demand whether he be well or no: Even so, if any of those that are committed to
the Pastors charge, do not eat of the spiritual food unto him offered, by
preaching and catechizing, it is to be feared, (...) he be crased, or not well
at ease, and therefore without delay, the Pastor is to harken out the cause,
and diligently to see to his cure, and to procure him an appetite.

16 As Jesus Christ requires that his sheep should not only hear his voice,
but also follow him: Even so it is the Pastors duty to learn, whether his
parishioners do follow the doctrine preached unto them; and to that end he is
to visit his people, by examining them, whether they be instructed in the
knowledge of the principal points of doctrine, required to salvation; whether
they persevere in the truth; whether they profit in pureness of life, and holy
conversation. Act. 15.36.

17 As good Parents have this care and diligence toward their children that go
to school, that they cause the^ to say their lessons, or look upon their
writing, and by such examination, try and see whether they profit or no: but
finding them to be negligent and faulty, they reprove, admonisth, and exhort
them to their duty: So in like manner must the good and faithful Pastors
deal with their people; following the example of Saint Paul. 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.
Act. 20 20. Iere. 23.2.

18 As a careful shepherd seeks his lost sheep; a Surgion binds up the
wounds; a Physician tries all medicines for the cure of the sick; and a
Father seeks al means to reclaim his unthrifty Son into the right way:
Even so likewise are the Ministers of the word bound to all these, and the like
duties toward people committed to their charge. Ezech. 34.4.

19 As men ordinarily, and grievously afflicted with sickness, feeling the
same, and having some perseverance of death, are then most troubled with
impatience, mistrust, and other temptations and dangerous assaults, wherein the
devil practices his uttermost endeavors: So have they at that time especial,
need of the presence of their Pastors, to visit, to comfort and strengthen
their patience and faith: Ezech. 34.2. 2. King. 20.1, 2. etc.

20 Like as Queen Hester, when she was to speak to King Assuerus, for the
bodily health of her Nation, prayed unto God to give her convenient words: Even
so much rather ought the Pastor and Preacher, to pray unto God, to give him
grace to speak well, and truly, when he is to preach the word and doctrine, of
the everlasting salvation of his people. Hest. 14.3. etc. Ephe. 6.19.

21 As he that is to preach, must seek to be heard willingly, and with
understanding and obedience: So must he know, that he shall the sooner attain
there^o by prayers unto God, for means to speak well, and therefore he is to
pray both for himself; and for his hearers. Act. 6.4. 1. Sam. 12.19, 23.

22 As the Husbandmans mind and eat, is ever upon Tillage, sowing, and
reaping; and the Mariners upon their ships, winds, and havens: So must the
thoughts, minds, and affections of the Ministers of the word, run only upon
the instructing, comforting, exhorting, edifying, and upon the saving of the
souls of their parishioners. Act. 6.2. 2. Timo. 2.4.

23 As God was angry with Vzzah, and slew him, for that he imagined that the
Ark of God must needs have fallen, had not he stretched forth his hand to
hold it up, which was beyond his calling: Even so the Ministers of the word,
ought to fear, and that justly, least God confound them in their ministry,
for meddling in civil causes, and undertaking above their callings. 2 Samuel 6.6.

24 Even as the Soldier that is enrowled to serve in the wars, so soon as
he hears the Drum, must forsake wife and children, house, shop, and all
other affairs, that nothing may hinder, or withdraw him from the service of
his Captain: So much more ought the Pastors, whom the sovereign King has
inrowled, for the spiritual warfare, and the holy ministry of the word,
keep themselves from all civil and politic affairs, and such as belong not
to their vocation, to the end they may wholly serve and please Jesus Christ.

25 As a Brook sufficient to drive a Mill, or carry a boat, being cut into
many ditches, will not be able to do either: Even so the Pastor that medleth
with many occupations, and much worldly business, is very unprofitable for
any.

26 As in a dark Evening, one goes before with a Torch or Linathorne, for
others to follow: So the life and conversation of the Pastors, ought to be as
a burning Torch, to guide others in the way of salvation, and life everlasting
1. Timo. 4.12. Tit. 2.7. 1. Pet. 5.3. Math. 5.1^, 16.

27 As faith without works are dead: Even so the doctrine of Ministers is of
no force, where it is not accompanied with holiness of life. Iam. 2.17.

28 As Worms do usual breed in fat Cheese: Even so Ministers, that in most
plenty have received the grates of God, are most subject to ambition. 2. Cor.
12.7. Luke 22.24, 25. Math. 23.12.

29 As when one of our eyes turns aside, the other turns the same way: Even
so all the consultations, affections, and deeds of Pastors, ought jointly, and
in a holy harmony, to tend to one self end, even to the glory of God, and
edification of his Church.

30 As they that jointly do bear the Mast of a Ship, or any other great piece
of timber upon their shoulders, do employ themselves in a joint labor, and
all tend to one self thing: So the Pastors ought to be joined and united in
the affairs of the Church of Christ, that happily they may advance and finish
their work, to his glory.

Bayer Morning and Evening, needful to be used in families.
1 AS the Morning and Evening, is a fit and convenient time, for suitors to
attend upon great men; and as the Morning was a fit and a convenient time to
gather Manna: Even so the Morning and Evening, is a fit and a convenient time,
for Christian householders, to become suitors unto the great Majesty of God, for
the spiritual Manna, the food of their souls; as also for necessaries for
their bodies. Gene. 28.18. Exodus 16.21.

2 As Moses was commanded to come up to Sinai, with the two tables of the law,
early in the Morning: Even so are we commanded to appear before God in our
chambers, early in the Morning before we go abroad, having the two
Testaments of God in our hands; learning how to honor his majesty in the one,
and how to use our brethren charitably in the other, both which are the two
principal duties of every Christian. Exodus 34.1, 2. Psalm. 5.3.

Spiritual Poverty.
LIke as if a King should have a certain house, fast locked and close shut up,
full of Gold, precious stones, and costly Jewels, and would promise al those
treasures to one that should open the same; and would offer unto thee two keys,
one of pure Gold, hanging at a costly string, made of silk and golden
threades, but that would not open the same lock, that thou might go into
the house; and the other of iron, rustie and ill favored to see too, hanging
at a thong of Leather, or whipcord, the which notwithstanding, would open the
door, and let thee in; and and thou might choose which of these keys thou
would; it were no doubt, better, and more profitable for thee, to choose the
old rustie iron key, then the key of Gold. The golden one in deed is more
precious, but what avails that, when it will not open the door, and bring
thee to the treasures: The iron one is the viler, but yet it is the better:
Even so, such a King is our God, and such an house is that heavenly habitation
of his Saints, wherein are inestimable treasures, endless joys, and
unspeakable good things, which are worthier, and more excellent, then man is
able to express. 2. Cor. 2.9. All which heavenly treasures, God has promised,
to all them that shall enter into his holy hill, or house of Saints. The golden
key, which the most part of this world do choose, and trust too, that they may
enter into heaven, is worldly wealth, and abundance of riches, joined with
covetousness, which will never open the Lords house, where are kept his
celestial, and inestimable treasures; but that key, does open a foul and vile
house of this world, which is full of all filthiness and abominations. The
iron key, is spiritual Poverty; against the which, the kingdom of heaven is
never shut, but stands ever wide open to all them, that bring with them that
key. Math. 5.3. Therefore let us make no account of the golden key, but let us
for Christ, and his kingdom, forsake and dispose the deceitful riches of this
world, which are desired and sought for, far and near, by Sea and land, with
dangers and loss, of the bodies and souls of many thousands; as though men
could bribe God for their sins, and purchase heaven, with their worldly
trifles; and let us without murmuring and grudging, with all patience of heart
and mind, bear and embrace Poverty, and al those crosses and afflictions,
which unto the world seem bitter and intolerable; of which kind, very many
do happen in the life of men. Let us earnestly seek after the riches of the
Lords kingdom, and everlasting life, for they be stable and permanent; and let
us not set our hearts and affections on this world, for it waxes old, and
rotten, it staggereth, is ruinous, and ready to fall. Job. 21.13. Prou. 11.4.

Posterity degenerating.
EVen as thick and black clouds, do obscure and darken the bright and
glittering stars: So degenerating Posterities, and such as be polluted and
blemished with treachery and iniquity, do dishonor their ancestors, and
do extinguish the clear light of their noble virtues, and do put upon them
the ugly darksomnesse of their own vices; that although they be noble men by
birth and descent, yet they fall into oblivion, and by little and little are
quite forgotten.

Outward Professors, are often hypocrites.
EVen as many men, are much delighted with Music, and will most gladly hear
Musitions, make songs of the noble acts, and singular virtues of many men, but
never care to imitate one virtue of a thousand, which they hear with praises,
extolled unto the skies: So very many men in these our days, are outwardly
very forward to hear Sermons, and the word preached, and as Ananias, will be
willingly, to see too, at some cost to maintain Preachers, and all is (in
many) but mere hypocrisy, to please their own humors, with strange and new
matter, with some Logic, Rethoricke, and bravery of words, which they look
for, without any purpose, to frame their lives, after such doctrine as the
Preacher delivers.

Gods mercy in his Promises.
1 LIke as if I owe to a Creditor, upon a very formal bill a hundred pounds,
he will not (to the end to enduce me to pay the same) faithfully Promise to
give me ten times so much more; yet thus does God deal with us, who is so
wonderful in his goodness, that he vouchsafes to Promise us so many
benefits, if we amend our lives, that is to say, if we perform the thing
whereto we are already bound.

2 If he that is free, binds himself to serve an other, then it is reason
that his Master should Promise him some wages, and reward for his service: But
we are not free, but already bound to serve our God, yet does he Promise us
great benefits, if we employ our selves faithfully in his service, by amending
our lives.

Preaching kills sin.
AS the Walls of Jericho did fall down flat, at the sound of the Trumpets,
and the shouts of the people: Even so sin and wickedness, will fall flat
down, and decay in the people, when Ministers shall faithfully and carefully
execute their office, by diligent preaching and Catechizing. Iosu. 6.20. Esaias.
58.1. Hose. 5.8.

Prosperity argues not a man to he saved, and contrariwise, etc.
AS Hawks of the best kind, whiles they live are highly esteemed, and much
made off, and are daintily fed, and tenderly looked unto, and are carried upon
the fistes of great and mighty men; but when they be dead, they are thrown
out upon the dunghill; and on the other side, the Partridge, when she lives,
is troubled, afflicted, and pursued of all; every Carter and Ploughman, is
ready to fall upon her, to do her violence, and to kill her; but when she is
dead, she is brought to the tables of Princes, and is very honorably set
before them: So very many that in this life, are counted very famous, and
notable men, and do lead their lives, in great Prosperity and worldly wealth,
and have all things at their wills and pleasures; when they remove hence, and
depart this life, they shall be hurled upon that most foul and filthy
dunghill of hell, to be tormented in the stinch and abomination for ever. But
others which in this life are encumbred, tormented, and afflicted with diverse
and sundry calamities, and even for their virtues sake, are hated of the
wicked, and contemned of the world; when they shall depart out of this life,
they shall be brought and presented before the Lord with great honor, and
placed with the King of heaven, in everlasting glory, that is full of honor,
and full of unspeakable joys.

2 As the skillful Physician does give to a patient, of whose recovery he
dispaireth, all things that he requires; but he denies many things to him,
of whose health he has good hope: So God many times bestows his blessings
of worldly things upon the reprobate, when he (for diverse respects) refuses
to give them to the godly.

The Passion of Christ to be reverenced.
AS he which rejoices when an other has killed the kings Son, is convinced
also to be partaker of the treason: So he which is glad off, and does not
speak reverently of Christ's Passion, is guilty of it.

Long escaping of Punishment, a hinderance that many do not repent.
AS an old Thief that has stolen a long time, and escapes both prison and
gallows, is animated and encouraged more boldly to proceed in his wickedness,
thinking he shall so always escape: So many filthy and loose livers go
forward in their abominations, without repentance, thinking that because God
does not incontinently punish them, and show some manifest judgment and sign
of his wrath upon them, therefore they shall be acquitted for altogether.
Whereas contrariwise, if God should by and by strike them down, as soon as
they had sinned, by thundering upon one, and lightning upon an other, and
raining fire and brimstone upon the third, it would make them afraid.

Preachers must be faultlesse.
AS when the Priests did offer, they did especially provide, that their
sacrifice should have no spot on it, least it should not be acceptable to God:
So the Preachers of the word, must have a special care that there be no blots
in their lives, or Sermons.

Prophets.
AS we looking on those things, which are before our eyes, do see them no
otherwise then they are: So the Prophets did foresee things to come, as though
they were present, and as they were in deed.

Philosophy.
AS the earth, heaven, and air, and such like, are not therefore to be
contemned, because some have abused them, and worshipped them as Gods: So
Philosophy is not to be despised, though it have errors in it, but what profit
soever can be gathered out of it, the same is to be applied to the use of our
life.

Vain Pleasures.
1 AS pilgrims and strangers, do not use to delight themselves with the
Pleasures of the Country, whither they travel as strangers, but so use them,
that they set not their hearts on them; but are ready, and willing to leave
them, if it were to morrow: So also must we, being pilgrims hear on earth,
never set our hearts or affections, on the vain Pleasures of this life, but use
this world as though we used it not. 1. Pet. 2.10.

2 Even as there is a kind of tickling in the flesh, which causes laughter,
that is both uncomely and unseemly; and like unto a convultion, and shrinking
of the sinowes: So likewise all those Pleasures of the body, which are provoked
only by fantasy and conceit of mind, are sottish, feeble, troublesome, and
far differing from nature.

3 Even as the affection, which a wicked person bears to a strumpet, does
exceedingly diminish the love which he should bear unto his lawful wife: So
likewise the love we bear to these vain and transitory things, and
especially unto Pleasures, which is like unto an old and common whore, who
draws us exceedingly from our duties, and diminishes that zeal and
affections we should bear toward our spouse Christ Jesus, and to those
things, which he commands us.

4 As Bees do first give Honey, and forthwith prick with their sting: So
bodily Pleasures (of which the Epicures make three sorts; namely to feed
delicately, to drink pleasantly, and to live lecherously; the rest serving
hereunto, whether they delight the eyes, or provoke the body, by what means
soever unto pleasure, they call appurtenances) bears a show of goodness,
while it tickleth the mind by her enticements; but in the end it brings most
bitter sorrow. Prou. 5.3.4.

5 As drunkards do by drinking not quench the thirst, and satisfy their
appetite, but increase the burning thirst of their bodies, and the insatiable
intemperance of their minds: So all other worldly Pleasures, the longer they
are enjoyed, the more greedily they are desired, and more obstinately preferred
before God, and spiritual graces. Iere. 13.23.

6 As the bough of a tree, being by the growth of many years, become stiff
and strong, is now far more easily broken then bowed: So for the most part,
men of age, experience, and worldly wisdom, do sooner loose their lives,
then leave their vain Pleasures, and carnal desires, which they have
carefully nourished, and strengthened all their life time.

7 As affliction and misery, do strike at the faith of a Christian; So the
enjoying of worldly Pleasures in the time of prosperity, does diminish the
other parts of sanctification, by the immoderate and unlawful seeking and
using of earthly pleasures.

Keeping of Promise.
LIke as the Mulberrie-tree, is said to be the wisest of all trees, because it
buddeth last of all, and not til the cold be past, and brings forth fruit
first, which is ripe before the cold comes again: So we must be slow in
promising, and quick in performing.

Pride makes God to take his graces from us, and to bestow them upon others.
1 AS the slave that has stolen from his Lord and Master, and will acknowledge
no duty, no rent, nor any service wherein he is bound unto him, does deserve
to loose all such lands as he holds of his Masters: So in like manner, if
God, who requires nothing of us, but a confession and acknowledgement, of the
good he has done for us, seeing us to refuse this, deals justly with us, if
he shut up his liberality from us, and bestows the same upon others.

2 Like as if a great Lord should receive some poor man into his house,
giving him nothing, but wherewithal he might maintain himself in mean estate,
and should perceive that within two or three years after, he purchased lands,
put money to usury, kept a great port, and to be at other excessive charges,
his master might have good occasion to think he were a thief, seeing that he
had nothing when his Lord took him into his service: So likewise we,
considering how poor we are by nature, and that we came into the house of our
God all naked, laden (as it were) and covered with filth and beggary; if being
there we will vaunt our selves, in so doing, we should rob God of his glory,
and give him just cause to take them from us, and to give them to others.

Pride corrupts all our works.
1 AS a little Worme-wood will quickly mar a whole vessel of wine: So in like
manner, when as our life is most perfect and godly, yea most divine and
angelical, the least Pride that may be, will wholly corrupt it, and make it
worse, and more imperfect, then ever it was good.

2 As it were a lamentable thing, to see a Merchant, after a long and
prosperous Navigations, suffer Shipwreck in the haven, and loss of al in that
place, where he hoped to repose himself, and enjoy the fruit of his labors:
So in like manner it is, when a man (like unto the Pharisie) has lived well in
this world, carefully observing the commandments of God, and wisely and
politickly carried himself among men, and in the end through a presumption and
Pride in himself, or contempt of his neighbor, he utterly casts himself
away.

3 Like as when we are on the top of an hill, or of some high place, we take
good heed to our feet, and we walk warily for fear of stumbling: So in like
manner must they behave themselves, whom God has exalted above others, either
in authority, knowledge, virtue, or wealth, or any other grace whatsoever it
has pleased him to bestow upon them in particular manner; considering that the
means to be preserved and continued in that estate wherein they are, is to
trust in him, and continually to cleave unto him, to the end that they always
may live in his fear, and in humble manner retain and keep their minds in
his obedience, in remembrance and consideration of his goodness, and not to be
Proud and arrogant.

4 As the Peacocke beholding his gay and goodly feathers, waxes forthwith very
proud thereof, but as soon as he casts down his eyes, and looks upon his
feet, which are far, different in beauty, his Pride is quickly abated: So
likewise, if in some respect of some prerogatives and preheminences, which God
has given us above other men, we find our selves to be solicited by our
flesh, or entised by the devil to become proud, let us consider that we are
but dust, corruption and vanity, the better to repress this Pride.

5 As we would laugh at a beggar, who having borrowed princely apparel, to
play the part of some King, upon a stage, will needs afterward retain and keep
his apparel still, proudly and gloriously behauing himself in them, as if
they were his own; Even so in like manner, if a rich man would glory in his
wealth, a Philosopher in his knowledge, a strong man in his force, a Merchant
in his wealth, a woman in her beauty, or an hypocrite in his virtue, they all
deserved to be laughed at: for this world is as it were a Theater, and all the
honors and dignities which men have therein, are as it were several attires,
which God has distributed and given to every one, as is most requisite to play
his part in, which is not to this end, to attribute them unto himself, or to
glory in them: but contrariwise, to honor him, who gave them, and to help
their neighbors.

6 As Pride was the first vice that entered into our nature, for the corrupting
and defacing of that image which was in us: So likewise is it the last that
comes out of us: and before we be wholly cleared thereof, we cannot attain
unto our former perfection and integrity.

Princes.
1 AS Princes seek for nothing but to be honored, served and obeyed of their
subjects: So there is no better nor readier way to attain this their desire,
then to show themselves, mild, gentle, and merciful, even in those
punishments which are due to offenders.

2 As skillful Surgions, who when they will fear or cut off any putrified or
rotten member, use to deal tenderly, gently, and in as mild manner as
possibly may be; thereby to comfort their patient, and to diminish his pain:
So likewise a Prince to mittigate the sharpness of the pain, which is often
due by rigor of Law, must mix equity, and moderation therewith, showing both
in his words and countenance, a co^misseration toward the offender, who
notwithstanding, by reason of his evil deserts, by force of his Laws, must
needs be condemned.

3 Like as Scipio the great (the Paragon of all nobility in his time)
aunswering one of his Captains, who told him, that with the loss of two or
three hundred of his men, he might win the City, which he then besieged;
said, he had rather save one Citizen, then destroy a thousand enemies: So in
like manner, it is the duty of a good Prince, to defend, cherish, preserve,
keep, support, and comfort all poor and desolate persons, and to be as it
were a Sanctuary to such as are pursued, whereto they may retire without
danger.

4 As the head gives moving to the whole body, and all the parts thereof; but
to the principal parts in the head, the eyes, tongue, ears; it gives
besides, the faculty of moving, the sense also of seeing, tasting, hearing:
So in like manner in the Commonwealth, by the Princes authority, all persons
are kept in order, and urged to look to their charge, both civil officers and
spiritual.

We must labor to come to Perfection.
1 AS they which leap, the further they go backward to fetch their race and
run, the further they leap forward, when they have run: So we may look
back a little, and remember, both that we have done ill, to amend it; and
also that we have done well, to continue in it. Otherwise the remembrance
either of vices or virtues, is so far from putting us any whit forward, that
it casts us quite backward. Phil. 3.14. 1. Timo. 1. 13. Reave. 22.11. 1. Sam.
17.36.

2 As they which die cloth, do not immediately change one contrary into an
other, but first turn a white into an Azure, and then make a Puke of it: So
we can never hold color, as a good Puke, except first our White be turned
into an Azure; that is, except first we do well, to forget, that which we
did ill to get; except first we happily unlearn, that which we did unhappily
learn.

3 Like as they which work in Wax, cannot frame any new impression in it,
till the old be defaced: So the Image of Caesar the Prince of this world, the
Devil, must first be defaced, before the Image of Christ can be formed in us,
that so we may endeavor to come to Perfection.

4 As the Israelites were commanded, not once in a week, or once in a month,
but every day, to gather Manna, except only the Sabbath day: So we must never
stand still, but every day be doing somewhat, till we come to the Sabbath of
our everlasting rest in heaven. Exodus 16.26. Esaias. 28.10. Gene. 17.1.

5 Even as they which run in a race, bend forward their breasts; and stretch
out their aims, to show that they have a desire to run faster then possibly
their feet can follow them: So in like manner, we which run in this course
of Christianity, must cast away every thing that presses down, and sin
which cleaves so fast, that we may endeavor and stretch our selves, to those
things which are before. Hebr. 12.1.

6 Like as Aeolus left all other winds, which might have been a^couble to him,
with his friend Ulysses, to be packt up in a Male, and kept only the Western
wind for his own use, to bring him home to his Country: So we must reject
all other things, which may be as contrary winds, to drive us from the shore
of salvation, and retain only the Western wind of the spirit of God, whereby
we may labor and endeavor our selves to that which is before, and stretch out
our sails, and so come safely to the haven of heaven.

7 As the silk worm keeps her body spare and empty, and uses to fast two
or three days together, that she may stretch out her self the better, and
spin her third the finer: So likewise we must endeavor to bring under our
bodies, and diet them for the nonce, that we may not any longer weaue the
spiders web, but with the silk-worme spinne a new thread. 1. Cor. 9.27. Esaias
59.5.

8 Like as the Viper perceiving her old skin to be so stiff that she cannot
easily stretch out her self in it, strips it quite off: Even so, after the
same sort, we which are by nature a generation of Vipers, must strip off our
old skin, and perceiving we cannot well do our endeavor, and stir our selves in
the armor of Saul, we must with David put it off, and put on the armor of
light; that so we may come to Perfection. Colloss. 3.9.

9 Even as when long war had been between the two houses of Saul and David,
at length the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, and the house of David
waxed stronger and stronger: In like manner the spirit must always endeavor it
self to that which is before, and never leave fighting with the flesh, till
the house of Saul, who was a limb of the devil, that is the flesh, wax weaker
and weaker; and the house of David, who was a figure of Christ, that is the
spirit, wax stronger and stronger. 2. Sam. 3.1.

10 As Abraham did run from the door of his Tent, to meet the Angels: So
must we endeavor to run forward, not only looking for, but also hastening
unto the coming of the day of God, that we may (if it be possible) meet the
Lord in the air, with all his holy Angels. Gene. 18.2. 2. Pet. 3.12.

11 As the Cherubins spread out their wings on high, and cover the mercy
seat: So must we spread out our wings, stretch out and endeavor our selves,
and be always pressed and ready to fly, as it were to do the will of God, if
we would have his will done in the earth, as it is in heaven. Exodus 37.9.

12 As he that has the thumbes of his hands cut off, may perhaps do
something, but he is so long about a little, that he were better sit still and
do nothing, then be so long pidling about nothing: Or as he that has the
thumbes of his feet cut off, may peradventure go forward, but is such a
Snayles pace which he goes, that he were better stand still and not go at all
forward, then go so slowly forward: So we likewise must not go so slowly
forward, as though the thumbes of our hands and feet were cut off, but rather
we must strive to come to Perfection, and to run as fast as it is to be
supposed, that that mighty man could, which had upon every hand six fingers,
and upon every foot six toes. 2. Sam. 21.21.

13 Even as those beasts in Ezechiel did run, and return as lightnings: So
must every one, who is enlightened with the spirit of God, follow as swiftly as
lightning, which does no sooner flash down from heaven to the earth, then he
must in affection, mount up from the earth to heaven. Ezech. 1.14.

14 As the Israelits were commanded to eat the Passover in haste: So in like
manner, all we which are true Israelites, must gird up the loins of our minds,
and follow hard, and run a pace toward Perfection, and redeem the time,
that both the wrath of God may pass over us; and also the mercy of God may
abide with us. Exo. 12.11.

15 As the Ostridge never flies with his wings, but only lifts up his body with
them when he runs; and in the pinion of each wing he has a sharp spur,
wherewith he pricketh his own self, that so he may run the faster: So we
ought by all good means, to quicken our dull dispositions, that we may follow
hard, even as we see the Ostridge eggeth his own self forward, with the
flapping of his wings. Esaias. 40.31.

16 As Pindarus writes, that King Therons coursers were such as would never be
weary of going: So we must follow, and still endeavor to come to Perfection,
and never be weary of well doing.

17 As Atalanta ranging out on the right hand, to gather up those golden
Apples, which Hippomenes for the nonce threw forth before her, did loose the
wager she ran for: So likewise they which are not thankful to God for the
glorious peace and prosperity of his Church, but run after every fond and
strange devised doctrine, and take up all pretty novelties, as golden Apples,
which every man lets fall, shall miss the mark; and loose the garland of
glory, and so never attain to Perfection.

18 As Paul left Cyprus on his left hand, when he sailed toward Syria: So we
must (if we will run toward the mark of Perfection) leave all Atheism, all
Gentilisme, al Popery, al prophannesse, al lewdness, on the left hand; and
also we must forsake all those worldly affections, which may draw us any way
from the mark of true godliness. Act. 21.3.

19 As Gunners wink with the leftreye, that they may level more truly: So
likewise, we must not be^old any ungodliness, or sinister dealing, with our
eyes, but we must aim directly toward Christ; and either if it be possible,
hit the mark of Perfection, or at least wise, with those left handed
Beniamities, come within a hairs breadth of it. Judge. 20.16.

20 Like as when Diogenes saw a bungling Archer s^oote, he ran as fast as he
could to the mark; the lookers on demanded what he meant in so doing? He
answered, to make sure that he might not be hit; for this fellow (says he)
means never to come near the mark: So likewise when we see profane
straglers, starting aside like a broken bow, and roauing a great way wide on
the left hand, we must rather labor to attain to Perfection, that so we may
not only keep our selves safe from the danger of their il example, but also
we may give aim (as it were) to others, by our good ensample; and direct them,
that they be neither wide nor short to draw to the mark of Perfection.

21 As Joseph's brethren stood so long dallying and delaying, and trifling out
the time, that having a journey to buy Corn, they might have returned twice,
before they would go once: Or as Eliseus, when Elias called him, went about
the bush (as we say) and would needs go bid his Father and his Mother
farewell, before he would follow the Prophet: So when we are called of God to
profess his Religion, we may not stand temporising and circling, and
consulting with flesh and blood, before we follow toward the mark of
Perfection; neither must we fetch a compass, but rather endeavor with a
straight course to come to Christ. Gene. 43.10. 1. King. 19.20.

22 As the Be, being to fly home to her Hiue, and fearing least if she
should be taken by the way with the wind, she might so perhaps be blown
about in the air, counterpeizes her self with a little stone, and so flies
straight home: So likewise we must not be wavering, and carried about with
every blast of doctrine, like a Reed shaken in the wind; but must be built
upon the chief corner stone, and grounded upon a rock, and established with
grace; that howsoever the rain fall, or the floods arise, or the wind blow, or
what times so ever come yet we may stand fast, and always follow Christ
directly, till we come to Perfection. Ephe. 4.14, 15. Luke 6.24. Hebr. 13.9.
Math. 7.25.

23 As Theseus being guided by Ariadnes thread, which she tied at the entrance
into Dedalus Labyrinth, escaped all the danger and error of it: Even so we
must make Christ the door, by which we must enter into the Labyrinth of all
out affairs, and tie Rahabs thread at this entrance, and follow it all the
way, that so we may be safe, and go in and out, and find pasture, and come to
Perfection. Iosu. 2.14. Ioh. 10.9.

24 Like as a lusty Hound of a good kind, orders his going so well, that
though he have run over many fields, and through a thousand thickets already,
yet he never remembers any labor which is behind, but forgets it, and if
he chance to lap water in some brook by the way, yet even while he lappeth,
he lifts up his head, and still goes on, and plieth him forwards to his
game: So must we do in this pursuit of Perfection; seeing Christ has now
sprinkled all the way, between heaven and earth, with his blood, and so has
made it a fresh and a living way, therefore we which have noses like the
Tower of Lebanon, must as Bloud-hounds, trace him by the foot, and run after
him in the smell of his ointments, and hunt hotly upon his fresh and living
way, with a fresh and lively faith; and though we have gone very far, and
done a thousand good deeds already, yet we must always forget that which is
behind, till we have gotten, if not the childrens bread, yet at the least
wise, some little crum of mercy, that falls from our masters table; some
little drop of blood, that falls from our Lords side; which will be sufficient
to make us perfect men in Christ. Hebr. 1^.20. Cant. 1.4.

25 Even as that altar of perfume was placed, not in any common room, or in
any odd corner of the Tabernacle, but in the Sanctuary it self; somewhat
beyond the veil, close to the golden Censer, very near the mercy feate: So a
Christian heart, which is a spiritual altar of perfume, and of a sweet savor
to God, must daily endeavor it self to that which is before; and still more and
more aspire to heavenly things; and always nearer and nearer approach unto
Perfection, and unto the throne of grace; and continually higher and higher
advance itself; to him that is the highest, and holiest of all. Exodus 36.6.
Heb. 9.4. 2. Cor. 2.15.

26 As the Israelites, so soon as they had pitched in Mithkah, which signifies
sweetness; by and by removed their Tents from Chashmonah, which signifies
swiftness: So we must join sweetness, and swiftness, both together; and
as soon as we have tasted and seen how sweet the Lord is, presently we must
remove our Tents from thence, and follow hard, and run, not only sweetly,
but also swiftly in the way of peace, which leads unto Perfection and life.
Number. 33.26.

27 As a Pomegranate has many grains within him in his case, and a little
round circle or a crown without him, upon his head: now these grains being
sweet in taste, and red in color, are orderly set one by another, and point
up, or as it were look up altogether to the crown: So in like manner, we
which are plants of the Church, as an O^cha^d^ of Promegrana^es, must grow
and go on still to Perfection; not only when we enjoy the sweet taste of
pleasant prosperity, but also when we bear the red color of bloody
persecution, and consenting in a kind of conformity and perfect peace and
unity, one with another, we must point up altogether with the finger of faith
to Christ, and look up continually, with the eye of lone to our head, who by
being first crossed, is now come to be crowned with honor and glory.

28 As Jacob wrastled all the night long, and never gave over, till about the
breaking of the day that he was called Israel: So likewise we must wrestle all
the night long of this life, and never give over, till the day break, and the
shadows fly away, and we come to the marvelous light and sight of God, by
Perfection. Gene. 32.24. Mar. 13.35. Cant. 4.6.

29 As Joseph signifies increasing, and Aramathia, signifies getting the
reward: So we must always increase and go on still to attain Perfection,
till we get the reward.

30 Like as they which run their Horses for a wager, spur them hardest at
the races end: So seeing our salvation is nearer now then ever it was,
therefore we must run faster then ever we did: especially because the very
Horse and Mule, and diverse other brute beasts which have no understanding,
though they have been never so much wearied and tired before, yet when they
come near home, they will mend their pace. And therefore the more to blame
should we be, if having traveled thus far already in the way to Perfection,
and being come by this time almost to our iournies end, we should now go no
further, when indeed we ought if it be possible, to run much faster to our
everlasting home in heaven.

31 As the holy Angels blush and hold down their heads, when they see us
stumble, or trippe never so little: So on the other side, they shoute and clappe
their hands, when they see us run cheerfully in a good course, and come away
a pace to Perfection.

32 Even as a royal King, when one of his Nobles returns home, which has in
a foreign Country by chivalry, or feats of arms, or other like excellent
parts, achieved and gotten great renown to his Realm, presently sends for
him to his Court, and in open audience gives him words of grace, and
aduaunceth him to hie preferments and honor: So Christ our most magnificent
King, immediately upon our arrival and entrance into heaven, but of the
foreign Country of this world, will reach forth unto us his holy hand,
conducting us to the eternal Tabernacles of rest: and as for all the prayers
that we have made, all the tears that we have shead, all the alms that we
have given, all the other exercises of Christian life, that we have performed,
though never so secretly in this pursuit of Perfection, he will openly reward
them, and most gloriously crown them, when all the host of Angels shall
triumph for our corronation, and the blessed Saints shall think themselves
more perfect for our Perfection, and all the Court of heaven, shall applaude
our praises, and God himself shall say Amen, to our felicities.

33 As they which (by the counsel of Hefiodus) do often add small things to
small, and so at last become rich: So he which grows in virtue more and more,
at last becomes perfect.

Private men and women, may greatly further the Chuch.
1 AS women did work diverse things for the Tabernacle, in the days of Moses:
Or as the Temple was not built but by men of all sorts, in the time of Solomon:
and the walls of Jerusalem under the guiding of Nehemiah: So may Private men
very much further the building of the spiritual Temple, which is the
congregation of Christ. Exodus 35.25. 1. King. 5. Nehem. 3. Josh. 24.15. Act.
10.2, 7. Gene. 14.14. and 18.19. Romans 16. toto. Iere. 35.1. etc.

2 As out of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs house, sprang forth the Churches of the
Jews: So the glorious congregations of the Gentiles in like manner, began in
the families of Private men: For as servants well nurtured, may adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things, Tit. 2.10. and husbands obeying not
the word, may without the word be won, by the conversation of the wives: 1.
Pet. 3.1. Even so, much more may the master of the family do unto God and his
Church, honorable service: not only by sanctifying his house by the word of
faith, but also by having always in a readiness, very notable matter, to
further the building of Gods dwelling place. 2. Timo. 1.5. and 3.15. Act. 16.1.

3 As the disorder of one Private family, namely, of one Micha of Ephraim, was
an occasion that Idolatry did spread through the whole Tribe of Dan, and so
continued many years: Judge. 17, and 18. Chap. Even so, contrarily, Gideon
being stirred up by the goodness of God, to the reformation of one mean
family in Manasseh, was the cause of a very great deliverance to the whole
nation, from most mighty and cruel enemies, and most abominable Idolatry,
for the space of forty years. Judge. 6, 7. and 8. chap.

Curious Questions to be avoided.
1 AS it is sufficient for one that would be heated or warmed by the fire,
that he stand near it, for if he put his hand into it, he shall surely be
burned: So they that presume to dispute and Question about God, about hell,
etc. further then the word reuealeth, falls into blasphemy, and so into hell
fire.

2 As a boisterous noise, or hidious sound, grieueth the hearing; over
abundance of meat, noyeth the stomach; grievous burdens be wearisome to
the bearer; continual rain hurts the earth; and overmuch of any thing, is
noisome and hurthfull: So do difficult Questions, quickly ouercharge weak and
mean wits.

Rashness to be eschued, especially of the godly.
1 AS he that is soonest wearied, that knows not how far his journey is: So
works he, and goes about his business, with tediousness, till repentance
ouertaketh him, who well knows not the estate and manner thereof before.

2 As the enemy lying near the Walls, is the cause why the City does
watch, and take diligent heed: So when your enemy diligently wait and mark
you, then will you do nothing Rash or void of reason.

Resurrection of all at the latter day.
1 LIke as at the last day, the bodies of the righteous and faithful, shall
rise again unto immortality, glory, and honor; the greatness whereof, the
eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived: So the
unrighteous and reprobate, shall rise again with their very bodies, unto
everlasting shame; and both body and soul shall go into hell, with the devil
and his Angels, there to abide everlastingly. Esaias. 66.24. Mark. 9.44. Math.
25.30.46. Ioh. 5.28, 29. Act. 24.15. 2. Cor. 5.10. Dan. 12.3. Reave. 20.13. 2.
Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.

2 Like as the ungodly in this word, have with their bodies taken their own
pleasure, joy, and delight: Even so in the life to come, they shall be plagued
and punished with everlasting pain and torments; in the same bodies.

3 Like as when we see seed sown, to putrify and corrupt, we are yet in good
hope, that it will spring up again with fruit; for unless it be dissolved, it
cannot rise again: So in like manner we must hope of our own bodies, being
buried, when we see their corruption, yet we must then be most certainly
persuaded, that they shall rise again; for death does not so much waste the
body, as the corruption of it. Act. 16.8. 1. Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Ioh.
5.28. and 11.24. Act. 24.15.

Repentance.
1 LIke as if a Noble man, or Gentleman's servant, were (for committing of
treasony, felony, or murder) condemned, and going to the place of execution,
and his Lord or Master, of mere favor and good will, should not only by suit
to her Majesty, procure a pardon for his life, and so deliver him from that
villainous death, which for his deserts he had worthily deserved; but also
should adopt and take him for his Son and heir; should this fellow after this
his deliverance, go and say, I will now be idle and take my pleasure, and
follow mine own fantasy, and never endeavor to please or pleasure my Lord or
master; but rather I will seek to hurt and displease him every way that I
can? What shall we say in this case? Be not these most wicked and desperate
words? And does not such a fellow deserve most grievous punishments. Even so,
the like say they, who either by word or deed say; that Christ has redeemed
us, and by his death has purchased for us forgiveness of sins,
righteousness, and so delivered us from hell, and made us the Sons of God,
and heirs of heaven; wherefore we will stand like idle persons, or rather do
more wickedness, and live as we list, etc. Christ our Savior doubtless died
not for such, nor satisfied for their offenses, no nor yet merited heaven for
them, to the end that they should spend their days in Idleness, and heap
sin upon sin, and become altogether wicked; but that they seeing his great
love, and how greatly sin displeased him, seeing he was willing to redeem
them from sin, Satan, death and hell, should no more commit sin, but love,
honor, and obey him, thank him, put their trust in him, and work virtuous
and good works plenteously, not as bond servants, to escape hell; for so much
as Christ has delivered them, neither yet thereby to win heaven, which he by
his passion has purchased for them, but as natural Sons, for the glory of
God, moved thereto, by motion of the holy Ghost, and by faith and love. For
godly Christians do undoubtedly fear to sin, so much more then the wicked
does, by how much more they know that God does in this present life, punish
his legitimate children, more then bastards. Romans 6.4. Gal. 5.14.2. Timo. 2.19.
Tit. 2.11. etc. Luke 1.75. Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.10. 1. Pet. 1.15. 1. Pet. 4.17, 18.
Iere. 25.12. Iona. 1.12.

2 As for examble, like as if an Astrologer, should tell an ambicious Cardinal
that he should be Pope, although he did put an undoubted trust therein; yet
for all that, he would not be idle, but would use all means possible to
attain, and come to that dignity: Even so the children of God, the surer they
are, that Christ has redeemed them, so much the more they understand the great
good will of God toward them; and therefore they are always forced more and
more by Repentance, and godly conversation of life, to make certain unto
themselves the knowledge of their election, and redemption in Christ. 2. Pet.
1.10.

3 Like as the fire without heat or warmth, is no true fire: So is it a clear
matter, that faith without Repentance, is no true faith. Luke 19.8. and 23.40,
41, 42. Act. 2.37 and 19.18, 19.

4 As it is the nature of some cloth, if it be stained when it is wet, the
stain will seem to be easily washed out, but being dry, it will appear
again: Even so some men think that they have Repented, when they have done it
to halfes; and therefore they are to repent again; as those that break out of
prison, are brought thither again. Psalm. 51.2.

5 As bleaching and whiting wears the cloth: So a man must be worn before
he can be clean washed by true Repentance.

6 Like as in an assurance or evidence, a man may leave out such words as be
effectual in the conueyance, to their great prejudice: Even so, sure it is,
that many things in Repentance, may be found out to a man's hindrance, which
were forgotten at the first. Esra. 10.2. etc.

7 As it is the nature of the children of God, in the reading of the Scriptures
to take all with them, not a piece only, but as well that which humbles them,
as that which lifts up: Even so it is the part of them which will repent
truly, not to play the Mice and Rats to nible a little, so much as makes for
them, but to take all, and not to leave out that which makes against them.

8 Like as a man that is strayed far out of his way, must turn quite back
again the contrary way: So those that have strayed from the ways of
godliness, to the way of sin, must by unfeigned Repentance, turn quite back
again into the right way.

9 As it makes a glad Father, and delights him to have a child like himself,
especially both in place and liniaments of body: Even so more glad is God, when
one is spiritually borne, and shows himself like unto God in all his
actions, by unfeigned Repentance.

10 As dead men in their graves, although they be helped never so much, can not
rise from thence: Even so men that are weak, but dead in trespasses and
sins, can do nothing that may further their Repentance, or conversion,
though they be helped never so. 2. Timo. 2.15.

11 Like as if a man build a house, which does cost him much labor, and great
charges, and not having laid a sure foundation, when a tempest comes, his
house does fall; then will he be very sorry, and repent that he has so
unadvisedly bestowed his money and labor: Notwithstanding, for all this his
great sorrow and Kepentance, yet it cannot set up his house again which is
fallen, but only it takes occasion by the ruin of the house, to teach the
owner more wit against another time, that when he builds again he may make a
sure foundation: Even so, though thou Repent never so much, yet that can not
get remission for thy sins that are past, but that must be pardoned only by
the faith of Christ's blood, nevertheless it does teach thee wit, and learneth
thee to tame thy body, and subdue it, and to cast a low foundation, that in
time to come, thou may the better resist the assaults of the devil, the
world and the flesh.

12 As the Angels in heaven do rejoice over man, when he repents: So the
devil is thoroughly imbrued, with highest delights, and (as it were) with most
pleasant pleasures, when he sees men, (specially those which have given their
names unto Christ) to live without Repentance.

Regeneration necessary in all men.
AS trees growing on the top of hills, have a rough bark, crooked knots, long
bows, and therefore unmeet for any building, until they be cut down,
pilled, squared, drawn home, and yet can do nothing of all those themselves:
So we likewise as long as we he wandering in the mountains, and wild woods of
this world, being highly minded, and in great wealth and authority above
others, as on an hill, we by nature have froward and proud minds, and not
meet for Gods house, until we be made lowly in our own sights, and fall flat
down at Christ's feet, and have the rough bark of our old Adam pulled off,
and our crooked affections out away, be mortified, and drawn home, by the
preaching of his word, and working of his holy spirit. Agge. 1.8. 2. Cor. 3.5.
John. 6.44.

Recreation.
AS the Land which is sown every other year, for the rest in the one year,
is more fertile in the other: So quick wits, and daily studies, do
sometimes desire Recreation and rest, wherewith they be much refreshed again.

Regenerate man falls not f^^atly.
1 AS a man in traveling from Barwicke to London, it may be that now and then
he does go sometimes amiss and out of his way, but he speedily returns to
the way again, and his course generally shall be upright: Even so it is the
property of the Regenerate man, to walk according to the spirit, which is not
now and then to make a step forward, for to keep his ordinary course in the
way of godliness. Romans 8.1. 1. John. 5.19.

2 As it is the practice of a sick man, who having recovered of some grievous
sickness, walks a turn or two about his chamber, saying; Ah, I would feign
walk up and down, but I cannot; meaning, not that he cannot walk as he
would, being soon wearied through faintness: Or as a Soldier, that with a
blow has his brain pan cracked, so as be lies groueling, astonished not able
to fight: Or like him that has a fit of the falling sickness, who for a time
lies like a dead man: Even so the Regenerate man, although the flesh for a
time vanquisheth and subdueth the spirit, not only in thoughts, in inward
motions, and in some particular offenses; but also in the general practice of
this duty or calling, and through the whole course of this life* Yet the
spirit preuailes in the end, and gets the maisterie. Romans 7.15. etc.

3 Like as a prisoner, that is gotten forth of the Gaile, and that he might
escape the hand of the keeper, desires, and strives with all his heart, to
run an hundredth miles in a day, but because he has straight and weighty
Boltes on his legs, cannot for his life creep past a mile or twain, and
that with chasing his flesh, and tormenting himself: Even so a Regenerate man,
and the servants of God, do heartily desire, and endeavor to obey God in all
his commandments; as it is said of King Josias, That he turned to God with
all his heart, with all his soul, with all his might, according to all the
laws of Moses, etc. Yet because they are clogged with the boltes of the
flesh, they perform obedience both slowly and weakly, with diverse slips and
falls. 2. King. 23.25.

Reformation.
AS Elecampane being green, has in it a superfluous moisture, which must he
first consumed before it be occupied about the body: So many men have in their
superfluity of evil, which must be first Reformed, before they be employed
to matters of the Church.

Regeneration increase by degrees.
1 AS seed cast into the earth, does not by and by sprout, increase and come to
perfection, but by space and length of time, it attaineth to his perfection and
ripeness, in that season, that God has appointed: As a tree likewise is not
perfect as soon as it is planted: Nor an infant is not straight-wayes upon
the sudden, as soon as it is conceived in the womb of his Mother, become a
man, but with time: Even so we are not all at the first dash Regenerated; but
this Regeneration rises by degrees, and being once begun, then it proceeds
fair and softly, and by little and little increasing every day, till we come
to everlasting life in the heavens.

2 Even as that beggar, which has but a patched or an ouerworne robe, had ever
need to be careful in peecing and mending the same; least otherwise his
nakedness appear unto all: So surely this Regeneration or righteousness of
ours, being in respect of our selves, but a torn and tottered robe, we had
need every hour to labor and exercise our selves in the repayring thereof,
least our filthiness break forth; and even to sigh and to groan, until we
be with our house, which is from heaven. 2. Cor. 5.3. Reave. 3.18. and 16.15.

Righteousness not in us.
1 AS an evil tree cannot bring forth any good fruit, nor a rotten or
worm-eaten seed, can engender any thing, but like it self: So we, for so much
as our thoughts, our affections, our words, our actions, and generally, our
whole life and nature being examined, it shall be found that in us there is
nothing but vanity, and the very matter of death and damnation; and that we
neither do, nor can do any thing, that may be able to abide the Righteous
examination of the justice of God, but only to fly to him for mercy. Math.
7.17, 18. and. 12.33. Psalm. 51.7. and 53.2, 3. Ose. 2.3. Luke 15.18. and 18.13,
14. Romans 3.10, 11, 12.

2 As they that are sick of the Dropsy, who by reason of the grosenesse of
their bodies, seem to be in good estate; notwithstanding they be full of
nothing, but water and evil humors, which in the end are the cause of death:
Even so such as are arrogant, and presumptuous, and puffed up with a vain
conceit of their own Righteousness, though they be in great credit and
reputation in the world, yet before God their state is miserable, and
abominable. Luke 16.15.

3 As Merchants, who praise and esteem their wares and merchandise, more then
they are worth; and as old Images new gilded over, which outwardly has some
glistering, and show, but within are nothing but dust and dirt; or as
counterfeit money, which is naught, how goodly a print so ever it has: Even so
all our Righteousness, virtues, and good works, when they shall be examined
and prised by those which know them, as by the spirit of God and his word,
they are altogether judged, as old rags, torn, tied together, and patched up
again. Esa. 64.6. Dan. 9.5. etc. Phil. 3.8.

4 Like as if a man would boast of his strength and health, and yet were
subject to a thousand diseases: Or of his knowledge, and yet were ignorant of
all good learning: Or of his riches, and yet were indebted, and endaungered to
the whole world; would not one mock him as an Idiote and a fool? Even so we,
as well show our ignorance, and what slender understanding we have, when we
will attribute any Righteousness to our selves, and boast our selves in it, be
it never so little. Iere. 9.23.

5 As the basest Gold, though it be rayed with some dirt, is always more
precious then the brightest Copper or Lead that a man can find. Even so the
Righteousness of a Christian man, though it be defiled through many
infirmities, and imperfections; yet notwithstanding is more to be esteemed,
then all the Righteousness of hypocrites and Infidels.

6 As there is no man so hard to be healed, as he that thinks himself to be
hoale: For as much as he always refuses counsel of the Physician, and will
take no remedies, nor keep any good diet, or government of himself, which
should be meet and healthful for him: Even so likewiset, here is no man
farther off from the Righteousness of God, then he that has some opinion of
himself. For such commonly are obstinate, and cannot without great
difficulty, be brought from the persuasion, which they have conceived of
their own Righteousness.

7 As new Wine, with the strength of the working thereof, will break old
Bouels, so that if it should be put into them, it should be but spilt and
lost: Even so they who have placed Righteousness in the outward exercises of
Religion, cannot savor, taste, or receive the doctrine of Righteousness, by
faith only in Christ. Math. 9.17.

The Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is one only, may be distributed to
all the faithful.
1 AS the soul of man, is wholly throughout the whole body, and every part
alike: Even so is the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, wholly in the body of the
whole Church, as the soul to give it life, and to mantaine it: So that it is
altogether in every of the particular members, to make them strong, whole,
stout, and of courage to do all their Offices and duties: Or as the voice of a
man, which being heard of a great many persons, is in such sort received of
every one of the^, (provided that they be attentive) that the same is wholly
understood, without being divided or sundred in any respect. And as the face of
a man, may be received in many Glasses, and wholly represented to all, without
any division or separation of the same.

2 As an old rotten tattered garment, cannot be comely, peeced with new,
whole, and sound cloth: Even so they that plant and place their Righteousness
in fasting and other external exercises, cannot admit that Righteousness that
comes only and wholly by Christ. Math. 9.16.

3 As the Israelits were forbidden to cloth themselves with Linen and Woollen,
made in one garment: So likewise must all true Christians at this day, put upon
them the Righteousness of Christ Jesus only, not mingling it with their own
merits. Deuteronomy. 22.11.

4 As the Sun, when he rises, obscureth and darkneth the light of the
skies, and dismisseth and scatters them: Even so the Righteousness of faith,
which for Christ his sake is imputed unto us, does vanquish the darkness, and
as it were drives away the night of the glory of men's works.

5 As the sin of Adam was the cause of condemnation unto eternal death: So
in like manner the Righteousness of Christ, is the cause of justification unto
eternal life. Romans 8.1, 2.

Religion.
LIke as in labor or work, he that begun last, ought with the more
diligence to redress his slacknesse, and recompense his late coming: So he
which lately began to profess and embrace Religion, virtue, or godliness,
ought with the more feruentnesse and zeal, to endeavor to attain the same.

Reading of Books.
1 AS they which be thirsty, first do drink, and at leisure do behold the
fashion of the cup, if it be engraven, or be marked: So ought we first to
Read things that be most profitable; then if leisure will serve us, we may
note and consider things elegant and trim.

2 As it is more profitable, often to dung the ground, then much, and that at one
time: So is it more for one utility, to Read with moderatnesse daily, then at
one time, and that greedily.

3 As a drop of water pearceth a stone, not so much by his only strength, as
by his often falling: Even so a man shall become wise and learned, not so much
by his force, and by himself only, as by his diligent and often Reading.

Riches.
1 AS it is the use to cut the wings of Birds, least they should fly far,
or away: So must Riches be taken from some away, as from children, and others,
least they should exalt themselves over much in hautinesse.

2 As the golden bridle, makes the Horse neither stronger nor swifter: So
Riches, and costly apparel, do nothing advance a man in virtue, learning
and godliness.

3 Like as we beholding a Rich man and a poor man Painted on a wall, do
neither enjoy the one, nor despise the other, and why? Because they be but
shadows of the substances: Even so our minds must never be troubled, either
for Riches, poverty, glory, or ignominy, because they be more fickle and
deceitful, then any shadow.

4 As Oil kindles the fire, which it seems to quench: Even so Riches come,
as though they would make a man contented, and make him more covetous. 1. Timo.
6.6.

5 Like as drink does not quench the thirst of him; that has the Dropsy,
but makes him the more thirsty: So likewise, although Riches be good to
withstand need and poverty, yet they oftentimes, cause men to be miserable,
and ever needy; and they that for the most part have abundance of goods and
Riches, do covet and greedily desire to have more, and so show themselves to
be very needy.

6 Like as they be in great danger of a woe, and curse, which do not give of
their own Riches to those that have need: Even so, in much more danger be
they, that take from the needy, that which they did possess. Habac. 2.9.

7 And if they shall go to Hell, that have not clothed the naked: Even so,
much less shall they escape Hell, that by oppression, and unmerciful dealing,
have caused them to go naked, that were clothed. Math. 25.41, 42.43.

8 As he that walks in the Sun, cares not whether the Moon shine or no,
because he has no need of her light: Even so when a man has found the
heavenly Riches, he cares not for earthly Riches. Psalm. 37.16. 1. Timo. 6.6.

9 As the madman desires nothing so much as to get water, by reason of his
excessive distemperature; yet is there nothing that so much tormenteth him; for
the only sight thereof, is able to cast him into his fit: Even so is it with
Riches, every man longs for them, yet are they the only things that increase
his longing, trouble his mind, and replenish his heart with passions. Mar.
10.23, 24, 25.

10 As those things which agree not with our nature, and have no proportion
with it, as fire, sulphur, and such other things, if we should eat them,
would not only not profit us, but would also hurt and kill us: So the
deceiptfull Riches of this world, too much desired and sought for; the pomp of
honor, vain glory, and such like; after the which very many do run too too
earnestly, do not only not nourish the souls of men to eternal life, nor
mitigate and appease the wicked lusts of the same, but also do bring upon them
everlasting woe, with utter and endless destruction.

11 As he that walks in the rain, shall hardly escape wetting; or he that
trauelleth in the whole Sun, eschew heat; So is it almost impossible for a
Rich man to avoid vice and corruption by his riches. Psalm. 62.10. 1. Tim. 6.17.

12 As Bucephalus, the Horse of Alexander the great, so long as he was naked,
would suffer any man to back him; but if he were once furnished with the royal
Saddle, Bridle, and other furniture, he grew so proud, that no man might ride
him but the King: Even so many, who in their poverty were modest, humble and
virtuous, by increase of wealth, have changed their virtues into vice.

13 As those mountains that contain mines of Gold and Silver, are otherwise
barren: So they that have Riches, and veins of Gold and Silver, are for the
most part in their hearts, made unprofitable to the service of God and man. 1.
Timo. 6.17, 18, 19.

14 As Musical instruments, are to no use to him that cannot play upon them:
So are Riches unprofitable to him, that cannot use them rightly.

15 As a Horse, is of no use without the bridle: So are Riches without reason.

16 As fair Tapistrie, covers foul and broken walls: Even so Riches may
well make a man more honorable in the sight of the world. Math. 6.19.

17 As Rivers and floods, although they be most sweet and pleasant, yet when
they run, and enter into the Sea, they are most bitter; keeping their right and
due course, they yield pure and wholesome water, but once mingled with the Sea,
they are as it were poisoned with bitterness: Even so the wealth and Riches of
this world, although in the course of this life, they do highly delight some
men, which have them in possession, nevertheless, when they come to the Sea of
death, whither all floods and Riches at the length shall come, they seem to be
doleful, sower, bitter, intolerable, and as it were, poison it self.

18 As Riches be unto the ungodly and wicked, hindrances of virtues: So
contrariwise, Riches, are to the faithful servants of God, helps and
furtherances of many good things, godly actions, and very charitable works: So
that Riches of themselves are not evil; for godly men do possess their
Riches, be they never so ample and infinite, and are not possessed of their
wealth and goods; because their Riches are drudges to them, and not they to
their riches.

19 Like as Gold is tried with a touchstone: Even so is man tried by having
Gold and much Riches, which most easily bewrays what manner of man one is.

20 As Feathers do lift up, and carry on high, the fowls and birds of the
air: So Riches and dignities of this world, are wont to extol and carry men
into the air and clouds of vanity.

21 Even as Corn laid up and kept in a Barn, Garner, or other place, does not
increase; yea many times is eaten, and consumed of Weuels, and other vermin,
but being cast into the ground, does bring forth plentiful fruit, and great
increase, and is very profitable for the owner: So Riches, as Gold, money, and
other Jewels, laid up in Chests, and kept in Coffers, are oftentimes in danger
of loosing, by thieves, that may break through and steal them; or by fire
that may consume them; but being dispersed and scattered among the poor and
needy Saints of God, they bring forth fruit an hundredth fold; and are very
profitable, both to the giver, and to the receiver; discharging a good
conscience in the one, and comforting the distressed body and mind of the other.

22 As pits and lakes of spring water, being stopped and polluted with mire,
mud, or other foul and filthy matter, if they be scoured and drawn out,
will flow with water that is pleasant, sweet, and wholesome, but suffered and
let alone, are corrupted, and do stink: So Riches and worldly substance, if
they be distributed unto the poor, and translated from them that have too
much, to those that are needle; and having nothing, they do greatly increase
and multiply; for a very little, is great Riches to him that has nothing; and
to him that did bestow them, they are instruments, and means of Gods blessing;
but being Coffered, and lying still, so that the poor needy creatures are not
relieved with them, they are unprofitable; and will breed the stinch of hell,
and endless woe, to those that so do keep them. Psalm. 41.1. and 112.9.

23 As the Licoure in the pot, profits not to it self, but them that draw
and drink thereof: So worldly goods and Riches, often profits not the keeper
and owner thereof, but other that come after.

24 As they that are swollen with the Dropsy, who a far off seem fat, and to
be in good liking, by reason of the abundance of the humors in their bodies,
though that for this cause they be soar and daungerously diseased: So do we
judge by the outward appearance, that Riches are very pleasant, and such as
love and have them, very happy; though that for the most part, there be
nothing more vile and filthy in their houses, then themselves.

25 Even as a Gold ring, does not so soon touch a goutie or diseased finger,
but that presently it causes great and intolerable grief: So likewise
Riches, honors, pleasures and profit of this world, do nothing else but molest
and trouble our minds, either with ambition or covetousness.

26 As an Ape or Munket, is tied and tethered to his clogge: So likewise Riches
of themselves, do encumber and entangle men's minds.

Reason.
AS if the Sun were not, all our life should be led in night and darkness:
So if Reason were not, all our other senses were no better then brute beasts.

Repentance requires confession.
1 AS the beginning of health, is the feeling and perceiving of the sickness:
So the beginning of Repentance, is to acknowledge the offense.

2 As they are most hardly healed, which in their sickness be void of all
reason: So hard it is for the^ to repent and amend, who will not acknowledge
their own sin and wickedness.

3 Like as when a man is sick, the fist step to health, is to know his
disease: Even so to true Repentance, and salvation, the first step is, to know
the damnation due for our sins.

Rich men are to live godly, as well as the poor.
AS God allows the Rich man, nothing more to misuse, or mispend, then he does
the poor man; for as he has the same Baptism, Faith, Lord, God, and Father
in heaven with him; and hops for the same kingdom, that the poor man does:
Even so has he the same Law given him to live after, and by the same shall be
judged, as well as the poor.

To Relieve the poor.
1 AS he that gathers up the Queens rents, if he bestow them not in that
good manner that he is appointed, but wastes and spends them ryotously
howsoever, shall be sure to suffer due punishment for his so doing: Even so
likewise, he to whom God has given riches and great wealth, for the relief of
his poor brethren, if he neglect them, and spend his goods lasciuiously, on
his back or belly, or otherwise, God will punish him most severely, at the day
of his account. Luke 16.1, 2, etc.

2 As the clouds that are full, power out rain: Even so the rich that have
abundance, ought to distribute.

Reading of the Word.
1 LIke as the busy Be, when as she flies into some fair and pleasant
Garden, and lights sometimes here, and sometimes there, as it falls out,
sucketh out some sweetness out of every flower and herb, whereon she
sits: Even so a Christian, looking into the volume of the sacred scriptures,
and reading sometimes this parcel thereof, sometimes that, shall receive by
every book therein, some comfort and profit; as will cause him to prefer
the same, before the honey, and the honey comb. 1. Timo. 4.13, 14.15, 16.
Psalm. 19.8, 9, 10, and 119.72, 103, 104.

2 As the use of meats is not sufficient to the nourishment of man's body,
except they be dressed and prepared: Even so the hearing of the word of God
read, is not sufficient to bring men to sound knowledge, and salvation, except
the same be preached, and rightly divided. Amos 8.11.

Reprobate and ungodly men, often in greatest prosperity.
AS the Butcher will suffer those beasts, which he appoints to be killed, to
go where they list in his best pastors, and to break his hedges, that in so
doing, the sooner they be fat, the sooner he may kill them: Even so the Lord
lets reprobate and ungodly men (whom he loves not in his Son Christ,) take
their pleasure, corrects them not for their amendment; but lets them work
their just condemnation, in giving them up to their own lusts, and into a
reprobate sense; as he did Pharao, Saul, Judas, Herod, Antiochus, Nero, etc.

Deferring of Repentance.
1 LIke as if a malefactor for his punishment, should be appointed to carry
every day a stick of wood to an heap, to burn him twenty years after: Even
so men, by deferring Repentance, do treasure and heap up wrath against the day
of wrath. Romans 2.4.5.

2 The longer a man goes and continues in his sickness without any Physic,
the harder is the recovery: Even so, the more the time is prolonged, the
harder it is to repent. For where the devil dwells long, he will hardly be
removed.

3 As the case is dangerous if a man fall into the relapse of an ague, or any
other strong disease, it may peradventure cost him his life, and the recovery
will be very hard: Even so it is very dangerous, after Repentance for some
grievous sin, to fall into the same again, and come to Kepentance the second
time. John 5.14. Luke 11.26.

Resurrection of our bodies.
1 LIke as the body of Christ, which he took in the virgins womb, was by
his Almighty power, raised up again, immortal and glorious, all infirmities
that it was subject unto, being clean put away, and taken off: Even so these
mortal bodies of ours, even the same, that we took of the substance of our
sinful and mortal mothers, shall at the day of the general resurrection of
all flesh, be raised up again, according to the mighty working of the Lord,
whereby he is of power to subdue all things unto himself. Esa. 66.24. Eze.
37.1. etc. Dan. 12.2. Math. 25.41. Ioh. 5.29. Ioh. 19.25. John. 11. 25. 1. Cor.
15.1. etc. 2. Cor. 5.10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. etc.

2 As Swallows, Worms, and Flies, which have lain dead in the winter season,
in the spring, by virtue of the Suns heat, revive again: So likewise men fall
in sounes and traunses, being for a time, without breath or show of life, and
yet afterward come again, and so is the Resurrection.

Remitting of trespasses.
LIke as if we see one eat or drink a great deal, we say he was hungry, or
thirsty, because we see him eat o^ drink so much, or so greedily: So do we
say, that one is hot, because we see him sweat; yet do we not say, (...) his
eating, or drinking, is the conditional cause, of his hunger or thirst, nor
yet the sweat the cause of his heat; but contrariwise, we say, hunger,
thirst, and heat, are the causes of eating, drinking and sweat: Even so the
turning from iniquity, and Remitting of trespasses, are not the causes of the
forgiveness of our sins, but the fruits thereof, and trial of our estate.
Ezech. 18.21. Math. 6.24.

Reading of Authors.
1 EVen as amongst healthful and medicinable herbs, there springs forth
some weeds unprofitable and venomous, but the herbs meet for medicines, the
wise Physician only does gather: So in Reading of Authors, although there be
some things contained, being not only unprofitable, but also wicked; yet it is
the part of good students not to neglect them, but rather to collect such
sentences and doctrine as may be profitable for them.

2 As dastard and cowardly Dogs, do bark at home at the skin of the wild
beast, but in hunting they will not come near the same: So some student will
piuishly prate of things vain and foolish, leaving the effect of learning
unlabored for.

Reprobate.
1 LIke as a man upon a Rack, cries and roreth out for very pain, yet cannot
desire his tormentor to ease him of his pain: Even so the Reprobate, when he
repents, he cannot come unto God, and seek unto him; he has no power, no
not so much as once to desire to give one little sob for the remission of his
sins; if he would give all the world, he cannot so much as give one rap at
Gods mercy gate, that he may open to him. Math. 7.7. Gene. 4.4. 1. Sam. 31.
4. Math. 27.5.

2 Like as if a man, that having made to himself a great burden to carry,
should assay it on his back, and for that it sat and lay uneasily, and pressed
him much, should cast it down again, and put a great deal more unto it, and
then begin to lift it again; but when he felt it more heavy then before,
he should fall into a great rage, and add twice as much more to it, thereby
to make it lighter: Even so do the children of this world, who finding it
somewhat loathsome and unpleasant, to resist one or two vices in the beginning,
do defer their conversion and Repentance, and do add twenty or forty more
unto them, thinking to find the matter more easy afterward.

3 Like as a man having tasted a good piece of Wine, making show as if he
would buy it, understanding the price, and not willing to give so much, leaves
if there, without buying or drinking of it any more: Even so the Reprobate,
having tasted the heavenly good things, finding them good, and praising them
exceedingly, after they understand the price, that is, that they must renounce
themselves, and bear the Cross of Christ, to go to take possession of the
kingdom of heaven, which has purchased for them with his precious blood, they
will none of it at this price, and so renounce these good things without
drinking, or enjoying them. Hebr. 6.4.

4 As those that have their stomachs charged with evil humors, cease not to
eat sometimes for all that, yea and to find taste in some good meats, but
are constrained after (through the evil disposition of their stomach) to cast
it up again, and to vomit: So some Reprobates, having with in them an evil
conscience, may well taste the good heavenly gifts, but this evil conscience,
not being able to agree with the true and sure faith of the heart, stops,
that these gifts take no root to fructify to salvation, so that finally they
cast it off, or let it wither and come to nothing: On the contrary, those who
have faith, are assured, that though the graces of the holy Ghost are often
weak in them, and like fire covered with ashes, and trees in the Winter, yet
can it never come to naught nor die; but rather they recover strength at the
last, whereby they are certain to be, and to continue the children of God,
and heirs of everlasting life.

5 As those whom God has chosen before all times, in time he calls, and
that of purpose to Christ Jesus his Son; and whom thus he calls, he
justifies; and that more and more, until that flesh, and the corrupt
affections thereof being mortified, they attain to their glory: So by the
contrary, be the Reprobate, either left altogether in blindness, never
called to the light and knowledge of Gods free mercy; or if they be called,
they either do condemn it, or else suddenly fall from the same; and so
abiding in their corruption, do still heap sin upon sin; till at the
last, their measure being full, God executes his most just judgment, against
their continual rebellion.

6 Like as the assured trust of the mercy of God promised for Christ's sake,
which follows straightway the hatred of vice and sin, with full intent and
purpose to live after the will of God, wh^rein so long as a man does remain
and continue, he may be sure that he is the elect child of God: Even so the
love to live ungodly, to wallow in all kind of vice, and to lie still in
impuritie of life, declares to him that is such a one, for that same season,
that he is nothing else then a Reprobate, the child of wrath, cursed of God,
hardened as was Pharao.

Reading of Scripture or word.
AS he which knows his letters perfectly, and can spell, cannot but Read if
he be diligent; and as he which has clear eyes without impediment or let,
and walks thereto in the light, and open day, cannot but see, if he attend
and take heed: Even so a man having the profession of his Baptism only
written in his heart, and feeling it sealed up in his conscience by the holy
Ghost, cannot but understand the Reading of the Scripture, because he
exercises himself therein; comparing one place with an other, and marking the
manner of speech; and asking here and there, the meaning of a sentence, of
them that be better exercised then himself; for he feels in his heart, and
has a sensible experience of that inwardly, which the spirit of God has
delivered in the Scriptures: So that he finds his own feeling, as a good
commentary unto him.

Resurrection.
1 AS a cunning Gold smith, knows what difference is betwixt a piece of
earth, dug out of a Gold mine, and other common earth; but ask an
ignorant man, and he will say there is no difference at all betwixt them:
Even so at the day of judgment, God will know the dust of men's bodies, from
common dust, which men cannot discern.

2 Like as if a Gardener, mingle diverse seeds together, and cast them into the
ground, yet they will not be confounded one with an other; but every seed will
have his proper herb: Even so the bodies of men, although they be mingled
together, yet every body shall receive his own flesh at the general day of
judgment.

3 Like as seed cast into the earth, during the cold, and storms of winter,
smally appears, or not at all; but as soon as the Spring comes, it
sprouteth forth and flourishes, growing more and more until the Harvest
come, and then it recompenceth the Husband man's labor with plentiful increase:
Even so our bodies (though they fall as see^e into the ground) are not
neglected of God, who regards the smallest grain and vilest seed, but shall
one day bring them out of the graves, where they were laid, in a far better
case then they were before.

4 As in winter time by the nipping Frost, the trees loose their leaves, and
the grass withers, but at the Spring, they both receive that which they
before seemed to have lost: So likewise, though men die, each in his order, now
one and then an other, yet they perish not, but shall live again at the last
day, when the everlasting Spring shall be, without either Autumn or Winter.

5 As God gives life unto the Infant, enclosed in the Mothers womb, and
maintain the same after a secret and wounderfull manner, until the tenth
month, when it can be there r^^ained no longer, but must be brought forth
into the world: Even so God, in whose hand is life and death, keeps us alive
in the midst of death; and the bodies which were cast into the earth, at the
sound of the last unknown trumpe (living until then, after a wonderful sort)
shall arise, at which time the graves, and every place where our bodies died,
shall yield up the dead, that were in them, when as they shall truly live, and
that for ever.

6 As the Ashes in the night time, so covers the fire, that no spark
thereof, nor any light appears in the house, but yet it may easily be kindled
and revived by dry straw, or a small match: Even so our life that cannot die,
lies as a sleep in our mortified bodies, which God in his good time, by his
mighty word and power, can and will awake.

7 Like as in sleep (which is as deaths kinsman) no part does his duty, the
eyes see not, the ear hears nothing, we can neither feel nor walk, but
every member is as dead, overwhelmed with sleep, when as in the mean time,
the mind lives and ever moves, and the next morning approaching, rayseth up
the body, when as every member and part, performs his wonted work, and more
lively refreshed by sleep: Even so, though our carcases being in terred, seem
to be deprived of all sense and moving, yet they perish not; but when the
last and everlasting morning shall arise upon them, at the end of the world,
they shall rise again, and the earth shall yield them far more glorious, when
as God has purged away the corruption and filthiness of them, as by the
means of sleep.

8 As in the Law, the offering of the first fruits, and all the fruits of
the earth were sanctified: So also by Christ, the first fruits of them that
sleep, the promise of the rising again of our bodies, to life everlasting, is
to us confirmed and assured. Exodus 23.16. and 34.26. Leuit. 23.10. Deuteronomy. 26.2.
etc. 1. Cor. 15.20. Colloss. 1.18. Reave. 1.6.

9 Like as it would make glad the heart of a lame man, or cripple, to hear
that all his limbs should be restored again perfectly, as they were at the
first: Or as it would greatly rejoice the heart of a poor naked beggar, to
hear that he should be clothed, with most precious garments of Silk and
Gold! Even so much more, ought all Christians to be joyful and glad, to hear
that they shall be restored to all integrity of body and soul, at the
general Resurrection, and so be clothed with most perfect and pure innocence
of life, for ever and ever.

10 As Herbs, dead in winter, flourish again by the rain, in the spring
time: So the dead Corpse that lie in the dust, shall rise up to joy, when they
shall feel the deaw of Gods grace. Esaias 26.19.

11 As the same seed in substance, that is sown, springs again, yet
altered in form and fashion: Even so our bodies, shall rise again, the same
in substance, but maruellously altered in qualities. 1. Cor. 5.37, 38.

12 As our bodies, except they consume, rise not again, yet altered in form
and fashion: Even so our bodies shall rise again the same in substance, but
maruellously altered in quality.

13 As often as we rise from sleep, having our weary limbs refreshed, and as
it were revived, so that we feel our selves in better case and ability to do
any manner of thing, then before: Even so we should often remember, that death
unto the godly, is but a resting of their weary bodies and bones, till they
rise again, exceedingly bettered by immortality and glory; and therefore
termed by the name of sleep. 1. These. 4.13, 14.

14 So bright and so glorious as one star appears above an other: So much
shall the state and condition of our bodies, at their Resurrection, excel the
state and condition, that they are now in, during this time of immortality. 1.
Cor. 15.41.

15 Like as the Husbandman takes no thought, nor sorrow for the seed that is
cast into the earth, because he has a sure trust and hope, that it shall come
again with a plentiful and an exceeding recompense: Even so the faithful, are
not so vnmeasurably heavy and sorrowful for the death of their faithful
friends, as the heathen and unfaithful are, which have no hope or belief of
the Resurrection. Reave. 14.13. 1. These. 4.13, 14.

16 Like as if impotent and miserable men, as experience shows, can by art,
even of ashes, make the most curious workmanship of glass: Even so we may in
reason think, that the omnipotent and everliving God, is able to raise men's
bodies out of the dust.

17 As the Goldsmith by his Art, can sunder diverse metals one from an other;
and some men out of one metal can draw another: Even so, much more may we
think it possible for the Almighty God, to raise men's bodies being dead, and
turned into dust, and mingled with the bodies of beasts and other creatures, or
one man's body with another.

18 As the cloud took up the very true body of the Lord, yea even the whole
perfect Christ: So likewise shall all godly persons be taken up into the air
to meet the Lord their God, that they may live with Christ their Lord and
head, for evermore. Act. 1.9. 1. These. 4.17.

19 Like as the root gives all virtue and sap unto the tree: Even so is the
matter of the Resurrection of the dead through Christ, the chiefest, greatest,
and true principal point of the word and affairs of God. Esa. 26.19. 1. Pet.
4.6.

20 As the wicked and unbelievers, have in this life with their bodies, taken
their own pleasures, joy, and delight: Even so in the life to come, at the
Resurrection of the dead, they shall be plagued and punished with everlasting
pain and torment, in the same bodies. Mat. 25.41. etc. 2. Cor. 5.10. Act.
24.15. Ioh. 5.29.

21 Like as when the Corn is cast into the ground, it seems to be lost, for
it rots and wastes in the ground, but afterward it springs fair: 1. Cor.
15.36, 37. So when the body has been corrupted, it tarrieth the time
appointed by God, to come out of the earth, and to be altogether perfect.

22 As the Corn, by means of the seed takes again a new shape, and that
more fayrer: So the faithful which dies and goes to rest with the seed of
Jesus Christ, which is the spirit of God, is raised again by the same spirit,
which rayseth the Son of God from death.

23 Like as Christ rose again in the selfsame body in which he suffered: So
we also shall rise again in the selfsame flesh, which we carry about with
us.

24 Even as Christ after his Resurrection, had an other glory much greater
then he had before: So we shall be far otherwise after our Resurrection, and
so renewed into a more glorious state.

25 As the Sun and the Moon being of one substance, differ in dignity and
excellency: So likewise in the Resurrection, our bodies shall have more
excellent qualities, then they have now.

Regeneration.
1 As there is need of no Law, to compel the body to eat or drink, to
digest, to sleep, to go, to stand, to fit, and to do their works of nature,
for it is ready to do them of it own nature, when the case so requires, and
when it is meet, without all respect, either of reward, or punishment; and may
not unfitly be said, as concerning these things, not to be under a Law,
notwithstanding thereupon nothing less follows, then that it does therefore
abstain from such works, unto which in deed, it so much more applies it
self, as they are less commanded, and are more natural unto it: Even so
after the same sort, altogether does the godly man behave himself, concerning
the works of godliness, he is carried to the doing of them, by that his new
nature of the spirit, albeit there were no Law at all; and all, both hope of
reward, and fear of punishment, were away. 1. Timo. 1.9. Reave. 6.14.

2 Like as if a man have all his mind set upon drinking and gulling in of Wine
and strong drink, having little delight nor pleasure in any thing else; it
argues a carnal mind, and unregenerate, because it effects the things of the
flesh; and so of the rest: Even so on the contrary, he that has his mind
affected with a desire to do the will of God, in practicing the works of
charity and Religion, he I say, has a spiritual and a renewed heart, and is
Regenerate by the holy Ghost. Romans 8.14. Gal. 5.17.

3 As God in the beginning created us after his own Image: So also must he
Regenerate us according to the same, which he does by the holy Ghost, the third
person in Trinity, one and the same everlasting God, together with the Father
and the Son. John. 3.5. Math. 16.17. Ioh. 8.36. and 15.5.

4 As a living body, although naturally it be the subject of sense, yet some
one part of it may be benumbed and senseless: So the soul of one Regenerate,
has in it, at least the beginnings and seeds of all graces, howsoever some of
them at sometimes do not work or appear: Whereas a carnal man is altogether
destitute, yea incapable of them.

5 Even as we know that the trees have heat and life in their roots, in the
midst of the coldest and sharpest winter; yea as many beasts lie all the
winter long in holes of the earth, without eating, drinking, stirring, or
having any iotte of heat, sense or life, in any of their outward parts; and
yet there is a remnant of life, and of heat lurking in the heart, which being
in Summer stirred up, does revive the beast, so that it is able to go or run
up and down, and to perform all natural actions, in the manner as it did
before: So likewise a total decrease, or an utter decay of holiness, as
whereby nothing is left, cannot happen to any one who is truly Regenerate, who
in the greatest extremity and depth of his fall, retains some relics of
Gods spirit and of grace received; yea some life of faith, whereby he lives to
God in Christ; howsoever he be to the eyes of all men, and even in his own
conscience a dead rotten stock.

6 Even as a man being suddenly taken with the plague, or any infectious
sickness, says, he knows not how it happens, only he sees the effects
of it: Even so the action of Regeneration, in it self is secret and unknown,
but manifest in the effects which follow of it.

Regeneration not without sin.
LIke as the Israelites, suffered the Iebusites to dwell amongst them, to their
great harm: Even so sin remains in our mortal bodies, conquered in deed,
that it does not reign over those that serve the Lord; yet not clean taken
away, but left for our exercises, who having our mortal enemy dwelling in us,
should fight against sin, under the banner of faith in Christ Jesus, who
only has, can, and will continually defend his people, subdue their enemies,
and give his children the victory.

Repentance.
AS a prisoner will strive to get out of prison, by all kind of means he can,
though he grate off some of his flesh: Even so a man that is out of the favor
of God, must try by all kind of ways that he can, that if he cannot come to
Gods favor by one way, he may yet by an other. Psalm. 51.1. etc.

The Redemption of Christ universal.
1 AS the Sun is the general giver of light to the whole world, though there
be many which do receive no light at all of it: Or as there was among the
Jews, upon the year of Iubylee, a general delivery of all bond men,
although many abode still in their bondage, and refused the grace of their
delivery: Even so the Redemption of mankind by Christ, is available for all,
although reprobate and wicked men (for want of the grace of God) do not
receive the same; yet there is no reason that it should leese his title and
glory of universal Redemption, because of the children of perdition, seeing
that it is ready for all men, and all be called unto it. 1. Tim. 2.6. Col.
1.13, 14. 1. Pet. 1.18. Tit. 2.14.

2 As they who being taken in war, are wont either to be slain, or to be
condemned unto perpetual bondage, except they be redeemed and ransommed: Even
so, such were we all, being taken prisoners of the devil; who had us body and
soul in his own power, from whose kingdom and tyranny, Christ has most
mercifully Redeemed us. Romans 14.8. 1. Cor. 3.22. Phil. 1.21. 1. Pet. 1.18, 19,
and 2.9.

No Reason for a man to find fault with an other, that is more faulty himself.
1 AS it is against Reason, that a blind man should take vopn him to lead an
other man, that sees better then himself: Even so it is an unreasonable and
impudent thing, for any man to offer to pull out a Moate out of his neighbors
eye, when there is more need, that his neighbor should say unto him; nay
rather suffer me to pull out the beam, that is in your eye. Math. 7.5. Psalm.
50.16, 17.

2 As it is a very usual thing with the Papists, to condemn it for a great
fault in Protestants, to leave off any of their popish ceremonies: When as they
account it no fault in themselves, to cut off and defraud them of the Cup, in
the ministration of the Lords supper, which is commanded to be taken and
dunken of all, by Christ our Savior himself. Math. 26.27.

3 As they cry out against us, for not subscribing and reproouing in all
points, to their writings and determinations: When as they themselves refuse to
subscribe and allow universally to the word of God, adding and ^^king from it
at their pleasure. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Prou. 30.6. Reave. 22.18, 19.

4 Like as it is too too common in all sorts of men, that have great beams in
their own eyes, whereof they make no conscience; yet will seem marvelous
curious and careful, in drawing out Motes out of the eyes of others: Even so,
he that of all the rest in the Parish, is the most worst obseruer, either of
Gods Law, or his Princes, he will be most ready to find fault, and to
quarrel with the painful and faithful Ministers, for omitting the least
^ite or ceremony, (as though he of all others, were the most desirous, that
the Queens proceedings should exactly be followed) whereas in very deed, he
could find in his heart, rather to have Popery fully established.

Rebukes.
AS Physions with their bitter drugs, do mingle sweet spices, that the sick
patient may the more willingly receive them: So ought bitter Rebukes to be
mingled with gentle admonitions, that the offender might be the better brought
to amendment.

Righteousness peace, etc.
AS the earth being fertile and fruitful, and beautified with the gallant
verdure of fresh flowers, and green herbs, is an argument of the bountiful
goodness of God toward us: Even so, Righteousness, peace, tranquillity, and
other virtues, wherewith the mind and soul of man is garnished, declare the
exceeding great goodness, and love of God toward mankind. Esaias. 61.10. Gal.
5.22.

Rich men.
1 AS the fiercest lightning does flash upon the highest Towers; the fairest
Oaks come soonest to the fire, and the fattest Oxen are first knocked down:
Even so, they which have the most money, are subject to the most miseries.

2 As poverty punishes the poor man: So the Rich cannot rest for fear of
robbing. Preac.

3 As the goutie man, the more he walks abroad, the better is his health:
Even so, the more the Rich man distributeth abroad, the more he shall inherit.
Luke 19.9. Gal. 6.10.

4 Like as a River when it goes by an empty place, it will not pass until
he has filled that empty place; and then it goes forward to another empty
place and fills it, and so to an other empty place, and fills it; always
filling the places which are empty: So likewise should Rich men, fill the
poor; the full should fill the hungry; they which abound, should fill them,
which want; for the rich, are but Gods Amners, and their riches are committed
to them of God, to distribute, and do good, as God does himself.

No Resistance against God.
LIke as the Eagle when she has taken her pray, stands with her wings
spread over it: Even so, those whom the Lord raises up to conquer any Country
and to destroy it, spread themselves all over it, so that there is no hope in
resisting, nor refuge in running away. Iere. 48.4^. Lamen. 4.19.

Repentant.
1 AS the Lilly does flourish and spring in the field or Garden: So God does
make the Repentant man, whose sins he forgiueth and pardons, to grow and
flourish. Hose. 14.6.

2 As it is often needful for the preservation of the bodily life, that the
patient be by detractio^ of blood, brought to a swowne, and so even to deaths
door: So likewise, it is needful for the spiritual life of the soul, that
the Repentant be by sorrow and fear cast down, even to the gates of hell, as
one forlorn, and being in a most wretched estate. 2. Cor. 7.8.

3 As the wise man exhorts the good husband to be sowing his seed, at all
hours, times, and seasons, because he knows not whether this or that will
prosper: So likewise, a Repentant must take all occasions of hearing gods word,
for that he knows not but that God will even at that time which he would
bestow on worldly profits or pleasures, bestow his unspeakable blessing of
regeneration upon him. Ecclesi. 11.6.

4 As that Offendant is liker to obtain mercy at the hands of his Prince, who
stands at his very gates in his presence, attending when he will becken or
call unto him, then he who having addressed himself to come before the King,
keeps himself aloof off, far out of his sight: Even so, it is liker that
God will behold that Repentant with the eye of mercy, who is in his presence,
hearkeneth to his voice, and attends his pleasure, then him who is out of his
sight, and employed about other matters.

Rich men.
1 AS it is impossible for a Cammell to go through the eye of a Needle: So
also is it impossible for such a Rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven,
who is possessed of his possessions, for he has made his Gold his God, though
he do not so think nor persuade himself. Mar. 10.24, 25.

2 As those Fishermen, which when they had sped well, did go and burn
incense, and offer sacrifice to their Nets, in stead of praising God, who had
blessed their endeavors: So likewise some profane Rich men, do ascribe their
wealth and other blessings of this life, to the outward means and instruments,
whereby they have gotten those things, forgetting wholly, that God is the only
author and given thereof. Habba. 1.16. Psalm. 127.1. etc. Iam. 1.17.

3 Like as if a Cable be untwisted, and drawn into small threedes, it may be
drawn through the eye of a Needle: So likewise he that is Rich, if he deny
himself, abase himself, and lay aside all confidence in himself, in his
riches and honor, and be as it were, made small as a twine third, and with
Joseph the good Senator, become the Disciple of Christ, he may enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Math. 19.24. Luke 29.50.51. Ioh. 19.36.

4. As Sheep that go in fat pastures, come sooner to the slaughterhouse,
then those which are kept upon the bare Common: So likewise Rich men, which
are pampered with the wealth of this world, sooner forsake God, and therefore
are sooner forsaken of God, then others. Romans 9.22. Eccles. 9.1.

5 As that is not always a good horse, which has his bridle and Sadle adorned
with gold: So also may not that Rich man be accounted blessed, who has rich
atire, sumptuous buildings, and costly moueables.

6 Even as a Fly, coming to a platterfull of sweet and pleasant honey, if
she thrust not her self altogether into it, but only touch and taste it,
with her mouth, and take no more then is necessary and needful, she may
safely go away, and fly to an other place; but if she wallow, and tumble in
the Honey, then is she limed, and taken in it; and whiles she is not able to
fly away, she does there loose her life: Even so, if a man, of all his Riches,
take only so much as may sustain him, and honestly maintain his estate,
bestowing the rest well and Christianly, his Riches then cannot hold him back,
nor bar him out of the kingdom of heaven; but if covetousness shall bewitch
him, and still prick him forward, to scrape together more and more, and shall
make him even insatiable, then they take him, and hold him, and so belime the
wings of his mind, that he cannot once in all his life, have one flight toward
the kingdom of heaven; and thus being in thraldom and bondage to wicked
Mammon, the end of his pleasures in this world, is the beginning of his
sorrows in the world to come.

7 As Aesopes Dog, who having a piece of meat in his mouth, and espying the
shadow thereof in the water, thinking it had been an other piece of flesh,
snatched at it, and through his greedy desire, lost that, which before he
had: Even so Rich men, who might peaceably and quietly enjoy the goods they
have, and with pleasure the fruits of their labors, by their covetous humor
they deprive themselves wholly thereof; and setting before their eyes, a
fraudulent and deceitful hope of things that seem to be good, forget for the
most part, those things that are good indeed.

8 Like as when we see a man that drinks continually, and yet cannot slake
his thirst, we conjecture forthwith that he is distempered, and that he has
more need to be purged, and his body to be cleansed from corrupt humors, then
to give him more drink: Even so the great desire of Rich men, which always
eats, which has so monstrous a belly, and insatiable, like unto the grave,
does evidently declare that the mind is very sick; and therefore to recover it
self, it must be first purged and cleansed of the passion that tormenteth it;
this being done, the disease would continually cease.

9 As it is hard for a Periwincle in the Sea to swim, or for a Snayle upon
the land to creep, while they bear their houses upon their backs: Even so
it is hard for a Rich man that trusts in his Riches, with all his big
bunches of wealth upon his back, to go through the needles eye, and to enter
into the kingdom of heaven. Mark. 10.25.

10 As the Moon, when she is at the full, is farthest from the Sun, of whom
she has her light: So likewise many Rich men, who do flow on every side,
with the goods and Riches of this world, do even then in the midst of their
wealth, withdraw themselves farthest from God, from whom themselves, and all
their treasures, and whatsoever, have their being. Luke 8.14. Act. 17.28.

11 As the Moon is not eclipsed, nor loses any light, but when it is at the
full: Even so some Rich men are wont, then thiefly to be eclipsed and darkened,
concerning the love of God and their neighbors, when they be full of Riches,
and abound with worldly wealth.

A Remnant reserved.
AS in the time of gathering of Olives, a few berries escape here and there
ungathered: So when God does bring general destruction upon any land, for the
impiety of the people therein, and for the contempt of his word, and
ordinances, a few here and there shall escape. Esaias. 17.6. and 24.13.

Reprobate are in perpetual remembrance.
AS the letters carved in stone or other hard mettalles, with tools of iron
and steel, are wont to be set up, for a perpetual memory, of that which men
will have remembered: So God never puts out of memory, the froward sins of
obstinate and wicked men. Iere. 17.1.

The Register of our salvation.
AS the Pen of man serves to commit to writing, those things, whereof he
would have the remembrance continued: So the holy Ghost Registreth in the
hearts of the children of God, those things, which God sees necessary for
their salvation, to be recorded of them. 2. Cor. 3.3.

Renewed holiness.
AS in the natural birth of man, his body comes into the world, not so great
and strong as afterward it becomes, but little, weak, and impotent: So in the
spiritual birth of Regeneration, the soul of man is not in the first moment,
endued with perfection, but with a small measure of Renewed holiness, from the
which it is to grow, and go on forward to a perfect estate.

The Renewed happiness of man.
EVen as when Saul turned his back to go away from Samuel, God changed
him, and gave him an other heart, and made him an other man: 1. Sam. 10.9. Even
so does God, by changing the minds and wills of his elect, so secretly, as that
they themselves know not which way it is done; make them new men, and prepare
them for his everlasting kingdom.

A Remnant saved.
1 AS a number of things should yearly decay, and come to naught, except seeds
of them were saved, whereof they are by sowing renewed: Even so the people that
bear Gods name upon earth, should in the day of visitation of their sins be
clean and utterly destroyed, as Sodom and Gomorrah, but that God spares some
Remnant to be as it were a seed, for the increasing of his Church and people
again. Romans 9.29.

2 As great and mighty vapors, with the force and power of the Sun, are
taken and lifted up from the earth; and do seek after the Sun, by whose
strength and virtue they are carried up on high, and growing into clouds, do
even follow the Sun: So there is a Remnant, and a little flock of Christ's,
that in a true and unfeigned, and sincere love of God, are lifted up from the
love of the world, and from all earthly, and fleshly affections, so far as is
possible, for a man in this life to be, and do seek the Lord and his
kingdom, in the singleness of their hearts; and thinking the time of their
abode here, in this vale of all miseries, too too long, they daily sigh and
groan, for a dissolution, and the coming of Christ, to judge the quick and the
dead. Esa. 60.8, 9.

The portion of Reprobates.
LIke as of the shreddings of the Vine, comes no profit, neither can they
serve for any other use, but for the fire: So those whom God cutteth and
casts off from his Church, can serve for no other end, but for Hell fire.
Ezech. 15. 2. etc.

Reading is not preaching.
1 AS the smell or sight of meat, does good to the hungry man, but it will
not feed him, except he taste of it: So by Reading of the Scriptures, men may
have some feeling and smell of Religion, but they shall never thoroughly taste
of it, without preaching.

2 As meat that is raw and fat, may be called good, but it is not to be
eaten, before it be made ready and dressed: So are the Scriptures Read, good,
holy, and pure, but not sufficient food for the people, without preaching.

3 As is a whole Loaf set or cast before children, which want strength to cut
it: Even so is Reading without preaching, which indeed is a right cutting and
dividing of the bread of life, that every one may have his several portion.
1. Timo. 2.15.

4 Like as if one should offer good treasures to his friend, but yet such as
were hid, shut up, and fast locked, and could not be come by, in thus doing,
he should mock his friend: Even so bare Reading without preaching, is bare
feeding; because preaching is an opening of the treasures, to the joy of Gods
children.

5 As fire covered with ashes, does little or nothing heat, or profit them
that stand by it: Even so bare Reading, is smally available to the people,
without preaching; which preaching, is an explaining and a discovering of hard
and dark points.

Like as if the Husbandman, should cast whole strikes and bushels of Corn on
his land together on heaps, he should both loose his labor and his seed:
Even so that Minister, that only Reads the Scriptures in the Church and
preaches not, does loose his labor, and deceives his auditorie.

7 As that Fisher catches no fish, who shuffleth his Nets on heaps, and not
opening them: Even so that Minister, that contenteth himself, with the simple
reading of the Scriptures in the Congregation, wins no souls to God.

Refusing the means.
1 AS we see many men at some times, not so much grieved for the sickness it
self, as for that they have willingly neglected the means, which might have
preserved their health: or else for that they have abused the physic that
might have restored their health to them again: Even so in like manner it
fares with those, who have either irreverently refused the means, which
should have kept their soul from surfeiting, or else unthankfully have abused
those helps, which might have recovered them again.

2 As a rich man is sometimes humbled, for not giving money to the poor,
which he might have done: So likewise, some are much grieved, for not using
their good gifts to the benefit of Gods Church; so also others are troubled
for abusing their gifts to the hurt of Gods Church.

The Resurrection, a woeful day to the unrepentant.
1 IF a man were bidden to go to bed, that after he had slept, and was risen
again, he might go to execution, it would make his heart to ache within him:
yet this, yea a thousand fold worse is the state of all impenitent sinners;
they must sleep in the grave for a while, and then rise again; that a second
death may be inflicted upon them, in body and soul; which is the suffering of
the full wrath of God, both in body and soul, eternally. Ioh. 5.29.

2 Like as when a Traveler comes into an Inn, having but a penny in his
purse, who sitting down, calls for all store of provision and dainties, whose
behavior and doing, may be thought in the judgment of all men, to be foolish
and mad; because he spendes so freely, and has no regard to the reckoning
which must follow: Even so much more foolish and mad, is the practice of
every man that lives in his sins, and bathing himself in his pleasures in
this world; never bethinketh how he shall meet God at the last day of
judgment, and there make a reckoning for all his doings.

A Reward.
1 AS a Reward is given to a workman, after his work is done: So everlasting
life is given unto the faithful, after the travails and miseries of this life
ended. Romans 6.23.

2 As he which runs a race, must continue and run to the end, and then be
crowned: Even so must we continue to walk in good works unto the end, and
then receive our Reward, eternal life. 2. Timo. 4.8.

Real presence.
1 LIke as when a word is uttered, the sound comes to the ear: and at the same
instant, the thing signified, comes to the mind: and thus by relation, the word
and the thing spoken of, are both present together: Even so at the Lords
Table, Bread and Wine must not be considered barely, as substances and
creatures, but as outward signs, in relation to the body and blood of
Christ: and this relation, arising from the very institution of the Sacrament,
stands in this, that when the elements of bread and wine are present to the
hand and mouth of the receiver; at the very same time, the body and blood of
Christ are presented to the mind: thus and no otherwise, is Christ truly
present with the signs.

2 As one Candle is lighted by an other, and one torch or candle light, is
conveyed to twenty candles: Even so the inherent righteousness of every
believer, is derived from the storehouse of righteousness, which is in the
manhood of Christ: for the righteousness of all the members, is but the fruit
thereof; even as the natural corruption in all mankind, is but a fruit of
that original sin which was in Adam.

Remission of sin.
AS it is meet and needful, that the inferior seek to the superior; the
beggar to him that is rich and liberal; the sick man to the Physician; the
offendant, to the merciful Prince: So it is the duty of man, to seek for
Remission of sin, for spiritual life, health, and wealth, at the hands of
God, the only giver of all good things. Amo. 5.6 Math. 6.5. and 11.28.

Riches and dignities, make wicked men worse.
AS great Floods, and swelling Rivers, when they ouerflow their channels, and do
break through their banks by reason of their raging and violent streams, and so
spread and run abroad, cannot fill and cover the field with water, but they
hurt corn and grass, or what so else is in their way: So, great Riches,
mighty powers, and high dignities, when they grow and increase in wicked and
ungodly men, do not spread abroad, and run over the fields, and limits of
Commonwealths, but they do much harm: to wit, they polle and pill away, the
riches and substance, of the silly weak, and poor men; they fill they^
purses, with the blood of innocents; they build their houses, and establish
their dignities, upon the disgrace, and the oppression of the Saints and
servants of God; and whatsoever is in their way, and to their liking, they
carry it with them, by hook or crook, by right or wrong; they care not who
weep, so they laugh; who be empty, so they be full; who be undone, so they be
advanced: Here hence come slaughters, and murders; thus are many brought into
great calamities, and miseries: But they that do these things to others, do
hurt themselves most; for whiles they hurt others in their bodies, goods, or
names, they kill their own souls.

Our Religion is not new.
AS a man in traveling, calls it a new way, which he never went before,
though the way it self be of long continuance and known of old: Even so may
this our way and doctrine be well called a new Religion, not as though it were
not before Popery, which the Papists count so old, and is not; but because
that men through the the mistie clouds of their errors and abuses, neither so
generally, nor so perfectly did know, or traced it before. Act. 17.18.

Where Religion is not, there is no wisdom.
1 AS the one eye of the body, is so assisting to the other, for the making
perfect of our sight together, that having the use of both, we attain
thereunto; and otherwise the one being blinded, the light of the other, is
somewhat dimmed and shadowed, and perhaps in the end fades away, and leaves
us altogether in darkness: Even so stands the case between Religion and
wisdom (the lights of the mind) being linked and placed together in the mind
of man, as the eyes thereof, to give light to his whole understanding; so that
no wisdom is to be allowed without true Religion, and where Religion is not,
there is no wisdom.

2 As we account him rather blind, or blinking, then otherwise, that shall say
he has eyes sound, pure and perfect, and yet in the open day, will never show
use of them in the presence of men, but continually be wimpled, and wear a
veyle, so that no man can perceive whether he do see or no: Even so wisdom is
no wisdom, and not to be accounted off in any, so long as it is dissembled,
and not employed, that other men may see good proof thereof; for that Religion
is no Religion, that shows not it self by his plentiful fruits; so that
what choice soever they that seem wisest or holiest, make of Religion, doing
it so as other men shall not be able to discern it in them, nor to be
witnesses thereof, they are indeed to be esteemed neither wise nor Religious.

3 As the Sun, which has his Globe, his light, and his heat, is so
conjoined, and wheresoever the one shines, the other cannot but warm: Or as
the soul and body, are so compact in one, that the body cannot but perform the
pleasures of the same: Even so in whom so ever true righteousness in Christ
is, in him also there cannot but be true Religion, the true fear of God, and
holiness of life, which is the singular serving of God, in the inward desire
of heart unfeignedly. Luke 1.6. Psalm. 116.10. Act. 4.20. Iere. 20.9.

Rage.
AS Fire being kindled but with a small spark, works otentimes great hurt
and damage, because the fierceness thereof, was not at the first abated: So
anger being harbored in the heart, breaks forth oftentimes into much
cruelty.

Riches oftentimes draw men to extreme danger.
1 AS among a flock of sheep, the Wolf chooses out always the best and the
fattest; and the Eagle likewise takes the fattest Goose in the field: Even so
do those men that live of ruin and spoil, when as they are minded to forage
and purloyne for themselves, they search out the richest and best houses, and
those fields, wherein there is the greatest store of Corn.

2 As we do with spunges, which we squeese and strain with out hands, to make
them yield us that water, which they have before soaked up: So also Princes and
great men, when they have given their servants the means to wax wealthy, and
that they have taken great pain to enrich themselves by a little at once, then
before they be aware upon the sudden, they lay hold upon them, and spoil
them of that they have gathered.

Riches make covetous and prodigal men evil spoken off.
1 AS we see that Flies will stay no longer in a kitchen, then there is grease
to nourish them: So flatterers, and claw backs, fool and bauds, which are
usually in the houses of prodigal men, as soon as his wealth begins to
diminish, and that he waxes poor, they will then straightway give them over;
yea if he be evil spoken of in their companies, the same men, as well as
others, will greatly blame him, for that he wasted his goods so riotously and so
folishly.

2 Like as men do with springs, which so long as they yield water, so long
they are haunted, but when they be once dry, there is no further reckoning
made of them: So flatterers and brainlesse persons, whose tongues are as light
as their minds, such as for a morfell of bread, or a meals meat, will praise
or dispraise whom you will; if the party fall into poverty by prodigality,
they will then cast him off, and make no account of him.

Some Repent to have eaten too much.
AS many Repent that they have spoken too much, but few that they have been too
silent: So likewise it is true that many Repent themselves, that they have eaten
too much, but no man sorroweth for his temperance and sobriety.

Sin in all men.
1 AS we see those rivers, which spring out of little Wells, are of the same
nature, that the head and spring is, whereof they come, though they run two or
three hundredth miles off, through diverse countries: Or as those Crabs, are
sower and bitter this day, which grow on the Crabtree, which is a hundredth or
two hundredth years old, because the first root and plant was sower and
bitter: So likewise we all be Sinful that be borne of Adam, and sower and
bitter as he was; because he the first tree was such a one, and the spring
whereof we came, was corrupt and filthy. 1. Cor. 15.21, 22. Hebr. 7.9, 10.
Romans 5.12.

2 As there is no Bread without Branne, no Corn without Chafe, no Garden
without weeds, no Wine without Lees; no Gold without dross: So there is no
wight that lives, has lived, or shall live, only man, without Sin.

Sin how dangerous a thing it is.
1 AS it skilleth not whether the ship sink, by sipping and leaking in of
the water in a long time, or whether it be overwhelmed by surges at once: Even
so, whither little Sins, or great sins work our destruction, it is all
one; therefore we must avoid and eschew, not only great sins, but little
sins also.

2 Like as if a Father should be sick of such a disease, that nothing would
heal him, but the heart blood of his own child; he would presently judge his
own case to be dangerous; and would also vow, if ever he recovered, to use
all means whereby he might avoid that disease: So likewise, seeing nothing
could cure the deadly wound of our Sin, but a plaster made of the heart
blood of Christ; it must make us acknowledge our pitiful case, and the
heinousness of the least of our sins, and stir us up to newness of life.
2. Cor. 5.19.

Salvation only in the Church.
1 AS Sothern-wood, will grow no where but in Gardens, where it is planted: So
the godly will not grow any where, but in the Church, and body of Christ, where
they are engraffed.

2 Even as it was necessary, that they which should be saved from the flood,
should be in the Arc: So likewise all they that will be saved from the flood
of Gods wrath, must of necessity be in Christ, and so in the Church. Gene.
7.1. etc.

Sacrament of the Supper, compared with the Paschall Lamb.
1 AS the Paschal Lamb was instituted and eaten the night before the children
of Israel were delivered out of Egypt: So likewise was the Supper of the Lord,
instituted and eaten the night before we were delivered from our sins. Exodus
12.1. etc. 1. Cor. 11.24, 25. etc.

2 As the Paschall Lamb was a very Lamb indeed: Even so the Sacrament is very
Bread and Wine indeed.

3 As the Paschall Lamb was called the Lords passover, or passing by of the
Lord, which destroyed the power of Pharao, and delivered him: So the Sacrament
is called the body and blood of the Lord, which destroys the power of the
devil, and delivers us.

4 As the Children of Israel were but once delivered from Egypt,
notwithstanding they did take every year a Lamb, to keep the deed in
perpetual remembrance: Even so Christ our Savior, bought and redeemed us but
once for all, although the Sacrament thereof be often distributed and broken
among us, to keep the benefit in perpetual memory.

5 As many as did eat the Paschall Lamb in faith, and believed Gods word, as
touching their deliverance from Egypt, were as sure of the same through faith,
as they were sure of the Lamb by eating of it: So as many as do eat of the
body and blood of Christ by faith, and believe Gods word, as touching their
deliverance from Sin, Death, Hell, and damnation, are as sure of their
deliverance through faith, as they are sure of the bread by eating of it. etc.

Sin, how carefully it is to be avoided.
1 AS the diseases of the body and corporal death, do much disquiet and
trouble our minds, that we commonly tremble and quake at the only mention of
them: Even so, how much more ought we to fear the sickness of the soul,
and death of the same, (which comes by reason of sin,) then which there can
be no greater, nor more fearful calamity come unto us.

2 Like as every man does avoid (so much as in him lies) the pain,
miseries, diseases, and death of the body: Even so, how much more ought we
to decline and eschew the death of the soul, and the causes of these euilles,
which be Sins, and offenses; and fear the anger of God, which we so (by
our transgressions) do procure.

3 As the Physician seeing in a Glass by the water, the diseases within the
body, by skill and learning, searches out the cause of the disease, and
ministers good things for the same: Even so we, in looking into the Glass of
Gods word, shall soon perceive the diseases and infections of Sin, which are
in us, and the cause thereof; and so wholesomely minister some profitable and
comfortable remedies for the same.

4 As little thieves being let in at a window, will set open great gates for
greater thieves to come in at: Even so, if we accustom our selves to commit
little Sins, and let them reign in us, they will make us the fitter for
greater offenses, to get the advantage of us, and to take hold on us.

5 As all kind of wild beasts escaping out of the snare, will take heed least
they come there any more; yea though they should be in bondage even unto man,
the most excellent of all other creatures: Yet man by Sin falling into the
snares of Satan, cannot beware, though he shall be in bondage, to the most
cursed of all creatures.

6 As a drunken man, whilst he ingorgeth abundance of Wine, feels no
discommoditie thereby, but afterward he sees and feels the inconvenience of
the same: So in like manner, Sin whilst it is in committing, does darken
the light of reason; howbeit afterward, the conscience arysing, shows both
the ugliness of Sin, and the absurdity of the fact; and so vexes the soul
more grievously, then if all the world accused him of the same.

Sacraments are not corrupted by the wickedness of Ministers.
1 LIke as there is no difference between the selfsame image or figure of
any thing imprinted or sealed with a Ring or signet of Gold, and with a signet
made of iron, or wood: Even so the word and Sacraments, being ministered by a
lawful Minister, although otherwise a wicked, and an ungodly Minister, yet be
the same Word and Sacraments, of the same vigor, strength and efficacy, as
when they be ministered by a man of excellent virtue and godliness. For as the
Father shall not die for the child, nor the child for the Father: So the
Minister shall not die for him that receives at him, nor the party that
receives, for the euilnesse of the Minister, for every one shall sincke in his
own sin; so that the Minister, which does so wickedly corrupt the holy
Sacraments and holy ordinances of God, ministers them to his own damnation,
and judgment. Deuteronomy. 24.16. Ezech. 18.20. 2. King. 14.6. 2. Chro. 25.4. 1. Cor.
11.29.

2 Like as among men, if a Letter be sent, so that the hand and feale of him
that sends it be well known, it makes no matter, who, or what manner of man
be the carrier: Even so it ought to suffice, to know the hand and seal of our
Lord in his Sacraments, by what lawful Minister so ever they be brought: for
the malice or lewdness of man, cannot change the nature of the ordinance of
God. And therefore the virtue and efficacy of the word and Sacrament, consist
and depend, not upon the worthiness, or unworthiness of the Minister; but in,
and upon the commandment, ordinance, power, and authority of God only.

3 Like as Gold is Gold, of whom so ever it be given or received: Even so
likewise is the Sacrament, whether it be given by a good or bad Minister: For
Judas although he were a thief, yet he Preached, and baptized; whose doctrine
and baptism, was as well the doctrine and baptism of Christ, as was Peter's,
and Andrews, James, and John's. Ioh. 6.70. and 12.6.

4 Like as if the Treasurer or Receiver of a Prince, do deliver forth false
and counterfeit money, in stead of good, the Office whereunto he is called,
cannot make it other, then false and counterfeit money, because he does not
execute his Office faithfully, but does change the good money, which he
received, to distribute by the commandment of his Lord and Master, into
that, which is not the same that he received to be distributed; and by this
means, they which shall have received the same, shall be deceived and spoiled.
On the other side, although he were wicked and unjust, if he did distribute it
good, and such as he was commanded, the same could not let at all, but that it
should be good current money; and that they which should receive it, should
very well make their profit thereof: Even so the Minister, (although he be
lawfully called, and have sufficient gifts to Preach) yet if he do not
administer the Sacraments according to the Lords ordena^ce, or do either
disguise, and pervert them, or else do administer other in stead of them; in
thus doing the case is altered; but otherwise the vitiousnesse of the person,
cannot, nor may hinder the virtue of the Lords ministry.

5 As the word of God, although it be Preached by mortal men, yet ought the
same to be received of all good Christians, not as the word of men, but as the
word of God, and as it were proceeding out of the mouth of Christ. 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. Even so the holy Sacraments, although they be ministered by frail and
lewd Ministers, are to be received of the godly and religious, not as
proceeding from men, but as it were from the hand of God himself, the first
and principal author thereof.

How Sin depends on God.
LIke as the Physician coming unto the sick person, does by medicines draw
corrupt humors out of his body, and brings them out either by a Purgation,
or by a sweat, or vomit, or letting of blood, as he judges it best; yet
does he not graft in the sick person naughty and corrupt humors: Even so
God causes to be brought to light our malice, which was not brought forth
before, but lay hid within, to make manifest his justice, and to open our
Sins; and yet he suffers them to break forth by chance, or rashly, but
orders and governs them, according to his judgment; that even by them, he
does fulfill the limits of his providence. Esaias. 10.6, 7.15, 16.

The Scripture not hard.
LIke as if one should affirm, that because there be some bones in a shoulder
of Mutton, therefore it is nothing but bones, and no flesh thereon at all: Or
because some places in the river be deep, therefore all the river from head
to foot is deep, and no shallow to be found therein, which were most
rediculous to affirm: Even so is this opinion of the Papists, that because
some places in the Scripture be hard, therefore all the whole body of the
Scripture is hard, so as lay people may not read them. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Psalm.
19.7, 8. Col. 3.16. John. 5.39. 2. Pet. 3.15.

Secrecy.
1 AS silence is a gift without perrill, and contains in it many good things:
So it were better our Silence brought our simplicity into suspicion, then to
speak either inconueniently, idly, or unnecessarily.

2 As the Viper is torn in sunder, when she brings forth her little ones:
So Secrets coming out of their mouths, that are not able to conceal them,
do utterly undo and ruin such as reveal them.

3 As we must render account for every idle word: So must we likewise for our
idle Silence.

No Service pleases God, but such as he teaches.
AS the Lord in the first Commandment, wholly demands the soul, will,
understanding, and heart, that is our faith; fear, love, thankfulness,
invocation, and spiritual adoration, or worshipping, to be given to him
only, and for his sake, as he shall appoint: So in the second Commandment,
Thou shall not make to thy self, etc. He generally requires for the outward
Service of him, that we should follow his word, in serving of him, and take and
account it no less then Idolatry, or Image Service, whatsoever thing is
invented by man, Saint, or Angel, and not by him, concerning his worship and
Service. Leuit. 26.1. Exodus 34.13, 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 4.23. Psa. 97. 7 and 106.36.
Esaias. 44.19. Iere. 2.27.

There is no Sin whatsoever, but it is forbidden by the Law of God: nor any
good work, but it is there commanded.
LIke as if a King being resolved, to forgive no offense worthy of death, and
thereupon pretending to set down a Law, which if his subjects keep truly in
every point, they shall escape the edge of his sword and be well promoted; yet
one man for all that omitteth some matter worthy of death; which being done,
the King conuenteth him before his judgment seat as a malefactor, lays to
his charge the committing of that evil, or omitting of that good, which is not
contained in his Law; and upon confession thereof, gives sentence of
condemnation against him; the party might well answer his King, that he were
unjust, and his Law imperfect: Even so in like sort, for as much as the Lord
has decreed death, to be the certain reward of every Sin. Romans 6.23. and
has given his Law for this intent, and to teach man to avoid whatsoever is
damnable, and that whosoever observed all things written in this Law, might
live thereby; If there be any Sin, that is any thing that he will damn a man
for, not forbidden, or any good work, not commanded in this Law, then is God
unjust, and the Law imperfect; of which neither is true: for as for God he is
not unrighteous. Romans 3.5, 6. And as for the Law it is perfect. Psalm. 19.7.
Iam. 1.25.

Sacraments be commonly called by the names of those things, which they be
Sacraments off.
LIke as when a Noble man or Gentleman, delivers a letter of Annuitie or
rent, to any one of his servants, he says, he gives him an Annuitie of ten
pound by the year: No man is so simple, to think that the letter, is the
money it self, but an assurance, confirmation, sign, or gage, of such a Sum
of money; in such sort, that having such a letter, he is full assured of the
money: Now no man is so blockish, to think that he has evil spoken, for so
much as every man does well know, that the signs have the names of the things
which they signify: After this manner of speech also; as an Ambassador of a
Prince, being demanded of the authority he has received of his Lord, to
deal in such or such a matter, does use to show forth his letters of
credit, or Commission, and to say; Here is mine authority: albeit that the
letters are not the power it self, but only the testimony of the same: Even
so the bread and the Wine, are the remission of sins, or the body and blood
of Christ: to wit, they are as seals and letters, whereby we are assured, that
the body of Jesus Christ crucified, and his blood shed, have purchased unto us
the forgiveness of Sins, and eternal life. Gene. 33.20. and 41.26. Ioh.
10.7. and 14.6. and 15.1. 1. Cor. 10.4, 16. Ezech. 4.1. and 5.2. 2. Cor. 5.21.
Ioh. 1.14.

Salvation is to be sought, in and by the appointed means, though God could
save us without all means.
AS God by his omnipotent power, could preserve alive our mortal bodies,
extraordinarily and supernaturally, without natural food and sustenance, as
he did Moses and Elijah, the space of forty days; they not receiving in that
time any bodily meat or drink, according to the order of nature; yet
nevertheless, no man ought to refuse meat and drink, being the ordinary
means that God has appointed, for the preservation of our bodily life: Even
so God could save us without all means, and give unto us a lively faith,
through the wonderful working of the holy Ghost; and that without either
preaching, or hearing of his word, or else without prayer and ministration of
the Sacraments; yet nevertheless, is it his ordinance not so to do. Exodus
28.18. and 34.28. Deuteronomy. 9.9. 1. Kin. 19.18. Act. 9.1. etc.

Sacraments.
1 AS the great Castle Gili^fer, floureth not til March and April, a year
after the sowing; and Marians Violets, two years after their sowing: So the
grace of God received in baptism, does not by and by show forth it self, till
some years after the infusion.

2 Even as the best medicines, do most annoy, unless they be rightly
ministered and received: So the unspeakable wholesome Sacraments of Christ, to
the worthy receivers, are al health and life; but to the unworthy, death and
damnation.

3 As a seal is altogether unprofitable, yea not allowed a seal, unless it
be bound or set to some instrument or writing, for the confirmation thereof:
Even so the Sacraments are altogether unprofitable, yea indeed are no
Sacraments, if they be not joined with the word of God preached, to confirm
the same unto us. Matthew. 28.19. 1. Cor. 11.26.

4 As they which come to hear the Gospel preached, and want faith, receive
nothing but words; and the Gospel to them is no Gospel: Even so, they which
come to receive the Sacraments without faith, do indeed receive the symballs or
signs; but they have not the fruit, and thing of the Sacraments.

5 As Circumcision, (which was a Sacrament of the old Law) was a seal in that
time to our Fathers of righteousness: Even so be our Sacraments to us in these
days, seals of Gods promises unto us; and al have one strength and virtue.

6 Like as the Sun, which shines well for all, but not to all; so it
happens to those, to whom the Sacraments are ministered.

7 As there are none, but those which have eyes, and do open their eyes, that
do receive the light of the Sun, the which it represents to all; but in the
mean time, such as are blind, or do shut their eyes, do not receive it, for
they have not the instrument, without the which they cannot receive it: So
stands it between the faithful, and the unfaithful, in respect of the
ministry of the church; for it represents unto all, the benefits of God.
And albeit that the wicked and faithless do not receive them at all, that
notwithstanding the fame lets not, but that the Ministry has always in it
self his virtue. But in the mean while, it is not ordained but to be exercised
toward those for whom it was ordained; or otherwise it should not be a
Ministry; and by consequence, should not have his virtue. For where there is no
faith in the heart, there the holy Sacraments, or signs, do no more profit the
soul, then the light or shining of the Sun, do those that are blind.

8 As a corrupt and withered branch, which sticks still fast to the tree,
but for all that, can receive no strength or life from the roof, or heart of
the tree: Even so the unfaithful, although they receive outwardly the bread
and the wine, of the Ministers, in the Supper of the Lord, yet they do not
receive the fat, or the inward strength, and the treasure; to wit, the life,
and the holy Ghost; or to speak it in one word, the communion of the body, and
of the blood of Jesus Christ; no more then the corrupted or withered branch,
receives life and strength of the tree, in the which it is dead; albeit for a
time, it cleaves fast to it.

9 Even as it follows not, that for so much as the withered branch can draw
to himself no strength, nor receive life, that therefore it must needs be
also, that the sound branches can draw or receive no strength or life of the
trunk or body of the tree; or that it does not communicate his life unto those
good and sound branches: Even so it follows not, that the Sacraments be vain
and bare signs, because that the unfaithful cannot lay hold on life, nor on
that which is offered, and sealed unto us by the same.

10 As the fault is not in the Tree, but in the withered branches, that it
receives not from the Tree, a fatness or a iuce: So no more is the fault in
God, which offers and presents to all men, richly his gifts, but in the
unfaithful, which neither will nor can receive and embrace the same, because
of their unfaithfulness; through the which, they are dead in the body of the
christian church, as oftentimes a branch does starve in a good tree.

11 Like as the Scripture of God, is an Indenture betwixt him and us, wherein is
contained both the promises, grace, and mercy, which God offers to the world
in his son Christ; and also the conditions, which he requires to be fulfilled
on our behalf: So the Sacraments are the seals set to this Indenture, to
strengthen our faith, that we do not doubt.

12 As it is not enough to write the conditions of a bargain in an Indenture,
except it be sealed: Even so God for our weakness, thought it not sufficient,
to make us promise of blessings, in writing in his Scriptures, but he would
seal it with his own blood; and institute his Sacraments, as seals and
pledges of the same truth, to remain to be received of us, in remembrance of
him, and strengthening of our faith. So that we may very conveniently say, that
Sacraments are as witnesses, and solemn oaths, whereby we do as it were homage
to God, and do make profession of our faith and Religion.

13 Like as in Circumcision there meet four things, that is to say; the
promise, the commandment of the sign, and the belief of the promise: So
likewise in the meeting of every Sacrament, the same things must of necessity
meet: namely, that a godly Sacrament be a visible sign commanded and
ordained by God: Whereby like as God bears record of his promise unto men; so
man accepting the sign, does on the other side, profess his faith toward God,
and confirms the same with the use of the sign, and by thinking upon it.

14 Like as if a man would take the bush, that hangs at the Tavern door,
and should suck it for to slake his thirst, and would not go into the Tavern
where the Wine is, might be well accounted an idiot and a fool: Even so
likewise may he be reckoned a fool, that (whereas the signs of the Sacraments
were ordained by God, to be helps to nourish and plant faith in our hearts,
and to confirm in us the promises of God,) he through ignorance thereof (as
many do) should preposterously judge of the same, taking the signs, for the
thing it self.

15 As Silver and Gold being not coined, is nothing else but Silver or Gold;
but if by her Majesty's commandment, a new form or stamp be added by a
print, it is made current money, which it was not before, although it be the
very same substance, which it was before: Or as if one take wax, which is
fastened to a writing or public instrument, and it differs not from other wax
of it self, but only because of the use, to the which it is appointed; that
is to say, to serve for a testimony, that the instrument is effectual and
available, the which it has not by nature, but by the ordinance of man: Even
so the signs of the Sacraments, to wit, water in baptism, and bread and Wine
in the Lords Supper, although they be not changed, concerning their substance,
mean, quantity, or quality, but only in the use of them, and do differ
from common water, bread and Wine, in that they are ordained of God, to serve
unto us as gages and pledges of those benefits, which Christ by his death and
^^ssion has purchased for us; yet they be ordained of God for an excellent
covenant, to represent unto us most great and excellent things. And albeit that
this mutation here spoken of, changes not the substance of the signs, neither
of bread, water, or Wine, but only the use of them; and is done and wrought by
the holy Ghost, according to the ordinance of the good will of God, which is
testified to us, by that promise, whereto the sign is joined, and not by the
pronunciation of words, after the manner of Sorcerers, and Charmers, but the
promise is the soul of the sign; so accordingly, the water, the bread and the
wine, become Sacraments; that is to say, true and veritable signs of those
things, which the word promises, and which be presented by them; so that this
alteration is only in the use thereof; for before and after the administration
of the Sacrament, it takes no place, but only during the action and use, to
the which this change or mutation tends.

16 Like as the word serves to no purpose, except it be so preached, that it
may be understood; and further, except that which it declares and represents
to us, that is to say Jesus Christ, with all his goodness, be received by the
faith of those which hear it: Even so also ought we to understand of the
Sacraments, if we bring not faith, which is the only means to receive that
which is preached to us, represented and offered by the same word; but
contrariwise in dispising them by our incredulity, and rejecting that
goodness, which God offers with the same to us, we seal our own
condemnation.

17 Like as the Gospel cease not of his own nature, to be the word of life
and salvation, although the wicked through their contempt, turn it into the
savor of death and damnation: Even so the Sacraments, cease not to be true
Sacraments, although they be either ministered by unworthy persons, or received
unworthily.

11 As the seed, how good so ever it be, brings not forth fruit at the same
instant that it is sown, but continues a certain time in the earth: So is it
not meet to restrain the fruit and virtue of the word of God, to the same
hour that it is preached, or the Sacraments to the same instant, that they be
ministered; but the fruit shall be showed in the elect, when it pleases God.

19 As water is not the water in Baptism, nor a sign, nor consequently a
Sacrament thereof; but so far forth as they be joined with the word of Jesus
Christ, by the which it is dedicated and consecrated to that use, and so being
applied to those persons, which are to be Baptized according to his
commandment: So the very like is of the Bread and Wine of the Lords Supper;
for they can no more be the signs thereof, then may the water of Baptism, if
being joined together with the word of Jesus Christ, whereby they are dedicated
and consecrated to this Sacrament, they be not given, and distributed to those
which should be partakers of the same; as it does appear by the express
word of Jesus Christ, in that he says of both the signs: Take ye and eat
ye; likewise, Drink ye all of this; For it is plain, that these words may
not be spoken either to the Bread, or to the Wine; but only to the persons,
which might understand them, and execute the commandment, that our Savior
Christ gave unto them by the same: For the Bread and the Wine, can neither eat
nor drink themselves. Math. 28.19. Math. 26.27. Mark. 14.22, 23. Luke 22.19,
20. 1. Cor. 11.24.

20 Like as loving and tender hearted parents, are not content to procure for
their children, costly possessions and liuely-hoodes, but take order that the
same may be conserved, and come to their use: Even so our Lord and Savior,
thought it not sufficient, to purchase for us his Fathers favor again, (which
is the deep fountain of all goodness and eternal life) but also invented
the ways most wisely, (by the institution of his holy Sacraments) whereby the
same might redounde to our commodity and profit.

21 Like as of old time, God decreed his wondrous benefits, of deliverance of
his people, in memory by the eating of the Passover, with his rites and
ceremonies: So our loving Savior has ordained and established, the
remembrance of his great mercy expressed in his Passion, in the institution of
his heavenly Supper, where every one of us must be guests and not gazers;
eaters, and not lookers on; feeding our selves, and not hiring other to feed
for us; that we may live by our own meat, and not perish for hunger, whiles
others devour all. Exodus 12.1. etc.

22 As of necessity, we must be our selves partakers of the Lords Supper, and
not beholders of other: So we must address our selves, to frequent the
Sacrament in reverent and due manner, least as Physic, provided for the body,
being misused, more hurts then profits; so this comfortable medicine of the
foul, indecently received, tend to our greater harm and sorrow.

23 Like as the Supper of the Lord is a spiritual meat, and sweet to those
that be incorporated and made one body with Jesus Christ, and with their
neighbor: Even so of the contrary, it is a mortal poison to them, which put
not their whole trust in Jesus Christ, and be separated from their neighbor.

24 As it is not enough for a child to be borne, and that he have life by his
parents, which begot him, if that afterward they do not also nourish him, to
conserve him; and to the end that he may grow and become tall and strong in
the same: Even so God our Father, does not content himself to have begotten
us for his children in his Church, by the incorruptible seed of his word, and
to have given us life in his Son Jesus Christ, by the virtue of his holy
spirit; but will also conserve and nourish us in the same, by the right use of
his holy Sacraments, and will make us to grow and wax strong, and accomplish the
work which he has begun in us, and all this by his Son Jesus Christ.

25 As it is not enough that a shepherd do only gather his sheep into the
fold or sheepecoate; but also that he provide meat for them and pasture: Or
as it is not sufficient that a Master do only entertain his servant, into
his service, by giving him his Liuerie coat and badge, whereby he is openly
known to be his man; but also that he provide and give him meat and drink
daily to feed him: So surely does the Lord with us in these Sacraments. For
by baptism, does he admit us to his service, and by the Supper does he feed
us, that we perish not with hunger.

26 Like as man's body is nourished and sustained by bread and Wine: So also our
souls are sustained spiritually, with the body of Christ given for us, and
with his blood shed for our sakes. John. 6.32, 33, 35. 1. Cor. 11.24, 25.

27 As bread nourishes our bodies: So thereby we learn, that Christ's body,
has most singular force, spiritually by faith to feed our souls. Ioh. 6.50,
55, 56.

28 And as with Wine men's hearts are cheared, and their strengths confirmed: So
we learn also, that with his blood our souls are refreshed through faith.

29 And further, as surely as we know, that we have received the bread and wine
with our mouths and stomachs: So surely thereby we are assured, that Christ
makes the faithful believers, partakers of his body and blood. Ioh. 6.54, 63,
64.

30 As those which have eaten sweet Comficts, and seed for the most part on
delicate Cates, have sweet breathes: Even so must there needs be found a
sweet smelling Odor, in all the words and works of those, which are fed with
this spiritual and heavenly food, the body and blood of Christ, and in whom
Christ does dwell; for they do all things for the profit and edification of
their brethren, and the glory of God.

31 Even as the Gospel, which of it own nature is the word of life and
salvation, is yet turned by the wicked, unto the savor of death: So the
Sacraments also, which are instituted by God, unto the salvation of men, are
notwithstanding, received by the faithless, and the unworthy communicants,
unto their condemnation, and judgment: and yet do they not desist in respect
of God, to be true Sacraments still.

32 As a sick man feels no comfort or nourishment, when he eats meat, and
yet it preserves his life: So the weak Christian, though he feel himself
not nourished at the Sacrament by Christ's body and blood, yet he shall see in
time, that his house shall be preserved thereby, unto everlasting life.

32 Like as Soldiers, when they receive their pay, do bind themselves to
their Captain, by solemn oath: Even so we, when we are partakers of the holy
Sacraments which God has appointed in his Church, by the which he bestows
upon us spiritual gifts, do bind our selves to him, by the same oath.

34 As we see with our eyes, that the bread is broken for us: So we are
certainly confirmed in our faith, that the body of Christ was given unto death
for us.

35 As certainly as we see that the bread and wine to be present: So certainly
do we believe, that the body and blood of Christ is present with us also: yea
we do not believe, that it is the Supper of the Lord, except his body and
blood be present with us.

36 As things set before the eyes, do move the sight: Even so the Sacraments
move the heart to believe.

37 Even as sure as we take the bread in the Lords Supper, and eat it with the
mouth of the body, and drink the wine: So verily and certainly, even at the
same instant, with the mouth of our faith, we receive the very body and blood
of Christ, and there it does as actually comfort and sustain the soul, as does
the bread and the wine nourish and comfort the heart, and the outward man.

38 And as verily as the most sovereign plaster and salve laid to a wound or
soar, draws out the filth, and heals it: so verily and really, does the
body and blood of Christ thus received, put away the soars and deformities of
the soul; and not only makes it whole, but also pure, clean, without scar,
wrinkle, and spot, and so makes it, a delectable, lovely, and fair spouse in
the sight of God.

39 As when many Windows be opened in an house, the more light may come in,
then when there is but one opened: Even so by the perception and receiving of
the Sacraments, a Christian man's conscience has more help to receive Christ,
then simply by the word preached, heard, or meditated; and therefore the
Sacraments may well be called seeable, sensible, taste-able, and touchable
words.

40 As the Devil entered into Judas by the soppe which Christ gave him, yet not
that he received an evil thing of him, but because he did receive it badly, and
with an evil mind: Even so the unworthy communicants, eat and drink their
own damnation; not by the eating of the bread and wine, (which are holy
signs) but because they receive the same, without faith and repentance, having
in evil conscience.

41 As the word Sacramentum, was a form of a solemn ^^h in war, whereby the
soldier did vow and destinat himself to serve his General, and the General in
like manner did bind himself to his soldiers: So also by the use and
institution of the holy Sacraments, after that God has promised that he will
be our God, and give unto us salvation, he does in like manner, bind us as it
were with a solemn oath, before himself, before Angels, and men, that we will
serve him, and none other.

Soul.
1 LIke as to be healthie in our bodies, it is not inogh, not to have the
plague, or a plurasie, but generally to be free from all diseases: Even so to
be holy in our Souls, we must be clean from all spots, and defilings; and we
must take the whole law of God, as an universal rule of all our thoughts,
affections, words, and deeds; to the end to keep it from point to point, and
not to omit any thing which is there commanded us.

2 As sweet Oil powered into a fustie vessel, loses his pureness, and is
infected by the vessel: So the Soul created good, and put into the corrupt
body, receives contagion thence. Romans 5.13.

3 Like as if a man should borrow a thing of his neighbor, and use it so, as
he does quite spoil it, he would be ashamed to bring it again to the owner in
that manner, and if he do, the owner will not receive it: Even so ungodly men
in this life, do so stain their Souls with sin, as that they can never be
able to give them up into the hands of God, at the day of death: and if they
would, yet God accepts them not, but casts them away.

4 Like as we know that in any common danger or peril; as the sacking of a
City, or burning of an house, if a man have any precious Jewel therein, he
will first fetch that out, and make choice of a faithful friend, to whose
custody he will commit the same; Even so, in common perils and dangers, we
must always remember to commit our Souls, as a most precious Jewel into the
hands of God, who is a faithful Creator. Psalm. 31.5. Luke 23.46. Act. 7.59.

5 Even as a little Bird shut up in a Cage, although it be very precious and
costly, and be made of Cedar, Iuorie, or Gold, yet she desires to go out,
and strives to have her liberty, and in her eager and earnest desire to be
gone, she does oftentimes thrust her bill through the loupes of the Cage: So
likewise the Soul of a virtuous man, inflamed with an unfeigned love of God,
being shut up and holden in the coupe of his body, although he abound with
all necessaries, fit for the preservation of this temporal life, yet most
earnestly desire to depart hence, and to go to his Counrie, which is heaven.
2. Cor. 5.2. Phil. 1.23.

6 As the Soul has a heavenly, and the body an earthly beginning: So the
Soul is immortal, and not suffering corruption; the body is mortal and
corruptible, and yet be so joined together without confusion, that in both,
remains his own nature.

7 As it were great folly to buy a house for the body, laying out so much
thereupon, that for want of goods, and other maintenance, the body so well
housed must die for hunger: Even so, a man shall get nothing by keeping his
goods for to feed and cloth the body, which is the house of the Soul; and in
the mean time suffer the Soul to pine away, and to die for hunger. Math.
16.26.

8 Like as it grieueth and makes sorrowful, and expert Ieweller, when he
beholds and sees, those Jewels and precious stones, which he with all his
wit, industry, and Art, has trimmed and polished, to be tumbled and tossed in
the foul and filthy fingers, of children and fools, who neither knowing
them, nor esteeming them, do soil, blemish and despise them: Even so, our
heavenly Father, when he sees our Souls, the which he has created after his
own similitude and likeness, to be in the midst and depth of the corrupted
cogitations, wicked and beastly thoughts, and hellish imaginations of our
hearts, he takes it heavily, and in evil part. Math. 9.4. and 15.18. Ezech.
11.5.

9 As the Soul of Christ was received into Paradise, the same day that it
departed out of the body: So also must we think of the blessed spirit and
Souls of the Saints, according to the promise made to the thief. Luke 23.42.
Phil. 1. 2.

10 As a body without a Soul is clean dead, and nothing but a filthy
loathsome carcass: Even so the Soul, unless it stir and raise up it self
by prayer, is dead and miserable.

11 As they that have healthful bodies, easily endure both cold and heat: So
they that have a stayed and settled Soul, have the dominion, over anger,
grief, joy, and all other their affections.

12 As the body of man by nature is mortal, lumpish, and heavy, delighting in
those things which are visible and temporal, and always of it self sinketh
down-ward: So the Soul, being of a celestial nature, violently enforces her
self to fly upward, and with all her might, strives and wrastleth
continually, against the heavy burden of the earthly body, wherein she
abides; despising those things which are mortal, and only desiring things
permanent and immortal.

13 Like as a man comfort his earthly and corruptible body, with bread and
meat, when it is hungry; and with ale, beer, or wine, when it is thirsty:
Even so does the Soul of man (when the lawsheweth to her, her faults and
eternal damnation, and the dreadful judgments of God for her offenses)
comfort her self in her great hunger and thirst; believing that Almighty God,
has forgiven his sins for Christ's sake.

14 Even as a man, who by chance is fallen into a deep dry pit, far from
succor, cannot by any means possible help him self out, unless some man
come with some ladder, or other instrument to help him our; desires to be
delivered out of the pit, but by his own wit he cannot tell how: Even so the
Soul of man, desires to be delivered out of the sorrowful agony of death,
hell and damnation, but she cannot tell how, otherwise then by the
righteousness of Christ. Psalm. 42.1, 2. John. 7.37.

Slander.
1 AS the hayres of the beast Tarandrus is not to be pearsed with any weapon:
So some men are such, as are never hurt with Slander, or reproach.

2 Like as the Camelion, can change himself into all colors save white: Even
so the Slaunderer can frame his tongue to speak anything, save for his
neighbors credit; but that he can as hardly be induced unto, as the Leopard to
change his spots; the Blacke-amore his skin, or the Brick his color.

3 As the good name is to be much more esteemed then silver: So the wound of
Slander and defamation, is almost incurable; so that a man may better beware
of such as steal his goods, then of the Slaunderer and backbiter, that takes
away his good name. Numb. 16. 1. etc. 2. Sam. 16.3. Hest. 3.8. 1. Sam. 24.1.
etc. 2. Sam. 15. 1. etc. Ioh. 7.20. Math. 11.19.

4 As when a wound is cured, there remains a scarce: So against a Slander,
howsoever a man purge and justify himself, yet will there still remain an
evil opinion, at the least in some. Psalm. 101.5. 1. Cor. 4.6. and 6.10.

5 Like as Cham, the Father of the Canaanites, having seen the shame of his
Father Noah, and in lieu of covering it, having showed it to his brethren, was
accursed, both he and his posterity, by the mouth of his own Father: Even so
they (who knowing the frailty, faults, and infirmities, and consequenly, the
shame and reproach of their brethren, where they ought in charity, to cover
the same) do nevertheless by backbiting, and evil speaking, lay them open,
do well deserve to be accursed with Cham, and called Canaanites. Gene. 9.22.
Psalm. 50.19, 20, 21. Act. 24.5. 1. Sam. 21.1. etc. Psalm. 52.2. etc.

6 Like as if when sundry Faggots lie each by other, thou should kindle the
one, and so by degrees burn them all: So likewise, if he to whom thou have
opened thy mouth, to Slander and backbite thy brother, has no more hold of
his tongue, then thou have of thine, so thou have put into his hand a staff,
wherewith, by revealing thy secret, to bring thee into brabling and strife; and
therefore thou ought not to reveal that to an other, which thou would
should be kept secret.

7 As in a Country, upon any murder, or other heinous trespass, they ring
the Town bell, which when other Towns or Villages do hear, they likewise
do ring theirs, and so from one to an other, whereby all the Country is soon
advertised, that their is some offender to be taken or stayed: Even so thou,
when the clock of thy tongue has strooken, look that he that heard it, will
likewise strike his; and his neighbor that hears it, his; and so shall the
infirmity of thy neighbor soon come to the ears of many. And therefore if
thou be loath it should be known, then thou ought not to have uttered
that, which thou know every man will be ready likewise to utter.

8. Like as if there were no receiver of thefts, there would not be so many
thieves: So if none would harken to Slaundring and backbiting, there would not
be so many backbiters. Prou. 25.23. Psalm. 15.3.

9 As a shaft shot against a stone, reboundeth, and sometime hurts him that
shot it: So when a Saunderer or backbiter, sees his countenance that hears,
or indeed harkeneth not unto him, sad, or frowning, he holds his peace, he
waxes pale, his countenance is troubled, and his tongue stops suddenly.
Exodus 23.1.

10 As one stripe of the tongue wounds three, the backbiter, him that gives
ear to the backbiting, and the backbitten: So the two first, do thereby wound
their consciences to death, by deserving the sentence of eternal fire; but the
third is no whit damnified, but in his good name, and that peradventure but for
a short space.

Sober in youth, and childish in old age.
THere is a nation in India called Pandora, which people in their youth have
gray hayres, but in old age their hayres are altogether black: So some in
their youth be Sober and modest, but when they wax older, then they are given
to more folly and trifles, in so much that they may seem to wax children
again.

Spirit.
1 AS Comfrey, sod and put with minsed meat, brings it altogether again
into one mass or lump: So the Spirit, joins in one those which were
severed, if it be among them.

2 As Baulme put into Beehiues, causes the Bees to keep together, and other
to come unto them: So where the Spirit of God is, it causes Christians to
abide in one, and draws other unto them.

Some snared with their own devises.
AS Perillus, who gave the brazen Bull to the Tyrant Phalaris, who caused the
said Perillus to be first pained and tormented in the same engine, which he had
invented: Even so some do fall into the pit and snare which they had made
and devised for other. Psalm. 57.6. Pro. 26.2. Eccle. 10.8.

Some have better liking to other men's things, then to their own.
EVe^ as Adulterers are greatly pleased with other men's wives, but their own
they do contemn, and little regard: So some men do more delight in the
pleasure, or things of other men's, then in their own.

Sabbath.
1 LIke as Masters will be displeased with their Servants, if they spend their
time idly, wherein they should apply their work: Even so we may well think,
that the Lord will not be contented with them, who when they should sanctify
his Sabbath, and do his work, either show themselves as slow-bellies therein,
or else altogether neglect the same, to serve their own voluptuousness.

2 As the Scholar deserves to be corrected and punished, that plays the
treuant, and so absenteth himself from the School: Even so no doubt the Lord
will punish and be revenged of those that absent themselves, (without just
cause) from the congregation of Gods people.

3 David would not have his servants adventure their corporal lives for his
provision, nor drink the water, when they had provided it: Even so, much less
ought Christians for their meats sake, to adventure their lives; yea the
souls of their servants and Cooks, in being absent from the holy exercises of
the Lords Sabbath. 2. Sam. 23.15, 16, 17. 1. Chro. 11.17, 18, 19.

4 Like as Christian Masters would not be content to see their servants
plowing, carting, or working on their Trades, on the Sabbath days, (which yet
to do, is lawful on the six days) least they should be accounted breakers,
both of Gods laws and their Princes: Even so, much more they ought to be
ashamed to behold and see their children or servants to profane the Lords
Sabbath, by dycing, carding, foote-ball, or stoole-ball playing, etc. which are
more unlawful to be done on this day, then working on their Trades, but yet
forbidden, both by Gods Law, and their Princes Law.

5 As it is lawful on the Sabbath day, to pull and draw out a sheep, or other
cattle, out of a pit or ditch wherinto it is fallen, and wherein it would
otherwise perish: Even so much more it is lawful to do good, and to relieve
any kind of necessity of our neighbor, the same day.

6 As it is sin, not to be careful of the Sabbath, that we might rest upon
it, so it is greater sin not to observe it; that it might be a Sabbath unto
the Lord, by sanctifying it: and if for want of heedfulnesse, any thing do
compel us to work upon the day of rest, it is our sin in not marking the
Sabbath day: So if by our negligence we cannot sanctify the day of rest unto
the Lord, it is a greater sin, of not remembering to keep it holy, which is
the first and greatest thing in this Commandment. Deuteronomy. 5.12. Exodus 20.8.

7 As the Passe-ouer, though it were a Sacrament only belonging unto the
Jews, and the difference of meats, and of clean and unclean things, was
proper unto them, yet the Lord would have the strangers that dwelt among
them, be subject to the same Laws, for the good of his people; and so that
otherwise he would not have them, to have any dealing with them (for he
threatens to cut them off from his people) as appears. Exodus 12.19. Leuit.
17.12, 15. Even so likewise, the Lord would have this holy Saboth of rest,
without all interruption and gainesaying, to be duly observed on all sides;
when unto the particular commanding of all estates, by name to rest, he has
adjoined the beasts and the strangers, upon whom he lays the like charge.
Exodus 23.12. Deuteronomy. 5.14.

8 As other things are called most holy unto the Lord, because they are
separated from the common use, wherein other of the same nature are employed,
and may not be used, but to the Lords use, Exodus 29.44. and 40.13. Leuit.
27.28, 30. So the Sabbath day, or day of rest, is then sanctified and hallowed
of us, when we do not use it in the affairs of this life, from the which it
must be separated, and from which upon it we must rest; but use and make that
day proper unto it, and to nothing principally but that.

9 Even as the child, which is set to read, must name every letter apart and
distinctly by it self, and spell every syllable, that so he might be helped
forward in reading, which when he has attained unto, though still he be bound
to read, yet he is freed from spelling, and naming every letter, as he had
wont to do, and that were a great bondage and wearisomnesse to bind him unto
it still, nay it were altogether rediculous, and childish in him indeed: So
now, though we be charged to rest upon the Saboth, yet when we are not
ouercharged with those Jewish ceremonies, which they (being children) had given
the^, as furtherances unto them, let us not complain, before we have cause;
neither murmr against God, because we cannot be so licentious as we would;
seeing we be at such liberty, as we be, and as it pleases the Lord to bestow
upon us; and let us be so much the more careful to rest, by how much we have
but this one thing to attend upon, and are made free from many other, which
might hinder us. Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9. Gal. 4.3.

10 As they preposterously labor to reform the church, that have no care to
reform themselves, and indiscreetly complaining of wants and disorders there,
do not practice better orders in their houses, upon themselves, and theirs, do
hinder it, and keep them back: Even so they that labor for more means to
sanctify the Sabbath, and are careless in practicing those that they have,
do stay such good blessings as God might otherwise bestow upon his Church this
way.

Notorious Sins.
LIke as a man is much more to be blamed, which goes out of his way in the
clear Sun at noone-tide, then he which goes by night with a candle: Even
so, such men deserve much more to be punished for committing of foul and
notorious Sins, now under the clear light of the Gospel, then in the time of
the Law.

Sin covered by Christ's innocence.
AS a garment or cloak do serve to cover our bodies: Even so the innocence,
justice, and holiness of Christ Jesus, does serve to cover our Sins before the
judgment of God, to the end that there appear no one spot of them in his
sight. Gal. 3.27.

Sinner.
1 LIke as God is much pleased with the prayer of the just: Even so, much more
he does delight in the amendment of the Sinner; for it does little profit for
the one to multiply his prayers, if the other do not diminish his sins.

2 As an earthly Father when his child is sick, he will not cast him away,
but take pity upon him: So much more our heavenly Father, when a Sinner
humbles him self before him, and lamenteth his sins, will show his fatherly
affection toward him that repents.

3 As the night in the first dawning of the day, in which though the darkness
remain, and be more in quantity then the light, yet when the Sun has
already cast some beams of light in the air, then the breaking of the day
appears: Even so, the conversion of a Sinner is not wrought all at one
instant, but in continuance of time, and by certain measures and degrees. So
that he that is in the first degree of his conversion, when the holy Ghost by
the means of the word, inspires him with some spiritual motions, and begins
to regenerate and renew the inward powers of his soul.

Sin.
1 LIke as that man's disease is most perilous, which lies sick, and feels
not his sickness, nor cannot complain of one part more then an other (for
then the disease has equally troubled the whole body): So likewise they which
lie wallowing in sin, so forgetting God and all goodness, that they feel no
remorse of conscience for their sins, are desperate, and almost past all
recovery.

2 As virtue must be embraced in heart, in affection, in countenance, word, and
deed, or else we are found breakers of the Law of God: So likewise Sin must
be abstained from, as well in heart, in affection, in countenance, and word, and
also in deed.

3 Like as the dead body lies rotten and stinking in the grave, fearful, and
loathsome to look on, and grievous to remember: Even so when we lie buried in
Sin, we stink in the sight of God, he cannot abide to look on us, nor will
remember us.

4 And as when the body lies on sleep in the bed, (which is an Image of our
grave) can neither see, feel, hear, taste, smell, understand, nor yet move
out of the place, until it be awaked, nor can take any pleasure at all, in any
one creature of God: So we when we lie sleeping and wallowing in Sin, we
neither see the majesty of God, with the eyes of our faith, nor feel his
mercies offered unto us, in and by his dear Son our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus; nor yet can taste at all how sweet the Lord is; our ears are stopped
from hearing good counsel; we perceive nothing at all of Gods goodness
toward us; his word is not sauerie unto us, neither yet be we moved or
stirred up to do any one good work of charity. Romans 13.11.

5 Like as Carrion does not only smell evil it self, but infects all that
come near it: So likewise that man that is defiled with any notorious Sin,
does not only defile all things that he takes in hand, but all such as keep
him company; so that Sin has greater force and strength to defile other
things, then goodness has to make other things holy. 1. Cor. 15.33. 2. Timo.
2.16, 17. Romans 6.23.

6 As a beast ouer-laden, is ready to sink under his burden, except there be
present help at hand to ease him: Even so we are in danger to sincke into
the pit of perdition, by reason of our great and grievous burden of Sin,
except we fly to Christ, who only and alone can unburden us, and ease and
refresh us. Math. 11.28.

7 Like as if we do suspect any uncleanness in us, wherefore the Prince, or
any Noble man, should loath or abhor the sight of us, we would take great
pains to remove and put it away: Even so, much more we ought with all
diligence and speed that may be, to put away that unclean Sin and
filthiness, that does separate, and make division betwixt us and God; and that
hides his face from us, that he will not hear us. Esaias 59.2. Iere. 5.25.

8 Like as if there were an Apostume about the stomach of a man, or in his
bowels, it would be never a whit the worse for him if it were seen, that it
might be launced: Even so, that man that thinks himself to be whole and
sound, because he will not see his sin and disease, he must needs be void of
all wit and reason.

9 Like as a man that has a disease or soar in his body, before he can be
cured of it, he must see it, feel the pain of it, and be in fear least it
bring him into danger of death; after this, he shall see himself to stand in
need of physic, and he longs til he be with the Physician; when he is once
come to him, he desires him of all loves to help him, and to show the best
skill he can, he will not spare for any cost; then he yields himself into the
Physicians hands, persuading himself, that by Gods blessing, he both can and
will help him; after this, he comes to his former health again: So in like
manner, every man is wounded with the deadly wound of Sin, at the very
heart; and he that would be saved and escape damnation, must see his Sin, be
sorrowful for it, and utterly despair of his own strength, to attain
salvation thereby: Furthermore, he must see himself to stand in need of
Christ, the good Physician of his soul; and long after him, and cry unto him,
with deep sighs and groans, for mercy; after this, Christ Jesus will come
with a plaster of his own heart blood, which being applied, he shall find
himself revived, and shall come to the assurance of the forgiveness of all
his sins. Psalm. 51.1, 3, 8, 12, 17.

10 As a man that has lost wife, goods and children, should be much grieved:
So he that has committed great Sins, ought to be as a man bruised between
the wall and the door.

11 Like as a man is more to be blamed, which goes out of his way in the
clear Sun at nonetide, then he that misseth his way by night with a candle:
Even so are men, more to be punished for such foul Sins, as they commit in
the clear light of the Gospel, then in the time of the Law.

12 As of clouds, when they be vanished away, there is nothing seen: Even so
the Sins of God people, when he forgiueth them, are clearly put both out of
sight and remembrance. Esaias. 44.22.

13 As Opium, Hennebane, and other things extremely cold, hide not pain, but
make the body so astonished for a time, that he feels not the pain; but
afterward when it comes to it feeling, the disease and pain is commonly more
grievous then before: So Sin and want of zeal, etc. hide not from torment of
conscience; but make the soul so astonished for a time, that it feels not the
torment; yet afterward when it comes to his feeling again, the torment is
more desperate then before.

14 As it would not avail or profit a City, diligently to watch at one gate,
and keep it shut against the enemy, if in the mean while all the rest stood
wide open to him: So likewise it is to no purpose, to keep ourselves from one
Sin or vice, unless we make account, and conscience, to abandon our selves
from all other vices.

15 Like as Surgions, when they must cut off any part of the body, use to lay
playsters to it, to mortify it, that being without sense and feeling, it may
be cut off with less pain: Even so in like manner, we are to use all helps
and remedies prescribed in the word, which serve to weaken or kill Sin, that
in death it may be abolished. 1. Cor. 9.27. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.5. 2. Timo. 2.21.

16 As a debt does bind a man, either to make satisfaction, or else to go to
prison: So likewise our Sins binds us, either to satisfy Gods justice, or
else to suffer eternal damnation.

17 As we see by experience that a ship which leaketh, is more easily emptied
at the beginning, then afterward: Or as a ruinous house, the longer it is let
run, the more charge and labor will it require in the repairing: Or as we
see that if a man drive a nail with a hammer, the more blows he gives to it,
the more hard it is to pluck it out again: Even so that man that commits
Sin upon Sin, and by perseverance therein, thinks to find the redress
thereof more easy hereafter, then now, is greatly deceived.

18 As a river that glideth and runs very swiftly, until there be a damme
or beam put ouertwhart; then it makes a swelling, and a roaring, neither by
any means will be quiet: So man's Sinful life does pass quietly without any
noise, till the beam of Gods justice ouertwhat him.

19 As a round bowl, thrown down a steep hill, never cease or stays,
till it come to the foot and bottom thereof: So likewise man's corruption, of
it self (as prone to Sin, as a bowl to run down a hill) never cease to
sin, till it receive the reward thereof, which is death. Romans 6.23.

20 As Gunpowder, and a rotten tree fired at the root, never cease burning
till they be all consumed: So the wicked will never give over their Sinning,
till all hope of eternal life be utterly taken away.

21 As Tinder catches the least spark, and is kindled thereby: So likewise out
corrupt nature, is easily provoked and drawn to Sin.

22 As the Viper conceaueth her young to her own death: So also man admits
Sin into his heart, but to his own great hurt.

23 Like as the Midwife is busy about a woman in travail, to bring forth the
child into the world: So busy also is Satan, until he has brought forth the
monstrous birth of Sin in men's conuersations.

24. As huge as the Sea is, yet one may taste the faltnesse of it in a drop: So
likewise in one Sin, we may see how ill favored the rest be. Romans 13.13.

25 As the forbidden nee, when it promised our parents knowledge, took their
knowledge from them: So every Sin gives other wages then it promises.
Gene. 3.6.

26 Like as if a man pass by some high dangerous place, in the night when he
cannot see, he is not afraid, but if ye bring him back again in the day,
and let him see what a steep and dangerous way he came, he will not be
brought the same way again for any thing: So it is in Sinning, for men living
in ignorance and blindness, practice any wickedness, and do not care for
Gods judgments; but when God of his goodness brings them back, and opens
their eyes to see the downfall to the pit of Hell, and the judgments of God
due to their Sins; then (say they) they will never Sin as they have done,
but become new men, and walk in the way to eternal life.

27 As it is the nature of a Canker, or Gangreene, to run from one joint to
an other, from toe to the foot, from the foot to the leg, from the leg to
the thigh, till it have wasted and destroyed the life of the body: Even so, we
give Sin but an entrance, it will soon over if spread the whole man; and if
the devil may be suffered, but to put one talent in our hearts, he will
presently wind himself into us, his head, his body and all.

28 As men which work in mines, and coale-pits, under the earth, are troubled
with nothing so much as with dampes, which make their candle burn dark; and
sometimes put it quite out: Even so every man's Sins are the dampes of his
heart; which when they take place, do dim the light of his judgment, and
cast a mist over his mind, and darken his understanding and reason.

29 Like as if a man should commit such an heinous offense, as that he could no
other way escape death, but by the Princes pardon; he neither would nor could
be at rest, til by one means or other he had obtained the same, and had gotten
it written and sealed; which done, he would carry it home, lock it up safe
and sound, and many times look upon it with great joy and gladness: Even so,
such is the case of every one of us; by nature we are rebels and traitors
against God, and have by our Sins deserved ten thousand deaths; now our
only stay and refuge is; that Christ the Son of God was condemned for us, and
therefore in Christ we must sue for pardon at Gods hands, and never rest till we
have the assurance thereof sealed up in our hearts and consciences; always
remembering, that ever after we lead a new life, and never commit the like
Sins against God any more.

30 Like as if a man should be so far in debt that he could not be freed,
unless the surety should be cast into prison for his sake; nay, which is
more, be cruelly put to death for his debt, it would make him at his wits end,
and his very heart to bleed: So likewise is the case with us, by reason of our
Sins; we are Gods debtors, yea bankrupts before him, yet have we gotten a
good suertie, even the Son of God himself, who to recover us to our former
liberty, was crucified for the discharge of our debt. Math. 18.23. etc. Ezech.
12.10.

31 As the Iuie by little and little creeps upon the Oak, till at the last he
does ouer-grow and destroy the Oak: So likewise does Sin by little and little
get up, and get the strongest, and mightiest men sometimes under him; as it did
Solomon, and David, and Peter, and diverse others, for all their wisdom, and
learning, and judgment, and experience, which they had both of themselves, and
of the world.

32 As a little Leaven sowreth the whole lump of dow; Or as a little fire,
whereof but one spark is sufficient to kindle a great fire, and to burn down
a whole City: Or as a tree, whose stubbes remaining in the ground, are enough
to give one a fall: Or as Iezabel that painted harlot, whose very remnants, as
the schull of her head, and the plames of her hands, must be buried, least they
infect the air: Or as a Mote in the Sun is but a little thing, and yet
enough to hinder the sight, to pain the eye, and to trouble the whole body: Or
a hair is but a little thing, yet enough to stiffle a man: Or as the flies of
Egypt were but little things, yet none of the least plagues: Or as the lice
were less the^ the flies, yet one of the greatest plagues, that came unto
Egypt: Even so, such be our Sins, which we call little Sins, and the
Papists call venial Sins, that may be washed away with a little holy water,
etc. we count them little and nothing, and not to be stood upon, nor once to
be touched; but in time we may prove them, to be the greatest plagues that
will trouble us, if securely and rashly we venture upon them. 2. King. 9.30.
etc. Exodus 8.16, 21.

33 As a moth-eaten garment, and worm-eaten wood, has no more use, but to be
cast away, the one to the du^ghill, the other to the fire: Even so no more use
with God, has a soul moath-eaten, and worme-eaten with Sin, but to be cast
out of Gods presence into the fire.

34 As we are loath to have our wounds often grated upon, and cannot well away
to have our soars rifled, seared, launced; but rather covet to have them fed
with healing salve: So likewise we are hardly brought to have our consciences
ground, or our Sins ransacked, sifted, searched, and ripped up; but rather we
could wish to have them playstered with sweet promises, and bathed in the
mercies of God.

35 As it is far safer before incarnatiue and healing medicines, to use
corosiue and mundifying waters, without which, though some sores may seem to
close and skin up apace, yet they prove worse, and be rotten still at the
coare; they have above a thin skin, and underneath rotten flesh: So in like
manner, we would cloak, hide, and cover our Sins, as it were with a
Curtain; but it is more sound Chirurgerie and divinity, to have our
consciences pricked, and pierced with the burning iron of the Law; and so to
cleanse the wound of our soul, by sharp threatening, least that skin being
pulled over the conscience for a while, we lament the rotten corruption, which
remains uncured underneath, and so we be constrained to cry out of our
Sins openly.

36 As it is a folly, then to dissemble our soars, whilst they be curable,
and after to make them known, when they be incurable: Even so it is a great
folly to dissemble our Sins, whilst they may be remedied; and so after to
be constrained to blaze them all abroad, when they are remediless.

37 As wild beasts, who so long as they are sleeping, stir not, but being
awaked, they fly in a man's face, and rend out his throat: Even so in like
manner, the Sins which a man commits, lies at the door of his heart,
though he feel them not; and if he do not prevent the danger by speedy
repentance, God will make him to feel them once before he die; and raise up
such terrors in his conscience, that he shall think himself to be in hell,
before he be in hell; and therefore it is good for every man to take heed
how he continues an enemy to Christ. Gene. 4.7.

38 As men may be too careful in seeking after Physicians, to remove the
diseases of their bodies: So may they be too too careless in seeking after
Christ, to remove the Sins of their souls.

39 As the body is soon hurt with wounds, but it is not cured but with much
grief and torments: So the soul is soon wounded with Sin, but it is not so
soon or easily healed.

40 Like as it is easier for one to hold a stone, whilst he has it, then to
recover it when it is fallen out of his hand: So it is easier to prevent and
eschew Sin, then to recall or hide it once committed.

41 As in a Well, except there be some water in it, we cannot easily see the
baggage that lies in the bottom: So in the depth of the heart, without tears
we cannot see our Sins; for the lesser our sorrows are, the greater are our
Sins.

42 As he that waxes pale, and is afraid of the hissing and biting of a
Viper, and does run to the Physician: Even so much more is filthy Sin, to
be abhorred and feared, which has worser poison then all Vipers, and much
more sooner ought medicines, and a remedy to be sought for it.

43 As when we walk and live according to Gods word, and in his fear, we
go to God, to heaven, and to everlasting life: So by Sinning, in lieu of going
forward, we slip back and draw toward death.

44 As he that flies from his enemies that pursues him, in lieu of saving:
himself in some town, turns back toward them, and so puts himself
into their hands: Even so we cannot turn back; that is to say, offend God, but
with this condition, that we shall fall into ruin, and everlasting perdition.

45 As he which is fallen into a deep Cave, cannot so easily get out, as he
fell in: So it is easy to Sin, but not so easy to be rid of it again.

46 As we are all angry with Adam, because he obeyed his wife rather then God:
So we must be angry with our selves for our Sins, in that we study to obey
and please our flesh and men, more then God.

47 As God did allow the good things, and ever had somewhat to say, for the
evil that he found in the seven Churches: So will his majesty reckon with
us, for all our Sins, not only of omission, but commission, although he do
find some, yea many good things amongst us. Reave. 2.1. etc.

48 As he who takes a taste of Honey, is easily drawn on by sweetness of it,
to eat of it to his great hurt: So the pleasure of Sin being once felt and
enjoyed, will not afterward be easily rejected and contemned.

49 As the Merchant venturer, having received a great loss by Sea; or the
Soldier a great wound in battle, often become desperate, and careless of
their own estate: So in like manner, a Christian by committing some grievous
Sin, is brought to this pass, that he lays aside the care and study of
holiness, and lets all go at six and seven.

50 As one having a weak constitution of body, being in safety, and as we
say out of gunshot, is liker to live, then the strongest man being in battle
in the midst of his enemies: Even so a weak man being out of temptation, and
avoiding occasions of Sin, is liker to stand, then he who rashly rusheth upon
the pikes, and has many occasions of sinning; although in his mind,
affection, and purpose, he do more abhor from Sin, and so have a greater
measure of the contrary grace, then the other.

51 Even as men do most fortify by Art, those places of their Towns and
Cities, which are weakest by nature; and flock thither a pace to defend, where
they see the enemy most busy in assaulting: So the care in avoiding Sin, by
considering the nature and effects of it, and by eschewing the occasions of
it, ought to be exercised chiefly in regard of those sins; and the occasions
of them, where unto we know our selves naturally inclined, to the which we are
oftnest tempted, and have oftnest yielded.

52 As that City, which is continually besieged and assaulted, cannot but be
taken at length, at one time or other; as they who have the care and defense of
it committed unto them, cannot but sometimes remit of their diligence, and be
overtaken with sleep, drink, forgetfulness, fair promises and pretenses, or
by some such means: So where the corruption of Sin, is continually working in
the heart, it cannot be, but that it should at one place or other, upon one
occasion or temptation or other, burst forth into open Sin.

53 As a most naughty Root, being not plucked up out of the ground, does
continually grow, and bud more and more: Even so Sin, when we chearish it,
does get daily new strength unto it, until a monstrous flood of Sins have
overcome us.

54 Like as when one man stands bound to an other for the performance of
diverse covenants, if he break but one, yet he forfaiteth his bond; but if he
break two, three, or more of the covenants, then is not only his bond
forfeited, but also the Law has more force and vauntage against him, to
condemn him: Or as he that stands bound to an other, for the payment of a
piece of money at a certain day, and breaks his day, is yet nevertheless
still indebted, although the Creditor do not straightway sue his bond, but of
good will forbeareth him for a time: Even so by every Sin, we increase our
debt to God, for if we break one title of Gods Law, and fail in one point, we
are guilty of all, and have forfaited our Obligation; but if we of purpose,
and willingly, heap Sin upon Sin, and as it were make an Art of sinning,
our condemnation shall then be the greater. And although the Lord in his mercy
forbeareth for a time, to take punishment of us for our Sins, to the end to
move us to repentance, yet stand we still debtors unto him, and are to yield
an account for the same, at his good pleasure. Iam. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 28.58. Romans 2.4.

55 As that Steward, that does spend and wast his masters substance, without
regard, and never looks to his debt book; the body of such a one is commonly
laid in prison: Even so he that never tries himself by the Law of God,
neither in the first nor second Table, shall be placed there (as Christ says)
where the worm dies not, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; for
by every Sin and transgression, we do increase our debts, which God will
request of us, except we crave of him with a lively faith, pardon of them.
Mar. 9.44, 46. Math. 22.13. Reave. 19.20.

Sacramental sign.
1 AS the word is all one to the evil as to the good: So the Sacramental
signs, be common as well to the evil as to the godly; but yet neither the
one part, or the other, does help any thing at all, to such as are void of
faith.

2 As men bind themselves in Obligations, putting too their hands and seals,
so as they cannot go back: Even so, when God commands us, to receive
Sacramental signs in faith, and withal, promises to the receivers, to give
the thing signified; he binds himself, as it were in bond unto us, to stand
to his own word.

Sin which is committed of frailty, differs from Apostasy, and
backsliding.
LIke as it is one thing, to ray a bodies feet after they be washed; and an
other matter to go tumble all the body again in filth and mire like Swine: Or
as it is not all a like, when a woman does sometime offend her Husband, as
when she breaks her faith and bond of wedlock, and sets her self quite
out from all the honest knot of wedlock: Even so it is one thing simply to
Sin, which the children of God also do; and an other matter, utterly to fall
and run back from the grace of God, and to mock and crucify Christ a new,
which the reprobate do, and not the elect. John. 1.8, 10. and 2.1. Hebr. 6.4,
5, 6. and 10.26.

A Sacraments are witnesses of the truth.
LIke as the chief end of Sacraments is this, that they are testimonies to
confirm the truth, by which the Lord in his Church, even visibly does
testify, that the things now uttered by preaching of the Gospel, and by the
promises assured to the faithful, from the beginning of the world, are in every
point so brought to pass, and are so certainly true, as they are declared,
and promised in the word of truth: Even so Baptism is the heavenly and public
witness of the Church of Christ, whereby the Lord testifies that it is he
which receives men freely into favor, and which cleanses from all blemishes,
and to be short, makes us partakers and heirs of al his goodness.

Schools.
1 AS a man that has diverse Orchards, will also have a Semenarie full of young
plants to maintain it: Even so Schools, which are as Seminaries to Gods
Church, without which the Church fails to decay, ought to be maintained;
because they serve to make supply of Ministers.

2 As trayning makes Dogs fit for hunting: So Schools and learning, makes
nature profitable.

The holy Scripture above the Church.
1 AS the Sun is clear and bright, not because that men do judge it to be
so, but rather men do judge it to be so, because it is so indeed, and can judge
of it none otherwise: Even so the holy Scriptures, contained in the canonical
books of the old and new Testament, are the infallible word of the living
God; not because the Church does judge and allow it to be so, but rather the
true Catholic Church, does judge and allow it to be so, because that it is so
indeed: and can judge of it none otherwise; no more then the clear and bright
eyes, can judge of the light and brightness of the Sun; of the which the
blind can give no judgment; even as the unfaithful and reprobate, can give no
judgment of the word of God, nor yet allow it.

2 As the Laws of Princes ruling by Justice, ought to be received, professed,
and practiced of all their subjects: Even so much more the Church ought to be
governed by the Laws of Christ, her Lord and King.

3 As the Laws and ordinances given by Moses, who was but a servant; might not
be abrogate, chopped, or changed of any mortal creature, without the
displeasure of the Almighty: Even so, much less, those Laws and ordinances
of the Lord Jesus, being the chief Lord and ruler over all. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal.
3.10. John. 10.4, 5. and 16.13, 14.

Schoolemaister.
1 AS it is the part of a good Husband, to understand the nature and fertility
of the ground, which he does till: So it is the part of a good Schoolemaister,
to discern the disposition and nature of his Scholar.

2 As Prometheus did make marvelous Images, such as none other ever could: So
a wise, discreet and learned Schoolemaister, prepares to a child of an
excellent wit, that which an ignorant and unlearned Master utterly destroys.

Scholar.
1 AS if Appelles should see the form of Venus, or Protogenes, the Image of
Hialisus, all with mire and dirt defiled, they would no doubt be sorry: So if a
man see his Scholar, whom he has brought up, now inclined and given to
lewdness, he cannot choose but greatly lament.

2 As there be some women that cannot conceive of some men, yet accompaning
with others, they are become fruitful, for the increase of children: So there
be some Scholars, that be unapt to learn under some Tutors, and
Schoolemaisters, but under others, they will soon prove of a good quick wit,
and learned.

3 As the goodness of the ground, is not much profitable for Corn, unless
there be a meet husbandman to till and sow the same: So it is not enough to
find good towardnes in a Scholar, unless there be added unto him, a meet
Schoolemaister to further the same.

4 As a drop of water falling from the house Eaues, wears and holloweth the
hard stone; not by force, but by his often falling: Even so a Scholar proves
learned, not by power or strength, but by much diligence, and great reading.

5 As Appelles became an excellent Painter, because there was never a day, but
he labored himself to some learning: So in like manner, a diligent Scholar,
by daily applying of his learning, and often exercising of virtue, attaineth to
perfect honor and virtue.

6 As young men, which have bestowed their time in laboring for learning and
knowledge, happily are apt and prone to come to great honor and preferment: So
contrariwise, those Scholars which are given to their own sensuality and
appetite, are to be avoided of all good men.

7 Like as the goodness of the ground, is not sufficient to bring forth
Corn, except there be a good Plower, and seed: Even so a toward and witty
Scholar, is not like to get good learning, except he have a master, a good
instructor, and books.

Suites in Law, how they are lawful.
1 AS a Soldier in lawful war may kill his enemy, and yet love him: Even a
man may forgive an injury that is done against him, and yet seek remedy by
Law, so it be in a Christian manner; that is, without private revenge: that it
be not scandelous to the Church; that it be to maintain peace; and that the
party offending, may be chastised, and brought to repentance for his fault.

2 Like as Physicians use desperate remedies, when weaker will not serve: Even
so must men use Law, as the last means, when all other fail.

Who is a Spiritual man.
AS the Scriptures call that man carnal, which is not renewed by the spirit,
and borne again in Christ's flesh, and all his works like, even the very
motions of his heart and mind, as his learning; doctrine and contemptation of
high things; his preaching, teaching, and study in the Scripture; building of
Churches, Schools, or Hospitals; founding of Colleges; giving of Alms; and
whatsoever he does, though they seem Spiritual, and after the Law of God
never so much: So contrariwise, he is Spiritual which is renewed in Christ, and
all his works which spring from faith, seem they never so gross; as the
washing of the Disciples feet, done by our Savior Christ, and Peter's fishing
after the resurrection; yea deeds of matrimony are pure, Spiritual, if they
proceed of faith; and whatsoever is done within the laws of God, though if be
wrought by the body, as the very wiping of shoes and such like, howsoever
gross they appear outwardly, yet are sanctified. Ioh. 3.6. 1. Cor. 2.15.

The Scripture sufficient to confute errors.
1 LIke as if a man being taken with a Frenzy, the Physician should come and
offer him a medicine, which is of virtue to purge the superfluous humor, that
causes the disease, and to make him whole and sound, and the phrantike man
should refuse it, and take an other to his own contentation, that would do
him no good; were this medicine strengthlesse, and not able to help his
disease, because the patient desired to have an other, rather then that? Not
so. So in like manner, although some men refuse to have their errors, and
false opinions to be confuted by the word of God, desiring rather to be tried
by the writings of men, which can do them no good to establish their faith;
this makes not, but the Scripture is sufficient to confute and refell
erroneous doctrine, and all false opinions, though they take it not so.

2. As in the night season in darkesome places, men are wont to do all their
business by candlelight, so continuing until the broad day: Even so in like
sort whilst we abide in this world, where we are compassed about with the
gross darkness and ignorance of heavenly things, we must carefully give ear
to the prophecies of the word, take counsel at them, and govern our selves
wholly by them, so long, till the day of the Lord approach, and the time wherein
we shall clearly behold those things in the presence of God, which now in this
pilgrimage of ours, we believe and hope after. 2. Pet. 1.19.

3 As men enterchaungeably, are said to be wiser one then an other, when as one
is wiser in diverse points, and an other again in some other points: Even so,
if man's wisdom be able to do that which the revealed wisdom of God is not,
then is God wiser then man, not simply, but in some points; and man wiser then
God, not simply, but in some points; and therefore such as avouch, that the
wisdom of man is not able to refell and confute some errors, heresies, and
false opinions, which the word and revealed wisdom of God cannot, is to make
man wiser then God. Esaias. 29.14. 1. Cor. 1.20, 25. and 3.19.

4 Like as Abraham said to the rich glutton, being in torments, who would have
had him to have sent one to his Fathers house, to warn his five brethren,
least they also should come into that punishment. They have Moses, and the
Prophets (said he) let them hear them; and if they will not hear them,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead again: Luke
16.29, 31. Even so, they that will not be persuaded by such reasons as may be
alleged and brought, both for confirmation and confutation of any point,
either of doctrine or manners, out of the sacred Scriptures; surely they will
not be moved any thing at all, either with the authorities of Poets,
Philosophers, Orators, or other profane writers whatsoever; neither yet with
the reasons, that may be brought out of an Ecclesiastical writer, how famous,
learned, or notable so ever he were.

Sanctification.
1 LIke as Lot was vexed, and his righteous heart was grieved, with the
unclean conversation of the Sodomites from day to day: Even so ought our
souls to be vexed and grieved continually, at the wickedness of our time; and
to send up prayers to God for them, that they may be brought to the obedience
of his holy will. 2. Pet. 2.7. Ezech. 9.4.

2 Like as Joseph, Elias, and Elizeus, left their garments behind them: Even
so must the children of God, leave their carnal affection, etc. before they can
please God, and attain salvation by Christ.

3 As Worms and Flies, that have layne dead all winter, if they be laid in the
Sun in the spring time, begin to revive by virtue thereof: Even so when we
are united to Christ, and are as it were laid in the beams of this blessed
Son of righteousness, virtue is derived thence, which warmeth our benumbed
hearts dead in finne, and reuiueth us to newness of life, whereby we begin to
affect and like good things, and put in practice all the duties of Religion.

4 As the sight of him that is bleare-eide, is hurt by looking against the
Sun: Even so likewise, it is very dangerous to handle a thing that is pure,
with hands unwashed: and a man not to purge himself, that he may become a
vessel sanctified to honor; meet for the uses of the Lord, and prepared to
all good works. 2. Timo. 2.19, 21.

The Service of God, is to be preferred before all earthly things.
1 LIke as if a Servant that is factor for his M. beyond the seas, after many
years returning home to give accounts to his master, should yield a reckoning
of so much time and money, spent in carding, dicing, dancing; so much in
courting and wanton company; we would laugh at so fond a reckoning: but being
further asked by his master, what time he bestowed on his merchandise which he
sent him for, if he should answer none at all, nor that he ever thought or
studied upon that matter, we might the^ think him well worthy of al shame and
punishment: Eue^ so surely with much more shame and confusion shall they stand
before God at the day of judgment; who being placed here to so great a
business, as is the worship and service of God, have notwithstanding neglected
the same, bestowing their studies, labors and cogitatio^s, in the vain trifles
of the world: which is as much from the purpose, as if men being placed in a
course to run at a golden game of infinite price, they should leave their mark,
and make some step aside after flies or feathers, in the air; and some other
stand still, gathering up the dung off the ground: we would think these men not
worthy to receive so great a reward as this that was proposed and offered to
them.

2 Like as Doves, Pigeons, and Lambs, were offered in sacrifice, and
sanctified unto the Lord, under the Law, as well as Oxen: Even so children and
young men, ought to dedicate themselves to worship and serve God, as well as
old folk. Leuit. 5.5, 6. Numb. 28.3, 9. 2. Chro. 7.5. Psalm. 8.2. and 119.9.
and 148.12.

3 As the sacrificing Fire never went out, but burned continually upon the
Altar: Even so Christians ought to have a continual care of Gods Service. Number.
6.13.

Scorners.
LIke as old men for the most part are wayward, and think scorn to be told
of their faults: So likewise is this doting age of the world, wayward and
waspish, if when a Preacher shall reprove them of any vice that they are
faulty in.

Sin left by ungodly means.
AS a Bird, the more she strugleth, having lyme twigges on her wnges, the
faster is she ensnared: Or likewise a Fish taken with a bait: Or as a man that
washes him in a poole that is muddie in the bottom, the fowler he is: So
likewise a man being in Sin, striving to get out by ungodly means, he
infecteth himself the more with Sin.

Satan.
1 AS a Raven or carrion Crow, will seize first on the eye of a beast that
seems to be dead, knowing that if the eye be out, they may the easier get
their pray: So Satan will seek first to pecke at our eye of faith, and if
that be out, he will rule us as he will.

2 As a weak and brittle wall, is easily cast down, and overthrown with every
Engine; but an huge fense, a mighty strong wall, and a Tower that is firm,
and fensed on every side, does stand surely, and endures the force that
comes against it, without yielding, staggering, or falling: in so much that
the enemies that seek to overthrow it, are driven and constrained, to use
warlike engines and policy; yea and to batter and shake it, with engines,
torments, and ordenances of wars, which will send and throw out, stones,
weapons, bullets, and pellets, of iron and lead: Even so Satan, does most
easily overthrow, with every light temptation, frail and weak men, which are
not well settled in virtue, nor grounded in godliness, nor armed with the holy
word, and spirit of God: but to win and overcome (if he could) men that are
furnished with a strong and lively faith, and such as are stayed, and do rely
upon the Lords protection, he uses sundry subtilties, and most dangerous and
forcible temptations. Math. 4.1. etc.

3 Even as the Fisher, when he takes some great Fish, does not by and by
violently strike, and twitch her, but lets his fishing line go at the
length, until the fish do swallow down the hook, and so work her own
destruction; least if at the first, he should twitch her too hard, the fishing
line or third should break, and his bait and hook lost, the fish should
escape: Even so Satan the Devil, when he has gotten a poor sinner, fast
upon his hook, and has entangled and fettered him, in the chains of some
dangerous and deadly sin, and has bewitched him, with the forceries of the
flesh, and the world, he does not sodeinly oppress and exasperate him, least
at the first dash, he play the Devil openly and roughly, like a Devil, as he
is; the sinner should break his bands, and escape his snares: But he does
cherish him, and makes much of him, and does suffer him now and then, both to
speak, and to do some things that savor of virtue, that by little and
little, he being made fast, and dead sure, upon the hook of sin and
wickedness, he may by degrees work his own woe and utter destruction: So
that the devil does stretch out his angling rod, thread and all, not that he
may let the sinner escape, but that he may make him the surer, and hold him
the faster.

4 As Achfah, who when she had begged of her Father, an inheritance of the
South countries, then she must have certain grounds with Wells and Springs:
Even so, such a shameless beggar is Satan the devil, that he will still have
a little sin, and a little, and never leave, till by little and little, he
gets both body and soul into hell. Iosu. 15.18, 19.

5 As little Children, who know not what is good for them, for if they begin to
taste Honey once, they will not leave eating by their good wills, till they be
sick with eating: Even so, so sweet has Satan made sin to the taste of
the wicked, that they cry still a little more of it, and find no fault with
it; but that there is too little, and they cannot have enough.

6 As Flies are always busy about a sore place: So that is a sport or
pleasure to Satan, which is a sore or a pain to man.

7 As an Ox will eat no kind of grass, but that which is green and fresh:
Even so the devil will be sure to have his food, of the finest and best.

Spiritual graces from God.
LIke as the earth engendereth not rain, nor is able by her own strength,
labor or travel, to procure the same; but receives it of the mere gift of
God from above: Even so faith, grace, forgiveness of sins, or Christian
righteousness, are given us of God, without our works or deseruings.

2 As the earth of it self, is not able to get or procure to it self,
seasonable showers of rain to make it fruitful: Even so much less are we
able by our own strength, works, and deseruings, to win and procure to our
selves, faith, grace, forgiveness of sins, or Christian righteousness,
unless God himself by mere imputation, and by his unspeakable gift, do
bestow the same upon us.

Swearing.
LIke as he that makes a custom of striking with his hand, it is likely that
he should sometime strike unjustly: Even so he that makes a custom of
Swearing in true matters, will at the length, even forswear himself, in
matters of no importance, by reason of his custom and use, which he has got
in Swearing.

Sons by adoption.
1 LIke as if a King or Nobleman, should of mere love and favor take in a
beggar, nay a Traitor, and make him his heir: Even so God did with us, and
such favor did he freely show to so many of the sons of Adam, as it pleased
him to adopt, and so to make them his children. 1. John. 3.1. John. 1.12. Romans
8.14.

2 As Iaball the son of Adah, the wife of Lamech, is called the father of
such as dwell in Tents, for he was the first inuenter of Tents: And Iuball his
brother, is also called the father of such as play upon Harpes, and upon
Orgains or Pipes: yet we may not therefore call the Tents, Iabales children;
and the Orgains and Pipes, the sons of Iuball: Even so God is called the
father of the reprobate, but metaphorically, because he first created them;
but yet they can no more be called the adopted Children of God, then the Tents
might be called the Children of Iaball, or the Harpes and Organes, the children
of his brother Iuball. Gene. 4.20, 21.

3 As the Sun, which sometime shines and sends forth her light,
dispersing the clouds, and sometimes again is hidden under the clouds: Or as
the Sea is one while ebbing, and an other while flowing: Or as the Moon is
sometimes waxing, and sometimes waning: Even so the adopted children of God, by
reason of their manifold corruptions, imperfections, and rebellious thoughts
of their hearts, have not the spirit of God always felt in themselves, nor
perceived in them by others in a like measure; but it is in them, sometimes in a
greater measure, sometimes in a less.

4 Like as Trees planted by the water side, which do bring forth fruit in due
season, yet the same Trees have both a summering and wintring, a spring time,
and a fall of the leaf; when Winter comes they seem as though they were dead,
but in Summer they shall wax fresh and green again; and yet the fruit of the
same Trees are first in the sap only, then it comes into buds, and so into
blossoms; whereof some are smitten with blastings, some are nipped with frost
and cold, and some are eaten with Worms; but if they escape all these, then
from blossoms, they come to be Apples: and at the first they are green and
lively, and some do lust to eat them, but they are still hard and harsh, but
in time they come to their full growth: And when they are ripe, then are they
either shaken down with the wind, and Swine devour them: Or if they be
fairly gathered; yet are they plucked from the Tree that has borne them, then
are they bought and sold, whereof some perish and are cast out of doors: The
fairest and the sweetest, are brought either to the fire to be roasted, or to
the Table to be pared and cut in pieces, and so to be eaten; then the tree is
naked and seems to be dead, but the next Spring do fetch all again: So
likewise are the fruits of the spirit in the adopted children of God; first in
the sap of faith only, which is hidden in the heart: then it comes into good
thoughts; then into good works by degrees; but many times they are nipped and
smitten in the bud, or in the blossom; that is, either in thoughts, or words,
that they never come to works. The works likewise of the Sons of God, are
at the first fair and fresh, but yet hard and harsh; and when they are come to
any perfection, they are either wind-shaken and devoured by beasts, or smitten
with persecution; then are they bought and sold, and every man handles them
as they list: In a word, the fairest, the pleasantest, and the best of our
works, must be pared and picked for dainty mouths, and queasie stomachs,
and in the end consumed of all; and then are our labors come to their
perfection, whether they be of the Church or Commonwealth; and then do many
of Gods children, think themselves naked and dead, and there is no cause why
they should; for their fruits whether they perish in the bud, or in the
blossom, or in the ripening, or howsoever they be handled; yet they prove
that the sap of Gods spirit is in them; and the next spring of Gods grace will
fetch all again. Psalm. 1.3.

5 As men say of fruit, this is but little, but it is good; here be not many of
them, but those that are of them, are very dainty, they are right, of such and
such a kind: Even so the adopted children of God may say; My faith is but little
and weak; my love is not so much as I would it were; my zeal is but little,
and my patience is but small; but it is true faith, and true love, and true
zeal, and true patience, even from the very heart root, without dissembling;
O Lord increase it, and strengthen it. Luke. 17. 5. Mark. 9.24.

6 As the adopted Sons of God, are planted by the ministry of the word and
spirit: Even so they flourish and abound in fruit by the same means, as also by
the Sacraments and prayer, etc. Psalm. 92.13, 14. Romans 1.17.

7 Like as if a King, Prince, or Nobleman, should make a poor beggar borne,
his loving Son and heir by adoption; he were greatly bound to love him, and
to be thankful unto him for ever: Even so much more we ought to love the
Son of God Christ Jesus, that has made us Sons and heirs to his Father,
by his death and redemption.

Salvation.
1 AS an Helmet saves the head of a Soldier, in the day of battle: So
Salvation, which comes from the Lord, saves and protecteth us, from the
deadly wounds of our spiritual adversaries. Ephe. 6.17.

2 As the Pismire provides food in Summer time, to live by in Winter: So in
like manner, we must labor to attain and get Salvation, with the means
thereof, in the Summer of prosperity, that so we may live spiritually in the
Winter of adversity.

2 As a supper is made, when the day draws to an end: Even so is full
Salvation given to the godly, about the end of the world.

4 Like as the Infant cannot live without a Nurse: So neither can we have
Salvation without Christ.

The Spirits to be tried.
AS Merchants credit men so far as their wealth and money will reach, but
yet trust not them, that do not keep their day and credit: Even so in the
promises that deceivers make unto their fellows, we must regard what ground
they have for them, and how they can be performed.

Salvation to be preferred before either profit or pleasure.
1 AS the eye is marvelous necessary, for the guiding of the whole body, and
a member that hardly may be spared, yet if there come danger unto the rest of
the body by it, we must rather suffer the loss of it, then the whole body
should perish for it: Even so we are to loose with contented minds, our
dearest friends, or whatsoever commodities of this life, though we can as
hardly spare them as our right eye, if they hinder us in the way of life and
Salvation. Math. 9.47.

2 Like as when a man's foot is so soar, that it cannot be healed, and puts
the other parts of the body in danger to be infected by it, is wont to be cut
off, for the preservation of the rest: Even so when our friends, or any earthly
commodity whatsoever, shall become hurtful to our souls, and endaunger us to
loose life everlasting, we must then reject them. Math. 18.8.

They whom God sets on work must needs Speak.
AS when the Lion roareth, whosoever is within his danger, cannot choose but
be afraid: So when the Lord Speaks, what Prophet or preacher of his, can
hold his peace. Iere. 47.2. Amo. 3.8.

Security is the high way to destruction.
AS the Ox, when he is driven to the Butchers stall, goes willingly, because
his hope is, that he shall be driven to some better Pasture, and never fears
until the Axe be ready to be laid upon his head: Or as a fool when he is
led to the stocks, goes cheerfully, and never fears until his feet be
fast snared therein: So likewise many men go securely forwards, weltering in
the broad way, without remorse of conscience; persuading the^selus that that is
the perfect way, because the greatest number do walk therein, and never
perceive their own folly, until till they snared in the traps of destruction.

A Spiritual man discerns all things.
AS a man of clear eyesight, is able to judge of colors, and to know one
color from an other: Even so such as are endued with the grace of God, do as
plainly and evidently judge of Gods word, and try out the truth thereof, from
the devises and doctrines of men.

Scriptures.
1 AS the Laws must be interpreted, not according to the censure and
judgment of them, to whom they were given, but after the will and meaning of
the Judge, and Lawgiuer which made them: So the Scriptures must be interpreted
by the Scriptures, and the word by the word, and that which is spoken obscurely
in one place, by that which is declared and uttered more plainly in an other
place.

2 As the Carpenter knows his Rule to be straight, not by an other Rule
applied unto it, but by it self, for casting his eye upon it, he presently
discernes whether it be straight or no: So likewise we know and are
resolved, that Scripture is Scripture, even by the Scripture it self, though
the Church say nothing: so be it we have the spirit of discerning, when we
read, hear, or consider of the Scripture. And yet the testimony of the
Church, is not to be despised, for though it breed not a perswasiton in us, of
the certainty of the Scripture, yet it is a very good inducement thereto.

3 Like as the Physicians in their books, do most diligently discribe, even
such diseases as are most filthy, not to the intent to praise and commend them,
or else allow the^; but to the end they may be exactly known, and the more
perfectly cured: So the holy Scripture in sundry places, does most manifestly
rehearse mischievous deeds, even such as are to be abhorred; not to the
intent to teach and command the same; but to the end we might know them the
better; and judge thereof, not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit of God; and also that we might warily avoid them.

4 As the precious stone called Drachonites, cannot be polished, nor needs
any Art or cunning, to make it either trimmer or fairer; for it is both
pleasant and bright of it self: Even so the holy Scriptures, has her glory
and brightness of herself, and needs not the artificial colors and
shows, either of Phylosophie, Rhethoricke, or any other Art.

5 Even as the cogitation and senses of man, are most hard to be known; yet
notwithstanding, our frindes, whom we fervently love, and with whom we are
continually conversant, do oftentimes, even by a beck, open unto us the
cogitations and senses of their minds, without any token of words and speech by
them spoken: So shall it come to pass in the holy Scriptures, so that a man
love them, and be continually conversant in them; he which seeks, finds;
unto him that knocks, it shall be opened. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. Prou.
14.6. Math. 11.25. and 13.11.

6 Like as in a Merchants Ship, are carried diverse things necessary for man's
life: So in the Scriptures are contained all things needful to salvation. Ioh.
5.39. and 16.13. and 20.30, 31, 2. Timo. 3.15, 16, 17.

7 As whatsoever Gold is without the Temple, is not sanctified: So whatsoever
sense is without the holy Scripture, although unto some it seem wonderful, yet
it is not holy, because it is not contained in the sense of the Scripture.
Math. 12.3, 4, 5. and 15.7, 8. and 22.31.

The Soul that sins shall die.
LIke as every man that eats sower Grapes, his own teeth shall be set on
edge: So likewise, shall every one that commits iniquity die, not for
others, but for his own sin. Ezech. 18.2. Iere. 31.30.

A Sorrowful man.
AS the Pellicane is wont to keep alone, and without company of other Birds,
and whose voice or singing has no pleasantness in it: So likewise such is the
estate of a Sorrowful man, and an heavy heart forsaken of all men, even of
those whom sometime he took to be his dear friends. Psalm. 102.6.

Impossible to Serve God and riches.
AS impossible as it is at one and the same time, for one man to serve two
diverse and sundry Masters, for that he cannot be diligent, and employ himself
about and upon the business of the one, but he must needs neglect the others
affairs: So likewise impossible is it for a man to addict himself to Serve
God and riches, or that which belongs to them. Math. 6.24.

Slothful.
1 AS a hedge or good fence of Thorn, is hard to pass through: So is every
way of gaining or getting to the Slothful. Prou. 15.19.

2 As Viniger is bad and hurtful to the teeth, and smoke noisome to the eyes:
Even so much more hurtful, then either of both, is a Slouthful servant, to
them that sends or sets him about any business. Prou. 10.26.

How to carry our selves in Sickness and death.
AS a man that is to pass through a great water, does not so much cast his
eyes upon the water, as on the bancke, that is on the other side: So we also
in the time of Sickness and death, are not so much to respect the
grieuousnesse of the same, as that which follows death, namely life
everlasting.

Sorrows.
1 LIke as when a man by bleeding at his nose, is brought into danger of his
life, the Physician lets him blood in an other place, as in the arm, and
turns the course of the blood an other way to save his life: Even so we must
turn our worldly Sorrows; for the loss of goods or frindes, to a godly
Sorrow for our offenses against God. 2. Cor. 7.10.

2 As the Moaths do hurt garments, and Worms the wood: Even so does Sorrow
and heaviness, hurt the heart of man.

3 Even as filthy matter or rottenness of a boil, blaine, or push, being
within the flesh, does greatly grieve and vex sore the body that is sick; but
if it break and run out, the pain is mittigated: So Sorrow being closed and
shut up in the heart of man, does mightily torment him; but being thrust out,
with tears and groans, the heart is somewhat eased, and the mind a little
pacified. Ezech. 24.16, 17.

4 As a great and thick smoke, vapouring out of a foul black fire, unless
it have free passage, and some vent or way, where through it may go out, will
all too darken, bestinch, and make black the house: Even so, Sorrow and
grief, proceeding out of the hot fire of adversities and calamities, being
shut up in the house of man's heart, does make it exceeding black, and does
corrupt it, with black and bitter choler, unless through the mouth or eyes,
there be a breathing out of sighs, fet from the bottom of the heart; and
streams of tears trickling down the cheeks. Yet an effeminate and desperate
wayling, either for the dead, or for any other cause, as of men without hope,
is utterly to be misliked; and that Stoicall opinion also, that a wise man
should never be moved, neither with mercy, Sorrow, mirth, or anger, is to be
avoided.

Security causes contempt of Christ.
AS they that are in health, and have no need of the Physician, and therefore
seek little or nothing after him: So they that know not the dangerous
diseases of their souls, but think themselves in case good enough, do seek
little after Christ, and set little by him. Math. 9.11. Mark. 2.17. Luke 5.31.

Striving against God.
AS he that beats his heels, and kicketh against sharp pricks, does
nothing but hurt his own heels: So he that Strives against God, prevails
nothing, but harmeth himself. Act. 9.5.

The Stewards reward.
1 AS men be bountiful unto such servants, whose faithfulness and deligence
they have good trial off, as well in their absence, as presence; and on the
contrary side, they are angry, severe, and sharp, to them which deceive
their expectation, and do not answer the trust, which is reposed in them:
Even so much more justly, will God put the like difference, in rewarding or
punishing, the good endeavors or negligence of them, to whom he has
committed services of trust, in his people and Church. Math. 24.45, 46. etc.

2 As men have just cause, with more sharpness, and greater severity, to
punish those servants, to whom they have showed their mind and will, and yet
their business is neglected; then to others, who therefore do it not, because
they know it not: So likewise God, to whom so ever he has revealed most, and
upon whom he has bestowed most greatest gifts of knowledge; if
notwithstanding they be negligent in using their gifts, to the profit of Gods
Church, them will he most severely and sharply, above all other punish. Luke
12.47, 48.

Servants of sin.
AS men are their servants, to whose commandments they yield all obedience:
Even so if Christians obey sin, they are the Servants of sin, whose wages is
death. Romans 6.16, 22, 23.

Gods Spirit purified.
1 AS clean water washes and makes clean our bodies: So the Spirit of God,
makes our hearts and souls clean, in the eyes and sight of God. Ezech. 36.25.

2 As no man that has the Spirit of God, can blaspheme Christ and worship
Idols: So none can acknowledge Christ for Lord and God, without the same
Spirit. 1. Cor. 12.3.

3 As John by the fire and Spirit, means nothing but the Spirit of God, which
purges and purifieth as the fire does. Math. 3.11. Even so our Savior, by
Water and the Spirit, meaning nothing else, but the Spirit of God, which
cleanses the filth of sin, and cools the boiling heat of an unquiet
conscience; as water washes the thing, which is foul, and quenches the heat
of the fire. John. 3.5.

Sin makes our bodies the Devils dungeon.
LIke as if a man had a fair house, wherein he must entertain a King, and
should make thereof a Swinstie, or a stable, all men would say, that he did
greatly abuse both the house and the King: Even so man's body being at the first
made a Palace, for the everliving God, if a man shall abuse it by drunkenness,
swearing, lying, fornication, or any uncleanness, he does make it in stead of
a Temple for the holy Ghost, to be a stie or stable for the Devil. For the
more filthy a man's body is, the more fit it is to be a dwelling place for
Sin and Satan, 1. Cor. 6.15.

Satan's subtlety.
1 AS Naab the Ammonite, warring against the men of Iabes Gilead, would not
raise his siege, but upon condition that he might thrust out all their right
eyes: So Satan the enemy of our souls, who seeks by all means possible
our destruction, never cease to assault us, until he have deprived us of
the eye of right judgment, that we may not see our salvation in Christ Jesus
only. 1. Sam. 11.2. 1. Pet. 5.8.

2 Like as if men by long experience, and observation of the natural causes,
can attain unto such great knowledge of things to come, that they can tell
twelve years before the change of the Moon, the Eclips of the Sun, what
day, hour, and minute it shall be: Even so much more Satan (who is a more
excellent nature then man, and greater experience) has knowledge of things to
come, for that he has been practiced therein, from the beginning of the
world, and is also more circumspect in observing of causes, because thereby he
deceives man, a poor simple soul.

3 As Amalek resisted the children of Israel, that they might not enter into
the land of Promise: So does the Devil with Christians, that they should not
enter into heaven. Deuteronomy. 25.17. Exodus 17.8, 9.

Spiritual man.
AS a man sore wounded and diseased, may for a time or season, be deprived
almost of all operations of the natural life, to the outward show of his own
indument and feeling: Even so may a Spiritual man be soar wounded by Satan,
and diseased by the present sight and feeling of his sinful corruption,
specially in temptation; that he may think, yea appear to others, that the
life of the spirit is not in him.

Impenitent Sinners.
LIke as a Captain that has taken some hold or Sconse, does rule and govern
all therein, and disposes it at his will and pleasure: Even so it is with all
blind, ignorant, and impenitent Sinners; not one Devil alone, but even legions
of Devils possess them, and rule their hearts: and therefore how soever they
may sooth themselves, and say, all is well, for God is merciful: yet their
case is far worse then Mary Magdalens was, who had been possessed with seven
Devils. Mar. 16.9.

Preventing of Sin.
1 EVuen as a Father when he sees his child too bold and venterous about
Fire and Water, takes and holds it over the fire, or over the water, as though
he would burn or drown it, whereas his purpose indeed, is nothing else but to
prevent danger for the time to come: So in like manner, Christ's subjects are
bold to sin by nature, and therefore to prevent a mischief, he does exercise
them with affliction, and seems for a season, as though he would quite forsake
his Church; but his meaning is, only to prevent offenses in times to come.
Hosea 2.6.

2 As Beasts, which going in the way see green pastures, and desire to enter
in, and therefore go to the hedge, but feeling the sharpness of the thorns,
dare not venture to go in: So likewise Gods people, like unto wild beasts, in
respect of sin, viewing the green pastures of this world, which are the
pleasures thereof, are greatly affected therewith: and if it were not for the
sharpness of crosses and temptations, which are Gods spiritual hedge, by
which he keeps them in, they would raunge out of the way, and rush into
Sin, as the Horse into the battle.

Sentence of condemnation, why set down.
AS a wise Father of a family, will check his servant, and if the cause
require, correct him in his childs presence, and that the child it self may
learn thereby to fear, and stand in awe of his father: So likewise Christ the
most careful and wise governor of his Church, has set down the Sentence of
condemnation against the wicked, that the children of God in this world, when
soever they shall hear or read the same, might be moved thereby to stand in
great fear of God, and more dutifully perform obedience to his
commandments. Mat. 25.41.

The holy Spirit regenerateth not all.
AS the Sun does not warm every thing that it lighteneth: So neither does the
Spirit regenerate, nor draw to the love of wisdom, all which it illuminateth,
and to whom he gives the knowledge of his doctrine, but only the godly and
the faithful. Math. 24.46.

Mot to grieve the Spirit of God.
1 AS men use their guests friendly and courteously, showing unto them all
service and duty: So likewise must we do to Gods Spirit, which is to come to
dwell and abide in us, doing nothing in any case, which may disquiet or molest
him. Ephe. 4.30.

2 Like as when the Arc of the covenant, which was a sign of the presence of
God, was in the house of O bed Edom, then the Lord blessed him, and all his
house: Even so much more when the holy Ghost dwelles in any man's heart, there
is more then the Ark of the Lord present, even God himself: and therefore such
an one, may look for a greater blessing, if he grieve not him by sinning. 2.
Sam. 6.11. 1 These. 5.19.

The use of all prescribed means to Salvation, is necessary.
1 IF a King should give unto one of his subjects a Princely Palace, upon
condition that he shall go unto it, in the way which he shall prescribe, he
would (no doubt) take what pains he could to know the way, and afterward
endeavor to keep and continue in it: So likewise the kingdom of heaven, is the
most glorious and royal Palace that ever was, and God has bestowed the same
on his Elect: and he requires nothing at their hands, but that they would
turn their faces from this world, and walk unto it, in the way which he has
chalked forth unto them in his word; Therefore if they be desirous to have
Salvation and life everlasting, they must come forth of the broad way, that
leads to destruction, and enter into the straight way, that leads to eternal
life: they must acqaint themselves with the guides, which are the faithful
Ministers of the word, that will cry unto them, Here is the way, walk ye in it,
when they shall go to the right hand, or to the left.

2 As Simeon going into the Temple by the motion of Gods spirit, met with
Christ: So if we will be ruled with the same spirit, and frequent holy
assemblies, we shall meet with our Salvation.

Christ's Spirit.
1 AS the light cannot match with darkness: So likewise Christ's Spirit
cannot accord and match with sin, and lusts of the flesh. 2. Cor. 6.14.

2 As Rain with the moisture thereof fatteth the earth, to make it fruitful:
Even so the holy Spirit, with his invisible grace does make us fruitful, to
produce the fruits of righteousness. Ioh. 7.38.

3 As fire consumes every thing that it lays hold on: So the Spirit of
God, consumes all the corruption of our hearts, and original sin in us.

4 As fire gives light to the bodily eyes: So the Spirit gives light to the
eyes of the soul. Ephe. 1.17.

5 As fire gives life and quickneth those that be benumbed with cold: So the
Spirit of God, does quicken and put life into those that be dead in their
sins. Ephe. 3.5.16.

6 As a man that made a bargain, will be careful to keep the earnest penny,
that he loose not all his bargain: So also must we be careful to keep the
Spirit of God, the earnest penny of our salvation, that we be not deprived of
the same. Ephe. 1.13.

Sacraments.
AS Circumcision, (which was a Sacrament of the old Law) was a seal in that
time to our Fathers of righteousness: Even so be our Sacraments to us in these
days, seals of Gods promises unto us, and all have one strength and virtue.
Romans 4.11.

Sin of set purpose.
AS he that strikes the King ignorantly, not knowing him to be the King, is
nothing in so much fault as he that strikes him, knowing it is the King: Even
so he that does offend God of ignorance, is to be less blamed, then he that
wittingly and willingly offends him. Luke 12.47, 48.

God gives us understanding to know the Scripture.
EVen as the Disciples of our Savior Christ had no knowledge, nor
understanding, until God gave it the^: So fares it with all the rest of Gods
children, that although they hear never so much his Apostles Preach, yea,
Christ himself personally sounding in their ears; yet except the Lord open
their hearts and minds as he did Lydia, it avails not one. Math. 16.17. Act.
16.14.

Sins are our greatest enemies.
1 AS a huge and mighty fire, will be assuaged, and at the length quite put
out, if the sticks and other matter, that does chearish and increase it, be
withdrawn and kept from it: So in like manner, our affections and troubles
will come to an end, if we do cease to do evil, and give over sinning,
before it give over us; for our Sins are as dry sticks and stubble, wherewith
the fire, not only of the wrath and malice of Infidels and heretics, but also
of the wrath and indignation of God, is kindled, increased, and most mightily
stirred up against us.

2 As we wonder at the Creator, not only in great matters, as heaven, earth,
the Sun, Elephants, etc. but also in like creatures, as pismires, lice,
worms, flies, etc. So a soul given to Christ, must as well regard little as
great matters, and Sins, knowing that we must give an account for every
idle word. Math. 12.36.

For the health of the Soul, the body is to be kept in subjection.
LIke as when one part of a man that is sick, is not capable of the remedy,
wherewith he may be helped, the Physician is wont to apply the same remedy to
an other part; as if one be grieved with an extreme Ach of the head, then the
Physician uses to strike a vain of the arm, because the head will not abide
Phlebotomie, or blood letting: So, that we may help and heal many diseases of
the Soul, we must keep the body in subjection to the spirit, and tame the
lusts of the flesh, and labor to bridle our affections, and to keep them
within the compass of reason, sobriety and temporance.

Spirits that die in the Lord.
EVen as the Spirit of Christ, passed from the Cross into Paradise, at the
very same moment that it departed out of the body, and thence returned into
the body, that whole Christ in respect that he was man, might be afterward
glorified: So likewise all good Christians, do believe that their Spirits and
souls, who die in the Lord, do straightway depart unto God, there to enjoy
that measure of glory that is appointed for them; until that they being
adjoined again unto the same bodies (which will be the very same in substance
truly corporal, though in a far more excellent estate) shall live under Christ
their head for evermore. Luke 23.43. Reave. 14.13.

The Lords Supper.
1 AS Bread nourishes and strengthens man, and gives him ability to labor:
So the body of Christ, eaten by faith, feeds and satisfies the soul of man,
and furnishes the whole man to all duties of godliness.

2 As Wine is drink to the thirsty, and makes merry the hearts of men: Even
so the blood of our Lord Jesus drunken by faith, does quench the thirst of the
burning conscience, and fills the hearts of the faithful with unspeakable joy.

The holy Spirit the earnest penny of our inheritance.
1 AS in a thing that is bought, there is sometimes given an earnest penny, to
wit, some part of the money agreed on, as well for the beginning of the payment;
as by consequent, for the assurance that the bargain shall be held firm: So
likewise the holy ghost, who by faith engenders peace and joy in the hearts of
the faithful, is the earnest penie, assuring us, by this beginning of the
spiritual blessings, which God promises to his children; that he holds us
for his possession, purchased to the praise of his glory; and that at the
length he will gather us into the full enjoying of the inheritance of heaven.
Ephe. 1.13, 14. Romans 8. 29, 30.

2 Like as when a man does purchase an inheritance, he first gives earnest
that is, some part of the money promised, that serves as a beginning to the
payment of the total Sum: So God having redeemed us by the blood of Jesus
Christ, gives the earnest penny of his holy Spirit; that is to say, a
beginning of knowledge of the true God, of sanctification, of love to God, of
righteousness, and of peace, and joy in the holy Spirit, attending until he
finish in us the communication of that light, joy, holiness, and glory, that
we shall have perfectly in heaven. Ephe. 1.13, 14.

3 As among men, when things that pass too and fro, though they be in
question, yet when the Seal is put too, they are made out of doubt: Even so
when God by his Spirit, is said to seal the promise in the heart of every
particular believer, it signifies that he gives unto them evident assurance,
that the promise of life belongs unto them. Ephe. 4.30.

Sluggards.
AS the Drunkards drinks till he has drunk all the money out of his purse,
and all the wit out of his head, and all goodness out of his heart, that there
is no difference between him and the beast, except it be in this; that the
beast can go and keep his way, which the drunkard cannot do: So the Suggard
sleeps in all security, and neglects his business, and puts off all care,
for doing of all his duties, until he has slept all thrift out of his shop,
and all his friends out of his company, and all Gods graces out of his heart,
and all comfort out of his soul, and all strength out of his body, and all
conscience out of his dealing; till his stock be spent, and his occupying
decayed, and his customers gone; and Gods spirit gone, and all be gone; and
till nothing be left but fear and shame, with poverty, penury, and a bare
head and feeble shoulders to bear off the blows.

Singing of Psalms.
1 AS that is a godly sorrow, that drives us to prayer; a blessed heaviness,
that makes us seek unto the Lord: So that is a godly mirth that ends with
Singing of Psalms, and heavenly joy, that at the least wise makes us more fit
to serve God. 2. Cor. 7.10. Col. 3.16. Ephe. 5.18. Iam. 5.13. 2. Chro. 35.25.

2 As no man can truly pray, without the feeling of his wants: So no man can
Sing from his heart, unless he have some persuasion of Gods favor; and so as
affliction drives him to pray; so mirth moves him to Sing. Act. 15.25.

3 As all knowledge is increased, especially by hearing, reading, and
conferring about the Scripture: So all affections are most of all stirred up,
by meditation, prayer, and Singing of Psalms. Psalm. 147.1.

4 Like as when the light of the Gospel came first in, Singing of Ballads
(that was rise in Popery) began to cease, and in time was clean banished
away in many places: So likewise the sudden renewing of them, and hasty
receiving of them every where, makes us to suspect, least they should drive
away the Singing of Psalms again, seeing they cannot stand together; of which
we are so much the more jealous, because we see that in other places also,
where these be not received in, yet the Singing of Psalms is greatly left,
over that it had wont to be.

5 As the ungodly have a grace in their wickedness, and are the better liked
of among the ungodly (though indeed they are then most deformed) So this
singing of Psalms makes us comely before God, and lovely in the eyes of his
Church, when we (having prepared our hearts thereunto) do sing with affection,
with reverence, and with understanding. Psalm. 331. Reave. 14.3.

6 Even as a costly garment may be comely in it self, yet shall it not become
us, unless we be fit for it, and it be well put upon us: So though to sing be
never so comely in it own nature, yet it becomes not us, except we be
prepared for it, and do sing David's Psalms with David's spirit. Ephe. 5.19.
Colloss. 3.16. 2. Chro. 29.30.

7 Like as the expert Physicians use for the most part to annoint the brinks of
the Cups with honey, when they minister their bitter potions to sick
children, least they should abhor their health for the bitterness of their
drinks: Even so the holy Ghost perceiving that mankind is hardly trained to
virtue, and that we be very negligent in things concerning the true life
indeed, by reason of our great inclination to worldly pleasures and
delectations, has invented and mixed in his form of doctrine, the delectation
of Music by the Psalms, to the intent that the commodity of the doctrine,
might secretly steal into us, whilst our ears be touched with the
plesantnesse of the melody: so that for this end be these sweet and
harmonious songs devised for us, that such as be children, either by age, or
children by manners, should indeed have their souls wholesomely instructed,
though for the time, they seem but to sing only.

Sin the cause of affliction.
AS no man ought to accuse and blame the Physician, as though he were the only
occasion of the corrupt humors within the body, notwithstanding that he has
brought and driven them out, that a man may evidently see and perceive them;
but the misbehauiour and intemperate diet of the man himself, is the very
right occasion, and the only root thereof: Even so we ought not to ascribe
any blame or fault unto God, if he send us heaviness, pain and trouble, but
to think that it is a medicine and remedy meet for our sins; and every man
to ascribe the ve^ie cause and occasion thereof unto himself, and his own
sins; and to refer blame to nothing else. Dan. 9.5, 6, 7. Jonah. 1.12.

Our Spirit must strive to overcome the flesh.
LIke as the Spirit far passes and overcomes the flesh in Christ: Even so
must it do in us also, that we have more respect unto God, and unto life
everlasting, then unto this our worm eaten flesh.

Sins of others are not to be imitated, or to be our excuses.
LIke as if in walking, thou should see him fall that goes before thee,
thou go not to fall with him, but thou art to be so much the more
circumspect that thou fall not as he did: Even so we are to remember, that
those foul falls, and gross faults of David, and of S. Peter, and of others,
are set before us, first that they should be to us as a mirror of the frailty
and weakness of man, to acknowledge, that if we be exempted and freed, it is
by the grace of God: and secondly, that we should so much the more stand upon
our guard, and be watchful, least we likewise fall.

Sorrow for imminent danger of death, war, hell, etc.
AS there was great lamentation in Syon, because of Gods justice for their
sins: Or as there was great lamentation for Pharao in Egypt, because he was
a Lion in the land, and a Dragon in the Sea; and as there was great Sorrow,
fasting, mourning, and weeping among the Jews because the King had decreed
their deaths: Even so we the inhabitants of England, have great cause of
lamentation, fasting, mourning, and weeping, because death is scaling our
windows, the beasts of the fields, to wit, the Pope and the Spaniard,
hungring to devour our bodies, to spoil our Country, and to shed our blood as
water upon the land; and our souls as prepared for the fire of hell, by reason
of sins in the common sort; of horrible cruelty in many of them that are
mighty; and of the general ignorance of Christ, according to his Gospel, in
every sort. Iere. 9.17, 18, 19. Ezech. 32.1, 2, 3. Hest. 4.3. Iere. 9.12.
Ezech. 32.4, 6. Math. 7.19. and 13.42, 49. Hos. 7.3, 4, 5.

Salvation is from God alone.
AS the virtue attractiue to draw Iron, is not in the Iron but in the Adamant:
Even so the virtue and power of Salvation, lies not in the Minister, but in
the power of the word, wrought by the spirit of God.

By our words, deeds, gestures and moouings, Satan knows the secrets of our
hearts.
AS a man holding in his hand an Angling rod, and with a baited hook fishing
in an obscure and troubled river, although he does not see the fish rush upon
the bait, yet he perceives very well, that the fish is taken, and hanged
upon the hook, because the Cork or bark of his fishing line is pulled down,
and hid under the water: So Satan, that most subtle and wily fisher, although
he sees not our thoughts, being in the secrets and bottomes of our hearts,
yet notwithstanding, by outward signs, he many times does know them; as by
our words, (for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks) by our
actions, and by the gestures of our bodies. Math. 15.19, 20. Prou. 6.18.

Our duty to read the Scriptures.
1 AS Artificers with their tools and instruments, do finish their work: So
by reading of the holy Scriptures, our selves are corrected, formed, and
renewed. Col. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.19. Ephe. 6.17. Romans 15.4. 2. Timo. 5.16. Act.
17.11. Psalm. 119.105. Dan. 9.2.

2 As Artificers cannot transform earth or wood into silver or gold, only
they can by their Art and workmanship, give form and shape unto things: But by
the reading of Gods word, thou may of a wooden or earthen vessel, make a
vessel of gold or silver; as says the holy Apostle Saint Paul, 2. Timo. 2.20,
21.

3 Like as there are some spices, which without brusing do yield no smell, but
the more they be chafed the sweeter they are: Even so is it with the holy
Scriptures, such as read but little can find no taste, but the more they be
perused and read; the more do they yield forth the treasures and pleasant
fruits hidden in them. Psalm. 25.14. John. 7.17. and 6.45.

4 As increase of strength grows to the body by meat: Even so the like
grows to the soul, by the reading of the holy Scriptures.

5 As a bar of iron by long lying in the fire waxes hot, red, and of the
nature of burning fire: Even so that soul that daily imployeth it self in
reading, and meditating the word of God, grows to be spiritual, divine,
heavenly, and kindled in the word of God. Ioh. 5.3^.

6 As some Birds use to sit by the waterside, that seeing the shadow of
ravening fowls flying in the air, they may escape them by leaping into the
water: So must Christians be even conversant in the hearing and reading the
word of God, that so they may behold as in a Glass, the sleights of the
Devil, may escape them, and so makes it their Glass to see their own sins
in; all which would (without unfeigned repentance) bring condemnation.

The Subjects duty to their Magistrates.
1 AS Saint Peter admonishes servants to be subject to their Masters, albeit
froward and peevish: So are Subjects bound to obey their Magistrates, albeit an
infidel, a wicked man or an Idolater. 1. Pet. 2.18. Romans 13.1. Tit. 3.1. 1.
Pet. 2.13, 14.

2 As Christian Religion does not subvert the order of Policy: So the
wickedness and impiety of the Magistrate, does not deprive him of his right
to command; neither does it exempt the Subjects from their duty to obey.

3 So long as there remains in Princes, the Image and ordinance of God: Even
so long continues the bond of Subjects, to yield obedience to Magistrates, not
as to men, but as to God. Exodus 9.16. Dan. 2.37. 1. Sam. 21. 1. etc. Iere.
26.7. and 29.7. and 35.9. Ezech. 29.18. 1. Sam. 26.9.

4 As God armeth the Magistrate with the sword, for the preservation of his
Subjects, against the violence of their enemies, and to enforce rebels to
yield obedience to their lawful decrees: So when alone, or with his Sargeants
and Officers, he is not able to perform this duty, he may and ought to
command his Subjects to help him to execute his office; and they are bound at
his commandment to take arms, and to employ themselves. Judge. 5.9, 23.

5 As by natural affection, the hands and other the members of the body, do
stand bound to employ themselves for the saftie of the body, but especially of
the head, against all violence and injury: So likewise ought all Subjects, to
think upon the natural bond and affection, and in duty under the conduct of
their head, to preserve the body of the Comminaltie; but especially the person
and authority of their Prince and Magistrate, against the violence and
endeavors of their enemies. 1. Sam. 11.6, 7. Judge. 21.8. etc.

6 As the Magistrate is by God authorized to leauie tolles, taxes, tributes,
and many other Subsidies of the people: So are the Subjects bound to furnish
and pay them. Romans 13.6, 7. Math. 22.21. and 17.25, 26, 27.

Salvation is desired of the godly.
AS all men of themselves be sinners, and through sin are in Gods wrath,
banished far away from him, condemned to hell, and everlasting damnation; and
none is clearly innocent but Christ alone: So every soul inspired by God, is
desirous to be delivered from sin and hell, and to obtain at Gods hands,
mercy, favor, righteousness, and everlasting Salvation.

Free from Sin by faith.
AS we being in the servitude of Sin, demonstrate and make known our
service, by giving over our member by the obeying of Sin from iniquity: Even
so we being made free from Sin by faith in Jesus Christ, and endued with
Gods spirit, a spirit of liberty, must needs demonstrate this freedom and
liberty, by giving over our members to the obedience of the spirit, by the
which we are lead and guided from virtue to virtue, and al kind of holiness.

No Sanctification, except we be united to the Church.
EVen as the spirit of man, does not strengthen the members of the body,
unless they be fast and surely joined together: So the holy Ghost, does not
revive and comfort the members of the Church, when they fall away, and will not
continue in league and fellowship with the servants of God, longer then they
are fast bound, and knit to the congregation of Gods people, in love and peace
in Christ; the holy Ghost does minister no strength, no consolation, no comfort
unto them; there remains nothing else in such men, but a numnesse, and
extreme blindness in heavenly things. And whiles in their arrogancy and
pride, they forsake and condemn the church of God, because they cannot draw
it into subjection, to their fond and fantastical humors, they become of men,
devils incarnate.

Sin is to be reproved in all estates.
AS those which have Corn fields, thinks it not a thing unmeet to be told
by their servants, of thistles and weeds which would hinder and mar the
Corn, if they provide not to have them plucked up: Even so it is not an
unworthy thing, to show unto those which are of high calling, the hurtful and
dangerous weeds, which would ouergrow and choke the heavenly seed of the
Gospel, sown in the Lords field.

Satan inflameth wicked cogitations into our minds by his temptations.
AS the Smith does not make himself the hot coals that be in his Forge, but
does blow the fire with bellows, and so the coals are kindled, and made hot
and fiery: So, the Devil does blow and inflame those dangerous and wicked
cogitations, which are conceived in our hearts and minds, with the bellows of
manifold temptations, and so laboring to kindle the fire of all iniquity, he
ministers nourishment to all our wicked and damnable purposes. For the heart
of man, is like unto a Smithes Forge; his evil and bad cogitations are hot
burning coals; he that does blow the bellows, to make them burn up, and to
consume both our souls and bodies, is the Devil, that ancient enemy of our
happiness and salvation.

Satan's craft to deceive Eve, and the world.
EVen as a Fouler does lay abroad and spread his net, to take the Birds, where
bait is, and there they may feed: So the Devil, when he would take Eve,
spread his net in gluttony, and tempted her with a beautiful Apple, till at
the length, to the harm and woe of all their posterity, both she and her
husband were taken, and trapt to our woes. Gene. 3.1, 2. etc. Ose. 13.6. Luke
6.25.

Similitudes in the Scripture.
AS Images and Pictures are not in all points alike, or correspondent to that
which they represent, but differ in colors, bigness, or thickness: So the
things and Similituds in the Scripture, are not in all points alike to that
which is likened unto them.

Service of man.
AS that Service of men which is done by constraint, carelessly, and
negligently, is justly hated and rejected: So the Lord hates and rejects all
Service of man, which proceeds not from a cheerful love, and earnest zeal
of his glory. 1. Cor. 13.13. and 16.14. Tit. 2.14.

Satan called God.
AS the belly is called a God, because they which are given to the pleasures
thereof, make more account of it then of God: So after the same sort is Satan
called a God, and the Prince of this world. 2. Cor. 4.4. John. 12.3. and 14.30.

Sin is noisome to Gods spirit.
AS the smoke of any filthy smelling thing, drives away Bees: So the smoke
of the dunghill of our corruptions, namely our Sins, will drive away the holy
Ghost out of our hearts.

Swearers.
LIke as if we see a man hold up his hand at the bar of an earthly Judge, we
pity him, and we are sorry for him: Even so much more ought we to pity
common Swearers and blasphemers, who are no better before God, then rebels,
that hold up their hands at the bar of his judgment seat, as guilty
malefactors. Exodus 2.7.

Little Sins to be regarded.
AS a man may die as well by the choking of a Fly, as by the devouring of a
Lion: Or as a Ship may as well be sunk by too much weight of Mustard seed, as
of great stones and lumpes of lead: So likewise little Sins will sink a man
to hell, as soon as great Sins.

Strength.
LIke as through wickedness man's mind is overcome, and brought into a base
slavery unto all evil: So likewise by Strength, it overcomes and has the
victory, and is advanced unto freedom and dignity.

The State of man.
AS the good estate of a Subject or servant, consists in this, that he
living in the favor and good liking of his King, or Master, procured by his
loyal obedience and faithful service, is free from all evils and injuries,
and enjoys al things either needful, or pleasant: So the State of man being
pure from sin, is good and happy; otherwise, if by sinning, and rebelling
against God, he incur his displeasure, most wretched and miserable.

Thankfulness for Gods graces and benefits.
1 LIke as a Husband loving his wife tenderly, (to make his affection known
unto her, by bestowing upon her many great presents, of Gold and costly
Jewels,) is much grieved if she dissemble the gifts which he has bestowed
upon her, and say she has purchased them by her own money: Even so God can
in no wise be pleased with us, if we will conceal, or else attribute to our
selves, the graces which he has bestowed upon us, which he would have to be
testimonies, tokens, and demonstrations of the inviolable love and fidelity,
that he bears unto us. Deuteronomy. 8.1, 2, etc. and 9.1. etc.

2 As a Hare or a Conie, cannot chewe their cud, unless they have champed it
before: Even so, if a man be presently Thankful, after a benefit received, so
shall he be the more able to call it to mind afterward.

Tale-bearers.
AS wood serves to kindle and keep fire: Even so Tale-bearers, stir up,
kindle, and nourishes strife. Prou. 26.20.

Humane Traditions.
AS the flowers of Lysimachus are fair to see, yet unsavory: So human
Traditions make a fair show, but there is no spiritual savor, or sweetness
in them.

Time seruers.
1 AS the Apple tree, which in the Spring time buds and opens it self, so
that it does as it were become white, by reason of the blossoms; but a shower
falling upon it, many of the blossoms are shaken off, and the frost also does
much more consume them; afterward, when the fruit begins to spring forth,
some great wind, (much of it being come forth,) falls down, and when it
waxes ripe, the Cater-piller comes, which, with other worms, gnaweth and
spoyleth it so much, that scarce the twentieth part, yea scarce the hundredth
part; many times remains: Even so it comes to pass with the hearers of the
Gospel; in the beginning thereof, every one coueteth to be a Protestant, and a
good Christian; every one likes of it very well; and the first fruits
thereof are very pleasant: but when wind, a shower, or tentation comes,
many fall away from it by companies: afterward sects and seditions arise, which
like unto woormes and cankers, gnawe and infect the fruits of the Gospel, and
so many false opinions spring up, that very few do persevere in the true
profession thereof. Math. 13.21, 21.

2 As the Reed is tottering, shaking, and yielding every way with the least
wind that blows: So likewise be all such as are weather-cockly Temporizers,
as in their words and deeds be wavering, vnco^stant, slippery, changeable,
fickle, faint-hearted, and dare not stoutly persist in their conceived opinion,
but as (turn-coates) say and unsay, do, and undo. Math. 11.7. Luke 7.24.

3 Even as lukewarm water does annoy the stomach so far, that the stomach
is constrained to cast up the same again: So those that be Time-seruers, and
lukewarm professors, are so offensive unto the Lord, that he must needs, and
will at the last, spew them out of his mouth. Reave. 3.16.

4 Like as the Hedgehog has two holes in his side, one toward the South, an
other toward the North, now when the southren wind blows, he stops up that
hole, and turns him Northward; and when the Northren wind blows, he stops up
that hole likewise, and turns him again Southward: Even so such are are al
Time-seruers and temporizers, they believe for a time, as long as the warm
Sun of prosperity shines upon them; but as soon as any storm of
persecution arises, by and by they have a starting hole to hide themselves in;
they change their Religion, and turn about with the time.

6 As a Top, which always runs round, and never goes forward unless it be
whipped: Or as a Mil-horse which making many steps, turns about, and is
continually found in the same place: Or as a door which riding upon his
hinges all the day long, is never a whit nearer at night: So likewise Newters
and Time-seruers, run beside the mark, by going forward and backward in a
Maze. Prou. 26.14. 2. Timo. 3.7.

7 As it was with the Tribe of Ephraim, which was as a Cake upon the harth not
turned, bakte on the one side, and raw on the other side: Or as the Laodiceans,
who were neither hot nor cold: So is it with all Time-seruers and Newters,
their Cake is dough, as we say, and they hold of both sides; and as Ambidexters
with Ehud, they play with both hands; and as the Sun in Ezechias time, they
go both forward and backward; running up and down, in and out, and yet indeed
are neither above, nor beneath; neither within, nor without. Ose. 7.8. Reave.
3.15. Judge. 3.15. Esaias. 38.8.

8 As an Ennuche, which is a man, and no man: Or as a Pu^neise, which is a
stone, and no stone: Or as a Bat, which is a Bird, and no Bird: Or as Fennel,
which is a tree, and no tree: Even so such are Time-seruers, men-pleasers, and
Newters, which go backwards and forwards, who will be sometimes Christians,
and no Christians.

9 As a Weauers shettle, which if it go forward one way, presently goes
backward again as much an other way: Or as a Weauer himself, such a one
Penelope was, who woul do, and undo, weauing that in the day time, which she
did unweave in the night: So in like manner, Time-seruers and Newters, build
and destroy, do and undo, say and unsay; for no man does more transgress,
then he that is doubtful, and uncertain in Religion, one while putting his
foot forward, an other while pulling it backward again. Job. 7.6.

Tears.
LIke as when the body receives a deep wound, at the first, ye shall see
nothing but a white line or dint made in the flesh, without any blood; yet stay
but a while, then comes blood from the wound in great abundance: So at the
first the mind is astonished and gives no Tears; but after some respite and
consideration, Tears follow.

Time.
1 LIke as a treasure, the more precious it is, the more warily and diligently
the owner thereof will safely keep it, and take better heed unto it: Even so
Time (considering nothing is more precious) should warily be used, and good
care taken, that it be not lost, without some profit gotten.

2 As they are worthy to be punished, that lewdly spend their money, and
waste away their lands, in riote, excess, and prodigality: Even so they are
much more to be blamed, that either idly, or ungodly spent their Time, which is
the greatest treasure that God gives. For money and riches being lost and
wasted, may be recovered again; but Time vainly spent can never be recovered
again.

3 As there is no man that loses money or any other thing, but some gains
and gets good by it: But the loss of Time turns to no man's avail.

4 As from the Ship, men through their swift sailing, trees and Towns seem as
it were to depart: So through the swift course of Time, first childhood
departs, then youth, and so at the length old age.

5 As men when they are dead and returned again to dust, cannot praise God,
nor declare his name, nor the great things which he has done for them: Even
so we are to take Time, while Time serves, and must do those things whilst
we are alive, that belong to our callings, for to that end was our life given
us. Esa. 29.5. Psalm. 30.9.

Time of peace more dangerous then of persecution.
AS the Sun and Wind, agreed on a day to prove their several strengths, in
taking a cloak from a way-fairing man; and in the forenoone, the wind used all
violence he could to blow off the said cloak; but the more he blew, the more
fast held the traveler his cloak, and gathered it more closely about him. At
afternoon the Sun sent forth his pleasant beams, and by little and little so
entered and heated this man, as he caused him to yield and put off, not only
his cloak, but also his coat: So likewise the allurements of pleasure are
more strong and harder to be resisted, then the violence of persecution. As the
example of David declares, who resists easily many assaults, in Time of
adversity; but yet fell dangerously in Time of prosperity; so that godly men
have no less war in Time of peace, then in Time of persecution; and that there
never wants occasion of bearing the Cross and suffering affliction, to him
that will accept of the same. 2. Sam. 11.

Truth.
1 EVen as the nearer that Gold and Silver are put to the fire, so much the
surer proof they have of their goodness and finnesse: So the Lords Truth, the
more exactly it is wayed with spiritual examination, so much the greater
confirmation of credit it receives.

2 As the froath of the Sea dashing upon the Rocks, does again fall off, when
the Rocks are immooueable: So is Truth the vanisher of all calamities, and
cannot be utterly oppressed.

3 Like as by striking of two flints together, there comes out fire: So it
may be, that sometimes by contention, the Truth which is hidden in a dark
peace, may come to light; which by a peace in naughtiness and wickedness,
being as it were buried under the ground, does not appear.

Tyrant.
1 LIke as the Serpent Aspis of Afric, whereas ( Pliny says) the male and
female go always together, and if one of them be slain, the other does
continually follow the slear, till he have stricken him, although he be in a
great assembly of people, except he pass over a river: So a Tyrants Son, or
the like Tyrant, will never cease to seek reuengement, until he either destroy
others, or else be destroyed himself.

2 As the rind of the Seale-fish, and the gall of Hyena, be effectual
remedies against sundry sicknesses: So God uses Tyrants, and wicked men
sometimes, for the correction of vice.

3 As in fishing, when the fishes be deceived with the bait, have the Hooks
in their mouths, men draw them, and make them follow, whither so ever please
them: Even so God withdraws mighty Tyrants, from executing their devises,
and from obtaining their enterprises.

Threatenings.
AS sometimes it thundreth, without lightning, which thunder brings most
terror, but void of all danger: So the Threatenings of some do appear
terrible, yet are they void of all trouble and hurt Esaias. 37.29.

Trade of life.
1 AS the Ox is most apt for the plough, the Horse for the carte, and the
hound for hunting: So ought men to choose that occupation, and Trade of life,
whereunto by nature they are most apt.

2 As he which has no house of his own, wandereth here and there: So he which
follows no certain Trade of life, must foolishly assay many sorts and
chances.

Thoughts.
LIke as the Lord requires an account of every idle word: Even so he
requires tribute of wicked lusts and Thoughts, arrayneth them, keeps a court
for them, and sets fines and mercements, upon the heads of them. Math.
12.36. Romans 7.7. Iam. 1.15. Math. 9.4.

Temperate.
LIke as it is in vain to shut the outter Gates of a City, if but one be
left open, whereat the enemy may enter: So it is not enough to be Temperate
in other things, (that is to have a firm and moderate government of reason,
against vicious affections of the mind) if we set open our ears unto
ribauldrie and filthy talk.

Tongue.
1 AS ryuers be compassed with banks, least they should flow over: So ought our
Tongue to be walled with reason, least it should be over busy in babbling. Iam.
3.2. etc. 1. Pet. 3.10.

2 As beasts and birds by man's industry are tame: Even so contrariwise the
Tongue of man, is so unruly that no man can tame it. Iam. 3.7, 8.

3 As a very little fire kindles never so great a heap of matter, apt to be
kindled: Even so the Tongue sets the whole course of nature on fire, and is
kinled it self of hell. Iam. 3.5, 6.

4 As a sharp Rasour with the least touch that can be, shaueth and cutteth: So
does also the Tongue of a mischievous lying man. Psalm. 52.2.

5 As a Ship though never so great and huge, is turned about with a very small
Rudder: Even so the Tongue, though it be a small member, oftentimes ouer-ruleth
the whole body, and sets it out of course. Iam. 3.4.

6 As it is impossible that a Fig Tree should be able to bring forth Olives,
or a Vine Figs: So it cannot be, that that Tongue which is given to evil
speaking and slaundering, should be able to bring forth any good thing, not
defiled with the venim of the Tongue and the heart. Iam. 3.11, 12.

7 As Fire, (Chafe and Stubble being added unto it, or any thing apt to
burn,) will burn it clean up; yea if Towns, if Cities, yea and the whole
world be added thereto, it will burn them up all: So likewise, if words be
added to the Tongue, then backbiting, slaundering, swearing, lying, etc. it
will at the last set whole Kingdoms on fire.

Talk.
1 AS the Musician with the soft striking of strings does please us: So the
Talk that is gentle, does sooner persuade, then that, which is rigorous and
extreme.

2 As the East wind is accounted neither good for man nor beast: Even so Talk,
and words that profit not, are not wont to proceed from the wise. Job. 15.2, 3.

3 As the savor of stinking carrion is noysom to them that smell it: So is the
speech of fools, tedious to wise men that hear it.

4 As a Vessel is known by the sound, whether it be whole or broken; So are
men proved by their speech, whether they be wise or foolish.

Two natures in the personal union of Christ.
LIke as in that one person of Christ, there be Two natures: So there is a
dubble will, working, wisdom, strength, power, virtue, etc. the one heavenly,
and not created; the other humane, and created. Luke 2.52. Mar. 11.13. and
13.32. 1. John 2.1, 17. John 2.25. and 6.64. and 5.20. Heb. 1.9. John 1.33. and
4.6. Heb. 1.3. John 2.19, and 10.18.

Testimony of the spirit in the elect.
AS Merchants being desirous to sell their wares, are content to let the buyer
see and handle, and sometimes also taste of the same, thereby to induce them to
buy: Even so God Almighty, willing (as it were) to sell us the joys of
heaven, is content to impart a certain taste before hand, to such as he sees
are willing to buy; thereby to make them come off roundly with the price, and
not to stick in paying so much as he requires.

False Teachers.
AS empty Clouds, which boast of rain, but yet have none, are blown away
with the wind: Even so false and untrue Teachers, who brag of great things,
yet they bring not that which they boast off. 2. Pet. 2.17. Hose. 13.3. Jude.
ver. 12.

Trouble of conscience.
1 AS the Angel did say that there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: So after that we are at peace
with God, it is most true, that there shall be no more Trouble of conscience.
Reave. 21.14.

2 As it is a chief point of worldly wisdom, not to tarry for the use of
physic, until we be deadly sick, but to be acquainted with Gods merciful
preservation to defend us from it: So likewise it is a chief policy of a
good Christian, not only to seek comfort, when the agony and Trouble of
Conscience is upon him, but also to use all good helps to meet with it before
it comes.

3 Like as we condemn them of folly, who will not as well labor to keep
themselves out of debt, as also to pay the debt, when they owe it: So likewise,
it is a madness not to be circumspect to avoid all occasions, which may bring
Trouble of mind or Conscience upon them: As also they would be provident to
enter every good way, which may draw them out of this Trouble, when they have
once entered into it.

Types of truth.
AS the Raven was a figure of the Law of God, which threatened al sinners: So
the flood was a reuengement sent from Almighty God, upon all offenders. Gene.
8.6. etc.

Trinity.
LIke as if three Kings equal in dignity, should meet all in one place,
being equal also in power and majesty, if all three should sit down, though
one be no better then an other, yet one of them must needs sit down the first,
and another in the second place, and then the third; but yet we cannot say,
that he which sat down first is the chiefest: So it is in the Trinity, though
none be greater or above another, yet the Father is in the first place, not
because he is before the Son, or the holy Ghost, in dignity or honor; but
because he is the fountain of the Deity, the Son being from him, and the
holy Ghost from them both.

2 As light proceeding from the fire, is never separated from it, neither is
one of them before the other: So it is with Christ and his Father.

Temptation.
LIke as a skilful labourer that riueth wood, who having a great knottie Logge
or tree to cleave, has also diverse wedges for the purpose, and every one
bigger then an other, and enters with the least first, and it makes way and
entrance for a bigger; and it again for the biggest of all; and so by little
and little, the Logge or tree, is cleft into many small pieces, and made fit
for the fire: Even so, when Satan purposes to make a spoil of the graces of
God in the soul of any, he uses sundry Temptations and devises for his
purpose, and every one of them differing from an other.

Strange Tongues edify not.
AS it were a madness, or at the least a great folly, for one man in
communicating with an other, to speak in a Tongue which the other
understands not: Even so, it is much more folly for a man to speak to a
multitude, or a whole Congregation, in that sort or order; and to speak
Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, to the unlearned multitude at Church. 2. Cor. 14.9,
11, 23.

Truth not to be found with false Prophets.
AS Wells dry in the bottom, deceive them which seek for water in them: So
they which look to learn a Truth at the hands of false Prophets, are deceived
of their expectation. Esaias. 12.3. 2. Pet. 2.17.

Trouble and afflictions, do further us to the right knowledge of our sins.
LIke as the hard Copper and Tin, do melt in the fire: Even so in Trouble
and affliction, our hard, rough, and stubborn hearts do melt, and fall to
misliking and loathing their sins. Gene. 43.18. Numb. 21.7.

Christians through Trouble and adversity, are made bold and hearty.
AS one that has sailed often upon the Sea, and proved and escaped great and
dangerous tempests, and has been sore tossed with the fearful waves, is
afterward the more bold and hardy to go unto the Sea, for as much as he has
ever escaped well, and come home safely: Even so a Christian man, whom the
cross has often assaulted and exercised, for as much as he has always found
comfort, aid, and help of God, afterward he trusts God, the longer, the
more, though the same affliction and adversity come again unto him, that he
had before. 1. Sam. 11.34, 35, 36. 2. Cor. 1.9, 10, 11.

Troubles and afflictions are means to try us withal.
1 LIke as those are the most honest, and most chaste Matrones, which being sore
tempted, assaulted, and provoked unto wickedness, do nevertheless keep
their spouse faith, toward their Husbands undefiled: Even so can no man know
nor prove perfectly, how the Church of Christ keeps her spouse and bridgrome
Jesus Christ, until such time as Antichrist assaulteth and tempts her, with
false doctrine, tyranny and persecution.

2 As such Trees as have strong and deep roots, and sufficient natural sap,
no violent heat of the Sun can hurt or harm them; but such as are felled
and cut down, are soon dried up with the heat of the Sun; and as the
grass that is mowne down does soon wither: Even so likewise such faithful
Christians as are rooted in Christ Jesus, cannot Troubles and afflictions hurt,
they grow and wax green notwithstanding; but the unfaithful do betray
themselves, and show what they are, as soon as they see any heat of Trouble
or persecution coming.

3 As with one Flayle, are both the stalks and ears of the Corn beaten, and
also the corn it self threshed and purged out: Even so with one manner of
Trouble and affliction, are the faithful purged, and provoked to pray unto God,
and to laud and magnify him; and the unfaithful also are provoked to curse;
and so are they both tried, provoked, and known. Esa. 41.15. Amo. 1.3.

4 Like as when the Corn is threshed, the kernel lies mixed among the
Chafe, and afterward are they disseuered asunder with the Fan or wind: Even
so the people in the Church, do first hear the preaching of Gods word; but
some stumble, repine, and are offended, and yet they dwell together one with an
other; but when they are fanned, and when the wind of Trouble and affliction
begins once a little to blow, then it is easy to sunder and to know the
one from the other, the faithful from the unfaithful.

5 As a rotten and an old weak house, stands a while for a time; but as
soon as a wind comes and blows, it appears unto all men how feeble the
foundation and stay of it was: Even so are there such Christian men, without
ground or foundation, which as long as all things go well and prosper with
them, they will seem to be good Christians; but in time of Trouble and
persecution, their dissimulation is known, and breaks out. Deuteronomy. 8.2.

6 Like as prosperity shuts and binds the eyes of men: Even so likewise
Trouble and adversity does open them.

7 As the Salve, that remedieth the diseases of the eyes, does first bite and
grieve the eyes, and makes them to water, but yet afterward the eye sight is
clearer and more sharp then it was: Even so Trouble and affliction do grieve
and vex men wonderfully at the first, but afterward it helps and lightneth
the eyes of the mind, that it is more reasonable, wise, and circumspect; for
trouble brings experience, and experience, brings wisdom.

Trouble and adversity, gives us occasion to pray unto God.
LIke as Water, as long as it flows, and runs over the even, plain, wide,
and broad fields, breaks not out by no violence, but dispearseth and
spreads it self abroad every where alike: but when it is gathered together
by cunning and skill, and conveyed into a narrow room, as into a pipe, or
co^duit, then it springs and spouteth out an high: Even so the mind of man,
as long as it is quiet, idle, and without sorrow or Trouble, it walks and
wandreth abroad at large, and at liberty: but when it is brought in,
restrained and driven to a straight and a narrow issue, through Trouble and
adversity, it breaks out aloft unto God in heaven, with an earnest, hearty,
and a fervent prayer; for grace, aid, and comfort: Whereupon is a common
proverb sprung: Need and necessity, teaches men to pray. Esaias. 26.16, 17.
1. Sam. 7.2, 3, 4. 2. Chro. 33.12, 13.

Trouble and adversity, do further us to virtue and godliness.
1 AS Water, that is continually standing, how clear so ever it seem, yet it
is corrupt and naught; but that water which has his continual course, the
more it rusheth and strugleth over the stones and sands, the more lively,
fr^sh, and better it is: Even so a godly man in the time of prosperity, and
absence of the cross, is sluggish, dull, and litherly; but through the cross
and affliction, he is quickened and exercised, and increased in all goodness.

2 As rustie and cankard iron, through the File is made bright and smooth: So
likewise our old rustie Adam, has need of Trouble and adversity, to cleanse
and purge us from the cankered rust of sin.

3 Like as a Knife, though it be never so smooth, if it be not used, it waxes
rustie; and the same rust fretteth it, and marreth it: but the more that it is
occupied, though it be somewhat worn thereby, yet it is the more bright: Even
so, although a man has a good nature and inclination, if he be not occupied
and exercised with Trouble and adversity, he waxes rustie, cankard, and
rotten: but through the cross and tribulation, though the rust have won
somewhat of him, being a man, and of himself weak, yet he shall thereby be
made more bright, clear and beautiful again. Leuit. 26.14. etc. Hebr. 12.11.

4 As the seed that is cast into the field, must suffer the wind, rain,
snow, frost, and all manner of tempests, and yet it waxes, and brings
forth fruit: Even so the spiritual seed, which is the word of God, being
received of a devout, and a fervent heart, is not destroyed through Trouble; but
brings forth right good and profitable fruit.

5 As a Walnut-tree, the more it is beaten, the better it is, and not the
worse: Even so man through many stripes and much adversity, turns from ill,
and waxes good. 1. Pet. 4.12.

6 As there is nothing better for the thick skin of an Horse or an Ass, then
a very sharp whip, to yerke him with: Even so, there is nothing more fit and
profitable for our stubburne and hautie flesh, then much sorrow and vexation;
whereby it may be stirred and pricked forward.

7 As Woollen-cloath must be often beaten and brushed, least moathes breed in
it: Even so shall spiritual Moathes and worms, to wit, wickedness, sin,
and abomination, have the less power to breed in us, if we be well brushed
and beaten in time, with Trouble, affliction and adversity. Prou. 20.30.

8 As Flesh, that comes fresh out of the shambles unsalted, waxes soon
unsavory, and worms breed in it; but the salt with his sharpness, keeps
it sweet from corruption: Even so does God cast and sprinkle salt upon us,
through diverse temptations and afflictions, that they may bite and season us,
that we corrupt not, nor perish in sin.

9 Like as that body that is always idle, and never moves, nor has no
exercise, is easily subject unto sickness and infirmities; but those bodies,
that have their exercise and labor, are more lusty and sound, and can better
continue: Even so the soul, that is well exercised with Trouble and
affliction, has occasion and cause to be beautiful, sound, and clear.

10 As Lie the sharper it is, the cleaner it takes away al manner of filth out
of clothes: Even so the greater and sharper our Trouble and adversity is, the
more filth and inconvenience it draws and biteth, from our corrupt and
poisoned nature.

11 As Worme-wood is very good and wholesome, for a raw and weak stomach,
which is of a naughty digestion: Even so bitter Trouble and affliction, is
very wholesome and necessary, for the weak and feeble soul.

Trouble and sorrow do help and further us toward the fear and love of God.
1 LIke as when a Trespasser is led out to be headed, hanged, burnt, or
otherwise to be punished; other that see him, do learn to fear and to
beware of that thing, which brought the offender to his last end: Even so when
God sends any plague, either upon some special person, or else upon some
whole Commonaltie, all other ought so to consider the same, as though they
themselves were in the place of the afflicted person; as though his Trouble and
sorrow were their own; that they may the rather fear God, and take heed, that
they fall not into the like vengeance of God. 1. Pet. 4.17, 18.

2 As a Dog that is of a good nature, if his Master strike him, yet he
loves his Master notwithstanding, and fawneth upon him: Or as a good child,
although his Father or Mother beat him, yet he loves them nevertheless, and
desires to have their favor again: Even in like manner are true Christians
minded toward their heavenly Father; but such children as be wicked, and of
an evil disposition, when they be a little scourged, they run away from
their Fathers, and murmr against them.

Trouble is good and profitable to teach men patience.
1 LIke as men use to clip and to cut shorter the feathers of Birds, or other
fowls, when they begin to fly too high, or too far from them: Even so does
God diminish our riches, possessions, estimation, honor, authority and power,
that we should not pass our bounds, and glory too much of such gifts.

2 As the body, when it is wearied and consumed with labor and travel,
desires ease and rest that it may lie still: Even so the soul, being laden and
oppressed with Trouble and affliction, is brought to a narrow issue, and then
it hastes after rest and quietness, and nothing vexes it less then pride.
Dan. 3.1. etc. 29. and 4.31. 2. Cor. 12.7.

3 As a piece of iron, or of Silver, stricken or beaten with an hammer, waxes
broader, thinner, smoother, and softer: Even so the stony and hard hearts of
men, through heaviness, and adversity, are made more buxom and plyant, that a
man may wind them (as a man might say) even round about his finger.

4 As a cursed wild Colte, has a Snaffle put into his mouth, that he bite not
him that handles him: Even so the Snaffle of the cross and adversity, does
let and hinder us (being froward, furious, and full of spite, malice, and
reuengement) that we commit the less wickedness, abomination, and
uncharitableness, in our lives. 2. Chro. 33.1, 2.9.11. etc. Act. 9.2, 3, 4.

5 Like as when a man has been a long season healthful, and without any
manner of sickness, he cannot take sickness by and by so patiently, as he
ought to do: Even so likewise, he that never felt any affliction or
adversity, whenever any happen unto him, he is sore vexed with
impatientnesse; but adversity teaches men patience, and practices them
therein. Romans 5.3, 4.

6 As men eat diverse things by morsels, which if they should eat whole, would
choke them: So by diverse days we suffer Troubles, which if they should all
come together, they would make an end of us in one day.

Trouble makes men temperate.
AS the Physician, when he perceives that his patient will eat overmuch, and
will wax too fat, he measures and restrains him, and by breaking somewhat
from him, he restores him to his health again, and so saves him: Even so,
when we do shamefully misuse Wine, Corn, bread, and drink, and other gifts
and creatures of God, to maintain drunkenness, surfeiting, excess and riot,
then does God punish us with hunger, dearth, penury, and with other plagues,
that we should learn thereby, to be temperate and to keep measure, and to use
his benefits thankfully.

Trouble teaches men to contemn the world.
1 LIke as he that takes a journey in hand, and goes into a strange
Country, when he comes into a pleasant Town, where he meets merry
company and good companions, peradventure he spends away the time, and
tarrieth too long among them, and so forgets his household and things at
home; but if one hard mischaunce after an other happen unto him, then he makes
the more haste home again to his wife and children, where he has more rest and
quietness: Even so, when these transitory things, as riches, health, beauty,
honor and dignity, happen unto us, if we will once gape upon them, and delight
so much in them, that we do the less regard and esteem the heavenly life;
then will God make the way rough and crabbed unto us here in this life, that we
should not take and esteem this transitory life in this world, for our right
natural Country, toward the which we take our journey. Psalm. 137.1. etc.

2 As a man must sometimes spur his Horse, although he be a good and quick
Horse, that so he may go and run the faster and speedier: Even so we cannot
go forward in our vocation and calling, so speedily, nor so well as we ought to
do, except we be pricked forward with sharp spurs and scourges.

3 Like as when the Master strikes his slothful, dull, and sleepie servant,
then he labors the more diligently, and is more profitable unto him: Even so
we all for the most part of us, have the nature of such slothful and sluggish
servants; which will do nothing well, except we be driven by compulsion, and
even whipped and beaten unto it.

4 As those be evil servants, which will do nothing, unless a man be ever
upon their bones with a cudgel, yea, and then will do nothing well neither;
yet notwithstanding, must a man never cease driving and forcing of them, until
such time as they begin to amend, and to serve willingly, and with a good heart:
Even so although no compelled service, that is violently wroong out of a man,
does please God, yet the continual inuring and exercising in goodness, may
make it at length so pleasant and delectable unto us, that we shall have
delight therein.

Troubles and adversities, is a furtherance to eternal life.
1 LIke as the Corn is first threshed, Fanned, and rid from the Chafe, and
then laid up and reserved in the Garner: Even so godly Christians upon earth,
are beaten, mishandled, evil entreated, whereby they are purged and rid of
many wild and light manners, and so are brought into the everlasting Barn of
the kingdom of heaven.

2 As no man can triumph or be crowned, except he has foughten, and warred
manfully, which cannot be without great danger, labor and travel: Even so
can no man attain to the crown of eternal life, except he has first
suffered much Trouble, sorrow, and adversity. 1. Cor. 9.24, 25. 2. Timo. 1. 8.
2. Timo. 4.7, 8. 1. Pet. 5.1. Iam. 1.12.

3 As the man that is sick, must receive the purgation and medicine, how sower
or bitter so ever it be, that he may the sooner recover his health again, and
not die: Even so when we suffer the hand of God, to rule and order us, being
content and patient therewith, although it smarteth and grieueth us, yet it
shall profit and help us, to everlasting health and soundness. Math. 5.4, 10.
and 7.13, 14. Luke 6.21.

Ordinary means to avoid Trouble, are not to be condemned or refused.
1 LIke as a Shipmaister, being upon the water, and foreseeing a tempest to be
at hand, calls upon Gods aid and help, and yet for all that, he has a
sure eye to the stern, to rule that as hansomely and cunningly as he can: Even
so in like manner of necessities, and perils, it is lawful, and men ought also
to use all manner of honest and convenient means; as Physic and medicines,
in sickness; labor and travel with the sweat of our brows in poverty; the
power and authority of the Magistrate in wrong, injury, debate, and
dissension; battle array against the enemies of our Country, and such like;
so that no man build nor trust in any manner of thing, saving in the very
living God only, which can help, deliver and remedy all things, without any
middle or mean, if there were none at all. Act. 27.10. etc.

2 As weak, tender and diseased eyes, are refreshed and quickened, with green
and fresh pleasant colors: Even so, cumbred and Troubled minds are
wonderfully refreshed, received, and restored to strength, through seemly,
honest, and measurable mirth and pastime; as by hearing of instruments of
Music, by walking abroad, by altering and changing of the air, and by going
out of such places as be obscure and dark, into such as be very lightsome;
and especially for a man in his Trouble, to visit his special friends, or to
be visited of them.

God delivers from Trouble in due season.
LIke as God sees the Trouble and affliction of his Church, how it is vexed:
Even so has he appointed a just time, how long he will suffer the wicked to
take their pleasure, and how far they shall go and attempt; and when that is
expired, no longer nor no further can they go. Iere. 25.1. unto 15. and 29.10.
Psalm. 46.1. etc. Math. 28.20.

God helps and comfort such as are in Trouble, by his word and spirit.
1 LIke as a Captain in war; gives his Soldiers that are under him, a
great courage, by speaking manfully and comfortably unto them: Even so God will
have his word daily to be published and proclaimed abroad to those that are in
Trouble, to the end to encourage his Soldiers, that fight under his banner.
Math. 18.20.

2 As in Winter, the trees although they seem, not only unfruitful, but also
utterly dead; yet the Sun with his coming, (when the winter has taken her
leave,) does so mollify, resolve, and warm, both the earth it self, and the
trees, that they bud out again, wax green, and bring forth fruit: Even so
when the faithful are esteemed, and seem as though they were deprived and
destitute of all help, and as it were utterly forsaken in time of Trouble; yet
does the heavenly spirit of God, lighten, warm, and strengthen their hearts
to all goodness.

God sometime mittigateth Troubles, that we may the more easily overcome them.
1 AS a Captain gives sometime his Soldiers liberty to take their rest,
ease, and pastime, that they may somewhat refreshe themselves, and afterward
fight the more manfully and freshly: Even so our spiritual Captain, grants
ofttimes unto his Children, a certain recreation, ease and rest, whereby they
may refreshe and revive themselves, that they may afterward handle themselves
the more valiantly in their spiritual affairs.

2 Like as a man of war, has a lust and a courage to fight, having diverse
valiant servants about him, which will suffer him to take no wrong: Even so the
holy Angels, do compass about and defend us, that in all manner of Trouble
and affliction, we are bold and able to stand and continue it valiantly.
Psalm. 34.7. etc. 2. King. 6.17. etc. and 19.35.

3 Like as a sick person, although he doubt nothing of the faithfulness,
honesty, and tenderness of his Physician or Surgion toward him, yet for all
that, desires him to handle his wound, and to dress him easily, and tenderly,
as is possible for him: Even so in like manner may we call upon God, that if
it be not against his honor and glory, he will vouchsafe to give some
mittigation and easement of our pain; and specially we must desire of him, to
grant us strength that we faint not, nor be overcome with the fear or
greatness of our sorrow and grief, by reason of our great Troubles, whereby
we might forsake him, and fall into some wickedness. Psalm. 50.15. and 91.15.
John. 14.13.

Patience in Trouble very needful.
1 AS a Lamb or a sheep is led unto the slaughter, and never cries, nor
opens the mouth, but suffers and abides it patiently and meekly: Even so
ought the children of God, when they are accursed and reviled, not to curse or
revile again; when they are smitten, not to smite again, but to suffer all
manner of smart and pain; and not once to bleare, or to open their mouths
against it. Esa. 53.7. Iere. 11.19. Math. 5.10, 11.

2 Like as they that are sick and distressed, and diseased, can be content to
suffer and abide any of their members of their body to be cut off, and to be
burnt, so that they may be any thing relieved and eased thereby, of their
great smart, and continual pain, (which is yet but transitory) and to be
made whole and sound again: Even so ought we gladly and willingly to suffer
our Lord God, and to be still and quiet, when he sends us adversity,
whereby we may be relieved and discharged of eternal pain, and obtain health,
bliss, and salvation for our souls.

3 As a good Captain leads and orders his army, according as the occasion
requires: Even so, a virtuous man behaueth himself patiently and well, in
Trouble and adversity, and makes the best of it.

4 Like as a Merchant man, makes fair voyages and great iournies, and
ventureth body and goods, and nothing is too hard and sower for him, only for
worldly and transitory gain and lucre; and yet his hope is uncertain, whether
he shall gain or loose; and though he gains never so much, yet he brings
home nothing but frail and transitory goods, which shall have an end: So we
likewise have a long voyage to make, even from earth to heaven; and therefore
we should be as well content, as prompt, glad, and willing, to suffer all manner
of perils and dangers, that may happen by the way; seeing that we shall have
an infallible and sure hope of eternal and everlasting riches, for Jesus
Christ sake.

5 Like as when a man of an high and noble birth, is contemned and mishandled,
in a strange land, where he is not known, it grieueth him nothing so much, as
if the like should happen unto him at home in his own natural Country: Even so
our natural Country is in heaven, upon earth we are but strangers and
Pilgrims, therefore we ought the rather to suffer all things patiently here,
only that we may have rest, among the inhabitants in our right eternal Land
and Country. Hebr. 13.14. Phil. 3.20. 1. Pet. 1.3, 4, 5.

6 As a man of war, preparing himself with all manner of things appertaining
to warfare, though his enemies be never so strong, yet he forgets al fear,
and never once thinks upon the strokes and wounds, but only upon the
victory and triumph, and goes his way and fights manfully like a giant,
against his enemies, only for worldly glory and lucre: Even so it would redound
to the great slander and shame of Christians; if they for the honor, glory,
and pleasure of God, should not as promptly, willingly, and manfully, fight
against their ghostly enemies, for higher, and greater triumph, lucre, and
commodity, though they should endure many Troubles, and great adversity.

7 Like as when a man plays at the Tables, he cannot always cast what he
would have; but whatsoever he has cast, he must make the best of it: So
likewise whatsoever things happen in our life, contrary to our will, we must
with courage and constant faith, take and turn all Troubles and adversities to
the best, and never despair.

8 Like as when a little child, that can scarcely go, chances to stumble upon a
stone, he falls down by and by in the same place, and there lies still
weeping and crying, til some body take him up: So contrariwise, Christians who
have reason and understanding, must use and endeavor themselves, that
whatsoever Troubles, sickness, or inconvenience soever happens unto them,
yet by and by (so far as is possible) to labor to heal, ease, and remedy
it.

9 As a virtuous Child will not forsake his father in his need or Trouble; nor
an honest and loving wife, her husband or spouse; nor yet a faithful servant
his master: So much less should a godly Christian, forsake or deny God his
Father, or Christ his spouse, and heavenly Lord and master, in Trouble and
adversity.

10 Like as worldlings and carnal men, fornicators, whoremongers, and
murderers, care neither for shame, nor for any thing else; and spare no labor
or travel, so they may bring to pass their wicked lust and desire; and yet
oftentimes they miss of it: Even so much more a faithful Christian ought to
be constant, earnest, painful, and patient in honest and good things, though
yet he be let, and greatly hindered, by many Troubles, and much adversity.

Love toward God, works patience in Trouble.
1 AS Jacob served seven years for the damsel Rahel, and by reason of the
hearty love that he bareth unto her, the time was but short unto him; and the
days that he served for, seemed but a short space: Even so whosoever loves
God, will bear and take patiently whatsoeeuer Troubles God shall lay upon
him, and whatsoever he suffers for Gods sake, it shall be easy unto him.
Gene. 29.18.

2 Like as a Soldier, (first for fear of prisoning, and of the shameful
death which he should suffer, if the battle should be lost; and again in
hope of the great reward and excellent honor and renown, if the victory go
on his side) will fight the more boldly and lustily: Even so every true
Christian is stirred and provoked to more faithfulness and patience in
Trouble, when he considers the exceeding profit and commodity of patience;
and again the great hurt and discommoditie of impatience in Trouble.

No Transubstantiation in the Sacrament.
AS Bread and drink by natural nourishment, be changed into a man's body, and
yet the body is not changed, but is the same that it was before: So although
the Bread and Wine, be Sacramentally changed into Christ's body, yet his
body is the same, and in the same place that it was before, that is to say in
heaven, without any alteration, or change of the same.

Tyrants.
AS the wings of Eagles, with their stripe or blow, do mar the wings and
break the feathers of other birds: Even so the mighty and great men of the
world, with their Tyrannical cruelty, and most hellish impiety, were wont to
draw to destruction, and to drag to death the weaker sort, and such as are
innocent, and tender the glory and praise of God. 2. King. 21.16. Math. 23.37.
Act. 7. 52. Hebr. 11.37.

Thankfulness for benefits received.
AS it is against good manners, for a man to mourn at the Marriage of his
friend: Even so it is against duty, for men not to rejoice with Thanksgiving,
when they by evident testimonies, perceive the favor of God toward them, in
coupling them to himself. Math. 9.15. and 12.49, 50.

We are Gods Temple.
1 AS Baltasar King of Babylon, by using the vessels belonging to the house of
God in a banquet, and drinking in them, with their Princes and Concubines, did
profane them, and was for the same soon, after rewarded, (for the same night
he lost both his kingdom and life:) Even so surely, they that shall abandon,
not the vessels, but the Temple it self, and not a Temple of stone and of
wood, but even their bodies and souls, that are made the lively Temples of the
living God, to profane and filthy uses of the world and the flesh, in lieu of
dedicating the whole to the holy service of God, who is with them, do most
filthily profane the Temple of God, and so can expect no other then a most
horrible vengeance and punishment. 1. Cor. 3.17. and 2.6.14. etc.

2 Like as when a King makes his entry into a Town or City, he finds
those streets where he is to pass, made clean, and his Palace hanged: Even
so much more ought we, whom God has chosen to be his Temple, and to make his
entry into us, to be with us, and to dwell with us, to purify and cleanse from
all filthiness and uncleanness, and to adorn the place of his habitation,
with all virtue and liveliness.

3 As they that wear long garments, when they come to foul ways, do tucke
and gird them up, least they should load them with mire, by dragging them
through the same: So we, whose minds and affection do so bend to the earth,
that they do even traile thereupon, walking through this world full of mire
and corruption, must tuck them up toward heaven, least they should touch such
dangerous and damnable mire, from the which we ought wholly to retire and
separate our selves, that we may be made holy Temples to the Lord. 1. Pet.
1.13, 14. Leuit. 11.44. and 10.2. 2. Timo. 2.21.

Temperance.
AS a man cannot be Temperate, if he be not prudent: So no man can be strong
or valiant, if he be not Temperate.

Unity among brethren.
AS you may not with any kind of might, break the Faggot or Bauen, that is
whole, when as yet you may lightly break the sticks thereof severally, or
being a sunder: So are brethren easy to be ouercommed, which do strive
together, but being at amity, they are not so soon discomfited.

Virtue always accompanied with praise.
AS our shadow follows us, although against our will: So likewise glory,
praise, and commendations, do follow Virtue and learning.

Vainglory.
1 AS winds being about to cease, do most vehemently blow: So mortal men,
when they do most exalt themselves, then are they nearest their fall and end.

2 As nights succeed days, and Winter Summer: So grief and sadness, follow
Vainglory and pleasure.

Spiritual Usury.
LIke as he which lends, looks justly to receive his own again: Even so
let him that is merciful to the poor, most assuredly expect, that the things
which he lays out, shall be rendered again of God with a most liberal
increase; as it were with a threesold Usury. Prou. 91. 17. Math. 5.41. Deuteronomy.
15.10. Math. 25.27, 28.

Virtue to be increased with life.
LIke as they that are tosted here and there with sundry tempests, have not
sailed much, but were greatly encumbred: So such as have lived long, neither
yet have profited any thing in Virtue, and godliness, are not said to have
lived, but lingered.

Unwilling to die.
LIke as he is overmuch given to Wine, which would suck up the dregs: So is
he too greedy of life, which in old age could not be content to die.

Virtue.
1 LIke as if a man cast a precious stone into the dirt, it will
notwithstanding show forth the beauty of it again: Even so the Virtue of a
holy and righteous man, will show forth it self, whithersoeuer it be cast,
either into bondage, prison, or prosperity.

2 Like as precious and costly Spices, and Odours, do smell and savor best
when they be bruised, broken, or set on fire: Even so the praise and
commendation of Virtue, through continual use and exercise, and through
adversity, is spread wide abroad, and made minifest, and known every where.

3 Like as true faith is not Idle, but working, and powerful by love: Even so
true Virtue, is not a bare affection of the mind, or the bare purpose of the
will, but does set out it self by outward honest actions, and does shine in
them; from whence all the praise thereof does consist in the action. Tit. 3.8.
1 Thessalonians. 4.12. Romans 12.17.

4 As we are wont to eat Pears, and the kernels of Nuts, but throw from us
upon the ground, the parings and shells: So we ought unfeignedly to be in love,
and delight with Virtue and godliness, and to continue and despise the shape
or shadow of the same, being separated and divided from Virtue it self; for,
to retain and hold the fashion and likeness of Virtue, without the substance
of the same, is mere hypocrisy.

5 Like as when Orpheus, went to fetch his wife Euridice out of Hell, he had
her granted to him upon a condition, that he should not turn back his eyes to
look upon her, till he had brought her into heaven. Yet having brought her
forward a great way, at length his love was so excessive, that he could not
continue any longer, but would needs have a sight of her; whereupon forthwith he
lost both her sight and her self, she suddenly again vanishing away from him:
So if we have any Virtue, which is to be loved, as a man is to love his wife,
yet we must not be so blind in affection, as to doat too much upon it, or to
be always gazing and wondering at it, least by too much looking upon it, and
by too well liking of it, and by too often remembering of it, we loose it.

6 As the Sun being directly over us, our bodies have the less shadow, as we
may perceive at noone, and a little before and after: So also the more Virtue
and goodness is in us, the less ostentation and boasting we should have.

7 Contrariwise, as this is a sign of the going down of the Sun, and his
departure from us, when as our shadows become great: So also this is an
argument, to prove that Virtue diminishes in us, when pride and presumption
increases.

8 As the heat of the Sun softneth Wax, and hardneth the mire: So likewise
Virtue rejoices and comfort the good, and grieueth the wicked, consuming
and wasting them by little and little, and so at length pineth away with sorrow
and grief, in seeing good men flourish in wealth and prosperity.

9 As we see the fire in the beginning, cast forth a great smoke, which
quickly vanishes away as soon as it is well kindled: So likewise Virtue
causes great malice and spite in the beginning, but if a man be constant and
will not be discouraged, but burns more and more in Virtue and goodness, in
the end he shall disperse them, as the Sun beams drives away the clouds, in
such sort, that at length we shall not know what is become of them.

10 Even as the Stars do shine in the night, but in the day time they lie
hidden: Even so, true Virtue, waxing beautiful by temptation, does (as iron
with use) show in adversity what force it is off, which otherwise in time of
prosperity lay hid in secret.

11 As the precious stone Sandastra, has nothing in outward appearance, but
that which seems black, but being broken, powers forth beams like the
Sun: So Virtue shows but bare to the outward eye, but being peirced with
inward desire, shines like Crystal.

12 Like as in a pair of Tables, nothing may be well written before the blots
and blurs be wiped out: so Virtue and nobleness can never be seen in a man,
except he first put away his vices.

13 As by nature the Cedar will be tall, the Diamond bright, and the Carbuncle
glistring: So Virtue will shine, though it be never so much obscured.

14 Like as an Adamant draws by little and little the heavy iron, until at
last it be joined with it: So Virtue and wisdom draw men's minds to the
practice thereof.

Vain glorious fools in preaching.
AS some Physicians to the intent they would seem the more learned, do mingle
sometimes together, diverse kinds of herbs, fetched from the sundry parts of
the world: So some Vain and glorious fools, do think no Sermons or Orations,
learned enough, unless they rehearse therein, the authority and sayings of
Poets, Orators, Philosophers, together with sentences in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin.

Variety of Treatises.
LIke as Variety of meats do corrupt in the stomach, and breed sickness,
rather then preserve health: Eue^ so Variety of Treatises, upon one and the
self-same thing, does hinder the growth and profiting of diverse, in soundness
of judgment, and godly life.

Vice.
1 AS into the Well or bow Net, is an easy way or entering, but the way and
going out, is altogether hard and uneasy: So is the entry into Vice, headlong
and easy; but the returning thence into a better life, is full of difficulty.

2 As the staining or blot, that of long time in the cloth has continued, may
not be easily taken away: So the Vices wherewith we have of a long time been
infected, may not at pleasure and ease be plucked from us.

3 As a Strumpet though she be never so richly dect, and it be with Purple
Velvet, yet she stinketh the viler, in the sight of all honest Matrones: Even
so, there is no Vice more pestilent, then that that is like Virtue: there is no
such Judas kiss, as with an Apostles face: there is no such deceiving Devil,
as like an Angel of light: and there is no such dissembling City as Jerusalem,
for hypocrisy.

4 As the civil Magistrates punish Vice and lighter faults, with some penalty
of money, or loss of member. So the Church, and the Minister especially with
the Church, has to punish Vice and faults, by reprehensions, and rebukes.

5 As the civil Magistrate punishes great faults by death: So the Minister,
with other which have interest, has with the sword of excommunication, power
to kill those which be rebellious, and to cut them from the church, as the
other does from the Commonwealth.

Usurer.
1 AS it behooves him that has fallen into the mire, either to be still, or
with speed to rise; for if he should stir, then he should therein be the more
defiled: So ought he that has to do with an Usurer, either to rid himself
from his debt and danger, or at the least to enter no farther therein.

2 As an earthen box, that is close, with a hole in the upper part, wherein
money is put, which money cannot be come by, unless the box be broken: So
likewise, a man can get no money out of the Usurers bags or coffers, until
death has broken the life of the Usurer.

3 As he that is strooken or stung of the little Serpent, called Aspis, falls
into a pleasant sleep, and so by the sweetness of that dead sleep, dies;
For then the venomous poison dispearseth it self into every member: So he that
borrows upon Usury, thinks for a time that it is pleasant and profitable
unto him, and that he has received a great good turn; but in the end, this
Usury runs through all his riches, and conuerteth all that he has into debt.
Exodus 22.25. Leuit. 25.36. Deuteronomy. 23.19. Nehe. 5.1. etc. Psalm. 15.5.

4 As the Law of Divorce, which was given by Moses, did not excuse the Jew
before God, which used it, but that he was guilty of the breach of wedlock:
Even so the statute for Usury, does not so make it lawful, that the Christian
which uses it to the hurt of his neighbor, is clear or guiltless thereof,
before the Majesty of God. Deuteronomy. 24.1. to 5. Math. 19.7, 8. Mal. 2.16. Mar.
10.4, 5.

5 Like as the Massing Priests, who were wont to offer sometimes an halfe-penny
themselves, to move the people by their example to offer also; and by that
means, for one halfe-penny, they got twenty: Even so does the Usurer, he
gives sometime a little Usury, to get thereby a greater.

6 As the Rain falling upon the Flint, neither breaks it self, or causes
it to grow bigger: Even so the pleasant deaw of Gods word, sweetly dropping
down upon the hard hearted Usurer, can neither make him cease and sin less,
nor yet grow in goodness.

7 As the Sea is never filled with water, though all the storms of the world
run into it: Even so the greediness of an Usurer is never satisfied, though
he gain never so unreasonably. Psalm. 95.5.

8 As no man stands for Nonsidencie, but he which is a Nonresident, or he
which would be a Nonresident: So likewise no man stands for Usury, but he
which is an Usurer, or he which would be an Usurer.

9 As the Iuie loves the Oak to grow up by it: So the Usurer loves the
borrower to grow rich by him. The Iuie claspeth the Oak like a louet, but it
claspeth out all the juice and sap, that the Oak, cannot thrive after: So the
Usurer lends like a friend, but he couenanteth like an enemy, for he
claspeth the borrower with such bands, that ever after he decays and
diminishes, as fast as the Usurer increases.

10 As a very bitter and pinching black Frost, does kill and destroy, the
tender, sweet, pleasant, and beautiful blossoms: Even so the Usurer
likewise, many times by his extreme Usury, does kill men, women, and
children.

11 As a poor siely sheep, has succor and shelter under a Thorn bush, in
some storm or tempest a little while, but when she departs from the bush,
it keeps back a piece of her fleece, and the oftener she goes, the barer
and nakedder she is; so that at the length, she is able to abide neither bush
nor storm: Even so such a bush of Thorns is the Usurer to the poor borrower,
he will leave him at the length no fleece on his back; he will leave him no
house over his head, unless it be some prison house to die in; no bed to rest
upon, no flesh on his bones, nor no credit in the world.

11 As the Thorn bush, that pincheth and pulls the poor sheep, never
thriueth, nor proves any good timber, but serves only for the fire: So the
Usurer serves for nothing but Hell, and howsoever he thriueth here, he shall be
pinched there.

13 As he that cutteth down a Tree by the roots, does with all cut down
the boughs, twigg^s (...) branches also: So likewise the Usurer, consumes,
utterly undoes, and with sorrow dries up the marrow in the bones of parents,
to the shortning of their days, and withal, does even destroy their poor
sweet infantes also.

14 As the Caterpillars of Egypt, were surely tethered, that they harmed no
place, but where they themselves were: But these Caterpillars the Usurers, will
sit at home in their Chaires, like a Boore that is a franking in his Stie, and
will consume a man, one, two, or three hundred miles from them; for they, by
their Brokers, do fly over, and view all the lands, lordships, manners,
parkes, woods, groves, fields, meadows, pastures, and whatsoever, farms,
leases, or other commodities, of Noblemen, Lords, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen,
yeomen, and husbandmen; and here they gobble up a whole Town, and there a
goodly Park; here a Lordship or Manner, and there a most pleasant wood.

15 As the Worm Teredo, (whereof Pliny makes mention in his natural
history) which is as soft as silk, in the feeling of the hand, but biteth so
hard with the teeth, that it eats the strongest Timber: Even so such a thing
is Usury, and the Usurer, soft in his words, and fair in his promises; but by
his deeds he stingeth to death, and wastes the greatest substance.

16 As Vultures and Ravens, will pick out the guts of a man's belly: Even so
likewise the Usurer, eats up the fruits of other men's labors.

17 Like as fire, which is an active and insatiable Element, for it burns and
consumes all the wood that is laid upon it: So the Usurer, the more he has,
the more he desires, and like Hell gates he is never satisfied.

Ungodly man.
AS he that shall ever and anon be casting himself into the fire and water,
and run upon dangerous places to break his legs, arms, or neck; and
further, shall take pleasure in doing all this, is either a fool or a mad man:
Even so is the Ungodly man as often as he sins, which endeavors as much as
in him lies, to pitch his soul into Hell; and whereas he takes pleasure in
sin, he sports himself with his own destruction.

Unbelief.
1 AS an empty vessel is capable of water, and yet being closely stopped,
none can enter into it, though it be powered upon it in great abundance: Even
so it fares with our hearts, they are capable of Gods graces, but being
stopped by Unbelief, no grace of God can enter into them, though daily and
plentifully offered.

2 As men that are but civil, have care to avoid robbing and killing, because
God gives commandments against stealing and killing: Even so much more we
ought to strive against our manifold doubting, distrustings, and Unbelief of
Gods love in Christ, having a commandment of God that calls upon us, and
binds us to do so.

Unthankfulness.
1 AS the Israelites were no more thankful and obedient, when they had peace,
and lived in a land that flowed with Milk and Honey, then when they were in
the solitary desert and wild wilderness: Even so the most part with us in
England, are no more thankful in this peace of the Gospel, nor any whit more
desirously give themselves to serve and worship God aright, then if they should
live in a land fruitless, and destitute both of spiritual and temporal
blessings.

2 Like as the ingrate, and unkind Cuckowe, after that she is nourished and
brought up of the poor hedge Sparrowe, to some good perfection of age, in so
much that she is able to get her own food and living, is then so much
forgetful of the kind love of this Sparrow, that (all mercy and compassion
set apart) she eats and deuoureth her up: Even so some children, who have
been with great care and expenses, brought up of their parents, to such good
perfection of age, as they might be able to live and maintain themselves, and
also be a great comfort to their parents, do notwithstanding show themselves
so unkind and Unthankful to them, that by their obstinacy and ungracious
behavior, they bring the gray heads of their parents to the grave with sorrow;
as Esau, and Absalom. Gene. 27.46. and 28.6. etc. 2. Sam. 15. 1. etc. and
16.11. etc. and 17.1, 2. etc. Gene. 37.17.35. and 42.38.

3 As every thing that is weighty and heavy, tends and presses downward,
yet notwithstanding, the clouds that are full of water, and swelled with
moisture, do ascend upward, because the Sun takes them from the earth, and
with his force draws them up on high; which being lifted up in the air, are
gathered to gether, and thickened, and so do cover and hide the brightness of
the Sun, by whose help and attraction, they were taken and carried up; but
notwithstanding their malice, they being desperate and scattered abroad, the
Sun they conqueror, and ouercommer of darkness, thrusts through his
beams, breaks the clouds, and gives light with his shine: Even so the
Iseralites, when they lay in Egypt a long time in obscurity, thraldom,
bondage, and slavery, to Pharao, and his people, and were even nalled as it
were, to the earth of all contempt and cruelty, were then taken up, and set in
great and high dignity, by the Son of righteousness; but afterward they
went about, to obscure and extinguish the brightness and light of God
himself; by whose benefit, they had gotten that honor and dignity, which
they had, and without whom they were nothing but bond-slaues of misery and
wretchedness; but seeing they were like foul black clouds, they were
dispersed away; and the glory of Christ, against their wills, and in spite of
them, together with the brightness of his name, did break out, and shine
abroad, and give light throughout all the world.

4 If a Prince should promise a Tailor, or Shoemaker, ten thousand crowns
for one years service, he would not refuse it, but being thus offered and
promised unto him, he would be ready to leave his house, his wife, his
children, and all other things, to go to service to such a Lord, for one
year: Even so we may well deserve to be accounted unthankful and
senseless, that will not be otherwise won and induced to serve God, who by
so many, so excellent, and so assured promises, does daily inuit us thereto.

Unthankfulness to God.
LIke as if any man should give unto any one of us, an annuitie of twenty or
forty pound yearly, during our lives, we ought to thank him for it: Or if a
friend had redeemed any one of us out of prison, either by his friendship, or
money (where otherwise we should have lain all our life long) we would
greatly love him: Now if the same man by his valiantness had saved us, being
in great danger in battle or Shipwreck, we would much reverence him, and say
that we were never able to make him amends: Even so it is a very great
ingratitude, seeing that our Lord God, has by his son Jesus Christ,
delivered us out of the captivity of satan, sin, death, hell, and damnation,
so by our disobedience and lewdness of life, to despise and anger him; and for
so great kindness, to give him again so great contumely and despite. John.
8.34, 36. Romans 6.20, 22. Coloss. 1.13, 14. Heb. 2.14.15. Act. 10.38. 2. Timo.
2.26.

Ungodly men.
LIke as Children which do not abstain from things forbidden them, specially
when they hope that it shall be kept secret, and that their father or mother
shall not know of it: Even so ungodly men wrapped in mischief, who when they
have offended, and are fallen into some sin, do not acknowledge their
iniquity, neither can they abide to confess it, although the torment of their
conscience does force and compel them to make confession thereof; but they
hide the same in silence, and in holding their peace, they think to cover and
bury all things in oblivion.

Vices covered with the names of virtues.
AS Achelous who when he would fight with Hercules, would shift himself into
a Serpent, would change himself unto the likeness of a Devil; or being a
Devil, he could change himself into what form and frame he would: Even so
some men do cover Vices, with the names of virtues; as the proud man, is
shifted unto a clean man, a fine man, a handsome man: a covetous man, is
changed unto a subtle prudent man; a wary and a frugall wise man: the
leacherous man, is called an amorous man, a loving, and a courteous man: the
idle man, is named a quiet and harmless man: the flatterer, is accounted an
eloquent person, learned and witty in his talk: drunkenness is changed into
good fellowship; gluttony, unto hospitality; envy unto good will; and
tyranny unto Justice, etc.

Variety of gifts.
AS one member has need of an other, and every office of each member, is
profitable for the whole body: Even so the Variety of gifts, diversely
distributed unto the Church, are given to profit withal, and to edify the
whole body of Christ in love. 1. Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, 11, 25. Ephe. 4.7.

Unfaithfulness in time of trouble.
AS a sliding foot, that lays his Master in the dirt: Even so such is an
Unfaithful man, in whom a man reposeth confidence in trouble. Prou. 25.19.

The Vanity of men's inventions.
AS when men dream pleasant dreams, as soon as they awake, there is no such
matter: Or as Chafe, which by reason of his lightness, the wind lightly
blows away: Even so fond devises, triflings, inventions, doting doctrines,
deceitful traditions, and supersticious Religions, coined by man's foolish,
fantastical, and phanatical brain, will come to nothing. Job. 20.8. Psalm.
73.20. Iere. 23.28, 29.

The Ungodly are grievous to God.
AS a Carte that is laden with sheaues of Corn in harvest, is pressed under
the load: Even so God is pressed with those, that are given over to sin and
wickedness. Amo. 2.13. Esa. 1. 14.

Virtue spreads her branches over all.
LIke as if a man carry in his hand, a light burning candle, it gives not
light to him only that carries it, but to all those which be in the house,
and they also see it which are without: Or as he that is bathed or perfumed
with precious ointments, or sweet poulders, have not only the pleasure
thereof to themselves, but the savor thereof casts it self out, and is
pleasant to all those which stand by: Even so such as be the children of
knowledge, and do carry about them the light of Gods word, they do not only
taste of the comfort thereof themselves, and work comfort to those that
appertain to the Church of God; but lightneth also the hearts of Pagans and
Infidels, which are abroad. Psalm. 18.28. Math. 5.15, 16. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.

Unity.
AS an Ointment well compounded of sweet and odoriferous things, cannot but be
acceptable to the sent of all men: So that Unity, which begins at Religion,
and stretches to the uttermost borders of the Church and Commonwealth, cannot
but both please God, and all good men. Psalm. 133.2.

Unmercifulness to others.
AS a liberal, good, and bountiful Master to his servants, cannot but be
very angry and much offended, if any of them deal cruelly with their
fellows: Even so much more justly, will God withdraw his mercy from them that
deal unmercifully with them that live amongst them. Math. 24.45, 46. Math.
18.33, 34, 35.

Usury.
1 AS poison the weaker it is, the longer nature resists it; and the stronger
it is, the sooner it kills: Even so Usury, the lesser it is, the less it
hurts; the greater it is, the sooner it consumes.

2 As a Burden, the heavier it is, the faster it wearieth; but a light burden
(says the Proverb) will prove heavy with far carriage: So likewise is it
with Usury, the greater, and the smaller, both eat and consume: but the first
in the shorter, the last, in the longer continuance.

3 As there is great difference between the biting of a Flea, and the biting
of a Dog, and the biting of a Lion: yet all are bitings, and the least will
draw blood: So there is difference between him that takes five, and him that
takes ten, and him that takes twenty in the hundred: yet all is biting, and
the least will consume a man in continuance.

4 As a Serpent that stingeth privily, is little perceived or felt at the
first, but afterward, the man that is stung swells, and the effect of that
little stinging, is dispearsed through the whole body: Even so the
inconvenience of Usury, is not felt in the beginning, but in time, it
amounts to a great sum, and deuoureth a man's whole substance.

5 Like as we see in theft or robbery, if a man steal but twelve pence out of
arich man's purse, though the want of it be little felt, by reason of his store
and abundance, yet he is hindered that loses it, and he is a Thief that
takes: it: Even so is it in Usury, though it be taken of a rich man, and in
so small a measure, as that his abundance, hardly suffers the evil thereof
to be perceived, yet is he bitten, that pays it, and he that takes it, an
oppressor. Exodus 22.25.

How we must Use the things of this world.
AS a Traveler uses his staff in his journey, as long as it does further
him, so long he will carry it with him; but when it hinders him, then he
casts it away: So likewise must we Use the things of this life; namely, as long
as they are helps to further and make us fit for the kingdom of heaven; but if
they be any hinderance to this spiritual gegiment of Christ, we must renounce
them, and cast them away, be they never so precious to us. 1. Cor. 7.31.

The best but Unprofitable,
LIke as servants, be they never so diligent in executing that which is
committed unto them, yet cannot justly vaunt themselves, that they have done
any more, then bounden duty: So all Christians, when they have traveled as
much as in them is possible yet they are to confess themselves, Unprofitable
servant. Luke 17.9.10.

God has Vengeance in store.
AS in treasure-houses or storehouses, men keep all manner of things, to
serve their purposes: Even so God keeps in store, weapons of his wrath, to
Revenge himself upon the wicked, for the injury and violence done to his
Church. Iere. 50.26.

Vainglorious talkers.
1 AS new Wine will burst the vessels which it is put in, except they have a
vent: So a man desirous to hear himself, can by no means hold his tongue.
Job. 32.19.

2 As a Dog having an arrow sticking in his leg, will not rest till he
have it out: Even so no more will a foolish pratler rest, till he have spoken
all he knows of any thing, or by others, good or bad.

Ungodly men.
1 AS the filthy Swine, regard not, but thrust from them Roses, that are most
beautiful and sweet, and seem to contemn most fragrant, and pleasant
Flowers; and do rather seek after foul puddles, and stinking mire, and
forsaking dainty dishes and costly Iuncates, do frank themselves most
greedily, with wild Mass and unclean things: So Ungodly men, have no taste
of the word of God, but hunting after uncertain riches, which are in
continual hazard; and at the length, will deceive them; they (are as it were)
fettered in the inchaunting pleasures, and pestilent flickerings of the world.

2 As Pilates soldiers with the wicked Jews, took Christ and stripped him
off his garments, buffetted him, and slew him: So likewise do Ungodly men by
their wicked behavior, strippe him of all honor, and slay him again.

Vainglorious men.
1 AS Organe players, unless some body blow unto them, the windy bellows
do make no sound at all: Even so Vainglorious men, unless they be pricked
forward, with commendations and praises of others, have never any mind or
purpose, to bend themselves to any good action.

2 As the lighter Balance, or end of the beam, will prease upward, and ever
be highest: So the Vainer, more unprofitable and vniuster, that a man is, the
more will he vaunt, and extol himself: and being a very impious, ungodly, and
most wicked man, will arrogantly assume unto himself righteousness, and most
impudently challenge the name of a good and honest man, when indeed, he sets
more by one penny of money, then by ten pounds worth of honesty: and does
love more ten pounds of money, then he does the health, wealth, credit,
liberty, life, yea and more then the soul of his neighbor, and Christian
brother.

3 Even as an Archer does shoot nearer, and sooner hit a fair great mark,
then a little one: So the Devil does easily hit with his arrows, and strike
with his darts, the Vainglorious man, and proud men of the world, but the
humble and lowly, he misseth, with all the sleights and cunning he has.

We ought to Visit them that be in misery.
1 AS Beggars when they would have men to pity them, lay open their soars,
because that though things be never so great in themselves, yet till they be
seen, we will hardly believe them (and therefore we do the poor much wrong
many times) in judging their estate to be better then it is: Even so thereby is
showed what is the nature of all, that if we will show mercy to others, so
cheerfully as we should, we must Visit them in their necessity, and not turn
our eyes away from beholding their need. Luke 10.30. etc. etc. Math. 25.40.
Iam. 1.27.

2 As the Queen of Saba came among others, to make trial of the wisdom of
Solomon, which was so great, which when she had done, and had seen, and heard
all things, she was greatly astonished; and said unto the King, it was a true
word, which I had heard in mine own land, of thy sayings, and of thy
wisdom; howbeit, I believed not this report, till I came and had seen it
with my eyes; but lo the one half was not told; for thou have more wisdom,
and prosperity, then I have heard by report, etc. Even so may it be said of
the condition of our brethren, that though we hear much, yet we shall not know
the tenth part of their poverty and misery, except we will go and see it;
and therefore cannot be so moved to pity them, as the Lord would have us. 2.
Chro. 10.5, 6.

3 Even as Abraham (when he would provoke himself to great humiliation, as
such a chastisement did require) he wept in the sight of the dead corpse, that
the beholding of it, might move him the rather: So likewise, if we would
look into the necessity and calamity of our brethren, and set it before our
eyes, we should be more plentiful in well doing, then we are; and be more
ready to weep with them that weep, and to be like minded one toward an
other. Romans 12.25, 26.

Virtuous and godly men.
1 LIke as the Margarites, those little white shining precious stones, which
do grow within shell fishes in the Sea, in this point are very marvelous and
wonderful; that though they be bred and increased in the Sea, yet have they
no similitude and likeness with the Sea; for the Sea is blew or sky colored;
but the Margarites are white; the Sea is horrible, and full of discomfiture,
but they are cheareful, pleasant and beautiful to behold; they move much,
greatly delight, and allure mightily men's eyes to look upon them; the Sea is
bitter, but they are amiable, and without all bitterness; but rather in some
sort and measure, by reason of their clearness and brightness, they represent
the sky; the reason is, because they receive influence from thence: Even so,
such Virtuous and godly men, who are surely grounded, and certainly settled, in
the love of God, and true Christian Religion, who being borne and brought up in
this world, have no resemblance, likeness, nor fashion of the same; in desire
they be drawn; in will they be severed; in words they differ; in works they
utterly disagree from it; and they do rather resemble in some measure, heaven,
from whence they receive the influence of the grace and favor of God.

2 Even as that precious stone called a Carbuncle, does not in darkness loose
his shine and excellent beauty: So likewise, a Virtuous and godly man, in the
extreme darkness of infinite calamities, obloquies, cursings, raylings,
backbitings, slanders, and whatsoever, does show his Christian patience, and
quiet sufferings; for he knows well, that such things do profit much, to
advance the praise of time and noble virtues.

3 As most pleasant perfumes, do even then, when they be in the fire, give out
a most excellent Odor, and their sweetest savor: Even so, a Virtuous and
godly man, when he is thrust into the midst of the hot scorching fire of
calamity and misery, does then show most his virtue, faith, religion,
patience, and constancy.

4 As the fuller and heavier Scale, is ever lowest: So the more Virtuous,
honest and godly, that any man is, the more will he submit and humble
himself; and howsoever other men, will seem to praise him, he nevertheless,
does still acknowledge his own imperfection. And indeed it is in a christian
man, some perfection, to know, and to acknowledge, his want and imperfection.

Union with Christ in the supper.
1 AS the Union between Christ and us in Baptism, is spiritual, and
requires no real and corporal presence: So likewise our Union with Christ in
his holy supper, is spiritual; and therefore requires no real nor corporal
presence.

2 Even as if one take molten Wax, and power it to other Wax, and so work
the whole together, they will be so united and mixed, that they cannot be
separated: likewise must it needs be, that who so receives the flesh and
blood of the Lord, he is in such sort joined to him, that Christ is found in
him, and he in Christ.

3 Like as if it be a thing to be marvelled at, how we be members one of an
other; and man and wife may be all one flesh: Even so much more wonderful, is
this nigh coupling together of Christ and us; which does most truly and
certainly, not unfeignedly, colorable, or phantastically, happen unto such, as
do faithfully eat the Lords supper.

4 As by a certain order of the heavenly dispensation, first the sign is
received, and then in the sign, and by the sign, the thing signified: Even so
must we first be United to the visible flesh of Christ, and by that afterward
to his Godhead, if we will be made partakers of grace. John. 6.53, 54, 55.

5 Even as the Bread is really and truly united unto us, eating the same: So
also is the flesh of Christ, truly and in very deed, United unto us, who eat
the same.

6 As by one and the same soul, all the members of the body are United with
the head and quickened: So likewise all the faithful, although they be upon
earth, and the head is in heaven, yet they are in very deed by one and the
same spirit, United with him; and being united, do abide and live in him. 1.
Ioh. 4.13. Romans 8.9.

The fruit of Ungodliness.
LIke as in husbandry, a man must not look or think of one seed to receive
an other; as of Barley to reap Wheat; or for Pease to receive Rye: So likewise
in this life, a man must not hope or look to reap of his Ungodly life, heaven;
the reward of a life lead in the fear of God.

The Vntractablenesse of some people.
1 AS a wild Horse, if he cannot by kicking and rearing, cast his rider,
watches the time till his rain be slacked, and getting the Bit between his
teeth, sets his tail an end, and runs his rider against the trees and
walls, and through hedges, to spoil him if it be possible; and when he is
down, gives him a farewell with his heels: Or as the Mule is a beast well
enough known to be froward and unruly, so that if his keeper watch him not
the better, he will take him up in his teeth, and lay him before him in the
Maunger: Even so there is nothing so brutish, as is the Vngratfulnesse,
frowardness, and waywardness, of some Parishioners, in rejecting the
doctrine, and government, which God has appointed for their souls; whereof,
although there be many Judges, yet none can tell what a troublesome work this
is, as the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who are driven to manage such
rustie and untamed iades, as are many among the multitude; for what with
yerking out the heels, rising upon the hinder legs, going side-long, and
other froward touches of such unbroken Coltes, the poor Minister, if he be on
their backs, can hardly keep the Saddle; and if he lead them in his hand,
one froward jade or other in the Parish, takes him up by the collar, and
throws him out of the way; so that though the Minister be never so honest and
godly, and have many good friends, yet if he be careful to do his duty, he
shall hardly stand without suspention or deprivation, or some such like foil;
which would never come to pass for the most part, if it were not for the
horses, and Mules in his own Parish. Psalm. 32.9.

2 As Horses get nothing by their furiousness and madness, but the sore Bit
and Bridle: Even so the Vntractablenesse and waywardness, of obstinate and
stubburne persons, gets not any thing, by oppugning and withstanding the
Gospel, and gainesaying the truth of Gods word; for they wrestle against God,
and so make themselves rediculous.

Unprofitable things, may be profitable.
AS the Bees gathers most sweet Honey, out of the withered Time, and out of
other herbs of more unpleasant juice: So likewise may we also, out of the
evil and Unprofitable things, pick out that which may turn to our profit and
commodity; as Shipwreck to Zeno Citius, and banishment to Diogenes, gave them
occasion to study Phylosophie.

Virtuous in poor estate, and contrariwise.
AS a woman, who having a Hen that laid her every day an Egg; now she
seeing that her Hen was very lean, and yet laid still after her accustomed
manner; supposed that if she were fat and lusty, she would lay twice a day;
and with this conceit of mind, she fed and crammed her thoroughly, so that in
short space she became so fat, that clean contrary to the expectation and
opinion of the woman, she left laying altogether: So in like manner, there are
many, who in their poor and base estate, are very Virtuous; but if they be
once mounted and advanced, to any degree of felicity and abundance, and do
live easily and wealthily, then they give over their former study, and become
careless, sensual, and void of all good works; so that they can neither go
nor run in the way of virtue.

Weakness in the best Christians.
AS sweet Trefoile, loses his sent seven times a day, and receives it
again, as long as it is growing, but being withered and dried, it keeps
still his savor: S the godly, living in the body, shall often fall, and
recover again, being dead, shall no more fall, but continue in their holiness.

Wicked children of godly parents.
1 AS the fair Echium, brings forth an evil favored seed, and that evil
favored seed again, brings forth a fair Buglosse: So sometime a godly
Father, begets an evil child, and a Wicked child; again sometimes
begets a godly Son.

2 As the foreskin of the flesh, remains in him, which is begotten of one
circumsised; and the Chafe comes again with the Corn, though the seed be
never so clean: So it is in original sin, and in sinful children of
Religious parents.

The Word of God, how it works in men diversely.
1 LIke as the material Sun in the Firmament (which being but one, and ever
the same) yet is in some sort an occasion of contrary effects; for whereas
properly it lightneth, and is comfortable to the eyes that be sound and
clear, improperly it dimmeth and breeds annoya^ce to such as are maimed in
sight; again, whereas it softneth Wax, it hardneth Clay; and as it procures a
sweet savor from Flowers, so it draws nothing but a stinking smell from
dead carrions: So likewise the Word of the Lord being preached, it works in
the godly and the wicked, a contrary effect; for it lightneth the one, and
blinds the other; it softneth the one, and hardneth the other; it draws a
sweet favor from the one, and a vile stink from the other; it makes some
better, but some others it makes worse: it allureth some to repentance, but
other some it causes (through their perverse nature) to increase in pride and
contumacie. Psalm. 19.8. and 119.105. Esaias. 6.9, 10. Math. 13.13, 14, 15. Act.
28.26, 27. Romans 11.8. Act. 2.37. Act. 7.51, 54. Phil. 4.18. Hebr. 13.16. Romans
22.11.

2 Like as water, notwithstanding it be but one, and ever the same, yet it is
in some sort also an occasion of contrary effects; for being the one among
fire, it quenches the same, but being cast into Lime, it sets it on fire: So
in like manner the Word does naturally quench the fiery affections in the
children of God: but accedentally, inflameth the fiery dispositions of the
children of Satan. Esaias. 55. 1. Ioh. 4.13. Iere. 44.16.

3 Even as the Flowers, although they be ever the same, yet are they the matter
of diverse things and effects: For whereas they are Honey to the Bees, they
become very poison to the venomous Spider: Or as the Honey, which is wholesome
for sound stomachs, is very hurtful for those that are sick of the
Collicke, not through fault of it self, but of the receiver: So likewise the
word of God is wholesome and profitable to the godly, but otherwise to the
wicked.

4 As the fire which purges the Gold, consumes the dross, which being put
unto Frankencense, procures sweet perfumes, which are great recreations for
men, which yet is present death unto Swine: So surely the Word of God, it
works like contrary effects in the godly and the wicked: For it is Honey to
the one, and poison to the other: It is very healthful for the one, and
hurtful to the other: It purges the one, and consumes the other: It draws
a sweet savor from the one, but a foul stincke from the other: Lastly, it is
a recreation for the one, but a destruction to the other. Psalm. 19.10. and
107.20. Tit. 1.9. and 2.8. 1. Timo. 1.9, 10. Ioh. 13.10. and 15.3.

5 As the godly by their obedience, do feel in the Word the mighty power and
wisdom of God to their salvation: So the ungodly by their disobedience, do
find nothing therein but the invincible power of God, to their endless
damnation. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. 1. Pet. 1. 8, 9. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9.

6 As the Thunderbolt (which being cast forth from the clouds,) spares
every such matter, as submits it self to the force thereof; but breaks
to powder whatsoever hard thing shall withstand the same: So the Word, which
proceeds from the Lord by the mouth of his Ministers, does never return in
vain, but is either a sovereign salve to such as are broken in heart, or
otherwise, an hammer to dash in pieces such as are obstinate in heart. And
therefore cannot properly be accounted the cause of sin, though by reason of
men's sundry natures, it may in some sort be said to be an occasion thereof.
Esaias. 55.10, 11. Iere. 23.29.

Word of God.
1 EVen as the Gold and Silver are put to the fire, so much the surer proof
they have of their goodness and finenesse: So the Lords truth, the more
exactly it is weyed with spiritual examination, so much the greater
confirmation of credit it receives.

2 As Wells, the more they are drawn, the better they are: Even so the Word of
God, the more diligently it is handled and used, the more plentiful fruit is
received by it.

3 As we cannot live without meat and drink, which God has ordained for our
bodily life: So we cannot have faith, without the preaching and hearing of the
Word of God.

4 As the fish called a Carpe, which seeing the Net to be cast into the water,
diueth suddenly down to the bottom, and dasheth her head so deep in the
mudde, that the compass of the Net slippeth over her clean; or at the most,
does touch no more then the tippe of her tail, but take her it cannot: So the
most kind of men, are of so carping a nature, that they no sooner perceive the
Net of Gods Word to be preached in the Church by their faithful Minister, but
forthwith they begin to diue so deep in the dunge of their own delights, and
to dashe their minds so much in the mucke of worldly trifles, that either the
net of Gods Word does slip over them clean, or at the most, it does but
lightly touch them; yet let them shift as they can, they shall be taken one
time or other, if they belong unto the Lord.

5 As Crows are then most busiest to do hurt, when the Husbandman sows his
seed, and when the same seed begins to sprout: Even so Satan, and his
infernal spirits, are then most careful to steal away the seed of the Word of
God, when it is first preached; as also when it begins to take some root in
the hearts of the hearers. Math. 13.4. Mark. 4.4. Luke 8.5.

6 As Gold, Silver, and precious stones, are not consumed with material fire,
but rather are made more pure: Eue^ so the pure Word of God, suffers neither
hurt, nor damage in spiritual fire, that is, temptation and persecution.

7 As wild Campion, Larks-spur, Canterbury beles, thrown before Scorpions,
takes away their power to do harm: So the Word preached sincerely, does
strike men with such a terror, that they dare not do the evil they intended.

8 As the water of Lilium Conuallium, if it be drunk, restores speech to him
that has lost it, by the Apoplexy: So the Word of Christ truly received,
makes them to speak that could not.

9 As Maister-woort where it is sown, delights the ground: So the Word,
where it is faithfully preached, delights godly Christians.

10 As Balm Apples called Charentia, taken in wine, are a pleasant remedy for
all pains, as well within the body, as without; and so comfort the strength
of such as take it, that no grief may happen to them: So the Word of God truly
preached, and rightly applied, is a present remedy for wounded consciences,
and so comfort such to eternal life, etc.

11 As Sothern-wood taken into the body, drives out Worms; and laid among
clothes, kills Moathes, and vermin: So the Word of God laid truly up in
the heart, kills and drives out evil motions.

12 As Echium or Milk-woort drunken, causes plenty of Milk in women's
breasts: So the Word of God well learned of the Minister, and rightly divided
and applied of him, yields plenty of instruction, for the hearers and
children of God.

13 As a blind man is altogether unable to judge rightly of any color: So he
that is ignorant of the Word of God, is not able to judge and discern, what is
either consonant or dissonant unto the truth of God.

14 As the pureness of Gold, must be tried forth by the touchstone, or
furnace; but yet through the industry of those that have skill and experience
in both; for otherwise, what use is there either of the touchstone or furnace,
with such as have no knowledge at all to deal in the same: Even so every
doctrine, is to be tried by the only rule of the Word; but yet the spirit of
God must direct the action, or else the Word of it self, will but little
avail us. 1. Ioh. 4.1, 2.

15 As they that have well swept their Chambers, it seems unto them, that
they are very clean; and yet notwithstanding, when the Sun comes, to
enter there by the windows, they perceive straightwayes by the beams, an
infinite deal of dust, which the Philosophers call moates: Even so oftentimes
before we be well instructed in the Law of God, if we be exempted from gross
and palpable sins, such as are murders, whoredoms, thefts, etc. we glory
that we are perfect and innocent; but when our consciences come to be descried
by the Word of God, and that Jesus Christ, who is the light, has entered there
by his spirit; then he makes us to see by his beams, an infinite number of
faults, and imperfections, which are hidden in our hearts, as are the Serpents
in the hoales. Romans 7.7.

16 Like as drunkards, who being over charged with Wine, and meat, have no
manner of knowledge or feeling of the case wherein they are, nor of any thing
else; and yet having their faces covered, and all to be rayed with dirt, they
cannot perceive it, until their Wine be drenched, and their brain delivered
from those fumes and vapors whereby they were so let, and darkened: So we
likewise, before we be regenerate, are in such sort besotted with a love that
we bear to our selves, and with a vain opinion that we have conceived of our
selves; that we know not the filthiness and villainies wherewith we are
betrayed; but when as the light of the spirit and Word of God begins to break
forth unto us, we come by little and little, to break and scatter those
clouds, which were before our senses, and recovering the view of our reason,
we begin to awake our selves, and discover the pitiful and miserable estate
wherein we are.

17 Anacharsis did say, that the Athenians used money for none other purpose,
then for numbering, and casting of account: So there be some that use the
Scriptures and Word of God, only for table-talke, vainglory, and
ostentation.

18 Like as the light of the Sun, cannot help the eyes that be blind; or a
voice which sounds loud, profit deaf ears: Even so, no more can the
preaching of the Word of God, or the administration of the Sacraments, profit
our souls, except the holy Ghost indeed, join his power withal; by the
which, only the ears are prepared, the heart opened, the affections touched,
and the wills disposed and prepared, there by to give an entrance to the
outward ministry.

19 Like as by the power and blessing of God, the fruits of the earth are
brought forth, yet by the ordinary means of planting and sowing: Even so,
although faith be inwardly wrought in us by the operation of the holy ghost,
yet is the true preaching of the Word of God, the outward ordinary means,
whereby the same is brought to pass; and as needful is preaching, for the
working of faith in us, as ploughing planting, and sowing, is for the bringing
forth of Corn, fruits, and herbs, out of the earth, for our corporal
sustenance. Romans 10.17. Ioh. 17.20. and 20.31. 1. Cor. 3.5, 6.

20 As seed sown upon the grass, or green sward, does not yield his
increase: No more does the Word, sown in hard and unprepared hearts.

21 As seed is sown to bring forth fruit: So is the Word of God preached to
give increase.

22 As the seed, how good so ever it be, brings not forth fruit at the same
instant time that it is sown, but continues a certain time in the earth: So
is it not convenient to restrain and bind the fruit and virtue of the Word of
God, to the same hour that it is preached, but the fruit shall be showed to
the elect, when it pleases God.

23 As when the seed is sown, men judge if the Land be good or bad, by the
increase of the fruit that it yields: Even so by the profit of the hearers,
men judge, whether the Word take effect in them, yea or no.

24 As where great store of Corn and seed is, it is a sign that our bodies
shall not die for hunger: Even so where the Word of God is plentiful preached,
it is a token that our souls shall not famish.

25 As where good land is, there is great increase: So in them in whom the Word
of God is fruitful, it will appear and show forth his fruit, as in Zacheus.
Luke 19.8.

26 As by bread our bodies are nourished and fed: So by the preaching of the
Word of God, our souls are sustained. Amo. 8.11, 12. Math. 4.4.

27 As good seed sown in good ground, will bring forth plentiful increase: So
will the lively Word of God, being truly preached amongst the faithful.

28 As that land that brings forth fruit, when the deaw of heaven falls on
it, is blessed: So those people, which receive the Word of God in their hearts,
and bring forth fruit accordingly, shall be blessed of the Lord, for it shall
not return, nor be preached in vain. Hebr. 6.7. Esa. 55.10, 11. 2. Cor. 2.
15, 16.

29 As that man, that is made Executor of his Fathers last Will and Testament,
by the benefit whereof, he looks to enjoy his Fathers Lands and possessions;
if there should be any hard clause, or point in it, he would no doubt, not
only be diligent in searching it out by reading, or getting it read, again,
and again; but also by conferring with other more learned then himself, and
by having the judgment of the best Lawyers: So then, if we in our causes and
earthly matters (whether we be old or young) no hardness can stay or hinder
us, to slack our duties, but rather cause us to use more diligence: Even so
should it be, yea so would it be, in hearing, learning, and searching out the
will and Word of our heavenly Father, whereby our hope is to attain to the
possession and inheritance of everlasting life. And if any part of it should
seem hard unto us, yet that should not cause an hardness of heart in us, to
cast off the care of the whole, and utterly to refuse to hear, read, or learn
any part of it. John. 5.39. Act. 17.11.

30 Like as our bodies are nourished and sustained with carnal and natural
food: Even so our souls are fed and nourished by reading, and hearing the
Word of God.

31 Like as the crowing of the Cock, was an occasion to move Peter to repent:
Even so the Word preached by faithful Ministers, is a means to bring their
hearers to repentance. Math. 26.74, 75.

32 As the Arc was a blessing to those that knew the right use thereof, as
the Israelites did; but it was a curse, and a plague to the abusers thereof,
the Phylistines. 1. Sam. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Even so is the Word of God a great
comfort and blessing to those that rightly use it, faithfully embrace it, and
rightly practice it; but it is a plague and curse to those that have it, and
abuse it, and do not reform themselves by it. 2. Sam. 6.3. etc. 1. Chro. 13.5.
Iere. 23.19. Deuteronomy. 11.27, 28. 2. Cor. 2.15, 16. Math. 10.14, 15. Hebr. 2.2, 3,
4. Iere. 11.3.

33 As a hungry man will not refuse meat, if it be good and wholesome, which
is offered to him by a child: So ought none to refuse the Word of God, if it be
offered sound and good, though the preacher thereof be a young man.

34 As those men that dwell by the river Nilus, are made deaf, by the great and
exceeding noise of that water: Even so many people at this day, by the
plentiful and continual preaching of the Gospel, (a lamentable thing to
hear) do wax dull hearers, weary of it, and loath it, even as the people of
Israel loathed Manna. Mumb. 11.6.

35 Like as young children that have Ratles when they be new, and have them
first, will love them very much, and greatly delight in them, so that they will
not forgo them, when they eat, or suck; yea and they will have them with
them in their Cradles; but when they be a little old, they will cast them away,
and care not for them: Even so a great number of people, did make great account
of the preaching of the Word, in the time of ignorance, and would go far and
near to hear it, who now having plenty of Sermons, do loath them, and care
not for them, etc.

36 As hunger is a sign of good health: So likewise to hunger and thirst after
Gods Word, is a notable sign of our spiritual health and safety. Math. 5.6.

37 As Spices smell strongest being pounned and beaten, then lying whole in a
bag: Or as Imbers are hottest being raked abroad; and meats do nourish
better being cut and shred, then being eaten in gobbeth: Even so the Word of
God truly expounded, preached, and rightly divided, is of greater efficacy
and power, then when it is but barely read.

38 As men usually rub the Chafe from the Corn, and then eat it: So must
the spiritual food, the Word of God be done withal, if it have any
corruption added to it by the preacher.

39 As by wholesome meats and drinks, the body is strengthened, and increased,
and by the wise counsel of Physicians, the sickness to be feared, is
prevented: So by the word of God, the faith of every Christian is increased;
and by the admonitions thereof, the dangers to be feared are avoided, whilst
he willingly gives credit to that which is spoken.

40 As the material seed is counted of small estimation: So is the Word of
God, amongst the wicked and ungodly. Luke 8.11. 1. Cor. 1.18.

41 Like as the seed has power to bring forth fruit of it self: So does the
Word of God, bring forth that, even which Kings cannot cause to spring forth,
but by it self.

42 As seed grows not in the hand, not being sown: So the Word of God, does
not increase, except it be preached, published abroad, and rightly divided. 2.
Timo. 2.15.

43 Like as worldly wise men use to buy books of Statutes, and to have them in
their houses, to read on, that they may know how to avoid danger of Law: Even
so the faithful do always set before them Gods Word, and in all their doings
it is their Counselor, least they should come into danger of Gods
displeasure. Psalm. 119.24.

44 As a shower of rain falling upon fire, does easily extinguish and quench
the flame: Even so the Word of God, being received into our hearts, does
easily make all concupiscence to vanish away.

45 As the skill and cunning of the Physician, heals all the infirmities and
diseases of the body: So Gods Word only cures the sick, sorrowful, and
distressed soul.

46 As a plant by continual watering, grows up at length to a great tree: So
a man by continual watering of Gods Word, does at last grow up to the full
height of virtue and godliness.

47 Like as long as the Physician does appoint the sick man what he shall
do, how to diet himself, and what medicines to take, there is hope of life;
but if he forsake him, we look for present death: So, as long as God of his
goodness lets his Word be among us, there is good hope of his love and favor;
but if he take the same away from us, then there is no comfort left.

48 As those that build without a good foundation, either the wind or water
soon overthrows it: Eue^ so they which in matters of faith, stay not
themselves upon the Word, but upon the credit of their teachers, shall not be
able to withstand the subtilties of the Diuill, but are easily overthrown.
Math. 7.26, 27.

49 As wheat gives sound, good, and substantial nourishment unto the body:
Even so does the true Word of God, mightily and wholesomely nourish the soul.

50 As a grain of Mustard seed, being the least of all seeds, and sown in
the earth, when it grows up, arises to a great height, and bears great
branches, so that the fowls of heaven may build upon the shadow of it: Even
so the Word of God, and faith being not idle, but working, although in outward
show, it seem small and slender, yet does it by little and little spread it
self, and like a fair fruitful braunched tree, receive daily strength and
increase. Luke 13.19. and 17.6. Mark 4.31.

51 As the Sun which was made to lighten all things, is most light: So the Word
which was made to clear all things, is most clear. Psalm. 119.105. Prou. 8.9.
Psalm. 19.7.

52 As a man will be more wary to try every piece of Gold, when he sees many
counterfeit and flourishing Angels to fly abroad: So when christians shall see
many sorts of doctrine, crawling daily like Locusts out of the bottomless pit,
they must be more diligent to taste and try, which is the sound and sincere
Word. 1. Ioh. 4.1. Iere. 23.28.

53 As the biting and sharpness of Mustard, together with his hot and fiery
taste, which is many times seen to make the eater thereof to rub his nose,
and wring out tears; and which also by provoking of neezing, does excellently
purge the head from rough phlegm, and rheumatike substance: Even so the Word
of God being faithfully preached, and rightly applied, does pearce the
conscience, shake the mind, enkindle and inflame the heart, excite and stir
up, drowsy, faint, and dull minds, to ensue virtue, and perform the duties of
piety; and does many times force and fetch out tears, of earnest and hearty
repentance. Act. 2.37.

54 As they that use the benefit of the day to travel and walk in, needs not
to stumble and fall at the things that lie in their way, for that they have
light to direct them by: So likewise, they that direct themselves in their
calling by the light of the Word of God, go aright and upright, because God
does guide them. Ioh. 11.9.10.

55 Like as Gods curse is apparent in that earth, which notwithstanding, the
rain and all the dressing that men can use, brings nothing but weeds,
briars, and brambles: So they that hear the word of God faithfully preached,
and continue in ignorance, and proceed in impiety and ungodliness, have
manifest seals of their damnation. Hebr. 6.7, 8.

56 Like as if Corn be spilt or shed in any common way, the fowls presently
fall upon it, and devour it, and suffer it not to remain there any longer:
Even so the seed of the Word, when it is preached, and fallen into hard
hearts, is by and by taken away of the Devil and wicked spirits, and so cannot
remain there, nor be understood. Math. 13.19.

57 Even as a man receiving the best friend that he has into his house, will
lodge him in his best room that he has: So likewise should a Christian lodge
Gods Word, in no worse place then in his heart. Col. 3.16.

58 As no man knows how sweet Honey is, but he that tastes it: So we
cannot understand the profit of Gods Word, except we have experience therein.
Prou. 24.13, 14.

59 As the salt which Elishia did cast into the spring of Jericho, was
profitable to that land: Even so the Word of God, is as healthsome to men's
souls. 2. King. 2.21.22.

60 As King Solomon, by continual exercising of himself in wisdom, did both
resolve the Queen of Saba of all her hard and curious questions, and wrote
many parables to instruct other men that were to come after him: So likewise
Christians, by acquainting themselves in the Word of God, shall be able to
satisfy both their own consciences in matters of Religion, and to teach the
ignorant, that which they ought to know. Math. 13.52.

61 As Jacobs sleeping in the land of Canaan, was a figure of his continual
rest, and perpetual possession of the same: So likewise the steadfast settling of
our senses in the Word of God, is an infallible argument of our continual
enioyin thereof. Gene. 28.13. Luke 10.42.

62 As all the sheafes in the Harvest did bow to Iosephes sheafe: So must all
men be controlled and subject to Gods Word. Gene. 37.7.

63 Like as the Sun does not heat all those that it lightneth: Even so the
Word of God, does show men what they ought to do; but not enflamed them with
a desire to perform the same; for it is one thing to know that we should be
wise, and an other to be wise indeed.

64 As the Israelites might not sow two kinds of seeds in one and the same
ground: Even so the immortal seed of Gods Word, must only be received in
the furrows of our hearts. Deuteronomy. 22.9.

65 As rain and Snow falling from heaven, returns not thither again, but
waters the earth, and makes it fruitful: Even so the Word that comes out
of Gods mouth, shall not return void, but shall accomplish and bring to pass
that which God will, and shall prosper in that whereunto he sent it. Esa.
55.10, 11.

66 As the seed once sown, wheresoever it pleases God to grant his blessing
unto it, whether the sower sleep or wake, or whatsoever he does, and howsoever
he is occupied, grows and increases, till it come to maturitie and
ripeness: So likewise the Word by the ministry of God, being scattered,
where God works withal by his holy spirit, there it brings a great,
marvelous, and an unlooked for increase. Mar. 4.20.

67 As of mortal and corrupt seeds, men are first borne to this mortal and
corruptible life: So must we of the immortal and incorruptible seed of the
Word, be borne again to a life immortal, and incorruptible, if we will live
ever. 1. Pet. 1.23.24.25.

68 As it is impossible that Corn should grow or prosper, and come to good,
among the bushes of thorns: So likewise is it impossible, that the seed of
the Word preached, should become the seed of new birth, to him that continues
full of worldly cares, and is snared with the deceitfulness of riches. Math.
13.22. 1. Pet. 1.23.

69 Like as he that is a thirst, does greedily and joyfully receive a cup of
water or beer to quench his thirst, and to ease him for a little time: Even so
much more greedily should Christians receive the Word, the water of life,
whereby the thirst of their souls shall be quenched eternally. Math. 10.42.
Ioh. 4.14.15.

70 As the Israelites in the wilderness, whenever the cloud, and pillar of
fire stood still, they stood still, and when it went, they went: Even so must
the Word of God be a pillar of fire unto us, when it commands us to stand,
we must stand still; and whatsoever we do in our calling, we must have
direction for the same out of Gods Word. Numb. 9.21, 22. Luke 5.4. 1. Timo.
6.1. etc. Deuteronomy. 17.16. etc. Psalm. 119. etc.

71 As children are so greedily carried with a desire of their food, that when
hunger pincheth them, they neither regard leisure, necessity, nor the
willingness of their Mothers, but all excuses, and business set apart, so
soon as they cry for it, they must be fed: Even so we must not think it
enough to desire the Word, but we must be earnest, and fervent, and importunate
in calling and crying for it. 1. Pet. 2.2.

72 As the Lamp burned continually in the Temple, without quenching: Even so
the Word of God, must continually sound in our ears, without intermission.
Leuit. 24.2, 3. Act. 2.46. Ioh. 6.27.

73 As David longed for the Well of Bethlehem: So must Christians long and
languish for the Milk of the Word. 2. Sam. 23.15. 1. Pet. 2.2.

74 Like as a vapor or perfume in the air, which in some men's nosthrils is
sauorie and pleasant, and does revive them; and others it strikes stark dead:
Even so the Word preached by Gods Ministers, lawfully called by him thereunto,
has the same power and force in it, which Christ himself showed, when he
spoke on earth; for it is the savor of life unto life, to save those that
hear it; Or it is the savor of death unto death, to those that contemn it.
Ioh. 18.4, 5, 6. 2. Cor. 2.16.

75 As it is the use of Physic, to cure men of diseases when they are fallen
into them, so also to preserve them from sickness before it have taken hold of
them: Even so it is the power of the Word, to assuage the trouble of
conscience, when it does once press us, as also to prevent it before it has
overtaken us.

76 As it profits nothing, to graffe a plant, if with a whirle wind or
storm, it be pulled up by the roots, before it bear fruit: So the Word of
God, being preached, heard, and laid up in our minds, shall do us no good, if
before it bring forth fruit, with some blustering blasts, and sturdie storm of
temptations, it shall be rooted out of our hearts. Psalm. 1.2.

77 Even as a twig or branch, taken from a very good and fruitful tree, and
graffed into the trunk or stock of some wild tree, as a Crab, Thorn, or
such like, does draw the stock or trunk, to the nature of the twig or
branch, that now it bears other leaves, and other fruit then it was wont to
do: So the Word of God, well planted, and surely graffed in our barren hearts,
by preaching and Catechizing, does draw us, and convert us unto, and into it
self, and causes us to bear other goodly leaves, of holy and godly Words; and
other most pleasant and wholesome fruits of unfeigned virtues and graces; but
by the way, we must needs crop and cut off, the boughs of our old sins,
that Christ may be graffed in us, and then no doubt our fruit shall be such,
as God, for his Sons sake, will accept and take in good part at our hands.

78 As men are wont and accustomed, to make account of precious things, and not
to cast them at random, but to keep them safe under lock and key: Even thus
safely and surely must the Word of God, when it is heard and preached, be kept
in our hearts, if we will ever come by true wisdom. Psalm. 119.11. Luke 2.19.
Heb. 2.1. Iam. 1.21.

79 Even as we cannot feel the favor and taste of any meat, unless we chaw
the same: So also we never feel any fruit of Gods Word, unless the same
abide in us, and we do as it were chaw and ruminate the same.

79 As the Sun at sometime of the year, in some place, does afford his shine
and light unto the people, and yet does little or nothing warm them: So the
knowledge and understanding of the Word, and will of God preached, does not by
and by work an hungring and thirsting, to lead a virtuous and godly life, in
all those whom it has instructed, and most perfectly taught, what they should
do, and how they ought to live. They receive knowledge and understanding from
it, but they refuse the grace, and deny the power of it.

80 As the Jews, which crucified the Son of God, even Jesus Christ, were
converted, by hearing Peter preach but one Sermon: But we are worse then they,
who have heard many hundreds of Sermons, and yet are (many of us) never touched
with any remorse of conscience, nor moved to any serious or true repentance.
Act. 2.37, 38, 39.

81 Like as we see Crows, and other fowls follow the heels of the sower, to
pick up and devour such grain, and Corn, as do lie uncovered: So in like
manner, do the Devils come like greedy fowls, into the assemblies where the
Word of God is preached, to take it away from the hearts of the people, that it
may not grow there. Math. 13.4.

82 As a Purgation made for the body, many times works not his operation, by
reason of the ill temperature of the body, or else of the region, that too
much, by reason of her, draws humors of man, into the exterior parts of the
body: So likewise the Word of God, powered into the ears, and understanding of
man, works not many times his operation, in cleansing the soul from the
humors and corruption of sin, by reason of the ill temperature, and
disposition of the persons, that uses to read and hear the Scripture.

83 As the child before he is borne into the world, abides in the Mothers
womb, and takes all nourishment of her: So we must learn what God is, within
the bounds of his Word; not at rouers, until he mercifully delivered us from
this bondage, and out of the dungeon of the body, and grant us to behold him
face to face.

84 As playsters, except they be applied in order and time, and be laid upon
the wound, though they be never so good, yet they cannot heal: Even so it is
with the Word of God, and the parts of it, which except they be used in order,
and time convenient, will not humble and receive us, as their virtue is.

85 Like as the red Sea, was a safe passage for the Israelites coming out of
Egypt, and a drowning to the Egyptians: Or as the fire of Babylon, hurt not the
three children cast into the Oven, but yet burnt the Ministers which cast them
in: Or as the Lion saved Daniell alive, but quickly did devour his accusers:
Even so such is the nature of the Word of God, that as it is a condemnation to
the wicked, so it is the power of God unto salvation, to all those which
believe the same. Exodus 14. toto. Dan. 3.21, 25. Dan. 6.22, 24. Romans 6.16.

86 As there was in the Arc the tables of the Law, the pot of Manna, and
Aarons rod: So in the Word of God, there are Commandments, mercies for the
faithful, and judgments for the impenitent and unfaithful.

87 Even as salt is good, both for the keeping of dead flesh from corruption,
and for the healing and purging of that which is alive: So the Word is
profitable for them that be dead in trespasses and sins, to make them alive;
and for them that be alive in Christ, to heal and purge them of sin.

88 Like as the Sun shining on the earth, is not polluted or hurt thereby,
but rather cleanses all things: So the holy Word of God, is not polluted by a
sinful body, but purifieth it.

89 As Honey through the sickness and heat of a Fever, does make the bitter
things that are taken into the mouth, to seem strange and worse then they are
indeed: So Gods Word, being digested and received into our souls, does make
us more abhor the bitterness of sin, lust, vanities, etc.

90 As we make great account of our Charters, whereby we hold our earthly
liberties; yea we gladly read them and acquaint our selves with them: So
likewise we ought to make more account of the Word of God, which is the Law of
spiritual liberty. Iam. 2.16.

91 As Mariners use by the stars, to direct their courses on the Sea: So must
we make Gods Word a star, to direct us to Christ.

92 As we account much of Rings, Jewels, or such like things, which are left
us of parents and friends, being dead: So must we account, and make much of
Gods Word left us by Christ.

93 As the Sun shining upon filthy sinckes, dunghils and puddles, draws out
loathsome smells, yet it self is pure and not defiled with them: Even so the
Word of God, which though it draw sin and wickedness from sinful men, yet
it self is pure and holy. Psalm. 12.6. and 19.8.

94 As we may see many men's faces, but not know their minds, except we
confer long with them: So it is with the Word of God, if we only barely,
and carelessly read it, and do not earnestly meditate in it, and studiously
search it.

95 Even as the natural man, conceived of natural seed, is nourished with
blood in his Mother womb, and fed afterward with Milk when he is once borne,
as all creatures are nourished with that, whereof they are engendered: So in
like manner, the regenerate man conceived, and begotten of the incorruptible
seed of the Word of God, is nourished and fostered by it, receiving the same
simply and purely, without any mixture, and hotch potch of any other man's
inventions with it.

Wicked.
1 AS the third sort of Canterbury belles, being planted in Gardens, prosper
overmuch, for it does spread abroad and multiply, that it hurts other
herbs, and will not easily be weeded out or overcome: Even so the Wicked in
the Church.

2 As if one and the same wormwood, the common wormewoood is hot in the first
degree, Sea wormwood hot in the second, and yet both wormwood: So among the
Wicked, some less hot in profession, some more, and yet both Wicked; some
less cruel, some more cruel, and yet both ungodly, etc.

3 As the wild Boores and Swine, which are wont to eat and destroy other
Wheat and Corn, will seldom feed upon Triticum Romanorum, or bearded
wheat, because of the prickie beards, which do them hurt: So the Wicked,
which live by devouring and oppressing other the Children of God, will seldom
assault them, which can hurt them.

4 Polimanie held in the hand, keeps a man from being stung or hurt, with
any Scorpion; but the more virtues a man has, the sooner the Wicked will vex
him, therefore are worse then Scorpions.

5 As the great Raifort or mountain Radish, being planted near the Vine,
causes it to starve, and wither away: So the Wicked, being too near the
godly, make them to decay and fall away.

6 As the Salamander that is ever in the fire, and never consumes: So be the
souls of the reprobate and ungodly men, ever dying in hell, and yet never dead.

7 As water lighting upon a hard stone, falls away, because there is no
entry open into the stone: So the Wicked, do with their hardness of heart
drive back the grace of God, that it cannot pearce into them.

8 As the flint stone are made of such matter, that neither water can moysten
them, nor fire can melt them: Even so the Wicked and obstinate, are so stony
hearted, that neither the heavenly deaw of the sweet promises of the Gospel,
or the fear or furious threatenings of the law, can mollify their hearts.
Ezech. 3.9.

9 As long as a sick man can walk and stand, there is some hope that he will
recover and amend; but if he must needs lie down, then there is little hope
of his health: Even so a man that walks in the counsel of the Wicked, or
stands in the way of sinners, there may be some hope of him; but if he once
sit down in the Chair or seat of the scornful, then there is no hope at all
of his repentance. Psalm. 1.1.

10 As the disease of a Canker, infecteth always the next part unto it, until
it have run through and infected the whole body: Even so the Wicked, never
cease, until they have drawn them all such as keep them company. 1. King.
11.3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. Judge. 16.16, 17, 18.

11 As fire is of this nature and quality, that it will burn up whole houses
and fair places, even with a spark, if it be letten alone, which otherwise
might be put out with ones finger: Even so the Wicked, yea but one Wicked
member in a Town if he be suffered, will at length do much hurt to the whole
Town, etc.

12 As that Mother cannot but be greatly afflicted, who having many children
weeping and crying at once for meat, and she not having sufficient, or none at
all to give them: Even so the Wicked man, being greedily called upon without
ceasing, but almost infinite passions, to yield to their desires, must needs
be vexed and pitifully tormented, especially being notable to satisfy any one
of the least of their petitions.

13 Like as the stone of Sycila, the which the more it is beaten, the harder it
waxes: Even so the Wicked, the more that the terrors and threatenings of Gods
judgments are denounced against them, the more hard hearted they be.

14 As the Grave always craves for more, and is never satisfied: Even so such
is the insatiableness of the throats of the Wicked. Romans 3.13.

15 As the Milner does muffle and blindfold his horse, that draws his malt
Mill, whereby the horse supposing that he goes right forward, is deceived, for
that he turns round: Or as the Faulconer, does put hoods upon the heads of
his Hawks, that so they may sit the quietter on his arm: Even so Satan
muffleth and hoodwinketh the Wicked, by ignorance, and by the delights,
pleasures, and vain inticements of the world, that so he may possess them the
quietter, to their utter overthrow.

16 As the Adder is by nature inclined, and desirous to sting and hurt with his
poison whom so ever he may: Even so all the counsels of the Wicked, tend to
the increase of wickedness and mischief. Psalm. 58.4.5. and 83.5.

17 As the poysonfull nature of an Adder, can by no means be redressed, no not
by enchauntment, for he stops his ears against the charmer: Even so there
is no hope of the conversion of obstinate Wicked ones, who stubburnely refuse
to hear, all wholesome doctrine and good counsel, that proceeds out of the
word. Act. 7.57.

18 As the Axe is in the hands of the hewers, or workmen: Even so the Wicked,
whose misery and service, the Lord uses to destroy, and to plague others, are
also in the hand of God. Esa. 10.15.

19 As men throw away their tools, when they are worn and broken: Even so
God, when he has finished his work, then he casts away the Wicked, whom
only he uses as instruments of his wrath. Esaias. 12.

20 As Anakins or Giants, were driven out of the land of Canaan for their
sins: So the Wicked, when their sins are ripe, cannot avoid Gods plagues.
Deuteronomy. 2.9, 10.

21 As a Bow bent with an arrowe, ready set in it, to shoot to any thing:
Even so are the devises of the Wicked against the godly. Psalm. 37.14.

22 As he whose Bow breaks in drawing, misseth his mark: Even so the
enterprises and endeavors of the Wicked, even then when they thir^ ^o destroy
the godly, are broken and come to naught. ^^al. 37.15.

23 As we see the firebrarnds ends burning, which very shortly are clean burnt
out, or easily quenched out: Even so the devises, attempts, and threatenings of
Wicked men, when God does not establish and ratify their counsels, come to
naught.

24 As young wild Bulls, are strong and lusty to do hurt: Even so is the
rage of malicious Wicked men, in persecuting the godly. Psalm. 22.12.

25 As trees that are unprofitable, and bring forth no good fruit, are to be
cut down, and cast into the fire: Even so the Wicked and obstinate, that
persevere in their malicious blindness, and indurate disobedience, deserve
severe punishment. Math. 3.10. and 7.19. Luke 3.9. Iud. ver. 12.

26 As Chafe is blown abroad with the wind, and scattered: Even so such is
the state of the Wicked, when God blows upon them, with the breath of his
displeasure. Job. 21.18. Psalm. 1. 4. Psalm. 35.5. Esa. 17.13.

27 Like as fire consumes Chafe and stubble: So likewise God shall make the
Wicked, overthrow, destroy, and bring to naught their own devises. Math. 3.12.
Esaias. 33.11.

28 As the mad Dog rages, and if he be able, biteth every one that he
meets with: Even so is the rage of Wicked men of might, toward them that
they can bring under their power. Psalm. 22.20.

29 As Dogs, when by vomiting they have cleared their stomachs, of such
matter as before lay there undigested, do presently return to it, and devour
it again: So likewise fares it with a fool, that seems sorrowful for his
folly, and with a Wicked man, that faineth repentance, and conversion* the one
delights still in folly, and the other returnet^ ^ine to his filthiness.
Prou. 26.11. 2. Pet. 2.22.

30 As in fining of metal, the dross is separated from other mettalls: Even
so God will separate the Wicked of the earth, from the godly, and them that
fear him. Psalm. 119.119. Esa. 1.22.

31 As dross is separated from Silver, by melting it in the fire: Even so the
Wicked shall perish, by the fire of Gods wrath. Ezech. 22.19, 20, 21, 22.

32 As fire quickly consumes dry stubble and straw: So the wrath of God
kindles as fire, and consumes the Wicked for contemning his word, and for
the wickedness of their inventions. Esa. 5.24. Iere. 4.4. and 5.14. Gene.
19.24. Leuit. 10.2. Numb. 11.1. and 16.35.

33 As the fruit cannot be good, except the tree be first good: Even so from
the evil heart of a Wicked man, nothing that is good in the eyes and sight of
God, can proceed. Math. 12. 33, 35.

34 As the grass on the house top, which for lack of root, withers before
it can grow up to be mowed, or to any other good use: Even so the Wicked,
though they flourish like the green herb, yet quickly shall they be cut
down and wither away. Psalm. 37.1, 2.

35 As the Mill if it go empty; or the filthy Hog, if he be not satisfied
with meat, make an unpleasant and odious noise: So the Wicked (if the Lord in
every thing satisfy not their desire) do most wickedly murmr, and
blaspheme his providence.

36 As his sight is very bad, that can discern nothing but black; his taste
very ill, that can feel relish of nothing but sharp things; as smelling is
far out of frame that sauoreth nothing, but that which stinketh: So likewise
his mind is most Wicked, and his tongue most devilish, that can conceive of
his brother, and report nothing but that which is bad and discommendable in him.

37 As a dark and dim light, which a man cannot discern any thing by, nor
use to his benefit, but is ready so soon as it is stirred to go quite out:
So is the prosperity of the Wicked. Job. 18.6.

38 As Lions rage and roar, when they seek after their pray: Even so do
Wicked men, when they seek to destroy them that fear God. Psalm. 7.2.

39 As a raging Lion, spoyleth and deuoureth all that he can catch or come by:
So the Lord deuoreth the Wicked that fall from him, and exercises all manner
of cruelty upon them. Ezech. 19.5, 6, 7, 8.

40 As Moathes eat garments, and Worms wool: So the Wicked shall be fretted
away and consumed. Hos. 5.2. Math. 6.19. Iam. 5.2.

41 As the Net craftily laid, encloseth a number of fish: So the Wicked by
their privy devises, seek to catch and draw into their danger, the godly.
Ezech. 12.13. Psalm. 31.4.

42 As men tread dirt under their feet in the streets: Even so God shall
cause the Wicked to be trampled on, that rise up against him, and his elect
children. Psalm. 18.42.

43 As in an Oven or furnace, the fire does quickly consume the wood, which is
put therein: Even so the Wicked, in the day wherein God will show forth his
anger, shall quickly be consumed. Psalm. 21.9. Mal. 4.1.

44 As Rushes and other green things, that commonly grow in watrie places, if
in hot weather they want moisture, do quickly consume, wither, and come to
naught: Even so the ways of the Wicked, and the hope of the hypocrite, shall
perish. Job. 8.11, 12, 13.

45 As the Sea when it rages, the waters thereof cast up dirt and mire: So the
Wicked in their outragiousnesse, show abroad their filth. Esa. 57.20.

46 As smoke vanishes and comes to nothing: So the Wicked and ungodly
perish at the presence of God. Psalm. 68.2.

47 As a Snaile melts and consumes to slime and earth: So shall God consume
the Wicked, and bring them to naught. Psalm. 58.8.

48 As we see diverse beasts, vermin, and fowls, escape out of sundry snares,
and engines, and yet in the end, to he trapped in one or other: So in like
manner, some Wicked, do at times seem to escape the heavy judgments of God,
yet in the end they shall be snarled. Iere. 48.44.

49 As Swine though they be washed never so clean, yet so soon as they can
find a myrie plat, they will wallow and tumble themselves in it again: So what
pains so ever is bestowed, to reduce and reclaim the Wicked and ungodly from
their impiety, they will shortly pollute and defile themselves again. 2. Pet.
2.22.

50 As fire made of Thorns, burns fiercely for the time, and keeps a great
noise and crackling, but yet is speedily burnt out and consumed: So the
attempts of the Wicked, are for the time violent, and dangerous, but God in
his good time, does with speed extinguish and quench them. Psalm. 118.12. Nah.
1.10.

51 Like as men are wont to hew down the trees, that are either unfruitful,
or else bring forth bad fruit, and make firewood of them: So God in his good
time, will root out of his Church, all Wicked men, and throw them into eternal
fire. Ezech. 31.3. Luke 13.6, 7.

52 As a Wall when it begins to bow, or is shaken, will shortly fall: Even
so ruinous is the state of the Wicked, howsoever it seem to be. Psalm. 62.3.

53 As Wax melts at the heat of the fire: So likewise the Wicked, perish at
the presence of God. Psalm. 68.2. Micha. 1.4.

54 As the Spiders web is now whole, and straightwaies broken, almost for the
least thing that may happen: So the expectation of the Wicked, fails and
deceives them. Esaias. 59.5.

55 As of Spiders webbes, no man can make cloth to cloth him: So the Wicked,
who bend their wits to conceive mischief, and whose whole labor is to bring
forth iniquity, shall not reap profit by their devises and pains. Job. 8.14.

56 Like as the widow that is in extreme grief, for the loss of her Husband
and of her children, because she is now destitute of all help and comfort:
Even so such grief and affliction, will God bring upon the Wicked; who when
they flourish and are in prosperity, are proud and unmerciful. Esaias. 47.8, 9.

57 As a little Image, though it be set upon an high mountain, is
notwithstanding a little one still; and on the otherside, if Colossus that huge
and mighty Image, be placed in a very low valley, yet loses not his
bigness: Even so a Wicked and cursed man, that is fraught with sundry vices,
though he flourish in honor and riches, yet is he but a seely mean man: and
on the other side, a man that is virtuous and godly wise, although he be in
extreme poverty, and beggarly estate, yet out of doubt he is a great man, and
to be highly accounted of.

58 As men mad and frantic, are wont to tear and rent themselves: So Wicked
and ungodly men, inflict upon themselves, most deadly and incurable wounds; yea
they be most wilful murderers of their souls and bodies.

59 As Wax melts at the heat of the fire: Even so do the Wicked perish at
the face and countenance of the Lord. Psalm. 68.2. and 80.16.

60 As the Sea, although it receives an unspeakable multitude of floods and
rivers, which do run into it, yet never runs over; neither is so full,
that it will receive no more: So evil and Wicked men, are never satisfied with
malice, envy, and hatred, neither make they any end of their treacheries,
sins and iniquities: but with the goades of some, they are stirred up, and
pricked forward, to commit others worse and more detestable then the first.

61 Like as if a King redeeming a poor bondsman, whom his Master diversely
tormented, should besides so favor and honor him, as to adopt him for his
child; it might well be accounted a frantic or senseless part in this
bondman, to forsake such honor and preferment, and to return to live under
the tyranny and thraldom of his cruel Master: Even so such are they, who
being delivered from the tyranny and cruelty of Satan, and made kings in
Jesus Christ, do give themselves to the lusts and pleasures of the flesh, and
the allurements of the world, thereby returning themselves into the wretched
bondage of the devil, to abide eternally under his tyrannous Dominion.

62 Like as if a man departing from London toward York, and yet gives out,
that he will take his way through Ireland, and every man will scorn him as a
fool, or take pity of him, as if he were a senseless person, that goes
far amiss: Even so is it with him, who taking no course to amend his life,
but continuing in offending God, does nevertheless say and uphold, that he
will go to heaven; every man may judge him to be senseless and greatly out
of the way, because he takes the contrary course, which leads to Hell.

63 As a continual rain, dropping upon a Rock of stone, makes it yet never
the softer: So nothing can make the heart of a Wicked man to relent.

64 As a wheel tilts up behind, and shootes down before: So the Wicked are
forward to all badnesse, and backward to all goodness. Psalm. 82.13.

65 As the death of Christ, was not efficient to save the Wicked: So the sin
of the Wicked, was not sufficient to condemn Christ. Zacha. 13.6.

66 As the thief imprisoned, wishes the judgment seat ouerturned, the Law
with his Princes and power dead, and the day of his execution never to come:
Even so do the Wicked Caterpillars of the world, men careless of godliness,
and hardened in heart, whose consciences do accuse them guilty, and fearing
Gods judgment, they desire rather that he were not at all, then that he
should come to give them the reward of sin, eternal death, the assured
stipend to all Wicked actions and thoughts. Romans 6.23.

67 As the Tiger, when he hears the sound of a Taber, or Drum, straightway
runs mad, and teareth himself in pieces: So the Wicked, when he hears
the sound of the charmer, charm he never so wisely, does not as the Tiger
tear himself, but he rents and tears the Lord in pieces.

68 As the sheep and Kine are put into fat pastures, to be prepared for the
shambles: So likewise the Wicked, the more wealth, ease and prosperity that
they receive and enjoy, the nearer and heavier is their destruction.

69 As the Ox that is stall fed, waxes fat, and the fatter he is, the nearer
he is to the day of slaughter: So it fares with the Wicked worldlings, which
never come under the cross or affliction, and whose necks could never abide
the yoke of the word of God, they are set up a fatting for the butcher of Hell,
and made ready against the day of slaughter, which is the day of judgment,
when all these outward, common and general blessings, shall tend to their
greater condemnation. Job. 22.7. etc. Psalm. 73.5, 7. etc.

70 As every thing that a godly man does, is not by and by to be allowed
off: So is not every thing that a Wicked man does, always to be misliked.

The Word of God the food of the soul.
1 LIke as the body is sustained and nourished, with material bread, because
it is material it self: So is the soul nourished with spiritual bread,
which is the Word of God, because it is spiritual.

2 As the body will faint and decay, if it be not from time to time, refreshed
with bodily sustenance: Even so the soul waxes feeble and weak toward God,
unless the same be often and continually chearished, refreshed and kept up,
with the Word of God, the only food of the soul. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Math. 4.4.

3 As the soul being a divine, spiritual, and immortal substance, does
far excel the body, which is nothing else but dust, earth and ashes: Even so
the sacred and eternal food, and assured salvation of the soul, ought to be
acquired and sought for, with far greater care and more earnest study,
zeal, love, desire, and affection, then the health and welfare of the body.
Ioh. 6.26, 27.

4 As the rain waters the fields, and makes them fruitful, and causes
Corn to grow, and gives strength unto the same, and garnisheth and
beautifieth, all godly plants, with abundance of most pleasant fruits: Even
so the Word of God and doctrine of Christ, bedeaweth and moysteneth the
children of God, and feeds and nourishes their souls to everlasting life;
and causes them to bring forth very excellent virtues, and most rich and
plentiful fruits and effects of a true Christian faith. Esa. 55.10. Hebr.
6.8. Ezech. 34.26.

5 As no man may entertain and conserve the life which he received by means
of his soul, by the food and nourishment which an other does take, nor by
that which an other eats and drinke^h, but only by that which he himself
does take, and by meats and drinks which he receives in his own person: So
likewise is it of the nourishment of the faith of every man, by the Word of
God, for the entertainment and conservation of the spiritual life.

Wisdom to be used in reprehending an other.
LIke as it is not enough for the Physician or Surgion, to know the wound, the
malady, and soar disease, and to tell the patient thereof, prescribing him the
names of the simples, that he must take for the curing thereof; but they had
need to prescribe him the manner of the compounding them, and quantity of each
one, which they would have him to take, with diverse other circumstances; or
else it is like, that the receipt will do more hurt then good: Even so is it
in spying of beams or motes, that is, of faults and sins committed by other;
yet it is not enough to know the fault, and tell the party of it, and what is
good for it, but in the administration of that which is good, great Wisdom is
to be showed. Math. 7.4, 5. and 18.15.16. etc. 1. Timo. 5.20.

Whoredom.
1 LIke as a fire being kindled in a City, if the wind blow vehemently,
stays not in the burning of one house or two, but spreads far and wide,
and draws a great destruction with it: So likewise Whoredom, being once
kindled, stays not in one man, but inuadeth and spreads over all parts of
the City. Prou. 6.27. etc. Job. 31.9. 2. Sam. 12.19. and 16.22. Heb. 13.4.
Mal. 3.5.

2 As not only he that kills with the hand, but also he that expresses by
token or word, the malice of his heart, is before God guilty of murder: So in
like manner, not only he which commits uncleanness in deed, but he also
that does solicit a woman by signs and words, is taken to be guilty, either
of Adultery, or incest, or of deflouring, or of Whoredom, although the work
it self follow not.

3 Like as he is before God a plain thief, that has a purpose to steal,
though he steal never a halfe-pennie; because he is not stayed from it by
will, but either by fear of punishment, or by some other means: Even so he
cannot be excused from Adultery, which in purpose and endeavor is inclined to
the work of Adultery, either in his eyes, hands, gesture of body, and filthy
communication. Prou. 5.3. etc. 1. Cor. 6.10. Deuteronomy. 23.17, 18. Pphe. 5.3, 5. 1.
Cor. 10.8. Reave. 21.8. 1. Cor. 6.15, 16, 17.

Will of God not curiously to be searched into.
LIke as a servant must not enter into the searching of those things, which be
most secret points of his Masters will, which do not belong unto his
knowledge, but rather must mark with all the diligence he can, to know what
his will is toward him, and to employ himself wholly thereunto: Even so, it
is not our parts to search the secrets of Gods Will, which do not belong unto
us, but rather to prove and understand what the Will of God is toward us.
Deuteronomy. 29.29. John. 6.39, 40. 1. Timo. 2. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. Romans 12.2. Math.
7.21.

Weakness of judgment.
1 AS there is a certain Weakness of the sight, which causes the patient to
think that he sees strawes, when he sees none: So there is a certain
Weakness of judgment, which makes men think they spy faults, when they
do not.

2 As they which have the Tenasme of body, often go about to avoid the filth
of the body, but cannot: So many have a Tenasme of soul, who labor often to
cast out their evil, and cannot.

A Word spoken not recalled.
AS it is not easy to take again the Bird, that we suffer to fly out of our
hands: So is it most uneasy, to call again a Word once pronounced and spoken.

Woman.
1 LIke as the kicking of a Mule, is oftentimes with wine let: So
contrariwise, the malapert sauciness of a Woman, is with wine provoked.

2 Like as a man that is stung with Bees, will thereupon forsake the Honnie:
Even so such is a Wife, that being offended with the manners of her Husband,
does therefore forsake him.

3 As none does feel and perceive so well, on what place the shoe does wring
him, as the wearer: So none does know so well the ouerthwartnesse of his Wife,
as he that is married unto her.

4 As the Bird of Egypt, which when she is old, purges all the filthy humors
of her body with spices of Araby, and sends forth of her mouth a woundrous
sweet breath: Even so a Woman, when she is past bearing of children, then
should she savor and breath all heavenly things, so that she neither do nor
say any thing, that is not religious and godly, and that may be an example for
the younger Women to follow. Tit. 2.3, 4.

5 As a vessel, the weaker it is, the more it is to be favored and spared, if
we will have it to continue: Even so a Woman, because of her infirmities, is
much to be borne withal. 1. Pet. 3.7.

6 As the perfect Gold which is of a pure substance, sooner receives any
form then the sturdie Steel, which is a gross and massy metal: So Women's
effeminate minds, are more subject to sudden affection, and are sooner
fettered with the snares of fancy, then the hard hearts of men.

War.
AS the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, being in twenty years by all the people
of Asia, and by so many Princes builded, should in one night be fiered by the
vile harlot Herostratus: Even so great Cities by War, are easily overthrown,
but not so soon to be builded again. Esaias. 19.2.

Choosing of a Wife.
LIke as he that will plant any thing well, does first consider the nature of
the ground, in the which he intends to plant: Even so much more, he that
entendeth to marry, should have respect to the condition of that woman, out of
whom he desires to plant children, the fruit of honesty, and godliness.

Will of a regenerate man.
AS a man that has one leg sound, the other lame, who in every step which
he makes, does not wholly hault, or wholly go upright, but partly go upright,
and partly hault: Or like a man in a boat on the water, who goes upward,
because he is carried upward by the vessel; and at the same time goes downward,
because he walks downward in the same vessel at the same instant: Even so
the Will of a man regenerate, partly wills, and partly nilleth, that which is
evil, because it is partly regenerate, and partly unregenerate.

Worldly wise men.
LIke as a woman, who having so much work to do, that she could not tell
where to begin, sat her down, and left all undone: Even so Worldly wise men,
who seeing many things out of order, both in Church and Commonwealth, and so
little hope of any redress or reformation thereof, that they cannot tell
which, or what to correct, or amend first, and therefore they leave sin
unpunished, and let men do what they list.

Works follow faith in every good Christian.
AS in material buildings, after the foundation is laid, there remains the
greatest labor, time, cost, cunning and diligence, to be bestowed upon the
framing and furnishing of other parts, that must ensue: Even so the heavenly
edifice or building of our soul, have laid on the foundation, and ground of
true belief, the rest of all our life, time, labor, and studies, is to be
employed in the perfecting of our life and actions; as it were in raising up
the walls, and other parts of our spiritual building, by the exercise of all
virtues, and diligent observation of Gods commandments; without the which, it
will be to no more purpose for us to brag of our faith or knowledge in the
scriptures, or to say that we have faith, and look to be saved as well as
other men, then it will be to purpose, to have a foundation without a building
upon it. Iam. 2.26. Mat. 3.8.

Wickedness, and the fruits thereof.
1 AS the godly when they die, leave not only behind them, a good name and
fame unto themselves, but also to their kindred: Even so contrariwise, the
wicked and ungodly, when they die, leave not only a reproach and shame to
themselves, but also to their kindred. Math. 11.39.

2 Like as when Grapes be full ripe, and ready for the press, then we know
that vintage is at hand: So likewise when Wickedness abounds, Gods
vengeance cannot be far of. Joel. 3.13.

Wife.
AS the glistering beams of the Sun when it arises, decketh the heaven: So
the virtuous dispositions of a good Wife, adorneth the house.

The Works of the world, declare God the workman thereof.
1 AS a prisoner in a dungeon, may easily by a little beam that shines in at a
chinke, conceive there is a Sun, from whence that beam descends: Or as a
Trauayler in the wilderness, that falls upon some Channel or Brook, may
ascend by the same, to the Well or Fountain: Even so, he that beholds and
considers the wonderful Works of the world, may thereby conceive also, the
wonderful Artificer or workman, that made them.

2 Like as if a man do pass by sea, into some foreign, strange, or sauadge
Country, where nothing else but birds and beasts do appear; yet if he should
epsy some exquisite building, or other work of Art and reason in the place,
he would presently assure himself, that some men dwelt, or had been in that
Country, for that such things could not be done by beasts or unreasonable
creatures: Even so, if we cast our eyes in the view and consideration of the
heavens, with the Sun, Moon, Stars, and the rest of the creatures of this
world, we may then easily judge, that there is a God that has made all these;
and so from time preserves the same. Psalm. 19.1. Job. 38.4. etc.

3 As in a Quiar, or company of singers, when the foreman has given the first
tune or note, there cnsueth presently a sweet harmony, and consent of all
other voices, both great and small, sharp and mean: So likewise God in the
creation of this world, having given once the first push or motion to the
highest heaven, called the first moveable, there ensues upon the same, al
other motions of heavens, Planets, Elements, and other bodies, in most
admirable order, concord, and congruitie; for conseruatio^ and government of
the world.

4 Like as if a man that stood a far off upon a Mountain, should see in a
field under him, a great, huge, and maine Army of soldiers, most excellent
well appointed, each one in order agreeing with other, divided into Ranks,
Squadrons, Companies, and Offices; subordinat the one to the other by degrees,
and yet all rending one way; all their faces bent upon one place; all moving,
marching, and turning together; all endeavoring with all cheerfulness, toward
the performance of one common service, by mutual assistance, without
dissension, or clamor; he that should see this, as he could not but imagine
some general high Captain to be among these soldiers, whom all obeyed, and
from whose supreme commandment and order, this most excellent subornation,
agreement, and union, proceeded: Even so much more, upon consideration of the
former coherence, consent, and miraculous subornation of creatures among
themselves, in their operations, must we infer, that they have some general
commander over them all, by whose supreme disposition, each creature has his
charge, and peculiar task appointed, which he must perform, for the common
and universal service of the whole.

Works good.
1 LIke as when we mingle water with wine, in a Cup, or in a Glass, that which
is powered in there, is called wine, though water be mingled with it; and albeit
there be more water then wine, yet that which is the more principal, and most
precious part of all, bears the name: Even so the good Works which we do by
the grace of God, be it that they have a great many spots and imperfections,
as they proceed from us, yet for all that, they hold always the name and
reputation of him, who is the principal author.

2 As sweet water issuing out of a pure Fountain, is by a filthy channel made
corrupt: So likewise Works of Grace, even the best of them are mixed Works,
partly holy, and partly sinful; whereby it is evident to a man that has but
common sense, that they are not answerable to the righteousness of the Law;
and that therefore they can neither merit life, nor any way justify a man
before God. Phil. 2.13. Luke 17.10. Esaias. 64.6. Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.^6. Ephe.
2.8, 9. Tit. 3.5.

3 As it is of necessity that the tree be made good, before she bring forth
good fruit, and therefore the fruit makes not the tree good, but is rather
the sign of a good tree: Even so it follows, that Works do not justify,
because they are done of those, which before were made righteous through Grace.
So that a good Work makes not a good man, but a good man makes a good
Work. Math. 7.17, 18. and 12.33.

4 Like as bond men and slaves, who were in such state in old time, and so in
bondage to their Masters, that though they labored and toyled never so much,
yet they got nothing for themselves, but were held and kept under the bondage
of their Masters, with all their labors, their force, and diligence, yea even
unto blood: Even so, forasmuch as both our selves, and all that we have, belong
to God by right, and he possesses us as slaves, and bondmen, therefore what
service soever we endeavor to do him, it is certain that he can owe nothing
unto us. Job. 9 3, 15, 20. Psalm. 143.2. and 16.2, 3.

5 As it has been sometimes said, and truly reported of the Athenians, namely,
that they knew what was meet to do, but they wholly neglected to do the same:
Even so, many Christians know what is meet and right to do, but yet for the
most part, wholly neglect to do the same. Luke 12.47. Iam. 4.17.

6 Like as the Lord (according to his justice and truth) has threatened
terrible punishments to wicked and impenitent sinners: Even so, contrariwise he
has promised rewards to them that do good Works, and work righteousness.
Mat. 5.16. Romans 13.9. and 1. Cor. 15.58. Ephe. 2.10. Phil. 4.8. Tit. 2.12. and
3.8.

7 Like as if a man should say, the Vine is made more fruitful by bearing
grapes; or that the internal light of the Sun, is augmented by the external
emission of the beams: So likewise, for a man to say that inherent
righteousness is by good Works, namely, the fruits of righteousness,
augmenteth; so to to say, is not only erroneous, but also ridiculous.

8 Like as if a rich man, not constrained, but of his own good will, should
adopt one to be his son, whom he knows not, and to whom he owes nothing,
and should appoint him to be the heir of all his lands and goods; and certain
years after that he has bestowed this benefit upon him, he should lay upon
him a law, to do this or that; he cannot now say, that he has deserved this
benefit by his own works, seeing that many years before, he asking nothing,
had received the same freely, and of mere favor: So God could not respect our
Works and deserts, going before righteousness; for the promise and the gift of
the holy Ghost, was 430. years before the Law. Gal. 3.16, 17.

9 As it is impossible to separate washing from water, and burning from fire,
and good fruits from a good tree: Even so impossible it is, to separate good
Works from a true and a lively faith. Iam. 2.22.

10 As Merchants or Chapmen, do oftentimes prise and esteem their wares and
merchandise more then they be worth: Even so do we of our doings, virtues and
good Works: but when they are examined and prised, by those which know them, as
by the Spirit of God and his Prophets, they are altogether judged as old
rags, torn, tied together, and patched up again.

11 As old Images new gilded over, which outwardly has some glistering and
show, but within, are nothing but dust and dirt: Or as counterfeit money, which
is of ill and naughty metal, how good a print soever it have: Even so is the
good that we do, and all the righteousness and virtue which is in us, is
nothing but shame and reproach. Romans 10.3.

12 As the Temple sanctified the Gold that was upon it, but was not sanctified
by the Gold; or as the Altar sanctified the offering that was upon it, but was
not sanctified by the offering: Even so good Works do not beautify a
Christian man in the Lord, but the man in the Lord, does beautify the
Works. Mat. 23.17, 19. Reu. 14.15.

13 As the Apple is not the cause of the Apple tree, but a fruit of it: Even
so good Works are not the cause of our salvation, but a sign, and a fruit
of the same. Math. 7.17.

14 As Caterpillars sometimes and blasting, do fret and annoy the branches,
that the sap cannot have his course, and so the fruit fails, which seemed
fair to the eye: So rancour and displeasure, division, schism and separation
among men; being no less then noisome winds and Caterpillars to our Christian
faith; eat up, and dry away many times, the sap or juice of love and
charity, whereby the expected fruit of good Works, is withered in the
branches.

15 As sauoury water cannot come from a stinking puddle, or sweet fruit from
a sower root: Even so, no more can any good Work come from an unregenerate
man, from a corrupt and sinful soul; who although he give his body to the
fire, for the profession and maintenance of the truth; and all his goods to
the poor, in a tender compassion of their misery, yet he being destitute of
faith, love, and the rest of the parts of regeneration, does not by these
works please God, or fulfill his Law.

16 As the channel which is polluted and defiled, does pollute and defile the
water, that is without defilement in the fountain: Even so the mind and will
of man, defiled by the remnant of sin, defile the Works, which as they come
from Christ, are undefiled.

17 As in fire there is both heat and light, yet do we not say that the
light does burn, but the heat: So in a man justified, there is both faith,
and good Works, inseperably, yet does not good Works justify, but faith
only.

18 As one Torch does give more light carried before, then four borne behind:
So likewise our good Work or deed done, in life time and perfect health, is
more welcome unto God, then forty after death.

19 As the green leaves outwardly, shows that the tree is not dry inwardly:
So the good Works openly, testify the zeal of heart inwardly.

Wise men.
1 AS the old natural Philosophers do say, that the Sun feeds on the
salt water, and that the Moon takes her food upon the sweet water: Even so
Wise men do seek things bitter, so as they be profitable, when fools only
pass for things pleasant and delightful.

2 As the Be out of the most bitter things, does gather most sweet Honey: So a
Wise man, out of things hard and unpleasant, picketh gain and utility.

3 Like as Alexander, did cause Bucephalus his Horse, being old, to be carried
on other horses to the battle, that he might be fresh for the fight: So ought
grave, old, and Wise men, be spared from labor, that their good counsel might
be only regarded, and had in necessities.

Wits.
1 AS the vessel with a narrow mouth, of a long time may not be filled, but
then at the length, it holds the liquour more furer: So Wits that be dull in
receiving learning, will most steadfastly remember the same, once obtained.

2 Like as too great a noise hurts the ear: Or as too much meat annoyeth the
stomach: Or as heavy burdens hurt the bearers of them, Or as too much rain
does more hurt then good to the ground: Even so weak Wits, and weak
consciences, may soon be oppressed, with over hard questions.

Wisdom.
1 AS that vessel can never be filled, which always powers forth and
leaketh: So may he never receive Wisdom, which continually speaks, and at
no time harkneth. Prou. 17.27. Iam. 1. 19.

2 As the Ass Colt, which of all other beasts is counthe veriest dullard, yet
brings more Wit and ability to help it self, then a young infant: Even so
whatsoever Wisdom or virtue men have now, they brought it not with them into
this world, but have it afterward by the gift and free liberality of God.
Iam. 1.17.

3 As the Palm tree spreads his boughs and branches so wide, and gives
such pleasant shadows, that Xerxes the King of Persia, took singular
delight to sit under it, whole days together: So likewise Wisdom, coming out
of the mouth of the most high, with heavenly comfort protecteth, shadoweth,
recreateth and defends al those that commit themselves under the shadows
thereof, from all harm and danger. Psalm. 17.8. Lamen. 4.20.

4 As Honey is good, and the Honey comb sweet unto the mouth: So also is the
knowledge of Wisdom unto the soul. Prou. 24.13, 14.

5 As earthly wisdom is corrupted with affections: Even so heavenly Wisdom
is pure, undefiled, and not polluted with affections. Iam. 3.17.

6 As earthly wisdom is desirous of contention: So contrariwise, heavenly
Wisdom is peaceable; that is, diligent, to make peace and quietness among
men.

7 As earthly wisdom is rigorous and cruel: So heavenly Wisdom is gentle,
and gives place to rigor.

8 As earthly wisdom will yield to no man: So heavenly Wisdom is
tractable, and does easily obey him that commands those things, that be good
and right.

8 As earthly wisdom is unmerciful: So heavenly Wisdom is merciful, and
full of good fruits.

9 As earthly wisdom does accept persons, omitting the cause: So heavenly
Wisdom, does in no case regard the persons, but the causes.

10 As earthly wisdom has hypocrisy joined with it: So heavenly Wisdom,
is void of all hypocrisy.

11 As the sweet showers of rain, fall down from the high hills and
mountains, and so they abide barren; but they rest and sink into the low
valleys, and make them fruitful: Even so the deawes of true Wisdom, does
not rest upon the proud, hautie, and scornful, but upon the meek, lowly, and
humble. Esaias. 57.15. and 66.2. Math. 11.25. Luke 1.51. 1. Pet. 5.51.

12 As he that is humble, and has denied himself, is fittest for the
receiving of wisdom: Even so there is no greater hinderance to the attaining
of Wisdom, then the pride of man's heart, and carnal Wisdom. Romans 8.7.

13 As in dangerous sailing, the stern is not committed to him which
excels in riches and nobility, but to him which is expert in the skill and
cunning of Navigations: So likewise it behooves not, to commit and deliver unto
him a princely government (which is richer and more honorable then other) but
to him which does excel other in Wisdom, policy, and fidelity.

14 As reason is the difference, which distinguishes a man from a beast: So
Wisdom is the perfect index, which shows how far one man excels an
other.

15 Like as a hand is no part of a man, except it can do the office of a hand:
So is Wisdom no part of Wisdom, unless it be employed as it should be.

Word of God.
1 AS an ill stomach, what good meat so ever it receives, it turns it into
ill humors; and the Spider gathers poison to the same flowers, that the Be
gathers Honey: So in the Word of God, and his blessed Laws, which he
ordains for our health and salvation, ill men gather death and damnation,
through their own wickedness, and no fault in the Law, nor Law maker.

2 Like as no Burgess of a City, that has care of his Corporation, but would
be glad to know, how in times past, the world went with his Corporation, that
thereby he may understand the better how to behave himself therein, as
occasion shall serve; and not only would desire to know the Laws of the same,
but also, what examples have any way been given, touching the same: Even so,
it becomes much more Christians, that are Citizens of the Church of Christ,
and have a community in that body, to know, not only the Laws of this
City, (which is the Word of God) but also, what has befallen, either good or
bad, and every accident; whereupon, experience may arise by example, and
wisdom thereof, to be put in use accordingly.

3 As men in the night because of the darkness, use Lantern and lights,
that they may see their way: Even so we ought in this blind, dark, and
ignorant world, to use the Word of God, as a Lantern unto our feet, and a
light to our steps, that we may walk in those ways that God has provided for
us to walk in. Psalm. 119.105. John. 1.9.

4 As Almighty God, by his most mighty word and his holy spirit, and infinite
power, brought forth all creatures in the beginning, and ever since has
preserved them: Even so by the same Word and power, he works in us, from time
to time, this marvelous spiritual generation, and wonderful spiritual
nourishment and feeding, which is wrought only by God, and is comprehended and
received of us by faith.

The Word must be rightly divided.
OFtentimes we see that one man's stomach, takes harm of that meat whereof
an other takes profit; and that which helps one sick man, hurts an other:
Even so does the Word of God not rightly preached; and therefore to Preach
mercy where judgment ought to be taught, and to Preach only the Law, where
the Gospel should be taught, is not good.

The World lies in sin.
AS a possessed or mad man, is not therefore free from the snares of the
Devil, or well in his mind, because he has his hands and his feet bound,
and can do no hurt: Even so the World, although it be bridled by the Law,
from outward wickedness and mischief, yet is it not therefore righteous, but
still continues wicked; yea this restraint shows plainly, that the World is
wicked and outrageous, stirred up, and enforced to all wickedness by his
prince the Devil; for otherwise it need not to be bridled by Laws, that it
should not sin.

The true Worship of God.
EVen as a man might say unto his wife, of one that is not a very man; for as
much as he is not a man, he is not meet for marriage, and therefore not to be
matched with thee as thy Husband; and if he be a very man indeed, yet thou
may not join him with me; for I am thy Husband only: So likewise if any be
a counterfeit God, even therefore he is not to be Worshipped, nor to be matched,
with the true God, because he is counterfeit; if any seem to be the true God,
yet we may not Worship him, which profess one true God, and that one alone.
Exodus 20.2, 3. Deuteronomy. 5.6, 7.

Our best Works stained.
1 AS pure water put into filthy vessels, is corrupted thereby: Or as clear
running water, passing through filthy channells gathers filthiness: Even so
the pure graces of God, so soon as they entered into us, are stained by the
corruption of our nature.

2 Like as there is a greater force in sin, to pollute holy things, then in
holy things to sanctify polluted things: Or as the whole part of a man's body,
touching the soar part, cannot heal it; but rather is in danger to be
infected by it: Even so it follows necessarily, that the best Works in man
are wholly corrupted; so that if the Lord should straightly examine them, no
man can answer for one of a thousand. Agge. 2.13. Job. 9.2, 3.

Our Weakness to please God.
LIke as if a man being hired to do a days work, should deceitfully work
but with one hand, and so disappoint his Master of the Work, which should
have been wrought with both hands: Even so, whereas God craves in every
action, all our wisdom, wit, will, memory, understanding, and affection,
wholly to concur together, we scarcely give him a part of all.

Wisdom and strength to be joined.
LIke as a Tree that the wind has shaken loose at the root, the higher and
greater that it is, the sooner it is overthrown: Even so a Soldier, the
stronger that he is, wanting Wisdom, the sooner he is ouerthrown; for courage
and strength, without Wisdom, is foolish rashness; and Wisdom without
courage and strength, is fearful cowardlinesse; join them together, and they
make a perfect Soldier.

The Will is in stead of the fact before God.
LIke as he is not to be accounted healthful, which though he do appear
whole in the outward parts, yet has some evil disease with in his stomach,
either in his Liver, or in his Lights, or in some other place: Even so, he
cannot be taken for a just and righteous man (if God be judge) which although
he do not outwardly use whordome, steal, nor kill, yet does in his heart
desire other men's wives, servants, etc. or any other goods, and wishes that he
were dead, or hanged, who^ he hates. Exodus 20.17.

Good Works, but yet failing in the manner of doing.
AS the Elders of the Jews, who coming to our Savior Christ, in the behalf
of the Centurion, for his sick servant, besought him instantly (as though
they might not be denied) and they tell him that the Centurion is worthy of so
much favor, as that forsooth the Lord Jesus should come to him and heal his
servant; for proof whereof, they allege two strong reasons; one is, he
loves our nation; an other is, he has built us a Synagogue: Even so plead the
Papists, we are worthy (O Lord) of thy favor, we have deserved so much at thy
hands: Or such a one that is now dead, has deserved so much, as that thou
should receive his soul; for he loved us well while he lived; he was an
honest man, he made us good cheer, he kept a good house, he filled our
bellies, and our purses too; besides this, he has built us a stately
Synagogue, goodly Churches, and Chapels of ease; he mended our highwayes, he
erected such a College, such an Hospital; therefore Lord, thou must of
necessity receive his soul into thy kingdom, or else thou do him wrong.
Luke 7.3, 4, 5. Math. 7.21, 22.

By the written Word of God, things amiss are discerned.
LIke as a man that has never so good eyes (yet if he be in a deep
darkness) cannot for all the goodness of his eyes, know and discern his own
Father, standing directly before him; much less a beam or a mote in his eye,
until such time as he has light to discern him withal: Even so, though we
be never so well and sharp sighted, are we able to discern a beam or mote
in the Churches eye, without the help of the light of the Word. Psalm. 119.105.
Ephe. 5.13. Math. 7.3, 4, 5. 2. King. 22.1. etc. and 29.1, 2, etc.

Not two Wills in God.
AS the sight of the eyes, when they are dazeled and disturbed, do imagine and
suppose that there be two candles burning, when there is but one: Even so our
mind when it looks upon the Will of God, supposes that there be two Wills
in God, one secret, and an other revealed; which is a thing far disagreeing
from the nature of God.

The Wisdom of God.
AS the Lord is Almighty, and able to deliver his children and Church from the
wicked, and willing to do it: Even so does he know the ways and means, most
perfectly and readily, how to do it at al times, according to to his will and
pleasure. 2. Pet. 2.9.

Wrath of God.
1 AS all good neighbors will hastily run to the quenching of a dangerous
fire: So likewise all Christians ought to make speed, to pacify the Wrath of
God, when they perceive the same to wax hot against them. Psalm. 2.12.

2 As the water of mighty floods, do with great violence and rage flow, and
cannot be stopped: So the Wrath of God comes upon the wicked, who pervert all
laws and all Religion. Hose. 5.10.

The Works of Gods ministry inevitable.
LIke as it is to no purpose, to seek to take by force a City so well fenced
and manned as it may be: So likewise vain are the attempts of them, that oppose
themselves to Gods Ministers, to hinder them, from doing that, for which God
has sent them. Iere. 1.18, 19.

Gods Word the salve for our souls.
AS those parts which are within us, have most need of careful keeping,
because the inward disease is most dangerous: Even so the holy Ghost, has
allotted unto our inward infection, the most sovereign and all sufficient
salve, his Word. Psalm. 147.3. Math. 8.8. Mark. 1.40.

Will of God.
1 AS the Potter in tempering his clay, if he cannot make and frame it
according to his mind, at length he will dash it in pieces: So God created man,
not that he should do his own Will, but Gods Will; and therefore whosoever he
be, that follows the lusts of his own wicked heart, and will not be brought
to be conformable to Gods Will, but continues rebellious still, the Lord in his
wrath will confound them eternally.

2 Like as if a man have a trade, and other men come into his shop, and use
such instruments as be there to a wrong end; though they were their own, yet
it would grieve him to see it: So God created all things for his own use, and
for the accomplishing of his Will; but rebellious man, conformes himself to
the Diuils Will, and thereby no doubt he grievously offends God.

Good Works uncontrollable.
AS no man can accuse the Potter, for making of the same lump of Clay a
drinking Pot, and a Chamber pot: So likewise none ought to quarrel, or find
fault with their Creator, whose Workmanship they are, framed at his good
pleasure and will. Romans 9.21.

Man's Weakness to do any thing for himself.
AS it is with young children, who when they are first taught to go, can stand
no longer then they are holden up by the hand: Or as it is with those that
learn to swim, who as soon as they are left to themselves, sink to the
bottom: Even so likewise is it with us, when God takes his help from us, and
cease to defend and relieve us, or else to take charge of us, or to do any
thing at all for us, and so leaves us to our selves, we then languish, and so
faint and fall down to our utter undoing; yet we perceive not this, until we
be exercised with affliction. 2. Sam. 24.17.

Ungodly Warriors.
1 AS they that power on Oil, and cast on dry straw upon a fire, do not quench
the flame, but minister matter for it to burn more ragingly: So likewise
sins being the cause of wars, and inflaming the wrath of God, the ungodly
Warriors do even increase and continue them, and make them more fierce and
raging; For where the Captains in war be irreligious, given to drunkenness,
whoredoms, riot, and horrible swearing; it is wonderful to behold the soul
enormities, and monstrous abominations which the common Soldiers commit.

2 As the King and the kingdom, are not beholden to those men which live in
ungodly ways, although they seem to do great service to the Commonwealth,
in as much as they be of those that provoke the wrath of God, and thereby put
the state even of both King and kingdom in hazard: So are they not the safer,
but in more danger, through those hardy Warriors, which sin so grievously.

The World.
1 AS a wrastler embracing him, whom he strives in the wrestling place, for
victory, lifts him up the higher, that with the greater force he may hurl
him against the ground: So this World does extol us, that with throwing us
down headlong it may hurt us, and that we may fall from the top of deceitful
and transitory glory, down to the bottom, of most certain and perpetual
ignominy.

2 As the Sea flows and ebbeth, and all the waves thereof, at the length fall
into the earth: So the World is never quiet; it extolleth some, and casts
down others; but all the vanities of it, are ended in the grave. 1. Ioh. 5.19.

3 As the Sea does cast to shore, shell fishes of all sorts, weeds and many
other things, and not long after does sup up, receive, and devour, and cast
into the depth the same again: Even so, this World does now thrust us out of
favor, and by and by receives us again; and when we think our selves to be
upon a very safe shore, and that we have leisure and time to rest us, and to
meditate upon some worthy and excellent things; even then we find our
selves deceived, and are tossed among the waves of infinite troubles; and are
swallowed up of innumerable calamities, because many things that we never
thought of, have prevented us, and the flickerings and false promises of this
cousoning World, have deceived our hope, and disappointed our expectation.

33 As a Child will love his Nurse, for the Dugs sake, though she be an whore:
Even so, many men love this present World, for the vain pleasures and carnal
delights of the same, though indeed the World be a very strumpet.

34 Even as the Eagle is carried up on high, and falls not upon the ground,
but to seek his necessary food, and having caught his pray, by and by flies
up again, and makes no abode below on the earth: So we ought to have our
minds occupied in heaven, and all superfluous care of worldly things laid
apart; with the eyes of our minds and faith, to behold our God, and in the
quietness and staidness of our souls, rest our selves upon his grace,
without having more to do with this World, then in our several callings, to
seek lawfully those necessaries only, which may serve for the presentation of
life.

35 As a Staff made of a Reed, is hollow and empty: So the confidence and
trust which we put in the World, is vain, and will deceive us. Esa. 31.1. and
36.6.

35 As we see sometimes in the air, a Cloud, having the figure and likeness
of a tall and mighty man, which by and by is spread abroad, and represents
huge and high Towers: but in the turning of an hand, being taken with a blast
of wind, it is dissolved and vanishes away: Even such is the trust, that we
put in this transitory World; it sets before us, in the conceit of our
imagination, that we shall be great men, and that we shall be very famous, and
attain to great dignity; it does promise unto us, mountains of Gold, and
huge and lofty Towers of honor and renown: but all these things are Towers
builded in the air, and Castles made of wind, and grounded upon vanity,
which are dissolved and dispearsed most suddenly. 1. Ioh. 2.15. 1. Cor. 7.31.
Iam. 4.14.

The Word of God, the only weapon to overcome the world, etc.
AS that man, that will give an onset, and encounter with an enemy, or will
defend and keep himself unwounded at his hands, has need of a sword in his
hand, to smite the enemy withal, and to repel his violence: So, who soever
will triumph, and carry away the victory, over this world, flesh, and devil,
must hold fast in his hand; that is, in his manners, conversation, and the whole
course of his life, the Word of God, which is called the sword of the spirit,
and is sharper then any two edged sword. Ephe. 6.17. Deuteronomy. 6.1, 2. etc. Prou.
6.20, 21.

It is in the Will of God to forsake his creature.
LIke as it is in the power and liberty of a man to kill an Ox or a Sheep
for his use, to hunt and kill the Hare and Partrige for his pleasure: Even so
much more without injustice, may it be in the Will and liberty of God the
Creator, to refuse and forsake his creature, for his glory.

Mot enough to know Gods Word, but we must be doers of it.
EVen as a Bird does not fly with one wing alone, but with twain: So it is
not enough, that we know much of the Lords Word and will, but we must do it
also: It will not suffice us at the latter day, that we have been great
professors of the Gospel, and are deeply learned, if also we have not bin
inflamed, with a love to God above all things, and have not loved our brethren
as our selves. Iam. 1. 22. Psalm. 128.1.

Not to be weary of Well doing.
1 AS the Sun does not leave shining, and sending forth his bright beams,
although a cloud will sometimes darken his light: Even so, we must not give over
to exercise godliness, and to do Well, even toward them that be our
enemies, and will hate and persecute us; and the better we do, the worse they
will deal with us. Gal. 6.9. Math. 5.44.

2 As the Nut and Olive trees, although they be beaten with rods, yet bring
forth most plentiful fruits: So we must not be weary of Well doing, nor
cast the exercise and practice of godliness behind us, but rather more
willingly and fervently proceed and go on in the same, although the friends of
this world shall braule and rate at us.

Works of hypocrites.
1 AS in a Glass, although there appear a certain similitude, yet it is
false, in as much as those things are represented in the Glass on the left
hand, which are indeed on the right, and those that are on the right hand, are
showed to be on the left; and by this means, there is a counterfeiting of the
truth: Even so in the Works of hypocrites, although there be a fair show
outwardly in the sight of men, yet it is false, for that those things which are
ungodly and wicked, are counted holy and true. Iam. 1. 23, 24.

2 As the strong bitterness of the Allow tree, takes away the sweetness of
the sweetest Honey: So evil Works, destroy and take away the praise of good
deeds.

Gods Word is true.
AS the Sun cease not to give light and brightness, although some man
shuts his eyes, that he may not see it, nor be lightened therewith: Or as
meat cease not to be good and nourishing, although it be received without
profit of a stomach evil disposed: So likewise, if many unwilling to believe
that the will of God is such, as he has declared by his Word, rejecting (by
their incredulity) the grace which God offers them; this their incredulity,
ought not to make any good Christian, to call into doubt the truth of God, and
the testimony of his good will toward him. Math. 9.29.

Good Works make us not pure in Gods sight.
1 LIke as if an Ass, were trimmed and decked in a Lions skin, and would
needs be a Lion, yet his long ears, being always upward, should easily
descrie and bewray him: Even so, if we adorn, garnish, and set forth our
selves, with glorious beautiful Works never so much, so that no man can say but
that we are utterly innocent, and inculpable in diverse and many points; yet
notwithstanding, we have filthy, unclean, and wicked hearts, full of
security and neglect of God, altogether given to the love of our selves, and
to all manner of dissoluteness.

2 As a Schoolemaister will take in good part, the diligence that his Scholars
can do, and if he see them put their good wills thereto, he will bear with
their faults, and teach them their lessons; but to the stubburn and froward,
he will show no gentleness, but cast them off: So likewise God (with those
whom he has chosen in Christ before the world was made) will bear with their
infirmities, and wink at their little faults, teach them to do better, and
praise their well doings, and gently correct their faults; but his enemies and
outcasts, because whatsoever they do is hypocrisy, he loves them not, but
even their prayer is turned to sin, and whatsoever they do is defiled,
because they be not graffed and chosen in Christ Jesus. Genesis 4. Tit. 1.15. Romans
14.23.

Wicked men take parts together against their Ministers, and godly men.
AS there was such affinity and alliance betwixt Hypocrates Twins, that when
the one wept, the other wept also; when the one laughed, the other laughed; and
when the one was touched, the other was touched; ones joy was an others joy;
and ones grief, was an others grief: Even so is it with the Wicked and
reprobate impes of the Devil, if the Minister speak against one, (say they)
he speaks against all; touch one, touch all; so wise they are in their
generation, as they will not say; The Preacher spoke against me, but he spoke
against such a one.

Worldly minded men.
LIke as a man that looks on a Town, platted in four leaves of Paper, he
shall somewhat discern the order of the streets and houses thereof, but
afterward if he shall lay down in the like quantity of Paper, the whole
province wherein that City stands, and the same will not show so great as a
man's nail: and lastly, if he shall represent the whole world in as much
Paper, he shall then see neither house nor Town, yea scarcely the whole
Province; perhaps he may find the names of the Realms, and see their extent
in the breadth of two or three nails; and looking from heaven, the whole world
w^l not seem so much: Even so then, it is a great folly, or rather a madness,
for those that are strangers upon earth, and burgesses of heaven, diversely
and by sundry means to offend God, for the getting of a small portion of
earth, which is as nothing; wherein they resemble Esau, who for a piece of
bread and a mess of pottage, sold his birthright. Gene. 25.34. Hebr. 12.16.

The true Worship of God.
1 EVen as a foul and stinking Vial, infecteth the pure and good Ointment
which is put into it: Even so the Worship of God, if it be placed in a foul
heart, it will soon corrupt, and shortly turn into flat Idolatry, and wicked
dissembling. 1. Cor. 5.7.

2 As a little Leaven leaueneth a whole lump: Even so a little ungodliness and
worldly affections, sowreth the whole mass of Gods Worship and service, and
makes it unpleasant unto him. 1. Cor. 5.6.

3 As the true God is to be worshipped alone: So is he to be Worshipped in
truth, as he himself, and not as man inuenteth. Exodus 26.1. etc. 2. Chro. 3.1.
etc. Leuit. 10.2.

We ought to put in practice the Word of God.
1 AS Medicines do minister health to none but those that take them, whose
nature also is strong, and well prepared to receive their operations: So it is
requisite that they which hear and read the Word of God, should receive and
apply it to themselves, and pray unto God to prepare them, and by his holy
spirit so to dispose their hearts, that the doctrine and exhortations may
work their operation in them. Ephe. 3.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Iam. 1.22.

2 Like as they that have learned the Art of sowing, of Cord-wainerie, or
Draperie, and so forth, yet are not reputed Tailors, Cord-wainers, or Drapers,
unless they do in act execute those Sciences, which is indeed the purpose of
their Apprentiship: Even so, let us never look to be true and sound
Christians, or Gods children, notwithstanding we have learned the Word of God,
and the manner thereof, unless we also perform the works of Christians, and
of the children of God. Lu. 11.28. Romans 2.13.

3 As when we have trimmed and shorn our heads and beards, before we come
forth, we look in the Glass whether it be well: Even so much rather ought we,
after we have heard the Sermon, the end whereof tends to amend our lives;
immediately to look upon and peruse our souls, to the end to see whether our
corruptions and vices being cut down and mortified, the same be clear and
pure in the sight of God.

4 As Herbs prepared by Art do heal the body: So likewise the Word of God
rightly applied, does cure a sick soul.

The Word of God ought to be carefully searched into.
AS they which do dig metals out of the earth, do not contemn nor despise
the least gobbets and pieces that they epsy, but take all, but especially, if
they find by digging a vein of Gold, they leave no way unsought; but with all
care and diligence they look about them, and do dig the Gold and earth
together, and most diligently do save and keep the same: Even so ought we to
deal in the holy Word of God, we must pass over nothing therein lightly, nor
despise one Word, of all the sacred and divine Scriptures, but eagerly and
earnestly, to do our best and greatest endeavors, yea and to call, and to cry
most mightily to the Lord, to aid, assist, and enable us to dig out of the
same Word, whatsoever is requisite and necessary for the salvation of our
souls, and eternal life.

The Works of the three persons be inseparable.
AS Reason cannot discern good and evil, truth falsehood, plainness and craft,
and sophistication, without either will or memory; neither Will chooses what
him likes, without the other; nor memory remembers not things gone, without
reason and will; These actions and Works, which are said properly to belong
only to memory, and only to reason and will, in very deed are done by the
workmanship of all three: So the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, work
all things unseperably; not that each of them is unable to Work by himself,
but that they all three are one God, one spirit, one nature; as reason, will,
memory, are one soul. Ioh. 5.17, 19.

Man's Wisdom often erreth.
AS in a fruitful and fertile ground, among many wholesome, and very
medicinable herbs, some that be dangerous and full of poison do grow: So
the wits and Wisdom of men, together, with some profitable and wholesome
counsels and admonitions, do bring forth perilous and pestilent errors, and
are therefore with Wisdom and great discretion to be regarded, even as herbs
are to be gathered and used.

Wit.
1 AS a Be is oftentimes hurt with his own Honey: So is Wit not sildome
plagued with his own conceit.

2 As empty vessels make the loudest sound: So men of least Wit, are the
greatest bablers.

Spiritual Warfaire.
1 AS men may have an end of bodily war, either by making peace with their
enemy, by flying far from him, or by ouercomming in fight: But in the
spiritual Warfaire, we cannot lawfully make any peace or agreement with our
enemies, the Devil, the world, and the flesh; but in so doing, it would be our
overthrow and destruction: for they be even so many traitors, and
irreconciliable murderers; yea it would be worse for us, then for the sheep
to make peace with the Wolf; neither can we fly, and so get from these
enemies; for the Devil will follow us into all places, who has a whole army
of Soldiers within us, even our affections and covetous lusts, that we bear
about us.

2 As God in old time commanded Joshua that he should not fear the
Cananites, and assured him that he would be with him; and that by ouercomming
them, he would bring his people into the land of promise: So likewise we must
give ear unto God, that calls us to this spiritual battle, with assurance
that he will stand with us, and in us; to the end that courageously fighting
under his banner against our enemies, that labor to turn us back, and to
recoyle, we may finally by his grace and power, obtain full and perfect
victory; and so ending his blessed voyage, attain to the fruition of the
heavenly and City, and our true country, that we may live with him in glory
for ever.

Gods Wisdom may be known by the ordering of his creatures.
AS when thou see a great and godly City, consisting of many and sundry
sorts of men, some of great reputation, and very many of small estimation; some
exceeding rich, and infinite others extremely poor; some in their fresh and
flourishing youth, and some crooked with old age; where all these, though
among themselves they be diverse and sundry, do live in great concord, and
agree well together, and are kept all within the bounds and limits of good and
godly discipline, thou will by and by judge, that the Prince or governor of
the same, is just, and very mighty and wise, though thou see him not: Even
so, in the huge greatness of this world, and the agreement and well hanging
together of the things contained in the same, though differing in their
natures, and the apt and fit placing of the whole, it cannot be, but that thou will presently conceive in thy mind, that there is, a great, a wise, and
mighty Creator, and preserver of these things. For not only the mighty
works of God in this great world, that is in man himself (for so he is called
of some) do teach us the wonderful knowledge of God.

Gods Word the more it is searched, the sweeter it is.
AS precious Jewels, made of most pure Gold, wrought cunningly and curiously,
with great workmanship, the nearer thou shall come unto them, and the more
steadfastly and clearly thou shall behold them, the finer, the brauer, and more
excellent thou shall judge them: Even so, as thou shall come nearer in
understanding and knowledge, unto the secrets and mysteries of God, contained
in his written Word, and with the greater purity of mind, the more strength of
faith, and the brighter light of the grace of God, thou shall look into them,
the profounder, the deeper, the more divine and heavenly; yea and the more
comfortable to thy soul, will they seem and appear unto thee every day: In
so much that thou will judge thy self, to have been little better then blind,
and to have seen nothing, as thou ought, in the mysteries of the divine Word.
Psalm. 119.18.

Wicked men die miserably.
1 EVen as those Birds, and souls, which fall to the ground, to take the
foulers baits, are taken themselves: So likewise those men, which do rely
upon the suggestions, and inchauntments of the Devil, world, and flesh, and
are taken in their traps, do die a most miserable, and as it may well be
called, an immortal death.

2 As there is never a man, that bears the name of a Christian, but he will
confess that his great Grandfather Adam, was expulsed, and thrust out of
Paradise, for eating one Apple, forbidden him by the Lord, upon pain of
death; and yet the same man, that with open mouth, will make that confession,
will every day eat seven Apples, as bitter, and as straightly forbidden as
that, that is, offend God seven times as much as that, and yet he will think
to escape better cheap, and easier, then his Graund-father did that eat but
one; that is, offended God but once; but the eater of seven, shall find the
way into everlasting life; as hard, yea harder to enter, as the way into
Paradise was to his Graund-father being once thrust out, unless he speedily,
earnestly, and truly repent him, and give over the eating of such fruits, as
the Lord has forbidden him.

3 Like as no water will stick, nor abide upon Leapers, by reason of the
foulness and greasy matter of their Leprosy: Even so such Leapers and far
worse are we, upon whom no deawes, nor any drops of the grace and word of
God, will cleave, abide, and continue.

Ouerweening Wits despise Gods wisdom.
LIke as the Jews said to him that was borne blind; Thou art wholly borne in
sin, and do thou teach us? John. 9.34. So likewise a number think
themselves too wise, too learned, too politic, and too cunning to be taught,
or controlled of God, or his word; who say in their heart with Pharao, Who is
the Lord, that I should hear his voice? etc.

Why the Works of Christians are called sacrifices.
1 AS the Sacrifices of the old Jews were commanded from heaven to the
Priests, were chosen, applied, sanctified, and accepted: So in our Sacrifices,
it is necessary that there be a commandment, a choice, an application, a
sanctification, and that they be accepted of God.

2 As in old time it was not lawful to offer a Sow, or any unclean beast, by
the law, but only such as were clean, according to the law: So the Works
that Christians should offer, must not be unclean; that is, either forbidden by
the word of God, or hypocritical, or superstitious, but such as God
commands.

3 Like as the clean Lamb which should be offered, was separated from the
rest of the flock: So by faith our Works are to be separated from the like
Works of profane people.

4 As the ceremonial sacrifice was applied to the Altar by the hand of the
Priest laid there-vpon: So likewise our Works shall be applied to the Altar
through Christ, by whose handling they are sanctified.

5 Even as those old sacrifices were consumed with fire from heaven, and
sanctified: So in like manner our sacrifices through the merit of Christ,
inflamed by the holy Ghost, are sanctified with fire from heaven, and are
accepted through Christ.

6 As Christ makes our obedience grateful, and deserves that our obedience
both in the Cross, and also in the law of sacrifice, is commended: So our
sacrifices please not, in respect of any excellency of merit, but through
Christ, in whom God wayeth our Works, that he may accept them as worthy
sacrifices.

7 As the faulty sacrifice of the old people, which came to the Altar through
error, and touched the Altar, was not changed for a better, but was taken as
purged, and holy, by reason it had touched the holy place: So our Works,
albeit they be very faulty, yet become they clean, and apt for holy
sacrifice; and acceptable to God through touching our Altar Christ, who through
faith is touched.

8 As in the earthly Jerusalem, there was only but one Altar for sacrifices:
So likewise in the heavenly, there is but one, upon which we do offer, when we
depend upon the merit of Christ, that our Sacrifice may be holy, and
acceptable unto God.

Youth comes not again after old age.
1 AS after Winter comes Summer: but after old age come (...) Youth again.

2 As the Cipres-tree, the more it is watered, the more it withers, and the
oftener it is lopped, the sooner it dies: so vnbridleth Youth, the more it is
by grave advice counseled, or due corrections controlled, the sooner it
falls to confusion.

Youth flexible to good or bad.
1 AS water on ^e ground will follow the tracing of the finger put in^o it, and
leading it: So young years are flexible, and ea^ie to b^ drawn to either part
good or bad.

2 As the Acanth^^ bred in the Thistle, feeds on the Thistle, and the Grash
(...) bred in the grass, lies in the grass: So in like manner, ^o ^th bred
and brought up in sin, will lie in it, and (...) be drawn from it.

Zeale^
AS Zeal must erect our discretion, that we we run not too slowly: So
discretion must direct our Zeal, that we run not too fast.

2 As all Zeal without discretion, is an offering without an eye, which was by
God forbidden. Leuit. 22.22. So likewise all blind Zeal, is a blind
offering, which God will never accept.

3 As Minerua is said to put a golden bridle upon Pegasus, that he should not
fly too fast: So in like sort, our Christian discretion, must put a golden
bridle upon Pegasus, that is our earnest Zeal, least if our Zeal be
unbridled, it make us run out of course.

FINIS.
A Table containing the principal heads, and Common places of Similies in this
Book.
A.
Ability. Folio. 536. Accusation. Folio. 1. Adams disobedience and fall.
Folio. 37. 42. Admonition. Folio. 24. 177. 515. Adoption. Folio. 45. 47. 714.
Adversity. Folio. 1. 43. 44. 45. 552. 579. Adultery. Folio. 41. Adultery
spiritual. Folio. 194. Affliction. Folio. 4. 38. 131. 192. 200. 244. 326. 337.
395. 735. 753. 754. 756. 758. 759. etc. Allegories. Folio. 37. Ambition. Folio.
30. Anger. Folio. 24. 552. 658. Anger of God. Folio. 3. 164. 844. Apparel
excessive and sumptuous. Folio. 33. 197. Application of Gods word. Folio. 35.
Apostasy. Folio. 703. Armies. Folio. 37. Armor of Christians. Folio. 178.
Atheism. Folio. 3. 348. Reading of Authors. Folio. 51. 624. 633.
B.
Babbling. Folio. 280. Baptism. Folio. 50. 288. Baptism of infants, and that
but once. Folio. 48. Baptism by a Midwife. Folio. 49. Beauty. Folio. 108.
Benefits. Folio. 181. Birth. Folio. 512. Second Birth. Vide Regeneration. Body
of Christ. Vide Christ. Books. Folio. 58.
C.
Calamity. Folio. 190. Calling. Folio. 179. 182. 192. 331. 749. Card playing.
Folio. 197. Cares of the world. Folio. 60. 157. 319. 452. 494. Careless
livers. Folio. 60. 118. 119. Carnal minds. Folio. 60. 146. 186. 510. Care of
others salvation. Folio. 198 330. Catechizing. Folio. 64. Charity. Folio. 120.
Christ. Folio. 95. 126. 127. 147. 148. 149. 154. 158. 161. 163. 164. 170. 171.
172. 173. 174. 176. 177. 178. 182. 183. 184. 185. 187. 188. 189. 190. 191. 194.
195. 198. 199. 200. 201. 203. 204. 210. 218. 332. 391. 514. 689. Christ our
redeemer received by faith Folio. 123. Christ our mediator. Folio. 74. Christ
the object of faith. Folio. 73. Christ communicated spiritually. Folio. 68. 74.
Christ's second coming. Folio. 72. Christ's body only in one place at once.
Folio. 55. Children. Folio. 297. 793. Childrens education. Folio. 69. 190. 405.
Children of God. Folio. 130. 152. 160. Children dying without baptism. Folio.
155. Children disobedient. Folio. 192. Christians. Folio. 107. 149. 162. 175.
191. 192. 192. Church. Folio. 79. 122. 181. 193. 519. 582. Company. Folio. 62.
200. Conscience. Folio. 75. 100. 176. 261. 751. Creation of man. Folio. 76.
Commandments of God. Folio. 77. 124. 158. The tenth Commandment explained.
Folio. 128. Covenant of God. Folio. 78. Creatures Folio. 78. 175. 182.
Contemplation. Folio. 99. Concord. Folio. 99. Content. Folio. 100.
Commonwealth. Folio. 118. Common people. Folio. 118. Correction. Folio. 121.
Confession of sins. Folio. 124. 173. 184. 388. 629. Corrupters of Princes.
Folio. 131 Comforts for the afflicted. Folio. 131. 179 328. 329. 333. 503. 763.
etc. Covetousness. Folio. 139. 147. Continuance in sin. Folio. 146.
Contention. Folio. 164. 175. Custom. Folio. 176. Counsel. Folio. 177. 181.
195 Contempt of the truth. Folio. 178. 186. Cross of Christ. Folio. 188.
Conformity with Christ. Folio. 196. Conversation. Folio. 199. Counsel
keeping. Folio. 203. Curiosity. Folio. 211. 827. Courtesy. Folio. 215. Courts
of Princes. Folio. 215. Conversion. Folio. 252. Cruelty. Folio. 496. 499. 784.
Conference. Folio. 554. Sirituall Combat. Folio. 735.
D.
DEath of Christ. Folio. 164. 179. Directing. Folio. 1^7. Doctrine. Folio. 215.
220. 231. 278. Fleshly Desires. Folio. 216. Deceites of the world. Folio. 216
Dissension, Discord. Folio. 216. 232. Diseases of the mind. Folio. 216. Death.
Folio. 217. 219. 232. 233. 241. 450. 721. 771. Decree of God. Folio. 217.
Decrease of holiness. Folio. 218. Displeasure of God. Folio. 219. Delight.
Folio. 219. Discipline. Folio. 220. Drunkards, Drunkenness. Folio. 221. 222.
Diet of the soul. Folio. 223. Desertion spiritual. Folio. 231. 331. 412. 848.
Death of sin. Folio. 231. Devil. Folio. 232. Desires heavenly. Folio. 241.
Dancing. Folio. 242. Divines. Folio. 244. Damnation. Folio. 558. 727 Prayer
for the Dead. Folio. 581. Deferring of repentance. Folio. 631. Death in the
Lord. Folio. 731. Deliverance from trouble. Folio. 763.
E.
EXamination. Folio. 245. 554. Election. Folio. 246. 253. 257. 258. Enemies.
Folio. 247. 262. Envy. Folio. 248. Enterludes. Folio. 252. Eyes. Folio. 252.
Ears. Folio. 252. Example. Folio. 253. 517. 522. 735. Edifying of others.
Folio. 255. Epicurisme. Folio. 255. Error. Folio. 256. 707. Eloquence. Folio.
261. Excess. Folio. 262. Evil. Folio. 313.
F.
FAith dead. Folio. 297. Faith. Folio. 73. 262. 270. 273. 274. 281. 282. 289.
290. 291. 335. 550. 739. 751. 557. Forgiveness of sins. Folio. 276. 282.
287. 300. 301. 656. 689 Feeling. Folio. 278. 279. 280. Friendship. Folio. 286.
293. 296. 299. Flattery. Folio. 288. Folly. Folio. 288. Flesh and spirit.
Folio. 289. Forgiving of others. Folio. 290. 632. Fear of God. Folio. 292.
296. 393. Frailty of nature. Folio. 293. Favor of God. Folio. 294. 348. 349.
Faithful. Folio. 294. Fall of man. Folio. 295. Famine of the soul. Folio.
295. Face of God. Folio. 296. Fornication spiritual. Folio. 298. Fasting.
Folio. 298. Forsaking the world. Folio. 303. 386. Fellow feeling. Folio. 305.
Free will. Folio. 306. Final falling. Folio. 479. 619. Fancies of men. Folio.
686.
G.
Gluttony. Folio. 256. 305. 659. Godliness. Folio. 308. 315. 320. 324. 334.
345. 456. Grace. Folio. 309. 320. 335. Good turns. Folio. 311. Goodwill.
Folio. 312. 321. God. Folio. 316. 321. 329. 343. 345. 350. 351. 415. 518. Holy
Ghost. Folio. 318. 320. 334. 343. All good things come from God. Folio. 321.
Gentleness. Folio. 322. 395. Gospel. Folio. 322. Gifts and graces of God.
Folio. 325. 327. 335. 336. 783. Glory of God. Folio. 328. 349. Guiltiness.
Folio. 334. Glory of the elect. Folio. 337. Generation spiritual. Folio. 344.
Glory and renoume. Folio. 347. Greatness in the world dangerous. Folio. 400.
Grieuing of Gods spirit. Folio. 727.
H.
HYpocrites. Folio. 191. 370. 382. 388. 593. 849. Hearers. Folio. 242. 348.
351. 393. 394. 844. 848. 851 Hardness of heart. Folio. 257. 383. Hope. Folio.
290. 401. Hearing of the word. Folio. 364 Humility. Folio. 366. 393. 394.
Heretics Folio. 382. 388 Hatred. Folio. 384. Husbands. Folio. 387. 388. 399.
Heaven. Folio. 391. Houses of the wicked. Folio. 391. Hell. Folio. 391. Host
of God. Folio. 392. Horror of sin. Folio. 392. Help of man. Folio. 392.
Holy days. Folio. 392. Holiness. Folio. 393. 651. Heirs with Christ. Folio.
395. Heart of man. Folio. 396. Health. Folio. 399. Householders. Folio. 509.
Earthly Happiness. Folio. 523.
I.
IVdgements of God. Folio. 61. 421. Impenitencie. Folio. 181. 596. 726.
Judgment day. Folio. 218. 412. 418. 500. Inventions of men. Folio. 220. 231.
417. 494. 686. 783. Good Intents. Folio. 254. Idleness. Folio. 256. 407. 721.
732 Justice of God. Folio. 333. 412. 414. 499. Ingratitude. Folio. 401. 414.
779. 781. Imperfections. Folio. 402. 412. 420. Infirmities. Folio. 703. 786.
793. 827. 841. 845. Justice. Folio. 403. 415. Ignorance. Folio. 403. 410
Injury. Folio. 403. Instruction of children. Folio. 405. Inconstancy. Folio.
406. 417. Judges. Folio. 407. Idolatry. Folio. 413. Incorporation with Christ.
Folio. 413. 790. Image of God. Folio. 414. Joy of the elect. Folio. 417. 418.
Illumination by Christ. Folio. 419. Judgment. Folio. 419. Journey to heaven.
Folio. 419. Jews. Folio. 420. Infidelity. Folio. 421.
K.
KNowledge of God. Folio. 423. Knowledge. Folio. 424. 425. 427. King. Folio.
425. 429. Kingdom of heaven. Folio. 425. Knowledge of our selves. Folio. 428.
L.
Unknown Language in Gods service. Folio. 173. Christian Liberty. Folio. 178.
456. Love of the world. Folio. 429. Love of God to his children. Folio. 429.
438. 453. 456. Life variable. Folio. 430. 452. 495. 499. Learning. Folio. 431.
449. 452. 455. Lying. Folio. 432. 454. Love to God. Folio. 501. Love of our
neighbor. Folio. 437. 453. Law of God. Folio. 442. 450. 455. 523. 667 Laws of
men. Folio. 452. 538. Labor. Folio. 452. 453. 587. 579. Lending. Folio. 456.
Lust. Folio. 458. Liberality. Folio. 459. 771 Going to Law. Folio. 707.
M.
MInisters. Folio. 183. 241. 468. 484. 485. 489. 491. 493. 497. 498 502. 503.
584. Marriage. Folio. 255. 460. 463. 483. 496. Magistrates. Folio. 311. 467.
485. 503. 522. Man. Folio. 460. 495. Masters. Folio. 463. Mercy to others.
Folio. 464. 499. Misery. Folio. 464. Mercy of God. Folio. 464. 488.
Mortification. Folio. 465. 505. Mind. Folio. 479. 480. 551. Mind troubled.
Folio. 466. 486. Mean estate. Folio. 400. 468. 497. Memory. Folio. 480.
Merit. Folio. 481. Murder. Folio. 488. Military discipline. Folio. 495
Meditation. Folio. 496. 554. Malice. Folio. 497. 498. Manners. Folio. 498.
Mass. Folio. 501. Mysteries of God Folio. 502. Means to be used. Folio. 504.
654. 669. 762.
N.
NOnresidents. Folio. 483. 484. Nursing of children. Folio. 496. Nature of
things. Folio. 508. Good Name. Folio. 508. Noblemen. Folio. 509. Names in
baptism. Folio. 511. Neighbors. Folio. 511. Nobility. Folio. 512. Newters.
Folio. 721.
O.
Original corruption. Folio. 65. 198. 385. 462. 496. 514. 516. Opinions
diverse. Folio. 245 Obedience to God. Folio. 513. 553. Obedience of Christ.
Folio. 514. Old age. Folio. 514. Order. Folio. 517. Office. Folio. 518. 519.
Oppression. Folio. 518. Obedience to superiors. Folio. 518. Offense. Folio.
519. Obstinacy. Folio. 537.
P.
Providence and Prudence. Folio. 521. Persecution. Folio. 122. 566. 581.
Persecutors. Folio. 125. 564. 581. Pope. Folio. 130. 571. Popery. Folio. 557.
Providence of God. Folio. 160. 555. Prayer. Folio. 176. 301. 351. 542. 551.
553. 554. 569. 580. 583. 591. Prishioners. Folio. 242. Promises. Folio. 569.
583. 598. Promises of God. Folio. 315. 554. 557. 594 Peace of conscience.
Folio. 396. 534. Pride. Folio. 400. 532. 537. 568. 575. 599. Preaching. Folio.
422. 5^^. 564. 577. 594. 653. 840. Pleasures. Folio. 458. 597. 548. Plurality
of livings. Folio. 484. Principles. Folio. 521 Persons not to be regarded.
Folio. 521. 533. Princes. Folio. 422. 533. 535. 570. 601. Prosperity. Folio.
523. 552. 558. 564. 570. 579. 580. 595. 631. Patience. Folio. 524. 572. 578.
765. 768. Preachers. Folio. 525. 565. 566. 718. 596. 774. Preparation before
good exercises. Folio. 532. 554. Papists. Folio. 533. 558. 572. Precepts of
godliness. Folio. 534. Plague or pestilence. Folio. 535. Praising of God.
Folio. 530. Pastors. Folio. 533 535. 584. Praise. Folio. 536. 539. Power.
Folio. 536. Parents. Folio. 537. 557. Perverseness. Folio. 538. Popish priests.
Folio. 538. Poyetrie Folio. 538. Poison. Folio. 538. Presumption. Folio. 550.
Progress in religion. Folio. 551. Professors. Folio. 578. 580, 593.
Profession. Folio. 552. Praying to Saints. Folio. 557. Peace. Folio. 558. 747.
Prophets. Folio. 596. False Prophets, Folio. 558. 565. 751. 753. Power of God.
Folio. 564. 647. Poverty. Folio. 565. 571. 584. 630. 778. 793. Plants. Folio.
365. Perseverance. Folio. 569. 489. People. Folio. 570. Physician. Folio. 570.
Physic. Folio. 583. Painting of faces. Folio. 571. Perfection. Folio. 576.
602. Purity. Folio. 577. Persons of the Trinity. Folio. 581. Posterity.
Folio. 593. Passion of Christ. Folio. 596. Phylosophie. Folio. 597. Private
persons. Folio. 612. Practioners of the word of God. Folio. 852.
Q.
Curious Questions. Folio. 613.
R.
REbellion against God. Folio. 175. Repentance. Folio. 42. 228. ^41. 563. 569.
614. 62^. 6^^. 647. 6^^. 726. Regeneration. Folio. 59. 344. 618. 620. 651. 827.
641. 643. 727. Rashness. Folio. 613. Rash judgment. Folio. 422. Reproof.
Folio. 5^^. 644. 645. 740. 825. Reformation. Folio. 517. 620. Resurrection
general. Folio. 614. 632. 636. 654. Recreation. Folio. 618. Righteousness in
man. Folio. 621. 646. Religion. Folio. 624. 657. Reading of Books. Folio. 51.
624. 633. 774. Riches. Folio. 924. 6, 6. 658. 659. Rich men. Folio. 630. 646.
648. Reason. Folio. 629. Reading the Scriptures. Folio. 630. 636. 833. 737.
Relief of the poor. Folio. 630. 771. Reprobate. Folio. 633. 651. 652.
Redemption. Folio. 644. Renewed holiness. Folio. 651. Renewed happiness. Folio.
651. Reading. Folio. 653. Real presence. Folio. 655. Rewards. Folio. 260. 655
Righteousness of Christ. Folio. 623.
S.
SAcraments. Folio. 664. 668. 669. 703 704. 729. Sacrament of the supper.
Folio. 52. 432. 457. 553. 5^4. 661. 731. Continuance in Sin. Folio. 146.
Spiritual graces. Folio. 17^. 7^3. Sabbath. Folio. 209. ^86. Ill Speakers.
Folio. 2^5. Spirit of God. Folio. 289. 685. 724. 728. 731 Superfluity in diet.
Folio. 305. Sumptuousness. Folio. 312. Notorious Sins. Folio. 689. Sin.
Folio. 312. 314. 315. 414. 660. 514. 662. 689. 690. 721, 723. 724. 730. 735.
742. 774. 783. The Souls life. Folio. 334. Soul. Folio. 680. Salvation.
Folio. 350. 651. 652. 661. 717. 718. 669. 728. 736. 739. Study. Folio. 405.
Sorrow. Folio. 452. 506. 721. 722. 736. 758. Praying to Saints. Folio. 557.
Poor in Spirit. Folio. 563. 592. Scripture. Folio. 666, 704. 707. 719. 729.
Secrecy. Folio. 666. Service of God. Folio. 667. 710. 741. 852. 841.
Sclaunder, Folio. 683. Speech. Folio. 750. 827. Sobriety. Folio. 685.
Schools. Folio. 704. School master, Scholar. Folio. 705. Spiritual man.
Folio. 707. 719. 725. Sanctification. Folio. 709. Scorners. Folio. 701. One
Sin not to be avoided by an other. Folio. 711. Satan's subtlety. Folio.
711. 725. 736. 741 Satan called God Folio. 741. Swearing. Folio. 714. 742.
S^^^^ of God by adoption. Folio. 714. Trial of Spirits. Folio. 717. Security.
Folio. 718. 723. Sickness. Folio. 721. Striving against God. Folio. 723.
Reward of Sin. Folio. 723. 791. 830. Servants of sin. Folio. 724. Sin of
set purpose. Folio. 729. Singing of Psalms. Folio. 733. Subjects. Folio. 738.
Similitudes. Folio. 741. Strength. Folio. 742. State of man. Folio. 742.
Searching of the Scriptures. Folio. 853.
T.
TRansubstantiation. Folio. 52. 57. 768. Traditions of men. Folio. 175. 494.
743. Time seruers. Folio. 337. 743. Trinity. Folio. 351. 581. 752. 853. Trial
of men. Folio. 416. Temperance. Folio. 730. 749. 770. Temptations. Folio. 740.
753. Thankfulness to God. Folio. 743. 769. 779. 781. Tale-bearers. Folio.
743. Tears. Folio. 746. Time. Folio. 746. Truth. Folio. 747. Tyrants. Folio.
748. 769. Threatenings. Folio. 748. Trade of life. Folio. 749. Thoughts. Folio.
749. Strange Tongues. Folio. 753. Tongue. Folio. 749. Talk. Folio. 750.
Testimony of the spirit. Folio. 751. Trouble of conscience. Folio. 751. Types.
Folio. 752. Temple of God. Folio. 769. Troubles. Vide afflictions and
adversity.
V.
Vanity of earthly things. Folio. 286. 597. Virtuous. Folio. 431. 771. 783.
789. Unity in the Church. Folio. 582. 740. 770. 784. Vocation. Folio. 749.
Vain glory. Folio. 771. 774. 786. 787. Spiritual Usury. Folio. 771. Usury.
Folio. 775 784. Unthankful, Vide ingratitude. Unbelief. Folio. 779. Vices
called virtues. Folio. 782. Unfaithfulness. Folio. 783. Unmercifulness.
Folio. 784. Vengeance of God. Folio. 786. Ungodly men. Vid. Worldlings and
wicked. Visitation of the sick. Folio. 788. Union with Christ, Vid.
Incorporation. Vntractablenesse. Folio. 791.
W.
WOrd of God. Folio. 794. 796. 824. 839. 840. 843. 844. 848. 849. 856.
Application of Gods Word Folio. 35. Writers dunsticall. Folio. 217. Works
necessary. Folio. 301. 829. 832. 842. 850. Wife, Wives. Folio. 388. 829. 830.
Worldlings. Folio. 464. 779. 782. 786. 851. Use of the World, Folio. 785.
Weakness Vide Infirmity. Wicked. Folio. 814. 856. The end of the Wicked
miserable. Folio. 856. Woredome. Folio. 826. Woman. Folio. 827. War. Folio.
828. 845. VVorldly wisdom. Folio. 829. 854. Works of God. Folio. 830. 845.
855. Wisdom. Folio. 836. 837. 842. Wit. Folio. 837. 854. Worship of God,
Vide service of God. Will. Folio. 842. Will of God. Folio. 843. 844.
Wisdom of God. Folio. 843. 855. World. Folio. 846. Spiritual VVarfaire.
Folio. 854. Ouerweening Wits despise Gods wisdom. Folio. 857. Why the
Works of Christians are called sacrificer. Folio. 857.
Y.
YOuth comes not again after old age. Folio. 859. Youth flexible to good or
bad. Folio. 859.
Z.
ZEphoniaes times compared with ours. Folio. 66. Zeal. Folio. 859.
FINIS.

