THE IMAGE OF NATVRE AND GRACE, conteynyng the whole course, and condition of
man's estate written by Richard Caundishe.

Sub laudibus naturae, latent inimici gratia.

The enemies of Grace, do lurk under the praise of Nature.

AUGUSTINE. Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia, and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To all that through simplicity of conscience, and lack of true knowledge,
embrace the doctrine of the Papists, Richard Caundishe wishes the spirit of
true understanding.
Seeing the dignity, and excellency of every knowledge stands in the
woorthynes of the subject, or matter whereof it entreats: therefore is this
know ledge worthy all reverence, which between your unfriendly abusers, and us
your vncredited friends, is so diversely handled with contrary judgment:
because the subject or matter thereof, is our justification, and reconciliation
into the favor of God again. But alas, though the knowledge be sure, and can
not be changed, seeing there can be but one truth, yet to the search of the
same our ways do so differ, that the one being settled, the other is
subdued. Whereof briefly to examine the principal passages: can not be
unworthy of diligent travel. The matter is weighty: for therein consists the
glory of God, and salvation of our selves: Enquire of your teachers, from
whence they would have you to seek for the truth: if they say from them
selves: you are not so simple to think them sufficient to direct your faith:
you will look at their hands for some further authorities: if they say from
the fathers: yet try or you trust the^, for fear they deceive you. The fathers
are many, their reasons are diverse, they felt their infirmities: their
writings do smell of it: wherefore upon their opinions only, to repose the
judgment of the truth it can not be possible: to great is the diversity of
their several assertions: though great were their gifts, and they worthy
reverence, yet each felt his lack: which sometimes appeared in dissentyng from
him self, by latter reuokynges of former opinions: by earnest reprouynges of
other their fellows. Hierome writing upon this place of the 23. of Matthew,
where Christ charged the Scribes, and Pharisees with yt innocent blood, that
was shed from Abell unto Zacharye the son of Barachye: affirms that some of
the Fathers did think it was Zacharye the father of John Baptist: Touching the
credit of whose opinion he thus writes. Hoc quia ex sacris literis Hierome.
Matthew. 23.
authoritatem no^ habet, eadem facilitate refellitur, qua probatur. Seeing this
says he, has no authority out of the Scriptures, it may as easily be
denied, as affirmed. Here by it appears, what authority this father him
self attributed to the fathers, where they bring any thing not warranted by
the Scriptures of God: and touching the authority of the fathers, thus writes
Augustine. Noli ergo frater Aug. ad Vincent. epistola 48.
co^tra diuina tam multa, tam clara, tam indubitata testimonia, colligere velle
calumnias ex Episcoporum scriptis, sieve nostrorum, sieve Hilarij: primo quia hoc
genus literarum ab authoritate canonis distinguendum est. No^ enim fic
leguntur, tanquam ita ex eis testimonium proferatur, vt contra sentire non
liceat, sic vbi forte aliter senserint, quam veritas postulat etc. Broother
seek not against so many, so clear and so assured testimonies of the
scriptures, to gather wra^glyng matters out of the Bishops writings, whether
it be out of mine, or out of Hilaries: first because this kind of writyngs, is
to be divided from the authority of the Canon: for they are not so read, as
though itwer not lawful to think contrary to the testimonies gathered out of
them, where they hap to mean otherwise, the^ the truth requires. Thus you
see within what limits, or bounds the good fathers enclosed the authority of
their own writings, submittyng them selves always to the judgment of the
Scriptures. Again the same Augustine disputyng with Hierome about Paul's
reprouyng of Peter, mentioned in the second to the Galathians, does appeal
from the authority of the fathers, which Hierome alleged unto the Scriptures.
Thus you see the fathers condemned all doctrine, not confirmed by the
Scriptures: And I dare boldly affirm it, that your teachers them selves, on
whom ye repose you (if they be well awaked) will not so advance the fathers
that in them alone you should repose the direction of your faith: if that be
their meaning, they do but decayue you, and deal nothing plainly. The fathers
dissented, how should they then direct you? some held open errors which they
must needs condemn: will they have you believe with Origene that only the
father knows him self, and that the son knows not the father, neither
the holy ghost the son, neither ye angels the holy ghost? with which error
they well know that Origene is charged: will they have you with that good father
beleu, that al men shall be saved, and leave no subject matter for the triumph of
Gods justice? They dare not so teach you: will they have you with Irenaeus,
Victorius, Papias, Lactantius, Methodius, and many other of the excellent
learned fathers subscribe to the heresy of ye Millinaries? I know they will
deny it: Will they have you with Augustine diffinitiuely judge all infa^tes
dying without baptism to be damned, and that the Sacrament should be ministered
to infantes? They will never allow both: Will they have you with Cyprian, new
christen all such heretics, as were baptized out of the Church, if
afterward they be converted? They do not so teach you: Will they have you
with Hierome condemn all second marriages, for whoredom? What soever they
think, they dare not affirm it: Will they have you with Denice at the burial
of the dead, to annoint the corses with oil? Them selves do not use it: Will
they have you to follow the example of Benet, who commanded the Sacrament to
be put into the mouth of a dead Nun? They will not confess it. And to
conclude, because the Fathers many times say true, they abuse their names, to
lead you to error. Your leaders themselves in substance of truth dissent from
the Fathers, and lead you to mischief, with some of their errors. You see how
the greatest had faults full of dainger, which must needs make you fear to
hang your faith upon them. That ground is to sclender for so weighty a
cause, you see how they erred, ye ought to be careful, seeing thereby you have
cause to know they were but men. If you tell this to your leaders, and require
at their hands a more certain ground to build on your faith, they will send
you to the Councelles, for they can not err: the pope is their warrante:
because they affirm it, they would have you believe it, but be not to hasty to
wage them with credit. Take these for examples, that Councels may err: The
Council of Aremine consented to the heresy of the Arrians. The second
Council of Ephesus did lean to the heresy of the Eutychians. And the
Calcedon council would have given to Leo Bishop of Rome, the name of
universal bishop, if the good father (being absente) had not utterly refused
it. But this your blind guides do hold for sound doctrine. But no former
Counsel would ever so judge it. The Council where Cyprian was chief, did
consent to the rebaptising of heretics. And did not the Council of Constaunce
break the institution of the sacrament of the blood of Christ, in withholding
the cup from the laity, which no Council before would have allowed? Thus in
the Councels you see open error, and that they always teach not a constant
truth. But Solomon affirms that a true mouth is ever constante, but you see
the council not so: and therefore by these words of Solomon subject to
untruth, whereby it appears that they contain not the fountain of truth,
whereupon to gather the direction of your faith, and what authority the fathers
them selves attributed to the Councels, may easily be judged by these words of
Augustine, against Maximine, an Arrian bishop: Thus he writes: Sed nunc
Aduersus Maximinu^ lib. 4.
nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminense ta^quam praeiudicaturus proferre
concilium: nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris: scripturarum au
thoritatibus, non quorumcunque propriis, sed vtrisque communibus testibus, res
cu^ re, causa cu^ causa, ratio cum ratione concertet. But now neither may I
allege the council of Nice, nor you the council of Arrimine to others
prejudice, neither stand I bound to the authority of this, nor you to the
authority of that: but by the authority of the Scriptures, which are
witnesses proper to neither of us, but common to us both, let matter be
compared with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason. Thus you may
see your leaders abuse you: their stuff is but feeble: they fly from the
rock, and build upon sand: their grounds be unconstant, ye ought to
forsake the^ their hope is still doubtful: their faith is uncertain: their
suit without comfort: Refuse them, for the better: and give ear to him that
cries, I am the way, the truth, and the life. Know you who spoke it? He that
never told lie: he in whose mouth was no guile: he that lives in truth, in
equity, and righteousness: he at whose anger the mountains shall melt: even
the Lord Jesus Christ him self, he it is that speaks it unto you. If he
wished not your salvation, he would not teach you the way. In that he says he
is the way: have ye not warning enough that there is no other way besides him?
Why then do ye stray into paths of perdition? return, and hear him, his word
is a light unto the feet of the righteous. Thy word (says David) is a light to
my feet. The^ follow the light that ye may be sure to see whether ye go: at
the presence thereof al darkness does vanish: desire you to be blessed? I know
you desire it. Then put on the badge, whereby to be known: put on ye delight,
which they that be blessed, are furnished withal: His delight (says David) is
in the law of the Lord, and in his law, will he exercise him self both day and
night. The scriptures be that light, that whosoever follows, can not walk in
darkness: whereby not only the fathers, and Councelles, but the whole world
shall also be judged, as Christ him self witnesses: The Job. 1^.
word (says he) which I speak shall judge in the last day. The majesty
whereof, the fathers had in due reverence, as partly ye have heard, in that
they acknowledged the same only judge of all councelles, and writings. And
touching farther confirmation hereof, thus writes Hierome: Omne quod loquimur,
debemus affirmare In psalm 98.
de scripturis sanctis. Whatsoever we affirm we must prove it by the holy
scriptures. And again Chrysostom speaking of these Aduersus Valentinij
script. li. 2. cap. 50.
words of Abraham, in the parable of the rich glotton, that, If they would
not believe Moses and the prophets, neither would they believe him that should
come from the dead. Writes thus: Haec aute^ Chrysostom in epist. ad Gal. cap. 1.
Christus ipse inducit in parabola loquentem Abraham, declarans se velle plus
fidei habendam esse scripturis, qua^ si mortui reuiuiscant. Paulus vero (porro
cum Paulum dico, ipsum Christum dico, hic enim erat qui eius mentem agebat)
etiam Angelis e caelo descendentibus praeponit scripturas, idque valde
congruenter: Siquidem Angeli, quamlibet magni, tamen serui sunt, and ministri.
Coeterum omnes scripturae, non a seruis, sed abvniuersorum domino Deo venerunt
ad nos: Christ him self, in the parable brings in Abraham to speak this: to
declare that he would have more credit to be given to the scriptures, then
unto the dead, if they should revive again. And Paul (when I name Paul, I
name Christ, for he it was that directed his mind) Paul I say, prefers
the Scriptures before the Angels, though they should descend from heaven, and
that very aptly: for although they be mighty, yet be they servants and
ministers: but all the scriptures came unto us, not from servants, but from the
Lord, and God of all things. And again, Augustine, August. de doctrina
Christiana, lib. 1. ca. 37.
Titubat fides, si diuinarum scripturarum vacillat authoritas. If the
authority of the holy scriptures waver, then does faith stumble.

Again Augustine in his 157. Epistle In epi. 157.
has this sense: Sine Scripturarum authoritate, nihil desiniendum: Nothing is
to be affirmed, without authority of the Scriptures. Thus you see ye good, and
holy fathers in the Primative Church, gave the whole pre-eminence, and
judgments of all truth unto the holy Scriptures. Wherefore in forsaking your
blind, and unfriendly teachers, and following the example, and counsel of these
reverend fathers, apply your selves to the study thereof, and ye shall soon
find out infallible rules, to be wray the treachery of your guilfull
deceauers: this is one of the easiest, and it can never fail, it is gathered
out of Paul to the Romans (as a sure touchstone) to discern truth from
error: his words be these: But now is the righteousness of Roman. 3.
God, declared without the law, having witness of the law, and the Prophets. By
which words this rule is plainly gathered, that the righteousness of God has
always the witness of the law and the Prophets, what soever is truth, the law
and the Prophets, that is to say, the Scriptures will ever acknowledge: and
what soever doctrine they give not witness unto, is falsehoode, and error. Now
if your blind teachers would make you believe that the search of ye scriptures
belongs not unto you, Christ him self does teach you the contrary. And
whether it be more right to follow him, or the^, judge your selves. Search the
Scriptures (says he) for those are they that bear witness of me. Ye see how
Christ him self does follow the rule, he claims witness of the law, and ye
Prophets, he gives the Scriptures for the discerner of truth. And in an other
place, where he teaches the cause of error, he shows the same to be
ignorance of the Scriptures. Ye err (says he). Matthew. 22.
because ye know not the Scriptures. Wherefore if your blind teachers seek to
witholde you from the Scriptures, you see they deceive you, for these be they
only, that can witness ye truth. How greatly in the Acts of the Apostles are
they of Berea commended? where the reason is given of their great readiness in
receiving the Gospel: for they daily searched the Scriptures, whether those
things were so: you see that ye Scriptures, the law, and the Prophets are
only the witness, and auouchers of the truth. These men went not to the fathers
writings to enquire, whether the Apostles said true: but they went to ye
Scriptures, as to the pillar of trust, whose witness they were sure could never
deceive them. Thus where your seducers would make you believe that the
Scriptures belong not to you, they falsely deceive you, as now they may see the
text bears record, yt these of Berea were both men, and women, and that not
a few. Chrysostom in his Homely of Lazarus, and the rich man, exhorts all
men to the reading of ye scriptures: and specially by name, occupiers,
marchantes, and householders, alleging that they can never attain salvation,
without continual travel in the Scriptures: affirming that they have more
need to read the Scriptures, then holiermen: for that they continually pass
their life in greater danger. Thus vehemently does this good father exhort all
me^ to the reading of the Scriptures which your uncharitable teachers, above
all things forbid you, and yet you see both out of Paul, and Christ himself
this rule confirmed, that all true doctrine has the witness of the law, and
the Prophets, that is the witness of the Scriptures. Whereby you must examine
the truth of your faith, and utterly condemn all manner of doctrine, that has
not this witness: he gives to the Galathians this absolute decree: If we (says
he) or an Angel from heaven preach Galat. y.
unto you, otherwise the^ that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. By these rules examine ye counterfeite doctrine of your faithles
deceivers: search the bottom of their Mass, or propitiatory sacrifice: and
say justly unto them, it has not the witness of ye law and the Prophets, no
witness of the Scriptures: They bring a new doctrine, ye must hold them
accursed. Likewise for their praying to Saints, their Purgatory, their
pilgrimages, their holybread, their holy water, their ringing, their senssing,
their work of the worker, their executed works, their vndewe works, their
lyftynges, their crossinges, their breathynges, their bendynges, their dombe
shows, their washyngs, their annoyntings, their shauynges, their relics, and
a thousand such follies: you may just ly say to them, they have not the witness
of the law and the Prophets, no witness of Scriptures they preach a new
doctrine, you must hold the^ accursed. If they (gentle Reader) meant to deal
plainly with you, they could easily tell you, that their doctrine can not
abide, to be examined by ye Scriptures of God, they could tell you that ye
greatest endeavor and study of the chief pillars of their feigned Religion, is
clearly to deface, and discredit ye scriprures, but they will never tell you
that, for the^ they be sure you will credit them no farther. And because you
may know, that I tell you the truth, I will in his own words rehearse the
sentences of one of their own Cardinals concerning ye same. Thus writes the
Cardinal Cusa, Certe hoc te non moueat, quod diuersis temporibus Epist (...).
de vsu commu nionis ad Bohemos.
alius and alius ritus sacrificiorum, and etiam Sacramentorum stante veritate,
inuenitur: Scripturasque esse ad te^pus adaptatas, and vary intellectas ita vt
vno tempore secundum currente^ vniuersalem ritum exponentur, mutato ritu,
iteru^ sententia mutaretur. Truly let not this move thee, that with diversity
of time, there is found diverse forms both of sacrifices, and Sacraments, the
truth nevertheless remaynyng, and that the Scriptures are framed to the time,
and diversely understand: so that one time they must be understand according to
the universal custom, and when that custom again is changed, the meaning
of the Scriptures again must be changed. Gentle reader mark this open
blasphemy, for the word of God abides for ever. That is to say, is ever one,
and the same. And David says, that it is an undefiled law. But if this man say
true, no doctrine can be more filthy: for what greater corruption can be
attributed to any, then to be inconstant, and uncertain, still mutable with
time, but bear him yet further: Thus says he in an other place, to confirm
the same doctrine. Quare nec mirum si praxis Epistolae 7. de ampl^cte^da
(...)te Ecclesiae ad Bohemos.
Ecclesiae, vno tempore, interpretatur scripturam vno modo: and alio tempore,
alio modo. Intellectus enim qui cu^ praxi co^currit, est spiritus viuificans.
It is no merueile if the practice of the Church, interpret the Scriptures at
one time, one way: and an other way, at another time: for the meaning which
goes with the practice, is a quickenyng spirit. If this to a Christian
conscience be not horror, then what may offend it? Truly (gentle reader) if
thou belong unto God, thy heart can not but tremble, at such fearful blas
phemy, and yet is this one of the principal pillars of that bewitchyng
Synagoge, whereupon your teachers would have your faith grounded: if you
knowing, and seeing, will run to destruction, ye worthily perish, but I hope
better of you. This have I said to make you know them: and what they would tell
you, if they durst utter all: Now touching this treatise, I have therein offered
no doctrine unto you, but that which is witnessed by the law, and the
Prophets: Namely, by the Scriptures, unto every part whereof, after the same is
confirmed by the Scriptures, I have added ye fathers sentences, which were of
the sounder judgment, to show that both they, and we, do acknowledge one
truth, whereunto I have added ye shameless, and subtle shifts of some of your
false teachers, captains I mean. Some of the head Papists and principal
Scholemen bewraying their treachery, wherein (gentle reader) this only I crave
at thy hands to read with patience, and examine by the rule of S. Paul, and
Christ him self: which of us soever has not witness of ye law, and the
Prophets, and the Scripture of God: think he brings a new doctrine, and
hold him accursed. The Lord (if it be his holy will) open your eyes that you
may perfectly see, and constantly confess his victorious truth, in the will of
his only begotten son Jesus Christ, before whom (in that great day) shall
truth be crowned, and error condemned, to the glory of his name, and endeles
felicity of all the eelect, amongst whom, the Lord place us, to whom be all
glory and praise for ever.

Amen.
The Arguments of the Chapiters.
1. THat Adams wilful transgression made him, and his offspring rebels to God,
and brought in sin and death. 2. That that transgression made man an apt
subject, for the two properties of God, namely, justice, and mercy to work
upon. 3. That for the manifestyng of ma^s subjection to both those properties,
the declaration of the law was needful, wherein the condition of his estate
might appear. 4. That the nature of the law is to be known, and what is
requisite to the fulfilling thereof: and the contrariety between the same, and
the corrupt nature of man. 5. To what end the law should be given unto man, he
having no power to satisfy any part of the same. 6. How man regarded the law,
and how in Christ the promised seed, the covenant concerning man's
restitution, was consummate. 7. How the obedience and death of Christ, was a
full satisfaction for the disobedience, and deserved death purchased to al
mankind by Ada^. 8. To enquire the nature of the new covenant, and what on
the behalf of man is required, to the atteinment of righteousness in the same.
9. To know the certain tokens of that faith, whereunto justification is
imputed, and the difference between the works of the faithful, and the works
required in the law. 10. To know what justification, or righteousness it is,
which the scriptures attribute to works, and also what faith it is, against
which S. James speaks, and why justification is imputed to faith, and not to
works.


THE IMAGE of Nature, and Grace.
That Adams wilful transgression, made him and his offspring rebels to God, and
brought in sin and death.

Cap. 1.
THe eternal wisdom of God having created Adam our first father after the
excellency of his own Image, adorned naturally with justice, holiness and all
perfection to be unto him, as it were the beauty and glory of all his works,
so advanced him by his creation above the rest of all his earthlye creatures,
that unto him alone he gave Man only created to gods Image, was made Lord of
all his other erthly creatures
the rule and pre-eminence in nature to be their Lord and ruler. That is, to
whom all they should obey and serve: for the first taste of the which
excellent dignity and prerogative he placed the^ all before him as before
their soueraign Lord, from his mouth to receive severally Man as sovereign and
Lord of all creatures, first gave them their several names. Eua the ^oma^ was
given unto man to be his helper. To man was granted free liberty to easy of
all that was in paradise, saving only of the (...) of life.
their titles and proper names, according to the which they all were called.
Then giving Eua unto him for his helper, he placed him in the garden of Eden,
the possession of all earthly delights, appointing unto him the keeping
thereof, with free liberty for his relief and comfort, to taste and eat of
all the excellent fruits therein, the only tree of knowledge of good and
evil excepted, of the which he forbade him to eat, affirmyng that what hour
soever he tasted thereof, he should dye the death.

Now forasmuch as the matters here spoken of, namely, the Image of God in man
and man's original, justice and perfection, do justly challenge some explication
thereof, as well that the excellency of Gods first benefits toward man, might
after a certain manner be seen, and the glorious estate of his former
dignity, more greedily thristed for again: and also the outrage of his
ingratitude with greater detestation abhorred, and the filthiness and foul
corruption of his nature, and miserye of his present estate by vewe of his
former perfection more perfectly painted out. And finally, that the triumph of
Gods unspeakable mercy in Christ, which (notwithstanding so huge
transgression) has not only pardoned him, but also adopted him into the
fellowship and liberty of his own son: that all these I say, might be made
the more apparaunt, those words do justly challenge some explication. Wherefore,
What the image of God in man is.
where it is said that man was created after the image of God, it is to be
understand, that he was created the most Man was the most excellent erthly
creature
excellent earthly creature, being made partener of the natural goodness and
virtue of God, namely, holy, wise, just, pure, good, true, immortal, etc.
having both power perfectly to know God, and also power and freewil constantly
to believe him, to serve him, to obey him, to love him, to fear him, and to be
short, to perform such works as answered to the image of so excellent a
Pattern. And therefore does Tertullian writing against Marcion, most
excellently, and briefly define the Image of of God thus. Haec ergo imago
censenda est dei in homine, quod eosdem motus and sensus Yer(...) c(...)
habeat humanus animus quos and deus, heet non tales qu^les deus, pro
substantia enim and status and exitus distant: Therefore is this to be
accounted the image of God in man, that the mind of man must have the same
mouinges and felings which god has, although not even such as God has, for
as touching substance of state and end they differ. That is to say, that is
the image of God, which naturally loves yt which god loves, and hates yt
which god hates, and which of very nature judges of all things according to
ye judgment of God: All which things were necessary to the duty of man's
office, for seeing God had made and created him as it were his liuetenaunt, or
vicegerent over all his earthly creatures, it was necessary that to their
government his nature should participate of the excellent properties of God,
that thereby in the whole execution of his office, he might have power not to
swerue from his duty and obedience required in the same. And hereby appears
what original righteousness was in man, namely, Original righteousness.
holiness, knowledge, wisdom, justice, pureness, goodness, truth, immortality,
love, temperance, chastity, unlust, freedom from sin, natural and willing
obedience to God, having power Man is called the image of God for the
excellency of the nature that he was first created in. Ephesians. 4.
to do good, not to sin, not to dye, etc. and that he in respect of this
excellent and glorious condition of this original nature is called the image
of God. It is thus out of the Scriptures of God easily gathered. Thus writes
Paul to the Ephesians. Lay from you the old man which is corrupt through the
deceiuable lusts, and be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the
new man, which after God is shapen in righteousness and true holiness. And again
the same Paul to the Colos. Col. 3.
says: Lie not one to another, seeing ye have put of the old man with his
works, and have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image
of him that made him. Now, what the putting on of this new (...)

willingly forgetful of his creator, from whom he had not only received his
being, but also the prerogative of so excellent dignity: He I say, missed by
deceitful perswation, neglecting the glory of his creator, rather gave
credit to the light persuasion of his wife, then to the reverend and dreadful
majesty. For his wife being deceived by the serpent, supposed, the
commandment to have been given, rather of subteltie, to hinder their
dignitye, and as it were a scarcrowe to fray them from the taste of that fruit,
whereby their excellency might increase, or as though God had rather not
vouchsafed them, that further good hap, which by taste thereof was incident
unto the^ then otherwise: Such was the tickling of ambitious desire, such was
the horror of contumelious ingratitude, that now in stead of homage and
duetifull thanks for so excellent an estate, straightway is he trained into
suspicion of his loving creator. And now seking in this desire to be the author
and builder of his own sovereignty, willingly he tastes ye fruit. But forth
with he felt the error of his The fall of Adam.
stray, and just scourge of his fall, beholding his nakedness and shame. Now is
he which was before the glory of God, The glorious state of man utterly
ouerthrown by disobedience
made through his rebellious contempt so loathsome in his own sight, that
shamyng his own filthy nakedness, he seeks to make aprons of fig leaves, to
hyde that which before was naturally That innecency covered, sin abhorred.
and most secretly covered with the pure robe of innocence. Now feels he the
hyre of his cruel ingratitude, new the bitter tuice of the tasted fruit
stingeth him, the excellent dignity of his first creation lost, the sower sap
of deserved destruction, fully felt in possession, the rigorous revenge of his
ragyng rebellion, now wofu^ly wringeth him, down droppeth the glory of his
royal estate. A full dispossession of all the excellent ornaments of grace, a
swalowyng spoil of all former glorious gifts. Now sin having him fully in
possession displayeth before his eyes the ensign of death. Horror and calamity
rush The miseries of man that came
in on every side, that which he before in ye swellyng of desire forgate to
acknowledge. Now the ouerwhelming calamity by the tra^sgression of Adam the
first man.
of painful practice has forced him to feel: namely, that God was the only
stay, and glory of his estate, the root and cause of all his dignity. Now
filthy wretch, hence flies he from the face of his God, whose presence before,
was the beutie of his comfort: the dreadful view of deserved destruction,
burrieth him into corners to hide himself. He yt before joyfully presented him
to his maker, yea, he in whom was written ye glory and magnificence of god, now
for fearful shame shroudeth him from his presence: and (being called in this
corruption) shieldeth his misery under the trembling shade of silly defense:
and being demanded why he had tasted of ye forbidden fruit, the woman says
he, who^ thou Genesis 3.
gave unto me, gave me of the tree and I did eat. As though he should have
said, although the contempt of thy commandment displayeth it self in the act
by me committed, yetalas, so measure my cause by the due circumstance, that I
be not made faulty above my trespass: the breach of thy commandment I cannot
hide, seeing the view of my wretched nakedness bewrays the same, in so great a
cause, only this small refuge resieth for my defense. Though I be gilty of ye
act, yet as the author I am not culpable, seeing this woman whom thou gave
unto me being deceived by the serpent, supposing a glorious sovereignty
coupled with so beautiful a bayte, sethyng down under the hungry desire of higher
dignity, breakyng out of the li^^es of thy appointed bo^n^es, into the maze of
persuaded liberty, presented to me a taste there of as a rare and singular
benefie: which alectiue persuasion abusing my affection, carried my will into so
unadvised consent, yt I yielded to the same. Wherefore, though touching the crime
I have no just defense, yet as the author I am not culpable. Thus could
graceles error, even in an instant, shroud ye giltyship of this child of
destruction, under the habit of wrangling defense, to hold tremblyng plea
against his creator: Now began he to shine in the right colors of
confusion, so far was he failen from acknowledgyng of offense. Here with God
beholding his glorious Image and likeness, utterly cancelled and defaced, the
beawtifull grace of all his goodness, despitefully rased, the stompe or Printe
of his divine nature, most filthily blotted out. God I say, beholding this,
(according to ma^s just desert) began to hate him, and refuse him for his
work, and to loathe that, which before he liked. Now all the former delight
which he thought to have reposed in man, was turned into just anger, his
likyng into lothing, his favor into frowns, his cherefull countenance, into
destroying displeasure. So that whole man, both thought, life, and action,
through the noisome stink of this hateful rebellion, became so abhorfull a
creature unto his maker, that it not only repented him that ever he made man,
but for his farther plague, Ge. 1. 6.
he also cursed the whole earth. Here entered our first foil and heinous
infection, Original sin.
namely, our original sin, the deprivation and ruin of whole nature, the
spoil and corruption of all virtues, both of body and mind, the swallowing
sea of all confusion, the cursed cloud of ignorance, the deep darkener of all
divine knowledge: the ruinous root of all outrage, the mother of al contempt,
the head and fountain of all sin: the banisher of reason, and surrenderer of
all the raynes, and government of life into the hands of licentious lusts, and
filthy affections: And to be short, the whole fountain of the tragedy of our
confusion, and triumph of Satan. But now, as from the root is derived and
sent into every branch and sprowte, that natural sap from which they The
generation and issue of man corrupted.
take their substance and increase. So this hateful impe nothing unfruitful
in his cursed kind, begat (according to the venemed juice of his corruption)
children of his own hear, like unto himself: namely, wicked, perverse,
corrupt and rebellious, swarmyng full of all filthe and wyckednes, naked and
barrayne of any one spot of goodness. Here again in this place, forasmuch as
sin and the effects thereof have been touched, I think it not inconvenient
for plain understanding to bestow some labor about the consideracion thereof.

Wherefore, first of all beginning with original sin, it may be thus
defined: Original sin is the loss of The definition of original sin.
original righteousness and corruption of the whole nature of man: the truth
of this definition is thus proved. Thus writes Paul to the Corinthians:
(...). Cor. 15.
The stinge of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law: So then
the law is the strength of the sting of death: but the law to be the strength
of the stinge of death, is nothing else but this: namely, that the stynge of
death has no strength but over such Death has no power but over the
unrighteous.
as the law declares to be unrighteous, but the law declares none to be
unrighteous, but such as have lost original righteousness. Therefore the sting
of death has no strength but over such as have lost original righteousness, but
the stinge of death has strength over the whole nature of man, therefore the
whole nature of man has lost original righteousness, which was first to be
proved. Again the same Paul to the Ephesians affirms, That man is by Ephe. 2.
nature the child of wrath. And again in an other place he affirms: That the
Romans 1. Col. 3.
wrath of God comes in respect of fornication, uncleanness, unnatural lusts,
evil concupiscense, covetousness, etc. And therefore it follows that man
seeing he is by nature the child of wrath: that he is naturally defiled with
the seed of all these corruptions, whereby the truth of the definition is
evident. And for further confirmation thereof, God in Genesis says thus, My
Genesis 6.
spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is flesh.

Now seeing Christ the most wise expositor of the scriptures, affirms that by
the fruit the tree shall be discerned, therefore by the fruits of flesh
declared by Saint Paul in the 5. chapter to Gal. 5.
the Galathians, it is plainly gathered, that flesh is nothing else but a
mass of iniquity and corruption, but the whole man was before concluded under
the name of flesh. Therefore the whole man is a mass of iniquity and
corruption.

Again in the 8. of Genesis he says: The imagination of man's heart is evil
Genesis 8.
even from his youth, whereby it appears that there is wickedness and
corruption cleaning unto his nature, which David also utters in plain
words: Behold (says he) I was begotten Psalm. 51.
in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me: And Jeremy says: That
the heart of man Iere. 17.
is wicked and perverse. And of the uncleanness and natural corruption of man,
thus Job in plain words bears witness, Who says he, can make him Job. 14.
clean, that is conceived of unclean seed? And Christ himself says: That
that which is borne of flesh, is fleshly. The meaning whereof is plain by that
which is said before.

Again Paul witnesses, That thorough the offense of one man, sin has
entered upon all men. Again the same Paul to show the filthy corruption of
nature, shows the opposition and contrariety between the law and sin: The
law says he, is spiritual, I am carnal sold under sin: as Romans 7.
though he had said, The law is pure, but I am corrupt, which he proves by
Christ's own rule, namelye, by the fruits: For says he, that good which I
would, that do I not, but that evil Romans 7
which I hate, that do I: If now I do that I would not, then is it not I that
do it, but sin that dwells in me. Where, this is to be noted, that he
affirms sin to dwell in him, that is, to have possession of him, and
naturallye to cleave unto him. Again the same Paul accuses the whole world,
that there is none righteous, that there is none wise, or that seeks after
God. Now I trust the truth of the definition is sufficiently confirmed,
whereunto I will also add somewhat of the opynion of the fathers, that the
agreemente between us in the truth thereof may appear. Thus writes
Augustine, Contra Psalm. 50
vulnus originalis peccati, quo in Adam omnium hominum corrupta. and
mortificata est natura, and vnde omnium concupiscentiarum morbus moleuit,
potens remdium est mors filij Dei Domini nostri Jesus Christi. The death of our
Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, is a mighty remedy against the wound of
original In libro de articulis falso sibi impositis. Arti. 1.
sin, wherewith the nature of al men is (in Adam) corrupt and slain, and
from whence the infection of all concupiscence has sprung. And the same again
in his book of nature and grace, Cap. 3.
Natura vero ista hominis qua vnusquisque ex Adam nascitur, iam medico indiget,
quia sana non est: For this nature of man wherein every man is borne of Adam,
has now need of a Physician, because it is not found. Again, upon the Gospel
of John, Non natura quae tota fuerat per liberum arbitrium in ipso radice
vitiata: Tract. 17.
not by nature which through free will was wholye defiled in the very In
Luchirid. ad Laurentiu^ cap. 30.
root: And again he calls it, Perditionem hominis, and liberi arbitrij. The
loss of a man and of free will. And again. Amissionem imaginis dei. The loss
of the Image of God. Again thus writes Origene, In lege pro illo qui natus
fuerit Origene.
iubetur offerri hostia par turturum, aut duo pulli colu^bini, ex quibus vnus
pro peccato, et alius in ho Romans 6. lib. 5
locaustomata: pro quo peccato offertur hic pullus vnus? nu^quid nuper aeditus
paruulus peccare potuit? et tunc habet peccatum, pro quo hostia iubetur
offerria quo mundus negatur quis esse, etsi vnius diei fuerit vita eius. In the
law it is commanded, that for him that is borne, a pair of turtles or two
young pigeons should be offered, of the which the one should be for a sin
offering, and the other for a burnt offering: For what sin is this one pigeon
offered? could the new borne child sin? yea even then We are conceived in
original sin.
he has sin, for the which he is commanded to offer a sin offering, from
the which there is no man clear, and though he be but one day old. And a
little after in the same place. Sciebant enim illi quibus mysteriorum secreta
commissa sunt diuinorum, quia essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati: For
they (to whom the secrets of the deuyne mysteries were committed) knew that
the natural filthinesses of sin were in all Homil.
men. And again the same Origene upon Leuit. Quaecunque anima in came
nascitur, iniquitatis and peccati sorde poluitur: what soul soever is borne in
flesh it is defiled with filthe of wickedness and sin. And Hierome upon
Ezechiell Hierom. cap. 47.
A pueritia appositum est cor hominis ad malum, vt ne vnius quidem diei a
natiuitatis suae exordio, sine peccato sit humana conditio. Man's heart is set
upon evil even from his childhood, that the nature of man is not one day
from his birth without sin. And again Ambrose, Omnes homines in Ambrose, de
vocatione ge^tium. Lib. 1. Cap. 3
primo homine sine vitio conditi sumus, et omnes naturae nostrae incolumitatem
eiusdem hominis praeuaricatione perdidimus, inde tracta mortalitas, inde
multiplex corporis animique corruption, inde ignorantia, et difficultas: All men
were All men in the first man were created without sin, but by transgression
he lost all, and purchased death.
in the first man created without sin, and all by the transgression of the
same man have lost the freedom of our nature, from thence we took the
manifold corruption both of body and soul, from thence ignorance and dulnes,
etc. And Bernard speaking thereof: A primo homine vsque ad nouissimum Bernard.
Sermon de passione domi ni, feria quata hebdomadae poenosae
protenditur, and in singulis quoque a planta pedis, vsque ad verticem
diffunditur hoc venenum. It is stretched even from the first man to the last,
and this poison spread abroad in every man eeuen from the soole of the foot
to the crown of the head.

Now I suppose it is sufficiently proved what original sin is. Wherefore I
will now a little touch the common doctrine of the earnest enemies, I mean
the Papists concerning the same. Their common received definition thereof
amongst their schoolmen is this: Peccatum originis est reatus tantu^m, seu
imputatio, qua propter lapsum Adae omnes The Papists definition of original un.
homines secundum naturam propagati rei sunt: Original sin is only the
giltiship or imputation, whereby all men generate according to nature, are
through the fall of Adam giltye. For the understanding of the error of this
definition, it is needful to mark this: that in every sin there are two
things to be considered, namely, the Two things in every sin to be
considered.
offense it self, which is as it were the matter or substance of the sin,
and also the giltiship, subjection or bond to the penalty due to the same. As
here in original sin, that which is as it were the matter or substance
thereof, is the corruption which is in nature. Now for as much as death is the
penalty due unto the same corruption, therefore that bond and subjection
wherein man stands tied unto this penalty, is called the giltiship. Now
these men in this definition free and discharge man's nature from all the
corruption, which is as it were the matter and substance of the sin,
affirming that original sin is now nothing else in us, but a participation of
the bond, or subjection wherein Adam stood tied to the penalty, and no
participation of the corruption of his nature. The shameful untruth whereof,
is by that which is said before, more then manifest: for as much as it is
there proved, that Original sin is not only according to theyir saying, an
imputation of Adams giltishippe, or bond to the penalty due to the offense:
but also a full corruption of his whole nature.

Now forasmuch as the Papists draw so near unto the Pelagians and
Anabaptists, as well about the nature of original sin, as the propagation
thereof, therefore although above all things I labor to be brief, yet will I
stay the ouervewyng of one or two of the principal arguments used herein. How
can it be say they, An other o biection.
that this corruption of nature should so be from the fathers conveyed into
the children, that their nature should equally be poisoned with the same
infection? Where unto it is answered.

That although Adam was created The answer.
after the Image of God, participatyng his natural goodness and virtue as was
showed before, all which seed of original righteousness should by him have
been conveyed into his posterity: yet were all those excellent qualities, not
so indiuisibly coherent to his nature, but that to the retayning of them there
was a certain condition annexed, the breach whereof should be his
deprivation from all: namely, under the condition of his God c^^ated the first
man heavenly like himself, but yet added (...) condition of his ob^dience.
obedience unto God. That seeing God had crowned him with so excellent gifts,
freewill, and power either to use or abuse them, that conditionally if he by
disobedience abused them, he should lose the dignity of his estate, and
possession of them all. Now these ornaments being lost by his disobedience,
and his nature wholly spoiled of original right^^usnes, and wh^ly lade^ with
corruption and uncleanness: it follows that all his children are by him
infected with the same, neither could they by him be generate in any other
condition of nature, then that which unto him was proper* for very nature
teaches this that in all perfect generation, that is, where generation is
between creatures of on kind, the like does ever bring ^orth the like, neither
can a sheep bring forth a wolf, nor a wolf a sheep, but one nature is ever
common both to the breeders and to the brood. Wherefore Adam having his nature
utterly corrupted through his fall, must needs convey the same corruption into
all his offspring according to this saying of Job: Who can make him I^^. 14.
clean that is conceived of unclean seed. And amongst men, even in civil
justice, if a man that is borne free do by some great offense lose the freedom
of his estate and become bond, all his posterity are borne in the same
thraldom, we are all through Adam made bond and thrall unto sin.
and so remain likewise bond, neither can they make title unto that freedom
which once their father possessed, seeing in him they have all justly lost it.
But here again the adversaries object, that An other objection.
as by the fall of Adam, nature received this foil to the infection of all his
posterity: so by his justification he being again made righteous, it should
follow that he should convey a justified nature into all his posterity. Unto
this An answer to the objection.
objection it is thus easily answered, that in every sin (as has been
showed before) two things are to be considered, namely the act, and the
giltiship. Now Adams justification did not for the present state restore his
first original pureness, or cleanse his nature from all her corruption: but only
this it did, it assured him that the giltiship of his corrupt nature was not
imputed unto him, and laid to his charge, so that his justification did not
purge his nature from sin, but it did free and acquit his person from the
giltiship and obligation, wherein he stood tied unto the penalty. Wherefore
Adam still possessed his corrupt nature, wherein all his ofspryng by him were
generate, whereby all their natures were laden with the same infection.

An other of the adversaries objections is this, that seeing no act is In
other objection.
sin unless it be willinglye done, and that children in their infancye have
no will, therefore it should follow that infantes have no sin. For answer
whereof, it is easily granted The answer.
that as touching actual sin in themselves, of their own committyng, they
have none, but touching original sin, their nature therwithall remains
defiled, seeing their nature can be of no other condition, as is said before,
then the original nature where of they be bred. Should not a man seeing the
young whelpe of a Wolf, or Tygre call them beasts of a ravenous or cruel
nature, because that their weakness thorough tenderness of age can not
express in action those properties of nature. Yes surely, they want but time
and age to make them manifest.

Likewise the Serpent in the heart and cold of the winter, lies in his The
nature of the Serpent.
shrowde so weak, that he may be touched without danger of his bityng, which
happens by want of strength, and not that he should be judged therefore to
have lost his venomous nature: for so soon as aunswerable time furnishes him
of strength, he bewrays the same. Even so young children, though they
have no actual sin in them of their own committyng, which they call
personal sin: yet are they utterly defiled by the original corruption of
their whole nature, and want only time, and age to express the fruits thereof.

And hereby appears the grosenes of this error, in that they reasonne from A
specie to the general word by a Negative, then which A false argument.
kind of argument none is falser. For this it is, infants have no actual
sin, Ergo, they have no sin. And where their argument was grounded hereon,
that unless it were willingly done, it were no sin: thereto it may be truly
answered, that even this sin whereof they are culpable, was willingly
committed, though not in their own persons, yet in their first father of whose
corrupt seed they were bred. Others there be that do more vehemently urge
the matter thus: If say they, there be original sin, it must needs be, yt
the same An other objection.
cleaves to the soul, for ye flesh being of it self of brute and se^seles
nature, is not capable thereof, and the soul we receive not of our parents,
but of God. How then comes it, that from our parents we should receive this
corruption? The which is thus by some The answer.
learned fathers answered, that ye soul is not by his creation sinful, but
forasmuch as man's disobedience has utterly spoiled his whole nature of
original righteousness, and forasmuch as the soul is in the creation knit
unto a body subject unto that loss, and made a part of ye accursed man:
Therefore it is forthwith both deprived of the original grace and virtue,
wherewith by creation it was endued, and wherewith it should have governed the
body. And also it has no means to use it self, but by the instruments or
organes of the body, which through the curse are naturally indewed with
nothing but filthiness, and utterly unapt to all spiritual works, whereby it
stubburnlye resists and impugneth the spirit, who being now depryued of many
of those virtues, wherewith it was by creation endued, is unable to encounter
the corruption of the flesh, and specially in her own organs or instruments,
and therefore yeldeth unto the inclinations thereof, so yt where it should
have raygned over the body, now contrariwise the body raygneth over it, and
suppresseth it, and carries it away captive unto the lusts aunswerable to the
body. And even natural Philosophy teaches this, that between the soul and
the body, there is a certain sympathy or knitting of affection: for who sees
not that in melancholy bodies the mind is heavy and solitary, in sanguine
bodies merry and light, etc. whereby it appears, that the mind being thus
enclosed in this house of corruption, is greatly blinded and drowned in the
perfection thereof, and so carried away unto the delight thereof. Surely this
curious search of the propagation of original sin, as it is very hard and
difficulte, so it is more then vain, and unto salvation nothing at all
necessary. Wherefore the adversaries ought rather in following the counsel of
Saint Augustine, in this matter to labor and study to find the way how they
must be drawn out of the danger of this original filth and corruption, then
curiously to stand questioning how they fell into it, he rehearses a pretye
story how a certain man chauncyng to fall into a deep pit, lying there
shouting and A proper and merry history
crying, an other hearing him, came to the pit and began very diligently to
e^quire of him how he fell in, I pray thee says he never ask me how I fell
in, but study diligently how thou may help me out. Having thus briefly
spoken of original sin, I think it not conuenyent because this deuysion is
received, to speak now of actual sin, which in deed is nothing else but a
fruit or effect The definition of actual sin.
of the other. Wherefore it may be thus defined, actual sin is every
thought, word, and deed, or whatsoever is contrary to the law and will of
God, and what soever is not of faith. The truth of this definition is thus
gathered, forasmuch as it is already proved, that the whole nature of man is by
original sin utterly corrupted: Therefore the same sin triumphyng in his
nature, as a cause continually woorkyng, can not but bring forth her effects
or fruits. And by the words of Christ, the fruit must be aunswerable to
the tree, therefore all thoughts, words, and deeds, and what soever
proceeds from that corrupt nature, is corrupt, and unclean, and so actual
sin: and that thoughts be herein comprehended, it is plain, for that they
be the effects of the original corruption. For Christ himself says: Out
of the heart goes evil thoughts, and if any act beside be not comprehended
under these words, thought, word, or deed, the same is comprehended under
these general words of Paul: whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Whereby it
appears that not only evil thoughts, words and deeds be actual sin,
but also those thoughts, words, and deeds, which otherwise (morally) of
their own nature be honest and good, if they be done out of faith, that is to
say, if they be done by envy, not through faith acceptable unto God in Christ,
even those thoughts, words and deeds (seem they never so holy) be sin.
Now forasmuch as there is a division of actual sin, which has been of long
time received, it is expedient that somewhat be said concerning the same. The
division is this, into deadly sin, and into venial The definition of actual
sin.
sin. About both which parts, not only how triflingly, but also how wickedly
the scoolemen do hold, shall partly be showed. Wherefore, first touching deadly
sin in that they bynd them to a certain number, affirming only seven The
teaching that there is but vii. deadly sins is mere papistical and false.
sins to be deadly, they do not only give unto man security, in that his
enemy has but seven ways to assault him unto death, from which if he can
imagine him free, he thinks himself in any other offense not to sin
deadly, whereby all other sins are extenuate, and all wicked inclinations,
affections, and thoughts, excluded from the number of deadly sins. And yet
sins be called deadly for no other cause, but because death is due unto them.
And therefore unto what sin soever death All sin for the which death is due
is of it self deadly un Rmo. 6
is due, that sin is consequentlye deadlye, but death is due to all sin.
For Paul says generally, the reward of sin is death, and therefore all
sin is (in respect of his own nature) deadly. And though there be sins
which God imputes not to man, yet that comes not through the smalnes and
lyghtnes of the sin, but through the mercy of God. And where again they
affirm that deadly sin does not exclude faith, but that they may both
stand together, they no less deceive you as hereby appears, for S. Paul
says: they that walk after the flesh, Romans 3.
can not please God: wherefore who so pleases God walks not after ye flesh,
but whosoever walks in faith pleases God. Therefore whosoever walks in
faith walks not after the flesh, but to walk after the flesh is to Romans 7
walk in deadly sin. Therefore they that walk in faith, walk not in deadly
Romans 8
sin, whereby it follows that faith, and deadly sin ca^ not stand
together. Again, whosoever is dead, has no life in him, but whosoever has no
life in him, has no faith in him: For the just do live by faith. Therefore
whosoever Abac. 2 Hebr. 10
is dead has no faith in him, but they are dead in whom deadly sin raygneth:
For he that synneth is the servant unto sin. Therefore they in John. 8
who^ there is deadly sin, have no faith in the^. Let this for a touch or say
of their errors concerning deadly sin, suffice. Now touching venial or
remissible sins, they may thus be defined. Ueniall sins are all those
sins which The definition of venial sins
through faith are forgeeuen. The truth of this definityon is evident by these
words of Peter in the.x. of the Acts: To him geeue all the prophets witness,
that through his name all that believe Act. 10
in him shall receive remyssyon of sins, but whatsoever is remytted is
venial, for to be venial and remyssible is all one thing, and therefore all
sins which through faith are forgeuen are venial: whereby the truth of the
definition appears, and hereby it is evident that no sin can be called
venial in respect of his own nature, for so it is deadly, but for that
through mercy it is remitted, so that one and the self same sin is in diverse
respects both Deadly sin and venial sin are in diverse respects but one.
deadely and venial, for in him where says is, it is venial, and where faith
is not, it is deadly. Whereby it is also evident that unto the wicked no sin
is denial, so then the dyfference between venial sin and deadlye,
consists not in the nature of the sin, but in the will of God, which to the
faithful remitteth The difference between deadly sin and venial sin
it, and to the unbelievers reteineth it. Now touching the opinion of the
scholemen concerning venial sin, it is a world to see how they turmoyle them
The opinion of the scholemen concerning venial sin
selves about it, some of them think the^ to be called venial sins, because
they be light and easily remitted, or else washed away with holy water, as they
term it: others think it so called, because after death it should be
remissible by the fire of Purgatory* others think them called remissible, or
venyall in respect of the sin against the holy Ghost, which is called
irremissible or un forgeueable. But the better learned amongst them, account
venyall sins the dysposition or pronenesse toward the thoughts, and
affectyons which lead unto deadly sin. Herein is this one thing worthy The
scholemen agree in error*
the notyng, that howsoever they amongst them selves disagree in diversity of
opinions about the same, yet in this one thing they all agree, that none of
them all takes either counsel, witness, or authority out of Gods word
concerning the same. The error of all which, can not be hidden from him that
considers what has been said before. And upon these false grounds thy
infer diverse opinions of corrupt doctrine, whereof I will rehearse one or
two. First they The false opinion and doctrine of the papists
affirm that some sins in the wicked be venial sins, which is proved
false. Again that venyall sins should be light sins, and not of their own
nature damnable. Again, that they should be washed away with holy water, or
cleansed by the fire of Purgatory. And yet John Baptist said: Behold the John.
1.
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. And again the Angel
said to Joseph: He shall save his people from their sins. Neither Math. 1.
said John nor the Angel, coniured water or Purgatory shall take away the
sins of the world, or save the people from their sin. These things suffice
for a fast of their errors herein. Now, forasmuch as it does plainly appear
both what original and actual sin is, it is thereby gathered that the
difference between them is only this. That in The difference between original
and actual sin.
actual sin that which is, as it were the matter or substance of the sin,
remains not after it be committed, but only the giltiship or bond to the
penalty: As when a man commits whoredom, murder, theft, or any such like,
so soon as the act is done, the sin is ended, so that the whoredom,
murder, or theft is past and gone, but the giltiship and bond to the penalty
remains: but in original sin both the substance and matter of the sin
and also the giltiship remains still: for the corruption remains still
whereby every man feels in his nature repining against all goodness, and a
greedy lust to the contrary. Thus by Adam By Adam sin entered into the world.
sin entered into the world, and death by the means of sin, and all
naturally are become the children of wrath, and all dead in sin, so that
death and damnation reign over every man. Thus having showed the excellency
of man's creation, and horror of his transgression, whereby all his offspring are
naturally rebels unto God, and slaves unto sin and death, it follows.

Cap. 2.
That that transgression made man an apt subject for the two properties of
God, namely mercy and justice to work upon.

NOw man having thus thrown him self headlong into the dolorous du^geon of
deadly despair, overwhelmed with swallowing surges of distroyng distres, being
now dedicate unto the just conceived wrath of God, as the coniured foe to his
own former felicity. Now lies his caitife conscience displayed, before the
offended Majesty of his late loving Creator, but now, revenging Lord: so far
has his rebellious outrage banished all grace, and stamp of the diuiue
nature, that no print, or image thereof remains perfect within him. Instead
of all those glorious ornaments, he has endued himself with peculiar
beauties of his own choice (namely) ignorance, envy, pride, cruelty,
carnalitie, and all other sin, and that so naturally, that ye same now
lurketh not in him as an accident, which may be removed from his nature, but
all his whole corrupt nature is now nothing else but sin it self. The whole
man, body, mind, thought, word, and The wicked and damnable state that man of
himself is in.
deed, utterly perverted into the same, so that the whole endeavor and
disposition of his nature, through rauishing sway of insatiable lust unto
sin, trauelleth (with unquenchable thirst) the execution of ye fruit thereof.
Whereby it appears, that man is now become a most apt subject, and convenient
matter, wherein the justice of God, has to display the magnificence of his
power. For he being now nothing else but wickedness it self (which the justice
of God utterly abhors and hates) in due punishment of him, all the
creatures of God have to testify and magnify the pure, and unspotted
righteousness of God, which with holy and just power punishes most duly the
hateful and rebellious monster sin and wickedness. But as his justice has
here an apt subject wherein to manifest to the whole As God by his justice
condemns and ^^steth us down, so by his abondant mercy he rayseth us up
again.
world, the holy, fearful, and reverent Majesty thereof: so has his other
most victorious propriety, namely his triumphant, and superaboundaunt mercy,
such a subject of the same man, wherein to manifest the glorious conquest thereof
as the whole world by vewe of the same, shall be enforced to testify and
confess the infinite largenes of his The mercy of God far excedeth his other
works
mercy, far to excede and surmount all the residue of his glorious works.
Wherefore the divine Majesty being not only loving and merciful, but in deed
love and mercy it self, willing John. 4.
yet of his infinite bounty and incomprehensible goodness to love, that which
now by nature was most unworthy his love, pitying the utter dissolution and
deserved destruction of mankind. God (I say) vewing and beholding with a
blincke of undeserved grace the miserable calamity, of this cursed and iustlye
condemned caitife, glaunsed by him with a certain dim slent of comfort
concerning his restitution, and adoptiou again into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God: in promising Romans 8.
that by the seed of the woman the Serpents head should be bruised. Thus Genesis
3.
being apparent that Adams transgression (bringing in sin and death) made him
and his offspring rebels to God, and consequently an apt subject, for the
mercy and justice of God to work upon It follweth.

Cap. 3.
That for the manifesting of man's subjection to both those properties, the
declaration of the law was needful, wherein the condition of his estate might
appear.

THe infinite mercy of God, having thus given to Adam a touch or say of the
foundation of this new work (concerning man's restitution) seems (as it were
for a time) to forget man, in leaving him neither rule nor law manifested by
his word, whereby to govern himself: to prove whether he (any thing stirred
as yet by his sweet promise) would hunte and seek after his God, to the
finding of whom he could want no store of guides, seeing all the other
creatures of god were indices or pointels, to show him who he was. For the
harmony and whole consent of all other creatures in their several kinds
conspired (as it were) together, to lead unthankful man to the knowledge, and
admiration of his mighty and marvelous creator, by the contemplation of their
obedience, and thanckefulnes in their kinds, for his glorious works bestowed
upon them: whereby he might be drawn both to reverence and glorify God, and
behold his own miserable condition, which amongst all the rest, was found
the only iarring, and discordant stringe from the sweet consent of that
harmony: By vewe whereof, he might also be pricked forward, to shame his lack,
and seek recovery of his lost obedience. For castyng his All creatures under
heaven reverence God in their kinds, saving only man.
eyes up to heaven, there he might see the inviolable law of their creation
most reverently observed. The rolling sky (with his rauishing sway measuryng
unto us the due times both of labor, and rest, cariing about with vntyred
motion in the space of one natural day, all the rest of the heavenly host)
paynteth out the glory of God. The Sun as a The Sun.
glorious bridegroom, expresses ye magnificence of God, holding his yearly
circuit about the limits of his stately palace: at whose approaching all
things growing on the earth (apparelling themselves in the beautiful
ornaments of their nature) yield in their kind glory unto God, for the
cheerful presence of that comfortable creature.

The chaungeable Moon that by her hasty journeys in each monthly travel, The
Moon.
dispatcheth one whole viage: in repairing her often decayed light, shows her
obedience to her Creator, thereby yelding him glory: upon whose motion, not
only small moystures and humors, but also the waste and swallowing seas,
seem to attend. All the residue Stars.
of the stars, both wandering and fixed, observing (inuiolably) their motions,
times, and circuites, declare the great and wonderful power and glory of God.
Then drawyng his eyes nearer home, The Air.
considering the air, there also sees he nothing but the praise and glory of
god, be holding there the continual travel of nature, in filling her
storehouses with plenty of munition, to execute the will and commandment of
their glorious God: namelye, lightening, thunder, Lightning Thunder Hayle Snow
Rain Wind The earth declares the magnificence of God. Beasts Fishes Fowls,
Birds in the air. Trees Plants
hayle, snow, rain, wind, and all other creatures of the place. The^ drawing
his eyes home to his feet, and beholding the earth, there also sees he
openly dysplayed the magnyficence of God. For the earth her self in bryngyng
forth and nourishing her children, bewrays the same. Beasts, Fishes and
fowls, in crauyng of God their food, acknowledge his soueraygntye. The birds
(in yeldyng him well tuned thanks in their melodious harmonye) declare their
reverence to God. Al trees, plants, and herbs by their smylyng grace, and
glorious ornaments of their beauty, paynte unto man the magnyficence of their
creator. And to be short, even from the heygth of heaven, unto the center of
the earth has he in all his creatures as it were written, or ingraued the
glorious Majesty, and magnyficence of his incomprehensible might, wisdom,
bounty and eternity.

But what needed this far travel to seek a thing so near at hand, had man
but looked into himself, he could not but see that all his own life,
increase A glass wherein man may behold himself
and conservation, was nothing else but the virtue and power of God dwelling in
him, whereby the truth of these sayings of Saint Paul does well appear,
namelye, That the invincible Romans ^
things of God, that is to say, his eternal power and Godhed are
understand, and seen by the things made from the creation of the world, to
the intent that they should be without excuse: because that when they knew
God, they gloryfied him not as God, Act. 14.
neither were thankful. And again the Lord left not him self without
testimonye even toward them to whom he sent no knowledge of his word.
Surely although these rules and guides might have trained man to the seeking of
God, yet God too geeue a more evident view of his infinite goodness and mercy,
myndefull of his promise concerning man's restitution first made to Adam, but
more clearly afterward Genesis 3.
to Abraham, in promising that in his seed all the nations of the earth should
Gene. 22
be blessed, God I say myndefull of this promise chose out a peculiar people
namely, the children of Israel, indewing Psalm. 135.
them with the name of his people calling himself the God of Israel, as Esaias.
19. Exodus 6. Leuit. 29.
though he had been peculyar to them only, unto whom he manifestly opened
himself both by word and miracle, unto whom he also declared the condytions
whereupon he would receive man to favor again. And writing the same in tables
of Stone, delivered them to Moses their ruler, as a glass wherein to view
their miserable fall and corruption. The sum whereof was contained in these
two commandments, namely, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy Deuteronomy. 6
soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. The second: Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. Leuit. 19
And although this brief sum was at the delyueraunce divided into diverse and
sundry branches, yet all those are from hence derived, as from their fountain
and head. Now having showed that man's transgression, bryngyng in sin and
death made him and all his seed rebels to God, and thereby an apt subject for
the justice and mercy of God, to work on, and that also for the manyfestyng of
man's subjection to both those propertyes, a law was needful wherein the
condition of his estate might appear, it follows.

Cap. 4.
That the nature of the law is to be known, and what is requisite to the
fulfillyng thereof, and the contrariety between the same, and the corrupt
nature of man.

AS the wisdom of God being of it self unsearchable, offers unto us
contynuall cause to have the same in admiration: so in my judgment it has not
here offered unto us the lest in adding to his puissaunt and imperial
commandment, God commands us to love him
and law, this word Love In saying, thou shall love the Lord thy God: why
not rather, thou shall honor, worship, serve, or obey the God commands us
to love him.
Lord thy God. All which words seem at the first sight to argue in the law
maker greater impery, superiority, and prerogative, then this word [Loue]
which seems to import too much familiarity and equality: surely the
wisdom of God having to deal with the overthwart nature of man, saw it
convenient to use that word, of the understanding whereof, man him self was
able to pretend least ignorance, and that whose nature by force of the
effect, and property was commonly known to all, and that which in deed well
wayed, includes more then any of the other rehearsed. For if he should have
used any of the other words, namely, honor, worship, serve, obey, or such
like, it might have been that some whose calling and estate offers unto them
the vewe of no such reverence, might at the least have pretended some
ignorance of the meaning thereof. But to meet with all occasions, the God of
all wisdom used that word, whose effect and property trained every man to
so sensible feeling of the meaning thereof, that no man could pretend
ignorance of the same, forasmuch as the whole nature of man trauelleth in
continual use, and practice of love toward sin and wickedness. And although
man's knowledge concerning the meaning of that word, was gathered out of the
fruits of his corruption, he being as it were sin it self: yet that,
neither hindered his understanding of the meaning thereof, neither any whit
debased the purity of the nature thereof. So that whosoever by those effects,
or properties of love, which he felt in him self (toward sin) had sought
the definition thereof, he should forthwith have seen how entire and absolute
a righteousness the law requires. Wherefore having thus spoken of the nature
of love, it seems now convenient, to use some definityon thereof, whereby the
truth of my assertion may be more apparent: wherefore it may be thus defined.

Love is a natural affectyon of the mind, inflamyng all the powers of the
Definition of love
lover with willing duty toward the beloved. By this definition it is
plain, that where he says, thou shall love the Lord thy God, it imports as
much What it is to love the Lord our God.
as if he had said, it is required that with willing desire and natural
affectyon both of body and mind, and all the powers of the whole man, thou
perform due obedience to the Lord thy God. Surely if the holy Ghost had said
no more, but thou shall love the Lord thy God, the force and efficacye of love
is by the definition evident to be such, as it requires a natural
inclination, and willing pronenesse of all the parts of man to the obedyence
of God: wherefore most truly it is said of ye Apostle Paul, that love is the
fulfillyng of the law. And to take away all ambiguitie, the holy Romans 13
Ghost has added such other words, as dyscharge his meaning herein of
doubtful understanding. For he adds these words: with all thy heart, Deuteronomy.
6
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. Now
forasmuch as the heart or mind, which I here take to be one, and yet both
terms put in, to express the vehemency of the law: Forasmuch I say, as the
heart or mind is the fountain, or seat of all willing desire, and natural
inclination of ye whole man, it is plain, that where he says, with all thy
heart, and with all thy mind, it is all one, as if he had said: thou shall
love thy Lord thy God with all willing desire, natural affection, and
inclination, of the whole man. And here this note is not to be omitted, that
he puts to this word [all] in saying, with all thy heart, etc. So that
thereby no affection, power, nor disposition of ye heart may be wanting: whereby
it is evident, that to the fulfilling of the law, is required such restitution
of man's original nature, that as now al his desire and affections naturallye
lust after wickedness, so must all the desires and affections of those whom
the law can justify, naturally lust after righteousness. He adds moreover,
with all thy soul, to show that the law is spiritual, and requires also to
the fulfilling thereof, all the powers, and intentyons of the soul, which is
evident in that Christ himself, the best expositor of the law affirms: That
who so is angry with his brother unadvisedly, is in Math. 5
danger of judgment: and that who so looks on a woman, and lusts after
her, has already committed adultrye with her in his heart: whereby the
spiritual force of the law appears. And last of all he adds, with all thy
strength, which is a propriety, Deuteronomy. 6.
common both to body and mind. And by adding thereto this word [all] it is
plain that it requires the full, natural, and absolute obedience, of all ye
powers of body and soul. And hereby sufficiently appears the meaning of the
law, namely, that with all willing desire, and natural affection, both of body
and soul, and all the powers and nature of the whole man, thou shall yield
obedience to the Lord thy God: less then the which, the law could by no
means require of man, seeing therein is nothing commanded but that which the
condition of his original estate was created unto, from the which seeing the
whole man (that is to say) body and soul, with endeavor and ability of them
both is willingly fallen, as is showed in the first and second chapters.
Whereby it appears that man's righteousness required in the law, must be in him
so naturally, that the same must not lurk in him, as an accident which may be
removed from his nature. But all his whole nature must be nothing else, but the
Image of righteousness it self: the whole man, body, mind, thought, word,
and deed, perfectly resolved into the same, so that the whole endeavor and
disposition of nature (through rauishing sway of willing desire and natural
affection unto righteousness) must travel with unquenchable thirst the
execution of the fruit thereof: such must be the unquenchable passion and prone
desire of very nature thereunto, that if no law were given to train man to
righteousness, yet nature her self would be unto him a continual and
inviolable law concerning ye same, as having no power nor ability to desire
the contrary: whereof no such example can be given to make us feel the truth of
this assertion as the contemplation of the pleasant sway and willing pronenes
of our nature unto sin, who needs no law to draw her thereunto, nay no law
can keep her from it: which is nothing else in deed, but the very opposite of
the other. So that look with what willing and natural pleasure and delight,
the whole disposition of man now trauelleth to the execution of vice and sin:
the law requires of all them that seek righteousness by the deeds thereof,
that with the same willing and natural pleasure and delight, the whole
disposition of them must travel the execution of the works of righteousness.
So that to be short, as now no law is able to hold man's nature from
wickedness: so the law requires in man, such a natural and absolute
righteousness as no law (if any such could be made) should be able to hold his
nature from righteousness. Having thus showed by the law of the first table,
that all works required in the law to man's restitution, must proceed from a
natural pronenes, and willing desire of the whole man unto righteousness.

I see no cause to tarry about the law of the second table, which concerns
only man's duty toward his neighbor, even as the first concerns his
duty toward God. The law is this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: unto the understanding Leuit. 19.
whereof, that which is already said concerning love, has so opened the way,
that only this brief explication thereof may suffice: namely, thou shall with
willing desire and natural pronenes of all the powers of the whole man, covet
thy neighbors felicity both in body and soul, as much as thine own. Having
now sufficiently showed ye nature of the law, and what is required to the
fulfilling thereof, it is necessary to compare with the same, the corrupt
nature of man, expressed in the first and second chapters.

For the plain understanding whereof, it is expedient to use some definitio^s
of the^ both. The law may thus be defined: The law is ye absolute rule of
righteousness, which chalengeth to the fulfilling Definitien of the law.
thereof, the full obedience, willing desire, and natural pronenesse of the
whole man. Contrariwise, the corrupt nature of man gathered out of the second
chapter, is a corrupt disposition infecting Man's corrupt nature.
the whole man with full obedience, willing desire and lustful pronenesse unto
sin and rebellion: which by these words of Paul to the Romans is evident: It
is not obedient to the law of God, nether it can be. And to ye Corinthes: The
natural man perceives not the things that be of God, for they are but
folishnes unto him, neither can he perceive them, because they are spiritually
examined. Thus thorough the comparison of these two together, it evidently
appears, that in Man can not satisfy the law.
the whole corrupt nature of man, there is no jot of ability to satisfy ye
law in any one point, their natures being as direct contrary as fire and
water, heat and cold, light and darkness.

And here I cannot omit, seeing ye place does urge me, the fearful shift which
in this cause some adversaries seek (in hunting for degrees of perfection) to
establishe their blind righteousness of works, as though the law challenged
not of man the absolute performaunce thereof, but a certain degree of
perfection proportional to the condition of his ability, in saying there is
perfection in children, perfection in men, perfection A false and corrupt
doctrine.
in Angels, and perfection in God, concluding thereby such a perfection
only, to be required in man as is proportional to ye condition of his
ability, as though in the law of God, there were at the least a certain
wincking at wickedness, alowing such perfection as man can attain, and
wincking at the rest of his wantes. Surely as this doctrine is untrue, so is it
dangerous and fearful. The untruth whereof is hereby manifest, both in that
the law was given unto man, and also it does expressly exact the full and
entire obedience of all the principal parts of man. For what creature besides
man has heart, soul, and mind. The daungerousnes and fearefulnes of this
doctrine does hereby appear, for no man can be so wicked, but under the lee
thereof he may find safe harborough to defend the deserved storm of just
reproof and punishment: for being reproved for sin, may he not by this
doctrine safely say to his reprouer? Sir, glory you in the measure of your own
perfection. I for my part express the perfection, answerable to my ability,
which is as much as the law requires, the less I can perform, the more is
my good hap, seeing the law aloweth the sufficiency of my small ability, for
that thereby I have the more liberty to feed my nature with her dainty
delights. Surely I see not how this doctrine can have other meaning, seeing
they seem to infer this sense, in yt they affirm that God commands us
nothing impossible: which by their own degrees of perfection must needs have
this meaning: that where our ability is not able to strain it self to the
absolute perfection of the law, there the law slacketh it self to the weak
perfection of our ability. Truly if this be not their meaning, it were
expedient that some of them made a gloss upon the text, that the reader might
better understand it. Surely if they were not to deeply learned in error,
they would otherwise consider the nature and end of the law, and acknowledge
man's imperfection, and whole insufficientie to the fulfillyng thereof, and so
seek for that which now follows here to be required, namely:

Cap. 5.
To what end the law should be given to man, he having no power to satisfy
any part of the same.

THe glorious and reverend majesty of God beholding (even from Adams fall) the
miserable captivity of man's estate, and mynding his promised deliverance, that
thereby the victorious triumph of his mercy might be sounded throughout the
world, to the just advancement of his glory. God I say, myndefull hereof, as
the wisest builder, began the foundation of this new work concerning man's
restitution, upon the rock, which was immovable throughout all eternity,
and that in such sort that the whole glory thereof (as of right appertained)
might justly redound to himself being the begynner, continuer, and finisher of
the same: namely, God freely^ and of his purpose procured man's redemption Gene.
3
upon the immutable determination of his own purpose freely offered by
promise: first to Adam, in promising that by the seed of the woman, the
serpents head should be bruised, which promise once past him, thereby was
straight way offered to careless man, just cause of two principal duties:
First, and chieflye with thankful heart to have laid hold of the promise of
God: that is, constantly to have believed that as God had promised, so he was
both able, and willing to perform the same. Secondlye, with continual
admiration to gaze at the incomprehensible wisdom of God, in the marvelous
continuation of that work. Which thing if we now do diligently mark (unto
whom from the beginning to the finishing thereof the whole course and order is
plainly showed in the scryptures.) Then shall we easily find that which in
this chapter is required: namely the end and cause why God gave the law to
man though man had no jot of ability to perform any part of the same.
Where-fore considering well the ordinary course of Gods doings in that cause,
we shall see how he (as it were by degrees) trained dull man to the
understanding of his glorious purpose. First, forasmuch as Adam and the young
world immedyatly succeeding him, was both so near the familiarity (as it
were) of God, and the time of the gift of the promise, and also for that the
full measure of wickedness (which with the age of the world continually
takes increase) was not yet in man's possession: therefore unto him (as then) it
might surely have been sufficient, even by the instinct of the law engrafted
in nature, and by the contemplation of the obedience of all other creatures in
their kinds, to have vewed and considered the great lack in his own nature
toward the performaunce of righteousness, and thereby to have been stirred by
flight to seek the immutable and perdurable free promise of God concerning the
woman's seed: thankfully, but yet boldly, chalengyng privilege of the same,
seeing the matter now hung not upon his worthynes, but upon the truth of Gods
promise. That is to say, that even as God is true, so has he bound himself
to perform man's deliverance As God is true, so did he bind him self to
perform man's deliverance
in his good time, by the woman's seed: And upon this faith joyfully to have
reposed himself. But alas foolish man did not so: which notwythstanding the
lenity and long sufferyng of God, bare with sinful man, to see if yet in any
time he would have regard of him self, and see from whence he were fallen.
But nothing it booted, for on trotted he in the high way of wickedness,
wherein the farther he travailed, the smother, larger, and more delicate he
found it. Wherefore God being not mutable as man, but one and the same for
ever, most myndefull of his promise, whereof the memory seemed now almost rased
out of the heart of careless man. God I say vouchsafed to renew the same again,
and that in larger God renewed his promise for the resto ring of mankind Gene.
22.
words unto Abraham in saying: In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed. And the same he continued in like form of words afterward to
Isaac. Here was the matter renewed again, still shooting at one Gene. 28.
mark, namely, that by the seed of the Gene. 3
woman the Serpents head should be bruised. But now he offers a plain
explication of his meaning, concerning the brusyng of the Serpents head,
namely, that where man by despisyng the commandment of God, and leanyng to
the subtle persuasion of the Serpent, was fallen into the curse of God: Now
was it promised that in the seed of Abraham all the nations of the Gene. 22.
earth should be blessed: that is to say, delivered from that curse again.
It is also come to a more particularitie, for now the promised seed is limited
within one stock: namely, of Abraham. Thus by degrees the purpose of God goes
forward more and more openyng it self, laboring still to provoke sinful man
to foresee his great danger and fly to the promised seed for refuge, which
notwithstanding corrupt man hastes so fast after wickedness, that little he
regarded the condition of his own miserye: wherefore in the rypenesse of time,
God seeing the wickedness of man grown to so monstrous an extremity, that
none of all his former works, nor free promise could wake his sluggishe heart
to consider his own miserye, and so prycked by necessitye to fly to the
promised seed, as to the shoot ancker of his safetye. God I say seeing this,
never vnmyndefull of his promise, determyneth now finally to set before man
such a glass, wherein he could no way fly, nor escape from the most clear,
and evident sight of his own owgely, and monstrous nature: that lothed with
the sight thereof, he forthwith might be driven to fly to ye sovereign
medicine of his restitution: namely to the free promise of God, in the seed of
Abraham. Wherefore now chusyng out one kind of people To the children of
Israel God first gave the law.
as was said before: namelye, the children of Israel, to make of them a
pattern to the rest of the world: that with the vewe of their obedyence
toward God, all the world might be provoked by their example to seek after
him, unto them I say he delivered the law: which contained in it two several
offices, the one exterior or outward, the other spirytuall and inward. Two
offices of the law. The outward office of the law
The outward office of the law, leads to the maintenance of the common
society in this life: for man according to the letter obseruyng the outward
show of the works thereof, although in the doors thereof, that be nothing
but sin, yet ciuyll virtue and common order is thereby amongst men conserved:
and publyke society mayntayned, without which the life of man, should taste
nothing but confusion. The inward and spiritual office thereof is this, that
The spiritual office of the law
man comparyng his corrupt nature therewyth, and beholding the utter
repugnaunce, and contrarietye between them, might forthwith have acknowledged
his great rebellyon against God, and perfectly understand that the
delyueraunce of man consists in the free promise of God, concerning the
seed, namely Christ: and in no righteousness that he in the law could
challenge, seeing his nature direct contrary to every part of the same: so that
the law was not by Moses declared unto man to iustyfie him. Not that the law
wanted ability thereunto, if man could have performed the righteousness
required in the same, whereunto he was in his first creation made able: but by
the reason of his dishabilitie through corruptyon, the law was opened unto him
to be as Saint Paul saeth: The displaier of the strength of sin, a threatner
1. Cor. 15 Romans 3 2. Cor. 3 Romans 7 Romans 4 Romans 5
of the curse, a bewrayer of his wickedness, the admynistratyon of death, the
increase of sin, the stirrer up of the motions of sin, the cause of wrath,
the increaser of offense. But unto what end was the law this unto man, to his
destruction? No: but to drive him by the dreadful vewe of his just
condemnation, utterly to abandon himself, and all his own works and
rightcousnesse, and to fly from the sentence of the law, unto the sentence of
grace contained in the free promise of God, concerning the seed to come,
namely, Christ. Saint Paul to the Galathians propened this question himself:
After he has beaten them from the Law, to the promise in Christ Gal. 3.
TVherefore then serves the law? as though he had said, if no man can be
iustyfied by the law, to what end then serves it? He answers himself, it
was added because of transgressyons, till the seed came unto which the
promise was made, that is, it was added, Romans 7
that sin might appear, and to make sin out of measure sinful, and to
conclude all under sin, that al by the fearful sentence thereof, might fly
to the promise, and wait the time of the seed to come, namely, Christ, unto
whom the promise was made, and by him receive their deliverance. Seeing man's
restitution stood now only upon the promise, and truth of God, and not upon the
law, to the fulfylling of any part whereof, he had lost both ability and
inclination. And therefore S. Paul says: If there had Gal. 3.
been a law given which could have given life, then no doubt righteousness
should have come by the law, that is to say, if such a law had been given, as
corrupt man had been able to have performed and kept, the^ no doubt he should
have been justified by the law. But the law being such, whereunto he neither
had ability nor inclination, it had only force to show unto him what he
ought to be, and to pronounce upon him the sentence of death, and his just
condemnation, to force him thereby to fly from thence, to seek his free
relief in Christ, ye promised seed to come. But hereunto the adversaries
object, that if God should command An objection of the papists.
us things impossible to us to perform, then should we both be justly
discharged of blame, and God to be accused of cruelty in condemning us, for
not doing that which by no means is possible unto us. Unto the folly and
wickedness of which objection, it is easelie answered, An answer
that although unto our corrupt nature it be now utterly impossible to
satisfy the law, yet neither is the law therefore unjust or violente, nor God
extreme or cruel in requiryng the performance thereof at our hands, for
therein is nothing by him required of us, but that whereunto in our original
nature he had created us both able, sufficient, and naturally inclined, with
full furniture of free choice and power to have executed the same: whereof what
soever now is wantyng in the ability of our corrupt nature, that comes not
either by cruelty in God, or fault in the law, but by our own wicked and
wilful transgression, whereby the ability thereunto is utterly lost (as is
showed before) by spoil of our original righteousness. For the law is not
given as a measure, or scantlyng of the ability of our purchased corruption,
but as the absolute rule of our original perfection. The law does teach us
how holy and excellent we were by God created at the first, and how foully by
our selves, we be now fallen from that we ought to be. The law does painte unto
us the excellency of the Image of God, whereunto we were created: if a man by
disease or extreme sorenes of his eyes, be utterly unable to behold the light,
is the light therefore to be thought or judged violente? Nay, is it not for all
that the only object, wherein that sense was naturally created, to have his
whole use and delight? if now the eyes can not behold it, this argues neither
extremity nor violence in the light, but contrariwise, great disease and
corruption in the eyes. So is the law, the natural object whereunto man's nature
was created, to have all her motions and senses directed, with natural
felicity and delight: which if now it be unable to abide, that neither argues
extremity, violence, or cruelty, either in God, or the law: but contrariwise
great disease and corruption, in man's nature. And that the observation of the
law is impossible unto man, as now his nature is corrupted, the testimony of
these Scriptures do plainly aumuch. Thus writes Paul to ye Rom, for what the
law could not do, in as much as Romans 8.
it was weak, because of the flesh. etc Here as there is an impossibility
joined to the law, in that he says the law could not do it. So also he
declared the same impossibilite not to consist therein, by reason of the nature
of the law, but by reason of the imperfection of the flesh, that is for as much
as the imperfection of the flesh is so great, that it can not perform any
such work, as the law is able or has stre^ght to allow. And a little after in
the same Chapter: for it is not obedient to the law of God neither it can be.
And a little after he affirms, that we know not what to desire as we ought:
The^ much less is it possible to do as we ought. And again to ye Corinthes:
The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, Cor. 2.
for they are but foolishnes unto him, neither can he perceive them, because
they are spiritually examined. And Christ him self says: how can you speak
good things seeing your selves be evil? And again: an evil tree, can bring
forth no good fruit. Hereby sufficiently appears, that the fulfiling of ye
co^maundeme^ts is impossible unto man, as his nature is now corrupt, which by
ye last Chapter was also evident: and that the fathers agreementes with us
herein may appear, thus writes Augustine, concerning the love toward De
spiritu and lite. Cap. 36.
God, and our neighbor. Cum ab hac peregrinatione, in qua per fidem nunc
ambulatur, peruentum erit ad speciem, quam (nondum visam) speramus, and per
patientiam expectamus: proculdubio and ipsa dilectio, non solum supra quam hic
habemus, sed long supra quam p^timus, and supra quam intelligimus, erit: neque
enim restat in nobis aliquid quod addi possit ad totum, quia si restabit al
quid, illud non erit totum: proinde de hoc erit primum praeceptum iustitiae,
quo iubemur diligere Deum extoto cord, ex tota anima, ex tota mente, cui est
de proximo diligendo alterum consequens, quod in illa vita complebimus, ^um
videbimus Deum facie ad faciem sed ideo nobis hoc etiam nunc praeceptum est, vt
admoneremur quid fide exposcere, quo spem praemittere, and obliuiscendo quae
retro^ sunt, in quae anteriora nos extendere debeamus. When from this
pilgrimage (wherein we presently walk through faith) we shall come to that
thing (which yet unseen) we hope for, and awayte through patience: without all
doubt our love shall not only excede that which we possess here, but also
be far above that which we desire, or understand: for there remains
nothing in us, that can be added unto All, for if any thing should be left
out, then can it not be All, therefore concerning this shall the first
precepte of righteousness be, wherein we are commanded to love G G D withal
the heart, withal the soul, and withal the mind: whereunto follows another
concerning love toward our neighbor, which we shall fulfill in that life
when we shall see God face to face. But for this cause is it now also
commanded us, that we should be admonished what to ask in faith, whether to
adresse our hope, and in forgettyng the things which are behind us, unto what
things that be before us, we ought to direct our selves. Again Ambrose.
Sacrificabo hostiam laudis. Non sacrifico inquit, sed sacrificabo, significans
illud perfectum esse sacrificium, Lib. de bono mortis. Cap. 3.
quando vnusquisque Domino corporis huius vinculis absolutus, assisteret, and
offeret se hostiam laudis: quia ante mortem nulla est perfecta laudatio. I
shall offer the sacrifice of praise, he says not, I do offer, but I shall
offer, signifiyng that that, is the perfect sacrifice, when every one losed
from the bonds of this body, shall be present with the Lord, and offer him self
a sacrifice of praise, for before death there is no perfect praising. Again
Saint Super cantica. ser. 50.
Bernard: Nec latuit praeceptorem, praecepti pondus hominum excedere vires: sed
iudicauit vtile ex hoc ipso, suae illos sufficientiae admoneri, vt and sci^ent
sane ad quem iustitiae finem niti pro viribus oporteret. Ergo mandando
impossibilia, non praeuaricatores homines fecit, sed humiles. vt omne os
obstruatur, and subditus fiat totus mundus deo, quia ex operibus non just
ficabitur omnis caro coram illo, accipientes quippe mandatum, and sentientes
defectum, clamabimus in coelum, and miserenitur nostri deus, and sciemus in
illa die, quia non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos, sed secundum suam
misericordiam saluos nos fecit. Neither was it hidden from the commander that
the weight of the commandment did exceed the ability of men, but he
judges it for this cause profitable, that it should warn them of his
sufficiency, and that they might also know unto what end of righteousness
they ought to apply their force. Wherefore in commanding impossible things,
he made not men transgressors, but humble, that every mouth might be stopped,
and that all the world might be in danger unto God, because, by works no
flesh shall be justified in his sight. For when we receive the commandment
and feel our lack, we shall cry unto heaven, and God will have mercy upon
us, and we shall know in that day that he has saved us, according to his own
mercy, and not for the righteousness of works, which we have wrought. Again
Augustine: Impossible est legem impleri per ca^nem: It is impossible that the
law should be fulfilled by Lib, 3 contra duas epist. Pelag. cap. 2.
flesh. Now touching man's impossibility toward the satisfaction of ye law,
let this suffice. And as touching the fathers opinions concerning the office of
the law, thus writes Augustine: Q^ui propterea iubet vt nos deficientes, ad
illum confugiamus: Who does therefore De lit. et spi. ad Marcellinum. cap. 17.
command, that we being insufficyent, might fly together unto him. And again
he says: Haec est igitur vtilitas legis, quia ostendit hominem sibi ipsi, vt
sciat infirm tatem suam, and videat quemadmodum per prohibitionem augeatur
potius carnalis Asollico epist. 200.
concupiscentia, quam sanetur. Appetuntur enim vehementius quae vetantur, dum
id quod spiritualiter iubetur, carnalis obseruare compellitur: This is
therefore the utility of the law, that it does show man unto him self, and
that he may see how by the restraint, carnal concupiscence is rather
increased then healed. For those things that be forbidden are more vehemently
desired, when a carnal man is compelled to observe that which is spirytuallye
commanded, And again the same Augustine. Per legem cognitio peccati, non enim
ablatio peccati est: quia per Expo. quarundam, epist. ad Romansx.
solam gratiam aufe tur peccatum. By the law is the knowledge of sin but not
the taking away of sin, because by the grace of God only sin is taken
away. And again, Iustam scilice^ legem iniustis hominibus dando, ad
demonstranda eorum peccata, non auferenda. In In lib. exposit. epist. Paul^ ad
Galatas.
geeuyng the just law unto unjust men, to show their sins, not to take them
away. And again: Omnes itaque homines sub lege constitutos reos facit lex, et
ad hoc illis super caput est, vt ostendat peccata, non tollat: For the law
makes all men gyltye that be placed under the law Super Joan. tracta. 3 cap.
1.
and therefore it is over their heads that it may show sin, but not to take
away sin. It appears by all these authorities that the law (as now man's
nature is corrupted) does serve him The law does show (...)nne but not take
away sin
to this end: namelye, to paynt unto him his miserable nature, curse, and
just condemnation, and to drive him thereby to seek his relief in Christ the
promised seed to come. Thus having showed why the law was given to man though
he had no jot of ability to perform any part thereof. It follows to be
enquired.

Cap. 6.
How man regarded the law, and how in Christ the promised seed, the
covenant concerning man's restitutyon, was consummate.

Forasmuch as man's miserable corruptyon, had so far carried him from the
feelyng of the spirit, and life of all divine causes, that now wholly he
wandered as it were in the bark, and in the contemplatyon of the outward
vewe, neglecting utterly the marye and pythe: In consideratyon hereof, the
incommensurable greatness of Gods mercy in the delyueraunce of the law, the
spirytuall end and purpose whereof, was by the just terror of the same, to
scourge and whyp man from trust in himself, to the promised seed. God I say,
in the delyuerance of the same, used such external cause of terror to train
the gresse senses unto which man wholly obeyed, that if their dusked and
daseled eyes, had not been more then palpably blind, they could not but have
clearly seen, that in the law was offered unto them nothing but fearfulnes,
horror, curse, and condemination. For the clouds did as it were tear, and
rent in sunder over their heads, with roaring of the thunders. The Element
with continual flashyng The giving of the law was horrible and fearful.
of lighteninges, seemed utterly resolved into flame. The Mountain by vaporing
out fearful fume, and smothering smoke, might seem rather unto them the mouth
of hell, and furnace of consuming revenge, the^ any other spectacle. The
terrible and hideous sharme of the trumpe, might well offer unto the^ ye terror
of ye host of heaven, as it were ranging toward their just deserved
co^fusio^. So that all the course and process of the whole action, seemed to
present to them nothing, but horror and fear. Yea and the comfort which Moses
him self seemed to give to the relief of their confounded minds, with the
view of this fearful pagent was such, as (if they had well considered the
same) the end thereof vanished also into terror and fear. Be not afraid
(says he) God is come to prove you, that his fear may be in your eyes, that
you sin not: As though he had said unto them, stand not in doubt, nor fear
that this should be the day of your destruction, for God does this to none
other end, but as it were to paynt unto your outward senses, the horror of his
fearful justice, pronounced toward you in the law, which now is to be
received, to awake your dull hearts by these external horrors, to fly from
the vengeance of the same, that the dreadful regard thereof, by these outward
fearful spectacles, may so syncke into your minds, that the burning terror
of the same, continually blasing before the eyes of your hearts, may chase you
from your own righteousness, which is nothing but sin, unto the true
righteousness, freely offered in the promised seed. Thus if they had well
considered, they might easily have seen, that all the whole comfort given the^
by Moses; vanished also into horror and fear of the law, that the vengeance
thereof always present in sight, might enforce their flight for succor to the
promise. If the face of Moses Exo. 34
the bringer of the Law, was of such brightness, that their fleshlye eyes were
utterly unable to sustain the pure, and persing beams thereof. Oh how much
might their dull hearts have judged the blered eyes of their corrupt nature,
utterly unable to sustain the sharp, and terrible beams of the glorious, and
irreuocable sentence of the Law, against sin and wickedness? God having thus
delivered unto them the law, as a scholemaister Gal. 3.
to lead them to the promise, he sent them diverse times Prophets amongst them,
by whom he renewed the same more and more, opening unto the^, the meaning of
his purpose concerning the promised seed, namely Christ: insomuch, that he
foretold them by Esaias, of whom he should be borne, namely of a Esa. 7.
virgin: by Micheas, where he should be borne, namely in Bethleem: both by
Mich. 5
Moses himself, and also by Daniel, he Genesis 49. Daniel. 9.
declared unto them the time, when he should be borne, and the afflictyons
which he should suffer for their restitution, he painted at large in Esaias,
and Zachery, the salvation of his people, glory Esa. 53. Zac. 9.
of his resurrection and kingdom: both by Esaias, Jeremy, and Zacharye he Esaias.
62. Zac. 9.
foretold them, so that from Adams fall he trained man to take hold of his
promise, concerning the seed for their delyuerance: All which notwithstanding,
so far were they from the true sense, and feeling thereof, that neither
themselves were profited, nor by their example the heathen provoked, to seek
after God. Wherefore God, new for his truths sake mynding the consummation of
his promise, determined the final establishment of this covenant, in the
hands of the promised sede, whereunto both Jew, and Gentile should be
invited, that he as the sole mediator between God and man, might make the full
reconcilement. Wherefore the time being now come of his long promised
determination, he sent his sole and only begotten some our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, who of the virgin taking flesh, was made man, like unto us in
all things, sin excepted: who after many afflictyons in publishing, and
declaryng Gods full purpose, concerning the consummation of his covenant,
sealed up the same with his own giltlesse death, and bloodshed. And after his
risyng again from death, sent his disciples abroad into all the parts of the
earth, to publishe that glad tidinges of man's reconcilement to God, and
deliverance from death, and sin, by the merits and just desert of Jesus
Christ. Thus having showed how man regarded the Law, and how in Christ the
promised seed, the covenant was consummate: it follows.

Cap. 7.
How the obedyence, and gyltlesse death of Christ, was a full satisfaction for
the disobedience, and deserved death, purchased to all mankind by Adam.

Forasmuch as Adams rebellious dysobedie^ce, had so swalowed up ye whole nature
of man into sin and wyckednes, as is showed before, that his whole nature is
nothing else, but a full obedyence, wylling desire, and natural pronesse, of
the whole man unto sin and rebellion. And contrariwise, the law of God, is
the absolute rule of righteousness, which challenges to the fulfilling
thereof, the full obedience, willing desire, and natural pronesse of the whole
man unto righteousness. These two being thus direct contrary, which
notwithstanding the God of all compassion (for the triumphant glory of his
victiorious mercy, by the mediation of Christ, the appointed seed) had bound
himself by promise to reconcile. In consideration whereof, it was expedient,
that to this reconcilement such a medyator in the promised seed should be
sent, as participating in some point with both the extremes (namely God and
man) might have an omnisufficient ability in him self to consummate the
absolute reconcilement: wherefore Christ the eternal son and wisdom of the
father, coming down from heaven, being very righteousness it self, indewing
the similitude of sinful flesh, became perfect man like unto us in all
things, except sin. And so of his divine nature, and of natural man (sin
excepted) became one perfect Christ, namely that perfect and only mean, which
in him self had absolute ability, to consummate the recencilement, in as much
as he was fully possessed of the natures of both the extremes, namely perfect
god, and perfect man (sin excepted) who having in himself full obedience,
willing desire, and natural pronesse of the whole man unto the law, he being
right ousnes it self, passing through many troubles and afflictions, in
proclaiming to stubbern man his nature, office, and cause of his coming, and
the nature of the new ^ouenaunt, where of he was ye mediator, finally offered up
him self unto the justice of God his father, the absolute end, consummation,
and sacrifice of this reconcilement. As he unto whom all the former promyses,
law and prophets, had respect and relation, who now appearing before the
sentence of the law and justice of God, presents himself the full raunseme
and reconcilement of Christ is the full ransom, and reconcilement ^or man's
trangression. 1. Cor. 15.
man's transgression, by the just desert of his innocent and giltles sufferyng:
that as by the rebellious act of one gilty man, namely, Adam, sin and
eternal death was engendered: even so by the obedient act, and giltles death
of one gilteles man, namely, Jesus Christ, sin and eternal death is justly
again destroyed, and eternal life, the crown of righteousness absolutely,
and most truly purchased for man. So that as the first Adam by corrupting
nature made man the slave of sin, so Christ the last* Adam by adoption has
restored Adam the first man made us bond to (...), And Christ the second man,
has made us free from sin. Ozee. 13.
hyni again to be child of righteousness. This is he in whose person it is
said by the Prophet Oseas, O death I will be thy death, O hell I will be thy
sting, so that by him death is swalowed up into victory: his life has devoured
our death: his righteousness has subdued our sin: his salvation has
vanquished our damnation: he has put out the hand writing of the Col. 2.
ordinances which were against us: he has taken it out of the way and fastened
it upon his cross. Thus all the promises as Saint Paul says being in him
accomplished, he now remains an advocate at the right hand Christ is our
Advocate to the father.
of his father, making intercession for us, being our peace, our hope and
consolation, our wisdom, justice, sanctification, and redemption: our light,
our way and our life, the accomplishement and end of the law: unto whom even
from the creation of Adam, until his coming, all the doing of God had
respect and relation. Thus the son of God became man, to make men by
adoption the sons of God: the glorious became abiecte, to make the abiects
glorious, The blessed became cursed, to make the cursed blessed: The rich
became poor, to make the poor rich: The righteous became condemned, to make
the condemned ryghteous: The free became bond to make the bond free: great
was the sore of sin that neded such a salve, as neither (...)riarke nor
Prophet, power nor Potentate, Angel nor Archangell nor any other, but only
the son of God was able to make: And he not otherwise, then by his death and
innocent bloodshed. Great I say was the sore of sin. Thus having showed that
Christ is the end of the law, and his death the omuisufficient redemption of
man, it follows.

Cap. 8.
To enquire the nature of the new covenant, and what on the behalf of man is
required, to the attaynement of righteousness in the same.

ALthough in the first couenantmade between God and man, concerning man's
restitution, namely, in the law, God offered unto man very much, unto whom in
deed he ought nothing: yet notwithstanding, the offer being under such
conditions, as man's corrupt nature could no way (neither by action nor
consent satisfy) as is showed before, surely the hope of that offer vanquished
into just fear, and horror of the sentence: and although ye people to whom the
law was given, namely, the Jews, fantised unto them selves a certain
foolish satisfaction, by outward show of holiness, which grew through their
negligence, in not serching diligently the spiritual nature of the law, which
requires (as is showed) the entire inclination, and natural obedience of the
whole man. Although the Jews I say fantised by this occasion such a
satisfaction, yet that nothing hindered the purpose of God, (who saw their
blind presumption) from establishyng this new covenant, which for his truth
sake he promised, should be a perfect reconcilement between him and man. The
which covenant in deed is nothing else, but the accomplishment, or end of
(...)ld covenant, and yet called new in respect of the old promise, and for
that the same is now delivered a new and consummat by the mediatot himself. To
the which covenant he seeks no other conditions, then that which from all
eternity he had appointed: And that whereunto the whole drift of all his
travel both before the law, and in the law, and new under grace, had the
only respect, as unto the appointed end, that the glory (as of right
apperteyned) might be only his: namely upon the condition of his own truth,
that is to say, that as God is true, so can he not but accept the satisfaction
of Christ, the promised seed, for the full and omnisufficient ransom of all
them that take hold of the same, unto whom of his free favor he had bound
himself by promise concerning the same, in promising that he should justify
the multitude and bear away their sins. And Paul declaryng Esa. 53.
the order of the performaunce of that promise, affirms that this
justification is the free gift of God, in respect of Christ, apprehended by
faith. For thus he writes to the Ephesians: By grace are you saved through
faith, and not Ephesians. 2.
of your selves: it is the gift of God, and not of works, least any man should
boast him. Now forasmuch, as it is here declared to be the free, or liberal
gift of God, in that he says. By grace or favor, which argues the fredome
By Grace we are saved, thorough faith and not of our selves.
of the gift. Therefore has the expectation of man (for the attainement
thereof) only to awayte upon the free bountye or liberality of God, and
from thence only to acknowledge the same received without all desert, seeing
it is given of grace or favor. The means also whereby it is received, or
applied unto man, is euidentlye declared, in that he says, through faith,
whereby faith appears to be the instrument which unto man is given of God,
to take hold of the promises wythall. And because ambitious man should have
no color, to think him self any furtherer, or fellow worker in this work,
he adds this plain exception, and not of your selves, to exclud all opinion
of man's help touching the same. Whereunto also for greater evidence of his
meaning, he adds as it were a repetition of the same sentence in other form
of words. In saying, it is the gift of God not of works: whereunto finally he
adds the reason, or cause why God so freely gives it, and why he so
earnestlye excepteth man with all his works, from helping toward the same:
namely, least any man should boast him, that is, that unto man should not be
left so much as the Image, or color of any cause to pretend title, to any
part of the glory of that work, that the same may be wholly reserved to God
alone. Now forasmuch as faith is here expressly taught, to be ye means which
apprehends the promise, therefore Only faith apprehends the promises of
God. Sola fides
it is, by necessary consequence gathered, that only faith apprehends the
promyses of God, and so only faith iustyfieth. And now because the weight of
this whole matter depends greatly upon the true understanding of these
words, grace, faith, justification, or righteousness, and works, therefore
Grace. Faith. Justification, Righteousness and works.
I think it expedient, to bestow some travel, in several declaration of
every of them. And first, touching Grace, forasmuch as in the Scripture, it is
taken in three senses at the least, therefore it is expedient that all be
declared, to the end it may be more apparent, in what sense it is used in this
place: wherefore, in this first and principal sense, it may thus be defined.

Grace is a free benevolence of the will Definition of grace.
of God, iustifiyng ye elect thorough faith in Christ. Now forasmuch as I
know, the adversaries will never admit this definition, because it is the
overthrow of their rotten building: Therefore, somewhat to arm the willing
reader, against the charms of their wrangling shifts, I will seek by the
scriptures, to prous the truth of the same, by the parts thereof, which are
these: first, that it is a free benevolence of the will of God secondly, that
it justifies the elect through faith in Christ. Now for the first part,
namelye, that grace is a free benevolence of the will of God, it is thus
proved. Saint Paul to Timothy says thus: Who saved us, and called us with an
holy 2. Tim. 1.
calling, not according to our deeds, but according to his own purpose, and
grace. And again the same Paul to the Ephesians says thus: Who has
predestynate us to be adopted thorough Jesus Christ unto him self Ephesians. 1.
according to the benevolence of his will. Note that in the former place, hs
affirms our salvation to be given according to his grace or favor: And now
in this place, he affirms the same to be given according to the benevolence
of his will: whereby it is evident that his grace or favor, and the
benevolence of his will is all one thing. And Paul to the Romans affirms it
to be freelye done, for he says: All Romans 3.
have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God; and are iustyfied freelye
by his grace: And therefore grace is ryghtlye said to be a free benevolence
of the will of God, which was first to be proved. Now touching the second
part, namely, that grace justifies the elect through faith in Christ, it is
thus proved by these words of the Apostle. That we being iustyfied by grace,
Titus. 3
should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Note here,
that he says, we are justified by grace. And in the second to the Ephesians
he says thus: For by grace are you saved Ephesians. 2.
thorough faith. Whereby it is evident that by grace through faith we are
justified, which was secondly to be proved. Now I suppose ye truth of this
definition is sufficiently confirmed, which being the first, and principal
signification of grace, namely, that whereby righteousness is given unto man
thorough faith: the rest do require the less travel. Of the which, the second
grows from this: first thus: Forasmuch as all they which are justified by
grace through faith, are by the free spirit of God, regenerate into a new
life: which breeds such disposition or habit as brings forth good-workes,
and holy cenuersation in them. Therefore those good gifts of God are also
sometimes called grace. Finally that favor which Christ has with God his
father, and in respect of which we are beloved of the father, is also called
grace: for John says: we have received grace for grace: that is, we are
received into the grace of God the father, for that grace or favor which he
bears unto Christ his son. And this is the third, and last signification of
grace; which being showed, it seems not inconuenyent to note somewhat again,
of the pestilent doctrine of your abusing deceauers concerning grace, seeing
their error about the same is the mother, and nursse of that presumptuous
traitor, and ambitious rebel, I mean the doctrine ^fiustification of works,
which to fill the pursses of the wicked, spoyleth the Majesty of God of the
final end of his labor, namelye, of the triumph and glory of his free and
bountiful favor, and makes the treasure of the death of Christ, of vile and
contemned price. Wherefore to the hatchyng of their heinous errors about the
effects thereof, necessytie constrained them to devise false, and counterfayte
matter or substance, or the ground of the same, according whereunto they thus
define it: Gratia est habitus a deo in animam infusus, Grace defined by the
papists.
bonitatis et charitatis eius similis, quo illum habens, gratus deo redditur,
et facit opera illigrata, et meritoria: Grace is an habyte like unto the
goodness and love of God by him infused into the miride, wherewyth he that
does possess it, is made acceptable to God, and woorketh works both
merytorious, and acceptable unto him. For the understanding of the which
definytion, it is necessary first to show what they mean by this word
habyte, wherefore any Definition of habit.
propertye or qualytye which by infusion, education, exercise, custom, or any
other way is perfectly attained, is called habyte, whereby this definition even
at the first taste sauoureth of the soil that bred it, for in the whole
Scriptures of God there remains not so much as the cooloure of proof
hereof, that the genus or general word, unto that grace (whereby we are
saved) should be an habit of ye mind, that is to say, a qualitye by
education, exercise, or infusion made perfect in mind: This divinity is
pycked out of Aristotle's Ethickes, where it is taught, that the habilityes and
powers of the mind, are strengthened by habit, that is to say, by a perfection
therein attained through exercise made easy and ready to be performed, which
without the same were very difficulte, or not to be done. Which being
considered, I think it not amysse, somewhat to note the treacherye of this
their heythenesse definityon, with shows beautified to the sale, being in
deed nothing else but a painted sepulcher, containing only a stynckyng caryon
of Pelagius filthy and corrupt heresy, though above all things they must
seem to dissent from him, and his doctrine. And therefore at the first, in
that they affirm grace to be an habit infused into the mind, they thereby
think with a pleasant profer, in the beginning to dasell the eyes of the
world from suspicion of their ioynyng hands with him: the substance of whose
heresye being well weyed, is nevertheless one, and the same with this
doctrine: wherefore great connyng was to be used in this matter, seeing his
hateful error remained, with great detestatyon condemned of the fathers, and
therefore they must seem (at the least in some superficial tryfle) as stout
enemies to dissent from him. Wherefore, where his cunning was by Saint
Augustine detected, that though he used the name of grace, yet he meant
nothing thereby but only nature. Now these me^ to avoid this open view of
unity, with his condemned heresy. At the first gate, or entry seek such
colerable passage, as dissenting from the show of his words, may
nevertheless embrace the substance of his heresy, wherefore not to seem that
they accoumpt grace to be nature, they term it an infused habit, thinkyng
thereby to make it apparaunt, that they mean not any natural power or
habilitye. And yet again, in that they affirm it to be like unto the
goodness and love of God, they think themselves to have geeuen a
substauntyall show, why all they that be therewyth adorned, should be
acceptable unto God: Namely by reason of that lykenes, and similitude to the
goodness and love of God. And this forsooth they term. Gratia gratum faciens.
That is grace which makes man acceptable, by which reason it must follow,
that the love wherewyth God accepts us must come after this grace, and come
in respect thereof. And yet S. John says he loved us first. And Saint Paul
affirms that our acceptatio^ with God comes in respect of his own mercy,
And this is here to be noted, that in man him self, they place this their
grace, whereby he is made acceptable unto God, making him thereby a cause of his
own salvation: which error Pelagius held, the falshode where Pelagians hereby.
of appears partly, by that which is said before in the proof of the first
part of the true definition of grace, where it is evident, that, that grace
whereby we be justified, is a free benevolence of the will of God. Whereby it is
manifest how falsely it is said ye we are justified by any habit powered into our
minds, seeing it is by the favor or grace which is in God (and not in our
selves) whereby he receives us into his mercy. But this definition of theirs is
(as I said before) grounded upon Aristotle's Divinity. Now for further proof
of their ioynyng with Pelagius in the substance of his heresy herein: it is
needful to compare the conclusion, of both the doctrines together in this
point. Pelagius affirmed, that the beginning of all good works proceeded from
our selves, namely, from the free will and election of man, and that grace did
only help the possibility of nature, that these works might more easily be
performed. Now the Papists and Scholemen because (as I said before) they must
seem to dissent from him in somethyng, affirm that the beginning of good
works, proceeds not from nature, as he affirmed, but from grace. Mary this
sovereignty they attributed to nature, that in the will consists free power
and choice, eitther by geuyng place unto grace, to bring forth good works, or
else by resistyng the same, to omit the^. And I pray you from whence comes
this will, seeing they call it free? could they have erred more if they had with
Pelagius affirmed the first cause of good works, to come from nature? no
assuredly: for they place the principal cause in free will, which they place
in nature, and unto grace (though in words they give it the first place) yet
allow they it no further power, but only to offer it unto the mind, leauyng
the whole sovereignty unto nature. Namely fre will and choice to admit, or not
admit the same, so that in this matter they differ from Pelagius only
herein, in that he affirms the first cause of good works to consiste in
nature, and the Papists affirm it to consiste in grace: But yet unto that
grace they give no further power but only to offer it unto the mind, which
Pelagius never denied, but not to convert or renew the same, whereby grace has
at their hands such straight alowance, that unless free will give it leave,
it is Jack out of office, and can do nothing: so that with them both, free will
is he, that rules the roste, whereby they differ a little in childishe show
of words, but nothing in the substance of the heresy.

This grace which the Papists have hunted out is like a sleuelesse Iacket
hangyng in the air, which every man may at his own choice either slyp on, or
leave untouched. And yet Paul in plain words affirms, that it is neither
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that pitieth, whereby
it is evident that grace does not only (as they imagine) inuit the mind unto
Christ, neither as they dream is it a certain general grace common unto all
men, which every one that lysieth has free will, and power to recaue or
refuse. But it is in deed that free favor of God in respect of Christ, which
not only moves the mind, but also by his spirit does clearly turn,
renew, and regenerate the same according to these sayings of the Prophets.
Thus says Elia, hear me O Lord, that this 3 Reg. 18.
people may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou have turned their
hearts again now at the last. And again Jeremy says, O Lord Lament. 5.
turn us unto thee, and so shall we be turned. Again God by Ezechiell says,
Ezech. 11.
I will plant a new spirit within your bowels, that stony heart will I take out
of your body, and give you a fleshy heart, And again by Zachary he says, I
will turn them also, for I pity them. Here is both taught that God turns
the heart, and also the cause thereof, namely, his mercy, For I pity them, says
he: according whereunto, David cries, make Psa. 51.
me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And again,
Inclyne my heart unto thy testimonies. And Solomon cries, Incline O Lord the
heart of this people, that they may obey thy commandments. Hereby appears,
that the free favor or grace of God is such, as first moves the mind, and
then renueth and turns the same, and draws it to consent thereunto,
according to this saying of Christ, no man comes unto me unless my heavenly
father draw him. Ioh. 6.
Surely the Papists show themselves the natural heirs of Pelagius, in this
their definition of grace: As by this which Augustine writes unto Innocent the
Bishop of Rome, is evident: Pelagius (says he) fearyng to be accursed in the
Palestine counsel, did aforehand accurse all such as said they could live
uprightly without grace: But by grace he understood nothing else, but the
gifts which he imagined was bestowed upon us in creation, as free choice,
reason, will. etc. by which subtility the Palestine Bishops being decaued,
did absolne him: in which deed Saint Augustine does excuse then for their
upright, and simple dealyng, for when they heard him confess the grace of God,
they could thereby understand no other grace, then that which the Scripture
acknowledges, namely, the favor of God, whereby we be regenerate and grafted
into Christ. By which words of Saint Augustine it appears, that all other
significations of grace hereunto applied, are but subtle and false shifts to
darken the truth withal. And is not this the very shift of the Papists? For
how much soever they seem to account of grace, they mean nothing less
thereby, then the free benevolence of the will of God in respect of Christ: but
in deed they mean their Philosophical grace, their infused habit, which must
help nature to hatch her brood of good works, whereby to be justified, if
free will be so courteous, as to give her leave. Neither do they only err
about the matter or substance of grace, as appears, but also about all the
effects thereof. For all those, which are but in deed diverse effects, or
proprieties of the favor or grace of God, they account for several graces, as
where the grace of God preventing us, does stir and move the mind unto
goodness, that account they for one several grace, after the which first
motion, and (as it were) iogging of the mind, to awake the same from the
deadly sleep of rebellious contempt, there works another effect of the same
grace which performs the same thing, whereunto the other provoke, for it
turns and alters the unwilling mind, and gives life again unto the dead
seed of original obedience: so that the mind which before despised to obey
any of the heavenly motions, of the first provoking effect of grace, is now by
this other effect, so chainged and clearly altered, that it begins to hate
the flesh whereunto only before, it wholly and willingly obeyed, so that now
it hungereth, thirsts, and gredely desires the full repair of the lost
obedience which before it could not but utterly abhor: and in respect of
this effect of grace which thus changes and turns the mind, is grace it
self called workyng grace, which is not so called as though this effect were a
several grace only furnished with that quality: but it is so called to put a
difference between this effect of grace, and another, which immediately
follows the same. Because that this effect of grace works ever in such a
subject, as never willyngly consents to the work of the same, for until it
has changed the mind, the mind can consent to no godlynes, and so soon as
it has turned the mind, then is the work of this effect finished, which once
performed, then forth with appears that other effect of grace, whereof I
spoke, namely, that as (in the converted mind) grace wills and works the
works of true godlynes, so does the regenerate mind, both will and work the
same, and this effect of grace is called cooperant, grace or grace working
together. And with the first of these two effects of grace, does the mind
meet only passiuely, because it is by it unwillingly subdued to suffer the
workyng of the same, and is said in the passive voice to be renewed or to be
turned But with the second of these two effects the mind does meet both
passiuely and actiuely: pasiuely in that it is drawn to will and work
righteousness, and actiuely in that being drawn, it willingly wylleth and
works the same. And all these several effects of grace, do the Papystes (to
build up their baggage) account for several graces, and not for the several
effect of one, and the same free, and undeserved favor or grace of God,
whereby in respect of Christ, we are reconciled. They also account grace making
acceptable, and grace freelye given for two several graces, and yet Saint
Paul affirms that if it be not free, it is no grace. But it is good reason
to geeue them leave to err, that seek for no truth: for so they may mysse
that, they care not what they find, for that once found, farewell their market
and sale of all their trashe. It appears by that which have been said, that
in their definition, the name of grace is not applied unto the true genus, or
general word, under which all the diverse propertyes thereof, be
comprehended: but only unto one effect thereof, namely that, whereby we are
provoked unto good works. Let this touching the true understanding of grace,
and their errors about the same, suffice.

This being declared, next comes faith to be considered: Namely, in what
signyfication it is to be taken, where it is said to iustifye, or what that
faith is, thorough which we be iustyfied. For declaratyon whereof, it is
also necessary to note, how dyuersely Faith diversely taken in the scriptures.
the word is taken. It is sometime taken for the matter or thing which we
do believe, as the Creed or belief is called the Chrystian faith. It is also
taken for that wherewith we believe, and that is that faith, whereof we have to
entreat. There be also other distynctions, as a lively faith, and a dead
faith: which dead faith is only faith in name, and not in deed: even as a
dead man is called a man, though he be no man in deed: and of this faith does
S. James remember.

There is also faith to do miracles, whereof Christ him self speaks, sayyng:
Verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, take thy
self away, and cast thy self into the sea, and shall not waver in his heart,
but shall believe, those things which he says shall come to pass,
whatsoever he says shall be done unto him And this faith is common as well
to the reprobate, as to the elect: as by these words of Christ appears.
Many (says he) will say to me in that day, Lord Lord, have we not by thy
name prophesied; and by thy name cast out devils? and by thy name done many
great works? and then will I profess to them, I never knew you. Depart from
me ye that work iniquite. There is also momentany faith, or faith for a
time, whereof Christ speaks in the parable of the seed, where he affirms,
that some falling in the stony Math. 13
ground, springs up for a time, until the heat of the son, or rage of
persecution comes, but then it withers away, because it has no root. But
now omittyng all the rest of the significations of faith, it is in this place,
only that firm, and constant assentyng of the mind, unto the truth of Gods
promises in Christ, which brings with it hope, charity, sure confidence,
and all other good works. Which for more The definition of faith
plain understanding, may thus be defined. Faith is a full assentyng of the
mind, unto the truth of Gods promyses in Christ, puryfiyng the hearts of the
receyuers. The truth of this definityon is gathered out of the Scriptures in
this sort. First that it is a full assenting of the mind unto the truth of
Gods promises in Christ, it is thus proved: Paul to the Hebrews says thus:
Let us draw near in a true heart, with assurance of Ebr. 10.
faith: And again, Let us keep the profession of our hope, without wavering.
And Saint John in the first of his canonical epistles says thus: He that
believes not God, has made him a liar: More heinous sin (then the (...).
Ioh. 5
which) none can be committed. Where-fore faith is so full an assurance (of
the truth of Gods promise in Christ) as can admit no whit of suspicion or
doubt, for look how much it wants of full assurance, so much suspicion (by
these words of Saint John) it admytteth of Gods untruth: any jot whereof,
were more the^ horrible to be suspected, whereby it follows, that faith is a
full assenting of the mind, to the truth of Gods promise in Christ: which
was first to be proved. And hereunto well agreeeth these words of Hilarious:
Ergo regnum coelorum, quod Prophetae nunciauerunt, In Mat. 5.
Johannes praedicabat, Dominus noster in se esse positum, est professus, vult
sine aliqua incerta voluntatis ambiguitate sperari: alioquin iustificatio ex
fide nulla est, si fides ipsa fiat ambigua. Therefore the kingdom of heaven
which the prophets foretold, John preached, and our Lord professed to be
placed in himself, he will have it hoped for, without all waueryng doubt of
mind: otherwise if faith it self be made incertayne, then is there no
iustyfication of faith. And Augustine says: Quid est enim credere: nisi
consentire verum esse quod dicitur. De spirit. et litera. cap. 3
For what signifies this to believe, but to consent that that thing which is
said, is true?

Now touching the second part, namely, that it puryfieth the hearts of the
receyuers. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles affirms it in plain words,
for thus he says: He put no difference Act. 15.
between us and them, after that he had by faith puryfyed their hearts. Thus
the definition being by evident words of the scripture confirmed, the truth
thereof is manifest, and that this definition does agree with that which S.
Paul gives to the Hebrews, it is manifest, if we note the matter wherabout
faith has his use, which is the word, and promise of God: his definition is
this: Faith is the ground of things hoped for, a certaynty of things which
are not seen: In that, he calls faith, the ground of things hoped for, and
that the thing hoped for, is the promised favor of God in Christ. Therefore is
faith the ground of the promised favor of God in Christ. And what he means
by calling it the ground thereof, he presentlye declares, in that he termed
it a certainty of things that are not seen, whereby it is evident, that by
hypostasis or ground, he means a certayntye, or full assurance. And unto
faith, as it were a present possession of that promised favor of God in
Christ, which is yet nevertheless but hoped for, and in expectation, and not
present unto the senses, whereby appears the truth of that definition which
I have put. And by this definition of S. Paul it also appears, how much they
err, that account faith within the predicament of qualitye, where in deed it
is a relative, in the predicament of relation, for faith is not but in respect
of his obiecte, namely the promise of God performed in Christ: so that if no
promise were, there could be no faith at all touching iustyficatyon.

Now having showed a true definition of faith, I think it not amysse somewhat
to note, what the scholemen and The opinion of the Schoiemen and Papists, of
Faith.
papists hold concerning the same: that thereby their error may partly be
apparent. The master of the sentences gives out of S. Augustine this
definition thereof: Fides est virtus. qua creduntur, Sent lib. 3 distinct. 23.
Cap, 1
quae non videntur. Faith is a virtue, wherewyth things are believed, that are
not seen. The generality of which definition, by a certain contraction he
presently streyghtneth thus: Which (says he) is not to be understand of all
things that are not seen, but only of such things as appertain to
religion. In this definition, as the scholemen have handled the matter, lurketh
a great and venomous subtletye, which is, in that virtue is made the genus or
general word unto faith, whereby faith should seem to be contained in the
predicament of quality, which before is showed false: and therefore he had
affirmed before in the. 27. distinction of the second book, that no qualitye
in the mind can be a virtue, unless by charity it be there formed, for thus
he writes there, Charitas est spiritus sanctus, quae animae qualitates
informat, and sanctificat, vt eis anima informetur, and sanctificetur, sine qua
animae qua'it as non dicitur virtus: Charity is the holy Ghost, which
charytie does form and sanctify the qualytyes of the mind, that by them the
mind may be formed and sanctified, without which charity, no quality of the
mind is called a virtue. Here shines the cause of his former foundation in
that they make virtue the genus, or general word unto faith: namely, because
he would express faith to be a quality by charity formed in the mind. And
forasmuch as all qualities of the mind be actions or works, therefore in
that, he imagines the same charity to form faith, he thinks him self to
have given a substantial cause, why faith (in our justification) should be
considered as it is a work, and not otherwise. So that all his course herein,
is run only to this end: namely, to teach that justification consists in
works, and that faith justifies in respect that it is a work, and not
otherwise. And that this is his meaning it is plain by that question, out of
the answer whereof his forenamed authority was alleged, which is this: Cur
ergo dicitur fides mereri iustificationem, and vitam aeternam? ex ea ratione
dictum accipitur, quia per actum fidei meretur illa: Why says he, is faith
said to deserve justification and eternal life? it is understand to be said
for this cause, because by the act of believing, it deserves those things.
Now does it evidently appear, why unto faith he applied that definition out of
the discourse: about the subtlety whereof this one thing is gathered worthy the
noting, namely, the overthrow of ye scholemens own smoky distinction of
formed, and unformed faith, wherewith so greatly they please them selves, for
by this definition, it is evident, that there is no other faith, but only
forined faith. But to know what hereby is meant, it is necessary to note, that,
that quality of the mind which by charitable works expresses it self
outwardly to believe, they call formed faith. And again, that quality of ye
mind, which likewise believing, though by charitable works it declare it not,
they call unformed faith, which by the doctrine of this deceauer, is evident to
be no faith at all. For if it be faith, by his definition it must be a virtue,
and if it be a virtue, it must by his forenamed authority be formed in the
mind by charity, or else he affirms it to be no virtue: Wherefore seeing this
their quality is unformed, therefore by him it is no virtue, and being no
virtue by his definition of faith, it is no faith: and that this is that, which
out of his own doctrine is to be gathered, it also appears by this question,
which he afterward in the 5. question of the 23. distinction of the 3. book
puts An illa informis qualitas mentis, quae in malo Christiano est, fiat
virtus cum sit bonus? Whether the same unformed quality of the mind, which
is in an evil Christian be made a virtue, when the man is a good Christian?
Here you plainly see that he flies the name of faith, and calls it an
unformed quality, and not unformed faith, knowing that, that unto his own
definition, had been a flat antithesis.

Thus is it evident, both how their doctrine is at war within it self, and
also that as the same is utterly strange from ye true doctrine of Christ, so
are they driven to forge terms of art accordingly for the same, such as the
Scripture can not acknowledge: the cause whereof may seem to have been this,
that for as much as the matter of justification of works, which is the prowler
for all their provision is by the whole course of the Scriptures overthrown,
and ye office thereof attributed to faith: Therefore sought they such blind
definitions of faith, as in reteinyng the name of faith for fashions sake,
might nevertheless reserve unto works the soueraignitie still. Which being
imagined there remained this one thing behynd, that for as much as their end
was, to seek a general gain of all men as well of the bad as the good, by this
their devised Religion, it was of necessity that this their faith being one of
the pillars thereof, should conteyne in it some such plausible proprieties, as
with pleasant allurementes and shows, might minister matter both to good and
bad, to feed the^ selves with opinion of the possession of true faith, under
the couloure thereof. For the doing whereof it was necessary that it should
conteyne in it two diverse kynds, proportional to the condition of the two
diverse subjects, which should possess the same, namely the good and the bad.
And hence seems their subtle distinction of formed, and unformed faith to
have grown. Their formed faith The unformed faith of the Papists.
was only perculiar to their good men, such as by their charitable works had
formed the same, and given it the true nature and form. Namely, by offering at
pilgrimages, buyldyng chauntreis, bying of pardons, and such other stuff. And
their unformed faith is a medicine for all hell hounds, and rake helles, for
The formed faith of the Papists.
none ca^ be so wicked, but if he acknowledge their Church, they will thus far
comfort him, that he may persuade him self that notwithstanding all his
vilanies, yet has he in him all good and true faith, necessary unto salvation.
Mary they say yet it is unformed. Surely it is like to that which has been
feigned of ye Bears whelpe, namely that it should be whelped a rude lumppe
without shape, which the dame with the lickyng of her tongue does perfectly
form: So the possessours of this their unformed faith by the lickyng the same,
not with their tunges, but with the charitable works of their pursse taught in
the rules of their holy Church, may form it at their own pleasure, yea if
they list after the best fashion, the more cost, the more perfection. Truly
this seems to to have been the ground of their doctrine herein, for what
soever they say of faith, they mean thereby no other thing, but that a
superstitious humblenes, and blind obedience to the penny prowlyng doctrine of
their counterfeyte Church, is true and Christian faith, though the possessor
therereof know neither how GOD will be worshypped in Christ, nor how by him he is
made gracious, and merciful unto him. This is their faith, to believe nothing
determinately, nor with assurance of knowledge, but always under this
condition, if the judgment of their Church so allow of it. This call they a
faith sufficient unto salvation: is not this a pestilent and wicked doctrine,
that such as have no touch of godly fear, nor any feelyng of true godlynes,
should be said to possess all true faith necessary to salvation? where it is
proved before in the proffe of the true definition of faith, that one of the
properties of true faith is, to purify the hearts of all the^ that possess
it. Let this both touching the description of true faith, and the counterfaite
faith of the Papists suffice, and let us proceed to show in what sense ye
righteousness, or justification is to be taken, which faith by grace
apprehends.

For the doing whereof, it is necessary to show how diversely the word
righteousness Righteousness how it is taken in the Scriptures, and also
Justification.
is used. Sometime it is used, for that common righteousness which naturally
cleaves unto man, whereby, even in the heathen the opposition of general
virtues and general vices, was understand, and the contrary estimation of
both, thereby generat. And this righteousness is common to all men. In another
sense, it is used for that outward righteousness, which by the good fruits or
works, of such as be already justified, is apparaunt in the eyes of men.
Therefore in neither of these senses is the word righteousness or justification
taken in this place, wherefore that which here is meant, may thus be defined.
Justification, is a free remission of sin and Definition of justification.
imputation of righteousness, unto man, through faith in Christ. The truth of
this definition is proved, by these words of Paul, Abraham believed God, and
that was imputed to him for righteousness: To him that works, the reward Romans
4.
is not counted of favor, but of duty, but to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness, even as David describes the blessefulnes of the man unto whom
God ascribes ryghteousnes, without deeds, saying, Blessed are they whose
unrighteousness are forgeuen, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes no sin, by these words of Paul it is plain that God
justifies ye ungodly which believes, by forgeuyng his unrighteousness, and
covering his sins, and imputation of righteousness unto him without deeds, and
that it is freely done Saint Paul also declares for all (says he) have
sinned, and are destitute of the glory of GOD, and are iustyfied freely by his
grace, therefore is iustyfication ryghtly said to be a free remyssyon of
sins, and imputation of righteousness unto man, through faith in Christ.
Thus having declared what justification or righteousness is truly gathered
out of the scryptures of God: I will also briefly note what the Papists and
Scholemen account it to be, wherein you shall perceive the building thereof, to
be wholly raised from their devised grace, whereof is sufficyentlye spoken: Thus
writes the master of the sentences. Mors ergo Christi nos iustificat,
Justification taught by the Papists.
dum per eam charitas excitatur in cordibus nostris. For the death of Christ
does justify us, when as by it, charity is stirred up in our hearts. By
which words it appears, that he affirms the death of Christ no
otherwise to justify us, but by excitation or styrring of the mind unto good
works by them to be iustyfied, so that in deed they account iustificatyon
to signify nothing else, but a certain quality or virtue, or infusion of a
certain habit into the mind, inclyning or mouyng the same to goodness, that by
the works thereby produced, righteousness may be attained. Which assertion of
theirs, affirms righteousness to come of our selves, through our own
works: only addyng this exception, that first through the merit of Christ,
a certain habyt or preuentyng grace does inclyne the mind to the execution of
those works: whereby justification is attained: which is (both by the true
definytion of justification) false and also by the manifest words of Saint
Paul, which so many times affirms justification to consist in the free
imputation of righteousness, unto man through faith. Abraham says he,
believed God, and that was imputed unto him for righteousness. It appears
that these men account ye general power or virtue of God, whereby he
produces and conserueth his creatures, and whereby (even in the heathen)
certain moral or civil good works are wrought, to further the doers
thereof unto iustificatyon. Thus are some of them not ashamed to dream, that
such as be not regenerate, may do such good works as may merit the first
grace (as they call it) whereby the mind being styrred has by their doctrine,
free will to admit the same, whichebeyng once admitted, certain works of
such perfection are thereby produced, as in a sort be acceptable to God, and
do merit the favor of Christ, and in a sort do iustyfie: though not by full
and exact worthiness, yet by a certain conuenyencye or congruencye (ay they
call it) according whereunto, they name these works congruent merits. That
is to say, such merits as in equity deserve favor, though they satisfy not
the extremity of the law. And these first works they call preparing works,
meaning that such prepare the doers unto regeneratyon. This their divinity
seems to be gathered out of this sentence in the ciuyll law: Summum ius,
Summa iniuria, extreme right, is extreme wrong. And therefore they will scan
with God the equity of the law, inferryng thereupon, that by the power of
nature, man is able to fulfill the commandment, in as much as appertains to
the substance of the work required therein, though not fully in such sort as
the intent of the commander requires, that is, though the doing thereof
proceeds not from love and the spirit, they be able to satisfy the equity
(as it were) of the commandment, though not the rigor or extremity thereof,
and hereby appears how fully again they have wallowed themselves from evil
to worsse, till at length they be perfectly tumbled again into a Pellagian
heresy: for by what soever good work nature has power and free will before
iustificatyon, to merit the first grace wythall, seeing by that first grace
once obtained, justification does by their congruence follow, it is of
necessity that that first meritorious work, is the cause of this their
iustificatyon, and so nature has of it self in equity, power to iustifye.

The horrible error of which doctrine is more then evident, by that which has
been showed before, as well by the true definition of justification, as by the
fourth and fifth chapters, where the filthynes of corrupt nature is evidently
declared. Let this touching the true signification of righteousness, or
justification, and the errors of the Papists about the meaning thereof, suffice.

Now rests somewhat to be said concerning works. Wherefore in one
signification, works are those things which by practice of art are done, and
apparently remain, as all things wrought by any handy craft, are called ye
works of the doer. In another signification, works are the actions of men,
produced Definition of works.
by the willing motion of the mind, which also admit another division. For
Inward works.
some of them be only inward works, or works of the mind, as to believe, to
hope, to fear, to love, and such like. And some other are from the mind
Outward works.
produced into external, or outward act, to give give alms, to succor, to
preach, to teach, and such like. All which be called outward works. And
works in both these latter significations, be those whereof in this matter is
spoken: but for so much, as some of them be good and some evil, therefore,
that the difference may appear, good works may thus be defined. Good works
are only Definition of good works.
such works as in the commandments of God be required, or in any other
place of Scriptures (for the further explication of them) expressed: which tend
to the true worship of God, and outward witnessing of man's election in Christ.
The truth of this definition, is thus proved: for the first part: Namely,
that all the works be good, which in the commandments, or any other place
of the Scriptures for their further explication be appointed: It is evident,
for so much as hereby we know them to be good works, for that by God, the
doing of them is commanded.

Secondly, that they tend to the true worshippyng of GOD, it is thus proved by
Christ himself, where he says: Let your light so shine before Math. 5.
men, (he tells the end wherefore it should shine, namely) that others
seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. Here is
the end of good works, namely, the glory and worship of God. And for as much
as God is not worshipped, unless he be truly worshipped, for he is worshipped
in spirit and truth: therefore they only be good works, which tend to the
true worship of God, which secondly was to be proved. Now touching Works are a
testimony of man's election.
the last part, that they be a testimony of man's election in Christ, it is
evident by these words of Peter: Brethren 2. Peter. 1.
(says he) be more diligent by good works to make your election sure.
whereby it appears: that good works are a testimony of the assurance of his
election in Christ, whereby the truth of the definition appears, and by this
definition it is plain, that all superstitious works of man's invention, be no
good works, forasmuch as they tend not to the true worship of God. Here
rests again somewhat to be The errors of the Pa(...)s abo(...) works.
opened of the erroures of the papists about works, whereof they have for
their purpose devised diverse strange distinctions as their preparing works of
congruent merit, their Opus operantis, or work of the woorker, their Opus
operatum. or act of outward execution, and their undue works or works of
supererogation. Wherefore, first touching their preparing work of congruent
Preparing work of congruent merit.
merit (whereof somewhat has been said before in the discourse about
justification) first, what they feign them, it appears, namely, the fruits
of that their preventing grace, which they imagine to reduce a man into such a
trance as they faygne him therein (as a man might say) neither dead in sin,
nor alive in Christ, whereby all moral, or civil woorks wrought, though of
nature they be not absolutely worthy works to merit full righteousness, yet by
a certain conueniency (as they term it) in equity they deserve favor, and so
prepare toward the full attaynment of justification, and these be all the
moral works, which be wrought by such as be not regenerate.

The error of which drowsy dream is more then palpable, for the scripture of
God, can acknowledge no middle estate, There is no middle estate between God
and the Devil.
between God, and the devil. He that is not against him, is directly with him:
he yt gathers not together, lets not things lie untouched, but he
scatters abroad. He that is not alive in Christ is dead in sin. S. Paul
could paynt out no mean estate between both, he consessed all either quick
in Christ, or dead in sin. The reward (says he) of sin is death. And
again, Ephesians. 2.
You has he made alive that were dead in trespasses, and sin And again to
the Colossians, And ye which Coll. 2.
were dead in sin, and in the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened
with him: so that there is no mean estate. Either the woorkers of their
preparing works be alive in Christ, or dead in sin: But a live in Christ
they cannot be by these words of Paul, for all before regeneration are dead:
wherefore, even as a dead man has in him self no power at al to prepare
himself toward life again: so al (being before regeneration dead in sin)
have no power at all to work any work that may prepare them unto life or
regeneration: And for that cause does Paul call them dead in sin, that they
might know themselves as utterly unable, to help toward their own
regeneration, as a dead carcas is, to help it self to the attaynment of life
again. Whereby the vileness of this presumptuous invention of preparing works
appears.

Now touching their works called, Opus operantis, or work of the worker,
after their meaning it is this: namely, The work of the worker.
the act and holy purpose of the mind, wherewith the worker goes about any
work which they count holy, and their Opus operatum, or act executed, is ye
outward execution of the same woork. Now touching their undue works, or works
of superogation, it is necessary works of Supererogation.
for plain understanding, what they mean to rehearse the invention of the
forged fable thereof. For the ground whereof, they begin with a goodly and
bewtifull show of aduauncemente of Gods unspeakable savor toward us. God
(say they) who might have prescribed us such straight, and severe precepts to
have been observed, as had been utterly to us impossible, has notwithstanding
dealt more favorably with us, and commanded us nothing, but that which (if we
list) we be able to perform, and a great deal more. And yet notwtstanding he
demands no farther of us but to perform the same, by the doing whereof we
shall deserve salvation, though we do no more. But if any be toward God so
liberally minded that Blasphemy to Christ's death and passion.
he will of his francke disposition do more: neither shall he lose the praise
nor reward of the same. And this overplus above the fulfilling of the
commandments, is that they call their vndew works or works of
supererogation, superabhominatio^ I should say. Who ever heard a more
presu^ptuous blasphemy? Does not ye commau^deme^t require a full obedience,
willing desire, and natural pronenes of the whole man, as in the 4. chapter is
evidently showed. Now then if the whole endeavor of all the parts of man, be
thus tied by just bond of duty, unto the commandment, from whence then
comes their overplus of undue works? Nay, is it not both there and in the
v. chapter evidently proved, that man is utterly unable to fulfill the
commandment? and that the Law was not by Moses delivered unto man, to the
end he should enable him self to the fulfilling thereof: but contrariwise by
view of his insufficiency, to drive him to Christ. But will ye know why these
men invented this fable? Forsoothe, not without provident consideration,
because if that be taken a way, farewell Penance.
all the fruits of penance, which is one of the most profitable engines that
their church has, and principal bailife, under shirife, their high Stuard,
for the Christ.
marie and pith of their penance stands in their satisfaction, which is the
last and golden part thereof, and has Satisfaction.
provided for the building of many an Abbey. Wherefore above all things their
works of supererogation was to be devised, for else could their satisfaction
have been woorthe nothing unto them, which by this politic prouiso, has made
kings fellows of such, as without the same, could never have been able to
have maintained two beggars in an hospital: for before any man be able to make
satisfaction of the old debt to his creditor, it is of necessity that first
he be able, to satisfy the duty of ye time present with an overplus, out of
the which excess, must be raised a sufficient superplussage, to discharge the
former danger. The wicked horror of all which their devise of works shall
(besides that which has been said already) be also iustlye overthrown
hereafter, where it shall appear that no works (no not the works of the
justified) be able to satisfy the commandment, any other way then under the
shield of mercy: by not having their insufficientie imputed unto them, but
contrarywyse hidden by Christ's innocentie, from the sight of Gods justice. Let
this both touching the description of good works, and also the counterfeit
works of the Papists, suffice. Having thus evidently showed, what these words
grace, righteousness, or justification, faith, and works, do mean in this
matter, I will now return to speak of the nature of this new covenant, which
(as was said before) justifies man freely by grace through faith in Christ,
the explication, or plain meaning whereof, is by these definitions cuident to
be this.

The new covenant does assure man that his sinne^ are freely forgeuen, and
Rightcousnes is un(...) unto us, by the f(...) (...)o sense and good will of
God.
that righteousness is imputed unto him, by the free benevolence of the will of
God, through the full assurance of the truth of Gods promises in Christ, which
unto him is given of God, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost: whereby his heart
is purified and ciensed unto good works; which righteousness, is imputed unto
him without all respect of his worthynes or works: only for the praise, and
glory of the grace, or favor of God. Whereby it is plain that unto the
attainement thereof, on the behalse of man: this only thing is required: that
he constantly believe (both severally touching him self, and generally touching
all the elect) that even as God has freely promised, to accept the
satisfaction of his son Jesus Christ, in full recompense for all their
sins: so assuredly he will perform the same. Who soever (I say) has this
undoubted faith, he has the true apprehension of Christ in the promise: so
that by faith only (as is proved before) justification Only faith, attey neth
(...)cation.
is attained in the promise: which faith is the only mean, which by believing
God, may assure man of the free favor of God in Christ: without suspicion of
incroching upon any part of the glory of the same: Which God has reserved to
him self, as the only end, for which he has bestowed upon man so rich a
benefit: whereunto (as to the appointed mark or end) all the Scriptures are
directed, whereof these authorities for the further confirmation of this truth,
may seem not unseasonably rehearsed. Beginning first with ye words of our
Savior Christ him self: he says thus: And as Moses lift up the Ioh. 4.
Serpent in the wilderness, eue^ so must the son of man be lifted up, that
none that believe in him perish, but have everlasting life: for god so loved
the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that none that believe
in him should perish, but have Only faith
everlasting life. Again in the same place: He that believes in him, shall not
be condemned. And again: He that believes, the son has everlasting John. 6.
life. And in an other place: The Capernaites said unto him, what shall we do
that we might work the works of God? Jesus answered and said unto them, this
is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom he has sent. And again in
the same Faith.
chapter: This is the will of him that sent me, that every man which sees the
son, and believes in him, have Faith.
everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. Again in the same
chapter: Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has
everlasting life. And in an other place: I am the resurrection and the life, he
that Faith. Ioh. 11.
believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live: and who soever
lives and believes in me, shall never Faith.
dye. And in an other place: I am come Ioh. 12.
a light into the world, that who soever Faith.
believes on me, should not bide in darkness. Again Peter in ye Acts of the
Apostles: To him also give all Act. 10.
the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe in him, shall Only
faith
receive remission of sins. Again the Gayler said to Paul and Barnabas:
Act. 16. Faith.
Syrs, what must I do to be saved? and they said, believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy household. Again Paul to the
Romans: Therefore by the deeds Romans 3.
of the law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the law comes
the knowledge of sin: but now is the righteousness of God declared, without
the law: having witness of the law and the Prophets, to wit, the righteousness of
God by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all that believe, for there is no
difference, for all have sinned and are destitute of the glory of God, and are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus:
who^ God has set forth to be a pacification through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness, in that he forgeueth the sins that be passed,
which God did suffer to show at his time his righteousness: that he might be
counted just, and a iustifier of him that believes one Jesus. Where is then the
boastyng? it is excluded, by what law? of works? nay, but by the law of
faith. Therefore we gather, that man is justified by Faith justifies, without
the vewes of the law.
faith without the deeds of the law, and a little after: For it is one GOD
which shall justify Circumcision which is of faith, and vncircu^cisio^ through
faith. Again in the next Chapter, for Romans 4.
if Abraham were justified by deeds, then has he wherein to boast: but not
with GOD: for what says the scriptures? Abraham believed God and that was
counted to him for righteousness: to him that works, the reward is not
reckened of favor but of duty: but to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly Faith.
his faith is counted for righteousness: Even as David describes the
blissefulnes of the man, unto whom God ascribes righteousness without deeds:
saying, Blessed are they whose unrighteousness are forgeuen: and whose sins
are covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. And a little
after: We say that faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness. And a little
after, for the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not given
to Abraham, or to his sede through the law, but through the righteousness of
faith. For if they (which be of the law) be heirs: the^ is faith but vain:
and the promise of no effect. And again, Therefore by faith is the inheritance
Faith.
given: that it might come of grace: and the promise might be sure to all the
sede: not to them only which are of the law: but also to them which are of
the faith of Abraham, which is the father of us all. And again, then (being
justified by faith) Faith iustefieth.
we have peace with GOD through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom we have access
through faith, unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the
glory of God. And again, what shall we say then? the Gentiles which followed
not righteousness have overtaken righteousness, I mean the righteousness which
comes by faith: but Israel which followed the law of righteousness, could
not atteyne the law of righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the law. Faith iustefyeth without
works of the law.
And again, for they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going
about to establishe their own righteousness, have not been obedient unto the
righteousness of God, for Christ is the end of the law to justify all that
believe: For Moses describes the righteousness which comes of the law in
these words, that the man which does these things, shall live thereby. But
the righteousness which comes of faith, speaks on this wise: say not in thy
heart, who shall ascend into heaven? that is even to fetch Christ down from
above, or who shall descend into the deep? that is even to bring Christ from
death: but what says the Scripture? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
and in thy heart. This is that word of faith which we preach: for if thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus: and shall believe in thy heart
that God raised him up from the dead: thou Faith saves.
shall besaued. For the belefe of thy heart justifies, and to confess with
the mouth saves a man. For the Scripture says, Faith iustiu^eth.
who soever believes on him shall not be ashamed. And again, even so at this
time, is there a remnant left thorough Romans 11.
the election of grace: if it be of grace, then is it not of works: or else
were grace, no more grace: but if it be of works, then is it no more grace,
or else were works no longer works. And in another place, we which are
Jews by nature Gala. 2.
and not sinners of the Gentiles, know that a man is not iustyfied by the
deeds of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: even we (I say) have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus
Christ: and not by the deeds of the law: because that by the deeds of the
law, no flesh shall be justified. Gal. 3.
Again, for the Scripture saw before hand, that GOD would justify the
Gentyles through faith, and therefore preached before hand the Gospel unto
Abraham: saying, in thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed. So then, they which
be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: for as many as are under the
deeds of the law, ar under the curse: sor it is written: cursed is every man
that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law to
fulfill the^. And that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it
is evident: for the just shall live by faith: and the law is Abac. 2
not of faith: but the man that shall fulfill these things shall live in them.

Now Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was made
accurssed for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on tree,
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus:
and that we might receive the promise of the spirit thorough faith. And a
little after: but the Scripture has concluded Gal. 3
all things under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ,
should be geeuen to them that believe. But before faith came, we were shut up
under the law unto the faith which should afterward be reveled: wherefore
the law was our Scholemaster, to bring us to Christ, that we might be made
ryghteous by faith: but after that faith is come, now are we no longer under
the Scholemaster: for we are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
Gal. 5.
And again, ye are all gone quite from Christ, as many as are iustyfied by
the law, and are fallen from grace: we wait for by the spirit thoroughe
faith, the hope of righteousness. Again: For by grace are Faith and not
works iustiu^eth us
ye saved thorough faith, and not of your selves: it is the gift of GOD, and
not of works, least any man should boast him. Again: Who saved us, and
called us with a holy calling, not according to our deeds, but according to
his own purpose and grace: which grace was given to us thorough Christ Jesus,
before the world was. And in an other place: That we being Titus. 3.
justified by grace, should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal
life. These authorityes I thought good, to rehearse out of the Scriptures: out
of the which it is evidently gathered, which has been said before,
touching the justification of faith: And to the end it may be apparent, that
the auneyent fathers gathered the same meaning, I will now rehearse of their
authorities concerning the same. First Augustine says thus: Credidit Abraham
deo, and reputatum estilli ad iustitiam: ecce sine opere, iustificatur exfide,
Augustide tempore sermon. 61 Solafides.
and quicquid illi legali posset obseruatione conferri, totum credulitas sola
donauit: Abraham believed God, and that was imputed unto him for righteousness.
Mark this, that without works, he is justified by faith, and that whatsoever
he might have gained by obseruyng the law, all that has faith alone given
him. Again Origin Faith alone
says: Dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem, it a vt credens quis
tantummodo iustificetur, etiam Exclusa est gloriatio. Solafides. Romans 3. Only
faith.
si nihil ab eo operis fuerit expletum: He afirmeth the only justification of
faith to suffice to justify a man, that only believes, although he have done
no good work. And by and by after he asks this question: Quis sine operibus
iustificatus est? Who is justified without works? Whereunto he answers:
Quantum igitur ad exemplum pertinet, sufficere arbitror illum latrone^ qui cu^
Christo crucifixus, clamabat ei de cruce: Domine Jesus memento mei, cum veneris
in regnum tuum. Nec aliud quicqua^ describitur boni operis eius in euangelijs,
sed pro hac sola fide, ait Jesus. Amen dico tibi body eris mecumin Paradiso:
As touching the example, I think the theefmay suffice which being crucified
with Christ, cried from the cross: Lord Jesus remember me, when thou come
into thy kingdom. There is no other good work of his expressed in the Gospel,
but for this faith only Christ says unto him: verily I say unto thee thou
shall be with me this day in Paradise. And a little after: Sola confessione
iustificatum, comitemque sibi paradisum ingressus, assumpsit: By this only
confession, he going into paradise, took him with him both justified, and his
companion. And a little after concerning the woman's washing Christ's feet with
her tears, he says: Et ex nullo legis opere, sed pro sola fide ait ad eam,
remittuntur tibi peccata Sola fides.
tua, and iterum fides tua te saluam fecit? And by no deeds of the law but for
faith only he says unto her, thy sins are forgiven thee, and again thy
faith has Faith noly
made thee whole. And Chrysostom upon the third chapter to the Romans,
writes thus: In hoc demonstratur virtus and potentia dei, quod seruauerit,
iustificauerit, Sermon. 7.
et gloriationem induxerit, sola fide, absque operibus: Herein is the virtue,
and power of Sola fides.
God declared, in that he has saved, justified, and glorified, by faith only
without works. And the same upon the Faith only
fourth chapter: Quod aliquis destitutus operibus, iustificetur per fidem:
fortasse videri potest Sermon. 8.
been habere. Quod autem aliquis ornatus virtutibus, et bonis operibus, non
tamen illis iustificetur, Sola fides.
fed sola fide, hoc certe est admirabile: That a man destitute of works should
be justified by faith, that peradventure may seem to be well: but that a man
beutified with virtue, and good works should nevertheless by them not be
justified, but by faith only: Truly this is wonderful. Again the same
Chrysostom in his fourth homily, upon the first chapter of the first epistle
to Chrisostom in priore. ad Timoth. Cap. 1. Homel. 4: Sola fides.
Timothy: Cui difficilis habebatur fides, quod inimici, quod peccatores, quod
hi qui in lege non iustificabantur, neque per opera, hi continuo ex fide sola,
primas parts meritorum consecuti sunt: Who could hardly believe that enemies,
that sinners, that such as were not justified in the law, nor by works, that
they by and by have by faith only Faith only
obtained the chief merit. And a little after: Incredibile eum esse videbatur,
siquidem bomo qui omnem priorem vitam, frustra atque inaniter consumpsisset,
duxissetque per mala opera, postmodum ex fide sola saluandus diceretur: It
seemed Sola fides.
to the Jews an incredible thing, that a man which had spent al his former
life vainly, and disorderly having passed the same in wicked works, that
afterward he should be said to be saved by faith only. The same again
concerning faith and the law writes thus: Ante Faith only
opera, fides primu^ induce^daest: eu^ qui operatur opera iustitiae sine fide
no^ possum probareviuu^ fuisse, fidelem aute^, absque operibus possum
monstrare, and vixisse Sermon de fide et lege.
and regnum caelorum assecutum. Nullus sine fide vita^ habuit, latro aute^
credidit duntaxat, and iustificatus Sola fide
est a misericordissimo deo. Atque hic ne mihi dixeris defuisse ei tempus, quo
just viueret, and honesta faceret opera, neque enim de hoc contenderim ego,
sed illud vnum asseuerauerim quod sola fides per se saluum fecerit: Faith is to
be alleged before works: I can not prove him to have be^e alive which works
the works of righteousness without faith, but I can show the faithful without
works to have both been alive, and attained the kingdom of heaven. No man
has had life without faith, but the thief did only believe, and he by the
most merciful God is justified. And say not unto me here, that he wanted time
wherein to live righteously, and do good works. I will not contend thereabout,
but this one thing I affirm, that faith only alone did save him. And again
Nam ea denium perfecta, and omnimoda gloriatio est in deo, Basilius homilia de
humilitate.
quando neque propter suam ipsius quis iustiam extollitur, sed agnoscit se
quidem vera destitui iustitia, verum sola in Christo fide, iustificatum esse:
For that in deed is the perfect, and full rejoicing in God, when no man
glories in his own righteousness, but acknowledges him self in deed to be
destitute of true righteousness, and that he is justified through faith in
Christonely. Ambrose upon this place of Paul Iustificantur gratis per gratiam
illius, writes thus: Just ficati sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes, neque
vicem reddentes, sola fide iustificati sunt: Both Jew and Greek are justified
freely, because that without work, or recompense, by faith only they are
justified. And again: Quomodo ergo Iudaei per opera legis iustificari se
putant iustificatione Ambrosu^ Roma. 4.
Abrahae, cum videant Abraham non ex operibus legis, sed yola fide
iustificatum? non ergo opus est lege qua^do impius per solam fidem iustificatur
apud deum. How the^ do the Jews think them selves to be justified by the
deeds Sola fides.
of the law, with the justification of Abraham, when they see that Abraham was
not justified by deeds of the law, but by faith only? there is then no need
of the law, seeing the wicked is justified with God by faith only. And a little
after: Sic decretum Faith only
dicit a deo, vt cessante lege, solam fidem gratiae dei posceret ad salutem: He
says that Sola fides.
it is thus by God decreed, that the law ceassing, he requires unto salvation
only faith in the favor of God. And again: Manifest beati sunt, quibus sine
Faith only Rom 4.
labor, vel opere aliquo remittuntur iniquitatds, et peccata teguntur, nulla
ah his requisite a panitentiae opera, nisi tantum vt credant: They be manifestly
blessed whose iniquities are covered, Sola fides.
without either labor, or work no work of repentance being (to that
purpose) of them required but only that they believe. And again ye same:
Conuenit vt in solo nomine domini, and conditoris Only faith. Romans 9.
consequatur salutem creatura: hoc est, per fidem, quia sublatis omnibus
neomenijs et sabbato, et circumcisione et lege escarum, et oblationibus
pecorum, sala fides posita est ad salutem: It is mecte that Sola fides.
man attain salvation only in the name of the Lord the creator, namely, by
faith, because that faith only is the mean to salvation, all new Only faith
Moons, Sabbath, Circumcision, difference of meats, offering of beasts set a
part. Again the same: Quoniam versutia aduersarij cumulare peceata Romans 11.
caeperunt, vt per interdictum magis homo reus constitueretur, deus clementia
bonitatis suae, semper homini procurans, vt et quod sine lege peccatum erat, et
in lege possit deleri, hoc decreuit, vt solam fidem poneret, per quam onmium
peccata aboleret, vt quia nulla spes per Solaf ides.
legem omnibus hominibus erat, dei misericordia saluarentur: Because sin began
to be increased by the craft of the adversary that man through the restraint
might be found more guilty, God of his merciful Only faith
goodness always careful for man, that that which without law was
transgressed, might in the law be blotted out, decreed this. Namely, to
appoint faith Faith only
only to be the mean, whereby he would extinguish the sin of all men, that
seeing no hope was left to any man in the law, they might by the mercy of God
be saved. Again the same Ambrose. In Christo Jesus data est gratia, 1. Cap. 1.
epi ad Corinth. Sola fides.
quia hoc constitutum est, vt qui credit in Christum saluus sit sine opere,
sola fide, gratis accipiens remissionem peccatorum. In Christ Jesus is grace
given, forasmuch as this with God is decreed, that who so believes in Christ,
is saved by faith only without work, receiving freely forgeuenes Faith only
of sins. Again Hilarious upon the 8. of Matthew has these words: Sola
fides iustisicat, only faith does justify.

Notwithstanding these authorities of Scriptures and fathers, yet do the Sola
fides.
adversaries keep still their brazen faces, and stoutly swear it and stare it
out that none but heretics and schismatickes affirm that only faith
justifies. Truly, gentle reader, if thou be not settled in error, thou
can not but see their wicked and shameless facing, in crying out that we
corrupt the scriptures, and that none of the fathers gathered out any such
sense, or meaning of them, concerning which matter, thou have heard diverse of
them, tell their own tales. Now it is here principally to be noted, that where
man's justification is a free remission of sins, and imputation of
righteousness unto him, through faith in Christ: it may be, that because the
phrase of the Scriptures, and of these aucthorityes attribute the same so many
times to faith, that therefore some might gather thereby, that faith is the
efficie^t cause of Faith is not the efficient cause of our justification but
God only.
man's justification which is not so, for the efficient cause is only God: eue^
as sinful man destitute of Gods grace, is the material cause, and as the
declaration of Gods justice and righteousness in performaunce of his free
promise, to the increase of the glory of his grace, is the final cause. And
forasmuch as unto this work two instruments were requisite: the one to be
used by God, which was Christ: of whom he made the sacrifice and offering,
the other to be used by man which is faith. Therefore that faith being (as I
said) the instrument, which takes hold of the promise, has relation unto
the obiecte of faith: Namely, unto Christ, and the promise: and so has the
title of justification imputed unto it, for so says the Scripture. Abraham
believed God, and God imputed that to him for righteousness. Which Paul
diverse times rehearses, to show that faith is not the efficient cause of
iustificatyon: but the obiecte of faith: Namelye Christ, and the promise. And
that faith receives the title thereof, only by imputation: and not by
propriety of nature. Namely, because it is that wherewith man takes hold of
Christ, and the promise: which I thought worthy the notyng. Thus having showed
the nature of the new covenant, touching man's justification, and that faith
is the only mean, required in man to the attaynement thereof, it follows.

Cap. 9.
To know the certain tokens of that faith, whereunto justification is imputed,
and the difference between the works of the faithful and the works required
in the law.

Faith being the gift of God (as Paul to the Phillippians affirms) for unto
you (says he) it is given, not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer
for him, faith I say being the gift of God, is accompanied with newness of
life, which possesses such beautyes of Gods Newnes of life.
grace, as forthwyth kyndle the soul or mind with desire of true obedyence
unto God: by ingraftyng him both into the similitude of the death of Christ,
Romans 6
whereby he dies unto sin, and also into the similitude of his resurrection,
whereby he ryseth unto a new life: being sure that the old man of sin is
crucified: that henceforth he should no more be servant to sin. So that
now Romans 6.
she trayneth his affection, toward the things above, from the things on
the earth, in that he is dead to sin, his life being hydden in Christ with
God: whereby he labors to mortifye the Col. 3.
affections of the earthly members: as having put of the old man with his
works, Ephesians. 4
and put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge after ye Image of God, Col.
3 Ephesians. 4
shapen unto righteousness, and true holiness, laboring not to grieve the
spirit of God, by whom he is sealed unto the day of redemption: but knowing
himself the temple of ye holy ghost, laboreth to cleanse and purify the same.
Which desire is 1. Cor. 6.
not now kindled in him, as in respect of merit: but as proper, and peculiar
unto ye faith, which through grace has taken ye possession of the mind, whereby
he is tra^sformed into the similitude of Christ: so that where before he yielded
himself servant, unto all the works of the flesh: now contrariwise he
labors to pursue all the works proper unto the spirit: Titus. 2.
Being certain that the grace of God which brings salvation unto all men
has appeared, and teaches him, that he should deny ungodliness, and
worldly lust^, and that he should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present life. Seeing Christ gave him self for him, to redeem him from all
unrighteousness: to purge him peculiar unto Col. 1
him self, fervently given to good works: that so he might walk worthy of
the Lord, in all things that please: being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing to the knowledge of God, because he is his workemanshyp created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.
which God ordained, that he should walk in them. Now forasmuch as these be
the proprieties, or fruits belongyng to regeneration, which enters with true
faith. Therefore presentlye, where soever she takes place, she makes her
self known by these effects: and forthwith upon her arrival, begins
fight with the old man of sin, and deeds of the same. And whereas before
whilst the strong armed man, namely the Mar. 12. Luke. 11.
devil kept the palace: that is, possessed the soul or mind: all things
were in peace, that is, man slumbred in security, feelyng no fight in
conscience. Now, so soon as a stronger comes in place, namelye, the holy
ghost, furnishyng the mind with true faith, whereupon newnes of life, and true
godliness attend: Then foorthwyth enters man into the christian fight: for
presently all the forenamed graces are encountered by the devil, and the
corruptyon of his sinful and rebellious nature, according to these sayings:
Hostis noster (adhuc in hac vita nos positos) quanto magis nos sibi rebellare
conspicit, tanto amplius expugnare contendit: Gre. lib. 24 cap. 12. moralium.
eos autem pulsare negligit, quos quieto iure possidere se sentit. Our enemy
(so long as we be in this life) how much the more he sees us rebel
against him: so much the more he stryueth to vanquyshe us, but he neglects
to smite those whom he feels himself to possess with quyettytle. So The
devil is a great enemy to a virtuous and good life. Romans 7
that forthwith upon his entry into newness of life, he feels just cause to
cry with holy Paul: I know the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold
under sin, for I allow not that which I do, what I would, that do I not: but
what I hate, that do I etc. These conflictes attend continually upon true
faith, which can no more from her be separate, then heat from fire, and
moisture from water. Hereby she be wayeth her self: these propertyes declare
where she dwells. Wherefore, whosoever finds in himself, an undoubted
persuasion of the free favor of God, only in the merits or deserts of Christ,
having that confirmed in him by the testimony of the holy ghost, breedyng a
desire of continual wrestlyng against sin, and the irksome lothyng of his
often falls, the hunger of well doing: though (through corruption of nature)
he want the ability to perform in such sort as he wishes: whosoever I
say, has this faith thus confirmed, he assuredlye is possessed of
righteousness, and has the true apprehension of the death of Christ, and the
earnest penny or pledge of his election.

And to this end cries Peter: Brethren, geeue more dyly gence to make your
calling, and election sure by good works: as though he should have said,
Brethren be diligent and labor continually in good works, that they may be to
you a sure pledge and witness, that you are the elect of God in Christ. For
that only is the true faith (whereunto righteousness True faith is known by
good works.
is imputed) which makes herself known by good works: without which ye can
neither show the obedyence of Gods children, nor yield testimonye of your
faith, nor outward witness of your election in Christ. And again S. Paul to
the same effect unto Titus: This is Tit. 3.
a true saying, and of these things I will thou should certyfie, that they
which have believed in GOD, might be diligent to maintain good works: These
things are good and profitable unto men. Surely good works are so profitable
(as I said before) that without them, we can neither show our obedience to
God: nor give certain testimony, that true faith, dwells in us, without Good
works are the fruits of good faith.
which faith we can pretend no just title to the kingdom of God. Where-Fore
above all things, it behooves every man (that makes claim thereunto) to
declare his faith by these euydente fruits, for unless the same be wytnessed
by his works, and fight against sin: (if death prevent him not) assuredlye
he has but a vain opinion, and no faith in deed. Hereby I trust the
indifferent reader can not but see, how wrongfully the adversaries (usurping
the name of catholics) charge them of our profession, under the scorned name
of gospellers, some with the contempt of good works, and some others say
that though we mayntaine good works, yet we geeue the people no
encouragement thereunto, seeing we say, they help not to justification: And
therefore we talk of good works, but (as it were) to no end. In deed any
such end by them, (as a price of our redemptyon) we know none, we leave the
glory of that triumph to God alone. Seeing he has by plain words reserved
the same for the praise, and glory of his grace and Ephesians. 1.
favor. But if they will allow this for an end: thus much we constantly
affirm, that what soever he be that seeks not by continual labor in good
works, and detestation of his own former wickedness, (as the true and
inseparable fruits of faith) to declare his obedience to God, that GOD thereby
may be glorified: and the truth of his faith touching his salvation witnessed:
assuredly (as I said before) he has True faith must be witnessed by deeds.
but a vain opinion, and no faith in deed, neither any sure warrant to make
title to the death of Christ. We constantly affirm, that as ye Sun ca^ be
seen by no other light, but by yt which he gives himself. So can faith by no
other means be discerned, but by ye fruits or works proceeding from her self. We
say with Ambrose Proprium hoc habet noua creatura per gratiam, vt qui figmentum
Dei sunt, De vocatione gentium, lib. 1. Cap. 8
et natiuitate coelesti conduntur in Christo, non otio torpeant, nec desidia
resoluantur, sed de virtute, in virtutem proficiant, per viam bonorum operum
ambulando. This has the new creature through grace proper unto him, that they
which be the workemanshyp of GOD, and in Good works.
Christ are builded in the heavenly birth may not slugge in idleness, not be
resolved in slouthe, but must go forward from virtue to virtue, walkyng by
the way of good works, and again with the same Ambrose. Gratia Dei a timore
liberati, accipimus spiritum adoptionis filiorum, vt considerantes Romans 8
quid eramus, and quid dono Dei sumus adepti, magna cum diligentia vitam
nostram ordinemus, ne ^nomen Dei patris in nobis iniuriam patiatur, and ea
omnia quae euafimus, veluti ingrati incurramns, Being delivered from fear
through the favor of God, we receive the spirit of children of adoption, that
considering Good works.
what we were (and what by the gift of God we have attained) we should order
our life with great diligence, least the name of God the father, should in us
suffer injury, and least as ungrateful we run into all those mischiefs,
which we have escaped. We say also with Cyprian. Igitur Christianus, qui
nominis Christi similitudinem De 12. abusionibus Cap. 7
tenet, morum quoque eius similitudinem habere decet. Christianus nemo dicitur
recte, nisi qui Christo moribus cooequatur. Therefore it becomes a Christian
man that holds the similitude of the name of Christ, to have also the
similitude of his manners. No man is rightly called a Christian, but he that
imitateth Christ in his conditions. If this be no end of good works gentle
reader judge indifferently. But now if we should join hands with our
adversaries, to examine whether the good works of ye faithful, be able to
satisfy ye rigor of the law: as though we suspected the matter, this cannot be
denied, that we must way them in the balance against the works required in
the law: to try whether they as well keep the inward weight, as the outward
fashion. And if there they also be found to light, then shall good works still
remain for a witness of our faith, and obedience: that God by them may be
glorified: and pass for no penny payment in the price of the purchase of
righteousness. Wherefore, for the trial of this matter, it is necessary we seek
the definition of faithful works, gathered out of the definition of faith
expressed in the viij. Chapter in this sort. The Definition of faithful
works. The good works of the law.
good works of the faithful, are such works as proceed from a heart purified
through faith. Now into the other Schole or ballaunce, let us lay the works
required in the law, whose definition is thus gathered out of the iiij.
Chapter. The works required in the law, are such as proceed from the full
obedience, willing desire, and natural pronesse, of the whole man unto
righteousness. Thus wayed in the ballaunce, it is evident that even the very
good works of the faithful (compared with the works of righteousness required
in the law) are found far to light to satisfy the same. For as much as the
law can allow none but such as proceed from a full obedience, willing desire,
and natural pronesse of the whole man. That is to say, the law can allow no
works, but such as should be wrought by natural strength, and desire unto
righteousness: But the good works of the faithful be not so, but contrariwise
The good works of the faithful
they are wrought through the free grace of GOD, purifiyng the heart by faith,
whereupon it follows, that the good works of the faithful (examined by the
justice of God) are insufficient to satisfy the law, and have no strength but
under the shilde of mercy. So imperfect are the best, and most purest works of
the justified, that being examined by the severity of the law, they are unable
to abide the presence thereof. Thus having showed the certain tokens of that
faith, whereunto righteousness is imputed, and the difference between the works
of the faithful, and the works required in the law, it follows.

Cap. 10.
To know what justification or righteousness it is, which the scripture
attributes to works, and also what faith it is against which S. James
speaks, and why Justification is imputed to faith, and not to works.

HOw diversely the word righteousness or justification is taken in the
Scriptures is by the viij. chapter declared, where it is evidently proved, that
justification (being taken for the free imputation of righteousness unto man,
whereby in the sight of God, he is discharged of giltiship) comes only
through faith in Christ, without respect of man's worthiness or works: by the
free benevolence of the will of God, to the praise, and glory of his grace. And
that the justification or righteousness of works, is nothing else, but the
declaration of the same righteousness of faith, by the outward fruits thereof:
which answers that which is first in this chapter required. Yet
notwithstanding, the ambitious pride of the adversaries, is neither ashamed,
nor afeard to hold plee as it were with God, for a part of the glory of man's
justification, arrogantly challenging the same, as a deserved duty purchased
by their works. The contrary whereof, as in the viij. chapter it is manifestly
proved, so is the fearful error thereof, by the iiij. chapter evidently
disproued. For it is there plain that all the works of corrupt nature are as
direct contrary to the law: as death unto life, darkness unto light, or cold
unto heat. And yet out of that hateful hourd must they of force take their
counterfeit store. Seeing they will needs have works to justify, for that
enferreth yt those works must go before justification, and so be wrought
before the man be righteous, which can be nothing but the fruits of a wicked
man, for until he be righteous, he is wicked, and by their doctrine he can not
be righteous, until the work have made him righteous: therefore whilst he is
wicked, it must needs be that he do the work, which shall make him righteous:
which is impossible as by the Scriptures does evidently appear. Thus writes
Paul to the Phillippians: That ye may be pure and without offense, until the
day of Christ, filled with the fruits of righteousness, which fruits are in
you by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Here in these words of
Paul we may learn the efficient cause, the formal cause, the material cause,
and the final cause of good woorks, by which causes it does evidently appear
that before justification, no good works can be wrought, and that the end of
good works is not to justify the doers of them, but only to the glory and
praise of God. Wherefore let us consider his words, first in that he says
that ye may be pure and without offense, he shows what is the office of a
christen man, namely, to labor for such pure and unspotted conversation, as no
offense may justly be gathered by the same He says moreover, Until the day of
Christ: to show that the endeavor toward goodness must have continuance,
through the whole course of the life. Having thus showed both the office of a
christen man, and the term of his continuance in thexecution thereof: he goes
forward to show what furniture is necessary in him to the performance of that
office: in saying: Filled with the fruits of righteousness. Here he shows
wherewith he must be filled, that must be pure and without offense: namely, with
the fruit of righteousness, that is, with good works. And as he teaches in
these words yt good works are ye furniture of a christen man: so does he
also teach in the same words, both the formal cause, and the material cause
of good works: for in that he says, with the fruits of righteousness, he
shows that righteousness or justification is the formal cause of them: which
as a good tree brings forth her good fruit: He also shows that the
materyall cause of any good work is, that it is a fruit of ryghteousnes,
whereby it is clearer then ye Sun, that there can be no fruit of
righteousness until the brynger forth thereof, be transformed into a tree of
righteousness, neither can the material cause have her being, until first the
formal cause be generate: for the tree must be before the fruit. And in this
place does Paul open the words of Esaias in the. 61. chapter where he says,
they shall be called trees of righteousness, which cause Paul does insinuate
by expressyng the effect: in that he says, filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which imployeth that the bryngers forth of those fruits, must
needs be treees of righteousness: whereby it is euydent that no woork is
good, but that which is brought forth by a righteous man: seeing that it is the
fruit of righteousness: but none is a righteous man until he be justified,
therefore can none bring forth good works, but such as be already
iustyfied. Whereupon it follows, that before justification no good woork can
be wrought. Paul goes forward and says: which fruits are in you by Jesus
Christ. Here does he euidentlye declare what is the efficient cause of good
works, namely, Jesus Christ: so that where before he had taught
justification, or righteousness to be the formal cause of good works, and
the fruits thereof to be the material cause, for that he would leave no
doubt concerning the effycyent cause, therefore he adds, which fruits are
in you by Jesus Christ. Where this is also to be noted, fully agreeing with that
which is said already, namelye, yt no good work can be wrought, but by him
in whom Jesus Christ does reign, that is, by yt justified: for hereby it is
plain yt no good work can be in man, onles it be by Jesus Christ: but Jesus
Christ works only in the justified: for his spirit does certify their
spirits in whom he dwells, that they are the children of God: there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: And in this place does Paul also
go forward in prosecutyng the word of Esaias, for where Esaye calls them
trees of righteousness, that is to say the bringers forth of the fruits of
ryghteousnes: he adds a plantyng of the Lords, to show that their
righteousness is the Lords work, and that does Paul open here where he
says, that good works, or fruits of righteousness are in us by Jesus
Christ: as though he had said, Jesus Christ has, made you to be trees of
righteousness, that you might bring forth the fruits thereof, namelye, good
works, and so declare your selves to be a plantyng of the Lords. This being
taught, Paul goes forward in declaryng the final cause of good works, in
saying, Unto the glory and praise of God, whereby it is plain out of these
words of Paul's, that Christ is the efficie^t cause of good works, and that
none can be wrought, but by him in whom the spirit of Christ dwells, that
is, none can be wrought but by the ryghteous, or justified, in that he says,
which fruits are in you by JESUS Christ. Whereby it is plain, that without
Jesus Christ they can not be in them. Where also is declared the material
cause of good works, Namely, a fruit of righteousness, so that unless it
be brought forth by a ryghteous tree, it can be no good work: he also
declares that the justification or righteousness of the doer of them, is the
formal cause of them, in that he calls them the fruit of righteousness,
for that declares the doers of them to be trees of righteousness as Esaias
terms them: whereby also appears, that no good work can be done, but by a
man already iustyfied: he also tells the final cause of them, in that he
says, Unto the glory and praise of God, concludyng even as Esaias in the fore
named place does. For after he had said that they might be called trees of
righteousness, a planting of the Lords, he adds for him to have glory in,
so that the end of good works is not to justify the doers, but to glorify
God: for unless the doers had been justified, before the works were wrought,
they could have been no fruit of righteousness. So that this place of Paul,
is an openyng of the forenamed place of Esaias, for where Esaye says, that they
might be called trees of righteousness, Paul expounds that to be, that
they should bring forth the fruits of righteousness: and where Esaye
calls them a plantyng of the Lords: that does Paul open, when he tells
that the fruit of righteousness must be in them by Jesus Christ. And where
Esaias says, for him to glory in, Paul says, to the glory and praise of
God. Thus by, comparyng together these words of Paul, and Esaias, it is more
then evident that good works be so far from iustyfiyng the doers, that
before iustificatyon no good work can be wrought. And Christ himself
affirms no less, when he says, that the tree must be good before it bring
forth good fruit: Every good tree (says he) brings forth good fruit.
So that first he acknowledges the tree to be good, before it brings forth
good fruit. And if the tree be evil, he affirms in the same place, It
brings forth evil fruit, concludyng plainly that no evil tree can bring
forth good fruit. Whereby it is evident, that the man must by faith be made
good, that is to say, righteous and iustyfied, before he can bring forth any
good works. So Good works follow justification and not justification work.
then the work is acknowledged for good, through mercy, which covers the
blemishes thereof, in respect that it is the work of a man, by faith already
justified, and clothed in the righteousness of Christ: and not in respect of
it self, which compared with the justice of God, is wickedness, as in the, 9.
Chapter was proved: for we be all by nature, the Ephesians. 2.
children of wrath, as Paul bears witness. And thus writes Augustine.
Sequuntur bona opera just fi atum, non praecedunt Libro de fide et operibus.
cap. 14.
iustificandum. Good works follow him that is justified, they go not before
him that is to be iustyfied. Again the same Augustine. Quid enim est boni
operis ante fidem? cum dicat Apostolus In euangel. Ioh. trac, 86.
quicquidsine fide fit, peccatum est, for what good work is there before
says? seeing the Apostle says that whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And
Christ himself says: without me you can do nothing: whereby it is euydent
that until they have the spirit of Christ, they can work no good work: but
none have the spirit of Christ, but such as be the children of God: for the
Scripture says, these be the children of GOD, that be led by the spyrite of
GOD: and none are the children of GOD, till they be iustyfied: for to be the
children of God, and to be iustyfied is all one thing: therefore none can
work good works, but such as be already iustyfied. Again to the workyng
of every good work there be two things specially required, namely,
understanding Two things required to every good work
and affection: So that the work that must please God must both be joined
with the knowledge of the will of God, and also be done with affection,
pleasure, and delight in the same. Touching that it should be done with Ose.
6.
knowledge, thus says God by the prophet. Ose. 4.
God desires in man more the knowledge of God, then burnt offrynges. And
before in his fourth chapter: where he gives a reason of the destructyon of
his people, he alleges only lack of knowledge, my people (says he) are
destroyed for lack of knowledge. And Christ himself says: Mat. 12.
do ye not therefore err, because you understand not the scryptures? And Job
affirms,: that to depart from evil, is understanding. Whereby it is Job. 23.
plain, that without understanding, or knowledge of the will of God, no man
can depart from evil, and do that which is good. And therefore does David
cry: Geeue me understanding, and I shall keep thy law, O geeue me
understanding that I may learn thy commandments. And that good works are
Psalm. 119
wrought through knowledge or understanding, it is by the scriptures evident:
Paul to the Phillippians writes thus: And this I pray, that your love may
abound yet more and more in knowledge and understanding, that ye may discern
things, that differ one from an other, that ye may be pure and without offense,
until the day of Christ. Here does Saint Paul not only pray, that their love
might abound in knowledge, but he also tells the cause of his prayer, namely,
that they might be able to discern things that differ: to judge between good
works, and counterfeite works: between true religion and hypocrisy: that so
through that knowledge, they might have judgment, how we cannot lead a pure
and christian life, without the knowledge of the will of God. Phil. 1.
to lead a pure and Christian life: which, without the knowledge of the will of
God, is impossible. And again ye same Paul to Philemon: See that the
fellowship (says he) that thou have in the faith be fruitful, through
knowledge of all good things which are in you by Jesus Christ. Hereby it
appears, that without understanding of the will of God, no good works can be
wrought. But Paul plainly affirms, that all they that be not already
justified in Christ, have no understanding. The natural man (says he)
perceaueth not the things, that belong to the 1. Cor. 2.
spirit of God, for they are but folishnes unto him. Then if he perceive not,
nor understand the things that please God. It appears by that is said
before, that he can by no means do the work that shall please God. Hereby it
both plainly appears that the knowledge of the will of God, is required to
good works, and also that none that is not justified, has that knowledge.

Now touching that unto good works, there is also required in ye doer
affection, and delight, toward ye same, yt is evident by the definition of
good works, expressed in the 8. chapter: where it appears that they be
nothing but an execution of the commandments: whereunto the whole affection
of man, both body, and soul is required as in the. 4. chapter appears: which
also is confirmed by the example of those of whose good works, the scripture
bears witness. Thus says David, If my delight Psalm. 119.
were not in thy law, I should have perished in my trouble, And again, my
delight was in thy commandments. And again, thy testimonies have I claymed
as mine heritage for ever, and why? they are the very joy of my heart. And
again, Lord what love have I unto thy law? all the day long is my study
therein: And again, my delight shall be ever in thy statutes: And again, for I
love thy commandments above gold, and precious stone. This affection of the
heart is required to the performaunce of Affection of the heart, is required to
the performaunce of good works.
good works, whereof how greatly they be short that be only possessed of the
natural man, and not justified in Christ, it is more then evident by the
plain words of God himself. In Genesis he says thus, my spirit shall not
always strive in man, because he is flesh. And a little after, The Lord saw
that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of
the thoughts of his heart were only evil continually. And again Man of his
own nature, has affection to rebession, and Just to all wickedness.
in the 8. chapter, the imaginations of man's heart is evil, even from his
youth. Here appears, that the affection of the natural man is only this,
affection to rebellion, desire so contempt, and lust to disobedience. Thus it
is evident, that in all those which be not already justified in Christ, their
is neither understanding how to please God, nor affection thereunto. And so
consequently no good work, seeing it is proved that no work ca^ be good, but
where both they be joined together, which also is evident by that which is
said in the fifth chapter.

Surely if these men had been as careful searchers of truth herein out of Gods
holy word: as they have been of mistes, and clouds out of Aristotle's schole,
to darcken and shadow the brightness thereof, they would never have sought with
so many subtle distinctions, and false definitions (without al ground of Gods
word) to have builded themselves, The Papists have builded a labirinth of
error and a ma^e, for their own confusion.
the labirinth of error, and maze of their own confusion: But would
contrariwise, have humbled themselves unto the spirit of God: and have
considered the end of his purpose in man's salvation. But they not considering
that to be the praise, and glory of his own grace, and enforcing the rigor of
the outward sound of some words in the scripture, have gathered works to be
the cause of ma^s justification, where, (if they more narrowly considered) they
should see that faith is the only mean, by which works are endued with the
title of goodness: forasmuch as no good work can be wrought, but by a man
already by faith justified, and appareled with the righteousness of Christ: by
means whereof, the blemishes and imperfections thereof, are through mercy
covered: which otherwise, if the same works were wrought by an unbelieving man:
they would appear in the sight of God most filthy, for of mercy it comes
(in respect of Christ) that the most perfect works are not laid to man's
charge for sin. Out of this ground, gathered from God truth, this rule of
Christian religion is concluded: that where soever righteousness, or
justification is in the Scripture imputed to works: it is not imputed to them,
as though they were the cause of righteousness: that is to sayas though they
going before justification, did procure or purchase the same: but far
otherwise: it is imputed unto them, as unto the fruit of the righteousness of
faith, which after justification does witness, and declare that the doer is
justified by faith, by apprehending of Christ: in respect of whom, mercy
covers the spots of that work, from the sight of Gods justice, so that
sin is not imputed to man for the same. Hic murus ahaeneus esto: Let this to
a Christian conscience be a wall of brass,

Now this foundation laid, let us seek (by this rule) to understand those
Scriptures, which the adversaries (for their filpursse doctrine of
justification of works) have forced into open combat both against their own
natural sense, and against the end and scope of Gods purpose, declared in the
Scriptures, touching man's justification: wherein to seek to answer to all
their subtle and shameless wranglings, were more tedious then profitable. And
(touching the multitude of words) more paynefull then possible. Though
touching matter (Gods truth being judge) enough has been said already,
where-fore to avoid all extremities, and keep my self within my power
touching words: (and yet not to pass the rest with silence) I will ouerlooke
a few of their principal rags, which they call reasons, wherein their
error being opened, the smaller, of them selves will drop a sunder untouched.
Wherefore first of all, that playnnes might be joined with the brevity for
which I labor: let the Scriptures which they make challengers in this fraye, be
gathered together into these sorts. In the first sort placyng those which
promising reward to works, procure men to labor for the same. In the second
sort, such as by the sound of words, seem to take justification from faith,
or gives the same to works. And in the last sort those Scriptures wherein the
righteous thallenge at Gods hands reward of their innocence and righteousness.
Wherefore by examples of every of these sorts, let us seek truly to understand
them, by their agreement with the^ selves and the rest of the Scriptures: that
as of God there is but one spirit, and one truth, so the same truth, by the
consent of the whole Scripture together may be acknowledged. For we may not
wrest such sense out of the Scripture (by urging the outward bark of some
particular places therein) as shall set them at strife with all the rest of
the body of the Scripture: and so imagine the spirit of truth at war with
him self. Wherefore for the first sort let these authorites serve: Every man
shall enjoy good according to the Such scriptures as promising reward to
works, procure men to labor for the same, are answered and expounded.
fruits of his mouth: and after the works of his hands shall he be
rewarded. Again: The son of man shall come in the glory of his father, with
his angels, and shall reward every man according to his deeds. And again: God
is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and labor, that
proceeds of love, which love ye showed toward his name, in that ye have
ministered unto the Saints, and yet minister. These examples may serve for
their argument of this sort: Well say they, seeing that man's reward is
according to his works, it appears that in works there is merit: and that
to man's iustyfication, works are required. Here I might briefly answer that
all these words, are spoken of works coming after iustyfication, which is
not the matter in questyon between us, for the question is about works going
before justification, for the purchase thereof. But for An answer to the
argument of the papists.
their great overthrow: Let it be imagined that these promyses are made to
works going before justification, and yet get they nothing thereby, for we
answer: they reason from a general, to a species, which in an affirmative
concludes fasly, as for example. If one seeing a living creature should reason
thus, yonder is a living creator, therefore it is a man. For as of living
creatures there be diverse kinds, whereof man is but one: so of rewards there
be diverse kinds, whereof merit, or desert is but one. For some rewards, are
freely given of love or favor: some through hope of further benefit: and some
of merit, desert, or duty etc. So yt as untruly this is concluded, that
because it is reward, therefore it is merit or duty, as the other, namely,
because it is a living creature, therefore it is a man, for in deed this
reward is of grace or favor, and not of merits, or works. As by these often
rehearsed words of Paul is euydent: For of favor Ephesians. 2.
(says he) ye are saved thorough faith, and not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, and not of works, least any man should boast him. And although
this (well considered, with the definytion of iustyfication in the. 8. chapter)
does fullye express what sense in these authorities may well be allowed: yet
shall the same in more larger form of words be declared thus. Forasmuch as
man's iustificatyon is a free remission of sin and imputatio^ of
righteousness unto man thorough faith in Christ: therefore that the
righteousness of the iustyfied, by this free grace might be declared: and the
bountiful liberalitye of Gods mercy made manifest to the praise and glory of
his grace, for this cause is the reward declared upon the outward work, as
upon the outward witness, of the inward righteousness of faith, to the open
declaration of the truth of Gods promyses concerning the woman's seed, namely,
Christ. By the Prophet Esaias he says Esaias. 53
thus: He shall justify the multitude, for he shall bear away their
sins. And again, the people shall be all ryghteous, and possess the land
for ever: Esaias. 60.
The flower of my plantyng, the works of my hands whereof I will rejoice.
And again, that they might Esa. 61
be called trees of righteousness. A plantyng of the Lords for him to
rejoice in. Wherefore for this cause, namely that the chosen might be declared
to be ryghteous in the eyes of all the world, and the triumph of Gods grace,
or favor thereby celebrated, by the open performaunce of these his promises:
that he might be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged: In
consideration hereof I say, he openly pronounces the favorable reward,
according to the open, and manifest works or fruits of the righteousness of
faith: induyng them with the reward of righteousness, which reward is of
favor, in respect of Christ apprehended by faith, and yet pronounced upon the
works, as upon that outward fruit, whereby the inward righteousness of
faith is declared, which he does to this end, that the elect may be
declared to be iustyfied, and the performaunce of his promyses in Christ made
apparaunt: so that for this cause, namelye, to iustyfie Gods promise concerning
this free, and merciful deliverance in the sight of all men, to the increase
of the glory of his grace: that as all men heard the promise, so all may
witness the performaunce thereof. For this cause I say is the favorable
reward, pronounced according to the outward works, or fruits of the
righteousness of faith: whereas if it had been pronounced according to the
faith, no man could have witnessed the true performaunce of the promise. And
this is the cause why the favorable reward, is declared upon the works.
And not that the works, are the cause of the reward. For the only end of Gods
actiou herein is (as Paul testifies) the praise of the glory of his grace,
which is also euydent by this saying of the Phrophet Ezechyell. And ye shall
know that I am the Lord, when I shall do good to you for mine own names sake,
and not according to your most wicked offenses. By which words it appears,
that God will not only be ryghteous in the performance of his free, and
merciful promise, but he will have all the world both see, and witness the
same: for he says in this promise you shall know that I am the Lord etc.
So that hereby, God has promised to declare his free favor, in such an
outward subject, as man may be able to see and wytnes the fulfilling thereof,
in that he says, ye shall know, and yet therewyth all he geeueth a determinate
caveat, that, that subject wherein his goodness shall be declared, shall, not
be the cause of his goodness: expressyng plainly what shall be the cause
thereof: namely his own glory. Affirming that it shall be for his own names
sake. Not only exceptyng works from being the cause, but also to express
their great need of mercy, to cover their spots showed them (touching their
own nature) how foul they be: in saying, And not according to your most
wicked offenses: And in both the other places before rehearsed out of Esaias,
where he promises to make all his Esa. 60. 61.
people ryghteous, and that they should be called trees of righteousness. This
is specially to be noted: that in both those places, he affirms their
righteousness shall be the flower of his plantyng, the works of his hands,
and not of their own: addyng thereto the cause thereof: namely, for him to
rejoice in. That is according to Saint Paul's words: For the praise and
glory of his grace. And to this end, are Ephesians. 1.
all the works of GOD done, that he may rejoice, and have glory in them.
Whereby it appears, that his glory, and not man's works is the cause of the
reward: And that works do nothing else, but declare, that that man upon
whom the free reward, and performaunce of the merciful promise is bestowed,
is righteous: and has by faith attained the promise. The reward is declared
upon works, as upon that only subject, which was able to manifest the
righteousness of faith: And to make the performaunce of Gods merciful, and
free promise apparaunt to all men: that he might be justified in his saying,
and overcome when he is judged. Having now showed in what sort al places of
the scripture (which attribute rewards unto works) are to be understand:
excludyng utterly man's merit or desert: according to the true nature of grace
and faith, expressed in the. 8. Chapter, and also agreeable unto ye end of Gods
purpose expressed, both by these places before rehearsed out of the prophets,
and also by Paul: namely, reseruyng unto his free favor and grace, the whole
praise and glory of this work, as the final cause thereof: having showed What
price and value our works is accounted of in the scriptures.
this, I will return to show what price man's works are of, by the
scriptures, and how the ancient fathers accounted of them.

First it is said in Genesis: the imagination Genesis 8.
of man's heart is evil even from his youth. And it is said in Job. Job. 4.
behold he found untruth in his servants: and in his Angels there was
follye: how much more in those that dwell in houses of clay? and whose
foundatyon is but duste. And again, How may a man compared unto GOD Job. 25.
be iustyfied? or how can he be clean that is borne of a woman? behold the
Moon shyneth not in comparyson of him: and the Stars are unclean in his
sight: then how much more man that is but corruption, and the son of man
that is but a woorme. And again: Who can say, my heart Pro. 20
is clean: I am pure from sin? And again: Enter not into judgment with
Psalm. 143.
thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be iustyfied. And again
Though thou wash thee with Nitrus, Iere. 1
and take thee much Soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the
Lord GOD. Again: We are Esa. 64.
all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as menstruous
clothes. Again: All men are liers. Again: The Job. 15
heart of man is wicked and unsearchable Again: What is man that he should be
clean, and he that is borne of a woman that he should be ruste? behold he
found no stedfastnes in his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his
sight, how much more is man abominable, and filthy which drinks iniquity
like water? Again: All the children of men are unrighteous: yea all their
works are unrighteous, and there is no truth in them. Again: In my flesh
dwells 3. Esor. 4.
no good things. And again: All Romans 7.
have gone out of the way, and all have been made unprofitable. Again: There
is none righteous, no not one: Romans 3.
they are all become abominable: there is none that does good, no not one. And
Christ him self says: When you have done all that is commanded you, say you
be unprofitable servants. Upon the which words of Christ, it shall not be
amiss to note, what one of the Popes own Cardinals Thomas de Vio writes:
Neta parabolam pro memoria, et conclusionem Cardinal Caietan.
pro documento: si seruando onmia praecepta sunnis inutiles, nec habemus vnde
superbiamus, quid sentiendum de nobisipsis est, qui non omnia seruamus, qui
multorum rei sumus? sed quid de nobis dico quum nullus dicere possit, quod
debeham feci? nisi qui exemptus est a dicendo, dimitte nobis debita nostra.
Quod ergo dicitur quum fecer it is omnia, non dicitur, quod facturi essent omnia,
sed quod si etiam facerent omnia: sed quod quum merita habuerint facientium
omnia praecepta, recognoscant se seruos inutiles: vt a fortiori recognoscant se
minus quam inutiles: hoc est debiteres, and reos multorum quae debebant, seu
debent facere: Note the parable for remembrance, and the conclusion for your
learning: if in keeping all the commandments we be unprofitable, and have
nothing to be proud of, what shall we think of our selves which do not keep
all, which be guilty in many of them? If no man can do that he ought, I pray
you, what place leaves this Cardinal to undue works, or works of sunetero
gation.
what I say shall we think of our selves, when none of us all can say, I have
done that I ought? unless any be privileged from saying, forgive us our
trespasses. Wherefore, where it is said, when ye have done all things, it is
not therefore said as though they could do all things: but for this cause, that
though they could do all things, and though they could have the merits of
such, as Thus can God use his enemies, to make them sometimes confess the
truth against them selves.
perform all the commandments, they must acknowledge them selves
unprofitable servants: that by a much stronger argument they might acknowledge
the^ selves less then unprofitable, that is, detters and guilty of many
things, which they ought, and are bound to do. Which things Gregorye well
understood, when he said: Humana iustitia diuinae Morah. lib. cap. 28.
iustitia comparata, iniustitia est: quia and lucerna in tenebris fulgere
cernitur, sed in Solis radiis posita tenebratur: Man's righteousness compared
with the justice of God, is wickedness: for even a candle is seen to shine in
the dark, but being set in the beams of the Sun it is darkened. Having now
showed (by these authorities) what is ye worthiness of man's works, it plainly
appears what merit is in them, namely, ye merit of damnation. And The
opinion of y fa. these concerning merits
touching ye opinion of ye fathers concerning merits. Thus writes Origin:
Sicut hoc quod subsistimus, non potest intelligi, quia ex operis nostri mercede
subsistimus, sed euidenter Origenes. Romans 4.
dei munus est quod simus, and gratia conditoris qui nos esse voluit, ita et si
haereditatem promissonum dei capiamus, diuina gratia est, non alicuius debiti,
aut operis merces: As it can not be understand that we be, that which we now
be, for the hire of our own work: but that we be, is evidently the gift of
God, and the favor of the creator which would have us to be: even so, although
we may receive the inheritance of the promise of God, it comes of the favor
of God, not being the hire of any duty, or work. And thus says S. Augustine
writing upon these words of the 30. Psalm. Deliver me in thy righteousness. Quis
(inquam) Augustine. in Psalm. 30,
est qui scruatur gratis? is in quo non inuenit seruator quod coronet, sed quod
damnet, non inuenit merita bonorum, sed inuenit merita suppliciorum: Who is he
(I say) that is saved freely? Even he in whom the Savior finds nothing to
crown, but to condemn, no merit of good things, but desert of punishment.
Again the same Augustine in his epistle to Pauline: Operibus debitum redditur,
gratia gratis datur: vnde and nuncupatur, si quis autem dixerit, quod gratiam
been opera^di fides mereatur: negare non possumus. Imo gratis dedisse
confitemur. Si autem ex fide, quomodo gratis? Quod enim fides meretur, cur non
potius redditur, quam donatur? Non dicat hoc homo fidelis: quia cum dixerit, vt
merear iustificationem habeo fidem: respondetur ei, quid habes quod non
accepisti? Cum igitur fides impetrat iustificationem (sicut vnicuique deus
partitus est mensuram and ipsius fidei) non gratiam dei aliquid meriti pracedit
humani, sed ipsa gratia meretur augeri, vt aucta mereatur perfici: Duty is
rewarded to works, of favor it is freely given, whereby also it is called
grace. But if any say that faith of well doing may deserve grace, we can not We
have no faith that can deserve grace, for it is freely given us of God.
deny, but we confess him to have given it freely. But if it be of faith, how
is it freely, that which faith deserves, why is it not rather repayed then
freely given? A faithful man may not say this: for if he say, I have faith
that I may deserve justification: it shall be answered unto him: what have
thou, that thou have not received. Therefore when faith obtains justification,
(according as God has divided to every man the measure even of the same faith)
there goes no merits of man before the grace of God: but the grace it self
deserves to be increased, that being increased it There goes no merits of
man before the grace of God.
may deserve to be perfected. Now forasmuch as S. Augustine does use here ye
word duty (which is also an usual word with many of the Fathers in this
matter) therefore I think it convenient to say somewhat concerning ye meaning
thereof: wherefore, ye word duty, or debt, Duty, or debt, has two senses.
is taken in two senses, or meanings. The one for recompense, or merit of
labor or works: as when an hired servant having finished his appointed
labor, does challenge his hire. Duty or debt (in that respect) is merit or
desert. And in yt sense does S. Paul take ye word, where he says: To him that
works, the reward is not counted of He that labors is worthy of his hire.
favor, but of duty. The other sense or meaning thereof, is best declared by an
example thus: Admit one man beholding an other in extreme misery, (through
such debt as he by no means is able to satisfy) and he seeing the penury of
this man: moved by compassion, takes upon him the debt: promising freely the
discharge thereof, and for sure confirmation of his promise herein to the needy
wretch, he gives him his obligation A debt that grows of love, and not of
duty.
under his hand and seal. This being demanded by the poor soul at the
appointed time: may be (in a sort) called duty or debt: though not in respect
of desert or merit: yet in respect of the free gift: confirmed by the geuers
hand writing: and in this signification the word duty, or debt infers no
desert or merit, but contrariwise the condition being known, it does make
apparaunt, the free, bountiful, and liberal grace of the geuer: and if the
adversaries would be content in this sort to understand the word duty, or
debt in this matter, (as of right they ought) Where this word debt or duty
is truly vnstand. there no desert is looked for.
they had long a go given over, this wicked and vain brag of merit.
Where-fore now to return again to the authority of the Fathers. The
foresaid Augustine in his book concerning nature and grace writes thus: Haec
igitur Christi gratia (sine qua nec infantes, nec De natura and gratia. Cvp, 4.
oetate grandes salui fieri possunt) non meritis redditur, sed gratis datur,
propter quod gratia nominatur. Therefore this grace of Christ (without which
neither young, nor old can be saved) is not recompensed The grace of Christ
comes freely, and not for merues sake. August. de c^uitate dei lib. 14. cap. 1
to merits, but it is freely given, for the which cause, it is called grace and
favor. And again: Mortis autem regnum in homines vsque adeo dominatum est: vt
omnes in secundam quoque mortem (cuius nullus est finis) poena debita
praecipites ageret, nisi inde indebita dei gratia aliquos liberaret. For the
kingdom of death did so reign over all men, that also into the second death
(whereof there is no end) deserved punishment would drive all men headlong, if
the undeserved favor of God, should not deliver some from thence. Again
Augustine: Per ipsam quippe iustificamur grat^s^, id est, nullis nostrorum
operum praecedent August. de spiritu et litera. cap. 18
bus mertis, alioquin gratia iam non esset gratia. For by grace we are freely
justified, that is without any merits of our works going before, or else
grace is not grace. And again: colligimus Ibidem. Cap. 13.
non iustificari hominem praeceptis benae vitae, nisi per fidem Jesus Christi:
hoc est, non lege operum, sed lege fidei: non litera sed spiritu: non factorum
meritis, sed gratuita gratia. We gather that man is By faith to Jesus Christ
we are justified.
not justified by precepts of good life, but by faith of Jesus Christ, that is,
not thorough the law of works, but by the law of faith: not by the letter,
but by the spirit: not by merits of works, but thoroughe free favor or
grace. And again: Nullis nostris Ibide^ in Psalm. 31.
praecedentibus meritis, sed praeueniente nos misericordia Domini Dei nostri,
iustificamur. We are justified by no foregone merytes of ours, but by the
mercy of the No merits but mercy preue^ed out justification. August in
expositione 2. Psalm. 31. Ibide^ in Psalm. 18.
lord our God preventing us. And again Et exultate: subaudis in Domino. Quare?
Quia iam iusti: Vnde iusti? Non meritis vestris, sed gratia illius. And
rejoice: namelye in the Lord. Wherefore? because now ye be ryghteous. By
what means be ye righteous? not by your merytes but by his grace. Again,
Coeli, id est, Apostoli, enarrant gloriam Dei, positam in Christo Jesus, per
gratiam in remissionem peccatorum, o^nes enim peccauerunt, and egent gloria
dei, iustificati gratis per sanguine^ ipsius: quia gratis, ideo gratia: no^ est
enim gratia nisi gratuita: quia nihil boni ante feceramus, vnde talia dona
mereremur magis quia non gratis inferretur supplicium, ideo gratis praestitum
est beneficium. Nihil praecesserat in meritis nostris, nisi vnde damnari
deberemus, ille autem non propter nostram iustitiam, sed propter suam
misericordiam, saluos nos fecit per lauacrum regenerationis. The heavens that
is, the Apostles, declare the glory of GOD placed in Christ Jesus, for the
remission We are freely justified in the blood of Christ.
of sins thorough grace: for all have sinned, and stand in need of the
glory of God, and are iustyfied freelye thorough his blood. And because it is
freelye done, therefore it is favor, for it is not favor unless it be
undeserved: for no goodness wrought we before, wherewyth to deserve so
excellent gifts: but rather because punishment should not be duelye
executed: therefore was the benefit franckly geeuen: for in our merits there
went nothing before, but that for which we ought to have been God of his own
mercy has saved us.
damned: but he saved us not for our own righteousness, but for his own
mercy by the fountain of the new birth. And again: Sed vt iustificentur
Ide^ in Psalm. 5.
praecedit vocatio: quia no est meritorum, sed gratiae Dei. But that men should
be justified their calling goes before, which is not of merit, but of the
favor of God. And again, Propter nomen tuum, Ide^ in Psalm. 142.
domine viuificabis me, attendite quantum potestis gratiae commendationem, qua
gratis salui facti estis: propter nomen tuum Domine viuificabis me, non nobis
Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam: propter nomen tuum Domine
viuificabis me in tua iustitia, non in mea: non quia ego merui, sed quia tu
misereris: nam etsi meum ostenderem meritum, nihil abs te mererer, nisi
supplicium, auulsisti merita mea, inseruisti dona tua. Lord thou shall quicken
me for God for the glory of his names. ache does freelye sane us by his grace
and mercy.
thy names sake: Mark diligently the commendacion of that grace whereby ye
are freelye saved: Lord for thy names sake shall thou quicken me, not unto us
Lord not unto us, but unto thy name geeue the glory: Lord for thy name sake
shalt thou quicken me in thy righteousness, not in mine: not because I have
deserved it, but because thou have mercy on me: for if I should show my
merit I should deserve nothing of the punishment, thou have weeded out my
merytes, and haste ingraft thy free gift. And again, Ipsa est perfectio
hominis: inuenisse Idem de te^pore sermon 49.
se non esse perfectum. That is man's perfection, to know himself to be
imperfect. And again, Sicut nulla sunt tam detestanda facinora, quae possunt
gratiae arcere donum, Ita nulla possunt tam praeclara opera existere, Ambro. de
vocatio. gent. libro. 1. cap. 5.
quibus hoc quod gratis tribuitur: per retributionis iudicium debeatur,
vilesceret enim redemptio sanguinis Christi, nec misericerdiae Dei humianorum
operum praerogatiua succumberet, si iustificatio qua fit per gratiam, meritis
praecedentibus deberetur, vt non munus largientis, sed merces esset operantis.
Like as there is none so detestable outrages, as can restrain the free gift of
grace, so can there be no works so excellent, that this (which is freelye
geeuen) should be dew unto them by actyon of debte: for then the redemptyon
of Christ should in deed be nothing worth, neither should the worthynes
of man's works be inferyor to the mercy of GOD, if the justification which
is given of grace, should be a debt dew unto merits, so it should not be
the larges of the geeuer, but the dew hyer of a laborer. And again Augustine
says. Nec quisquam Ad valent. epist. 46
dicat meritis suorum operum, aut meritis crationum suarum, vel meritis fidei
suae, traditam Dei gratiam, and putetur verum esse quod illi haeretici dicunt,
gratiam Dei secundum merita nostra dari, quod omnium est falsissimum. Let noe
man say that for the merits of his works, or for the merits of his prayers,
or for the merits of his faith, the grace of God is delivered unto him: And so
that which those heretyckes say be counte^d true, namelye, that according to
our merits the grace of God is geeuen: then the which nothing can be more
Idem lib. 2. homiliarum homilia. 14 Augustine calls such heretics, as
ascribe grace to merit. August. Sexto, epist. 105.
false. And again. Gratias agamus Domino, and saluatori nostro qui nos nullis
praece^dentibus meritis vnlneratos curauit. Let us geeue thanks unto our
Lord, and Savior which healed us (being wounded) without any foregone
merytes of ours. Possunt quidem dicere remissionem peccatorum esse gratiam,
quae nullis praecedentibus meritis datur. They may in deed affirm remission
of sins, to be grace which is given to no foregone merytes. Again the same
Augustine writes against the heresy of extollyng man's merytes. Vnde
supradictam Epistolam, Aug. Valentino, et fratribus epist. 46
ad Sextum Romanae Ecclesiae praesbyteron, co ntra nouos haereticos Pelagianos
noueritis esse conscriptam, qui dicunt gratiam Dei, secundum merita dari, vt
qui gloriatur non in Domino, sed in seipso glorietur, hoc est in homine non in
Domino. VVhereupon understand that the forenamed Epistle (to Sixtus an elder of
the Church of Rome,) is written against the Pelagians the new heretics,
which affirm the grace of GOD to be geeuen according to merytes: that he
that gloryeth, should not glory in the Lord but in him self, that is in man,
and not in the Lord: Would not the same Augustine think you, if he now were
living attribute the same name of heretics unto the Papists, which in this
point affirm Pelagians heresy? Yes assuredly, but hear him further. Thus
writes he in an other place. Sed Pelagianis non immerito anathema dicimus,
qui tam sunt inimici gratiae Contra duas epist. pelagionorum. Lib. 1
Dei (quae venit per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum) vt eam dicant non gratis,
sed secundum merita nostra dari: ac si gratia non iam sit gratia. Neither do
we unworthily accurse the Pelagians which be such enemies unto the grace of
God (which comes by Jesus Christ our Lord) that they affirm the same not
to be freely given: but according unto our merytes: as though grace were now
no grace. And again. Nulla ne ergo sunt merita iustorum? sunt plane, quia
iusti sunt: sed vt Ide^ ad Sextum Romans praesi epist. 105.
iusti fierent merita non fecerunt: iusti enim facti sunt sed sicut dicit
Apostolus iustificati gratis per gratiam ipsius. Then are there no merytes of
the ryghteous? yes in deed are there: because the doers be ryghteous, but that
they should be made ryghteous, their merytes wrought not that, they in deed
be made ryghteous but (as the Apostle says) they are iustyfied freely by his
grace. And Idem libro. 3. contra pelag. hipognast. cap. 37.
again he affirms. Deum nullis meritis hominum gratiam suam dare. That GOD
geeueth his grace in respect of noe man's merytes. And again Chrisostom says
thus. Et si millies moriamur: and si omnes virtutes animae expleamus^: nihil
dignum gerimus ad ea, quae ipsi a De compu^tions cordis.
deo percepimus. Although we should dye a thousand times: and though we should
accomplish all the virtues of the mind: yet do we nothing worthy of those
things, which we receive of GOD. Again Bernard in his: 53. Sermon: Hoc totum
hominis meritum, si totam spem ponat in eo, qui totum saluum fecit. This is the
whole merit of man: if he put his whole trust in him, that has saved the
whole. Unto this place may be applied all the aucthorities rehearsed in the 8.
Chapter about the justification of faith.

Having now showed what man's merit, or deserte is: I think it now convenient
to proceed to the consideration of those authorities, which I put in the
second sort: namely, such places of Scripture, as either seem with outward
sound of words, to take justification from faith, or attribute the same to
works: through coulor, whereof some of the adversaries reason thus. Paul
(say they) has nothing The reasoning of the aduersarirs
more strongly to prove justification of faith: then that the Scripture
imputes faith unto Abraham, for righteousness: wherefore if now we can show,
that God also in the Scriptures imputes righteousness unto works: have not we
our justification of faith and works, and not yours of faith only? It is
said of Phinees in the 106. Psalm. that his act was imputed to him for
righteousness: And likewise in Deutronomy of him that delivered his neighbors
pledge, that it shall be righteousness unto him, before the Lord his God. And
likewise S. James says, was not Abraham our father justified by works? in
offering his son Isaac upon the altar? Whereupon they conclude, that as man
is not justified by works: so is he not justified by faith without works:
flatly against S. Paul, who concludes plainly, that man is justified of
favor through faith without works Man is justified through faith without
works.
where he tells both the final cause of that liberal gift (namely, the
praise and glory of the grace, or favor of God) and also he tells the reason
why he so vehemently excludes works, namely, least any man should beast:
that is, through blind presumption should challenge any part of ye glory of
that work, which God has reserved to himself for his special triumph: Now
if the adversaries will needs urge that the word, righteousness, or
justification, has the same signification in these places by the^ alleged,
that it has in Paul: Do they not tear in sunder the spirit of truth, and
set him at war with himself? forasmuch as by ye rigor of words they be
contrary. Paul says fiatly, and affirms it by many discourses that faith
without work justifies: and Romans 3.
that by works no man living shall be justified: but these aucthorities
affirm Gal. 2. 25y works no man living shall be justified.
the contrary, that these men by works were justified.

Now if they will needs affirm that both in Paul, and in these places which
they allege the word righteousness, or iustifycation has one sense: is not
this a doctrine that either must accuse Paul of ignorance of the sense of the
ancient scriptures, or of error in his own, and rob God of his final
triumph, namely, of his glory, and utter spoylinge man of the assurance of
Gods favor in Christ: for if his assurance thereof be once joined with the
condition of his own desert or works: surely he falls by and by into one of
our Physicians new found Agewes: A triple tertian quotidian: he can never know
when he is without a fit. Surely it were to hard for Peter Lumbard him self,
with Peter Lom bard.
both his foundations of hope, to spy out a time to find him self clear from
a fit: if for one mass while, on the Sunday, his imagination could mock
him that he were creeping to godward: The true testimony of his conscience
might assure him, that all the rest of the week after, he were gallopping to
the deuilward. The Lord has blessed his elect from such assurance. Wherefore
let us now reverently with Paul have respect unto the final end of Gods
work in this cause. Namely, to him only to yield all the glory, and to man
assurance and undoubted possession of his favor in Christ. And we shall
easily see in these places no contrarictie, but most sweet consent. Let us
follow the rule of the ancient fathers in serching the truth of doubtful
sentences. Thus says Hilarious. Intelligentia dictorum, ex causis est
assumenda dicendi, quia non sermoni Hilla. lib. 4. de trinitate.
res, sed reiest sermo subiectus. The meaning of words is to be gathered by
the causes of the speaking, for the matter is not subject to the word: but
the word to the matter. Again Jerome upon the Epistile to the Galathians
says thus. Nec putemus in verbis Scripturarum esse Euangelium, sed in sensu:
Hier. in epist. ad Gal. Cap. 1.
non in superficie, sed non medulla: non in fermonum folus, sed in radice
rationis. Neither let us think that the gospel, consists in the words of
the Scripture but in The (...)e of the scripture consists not in the words,
but in the meaning of the same.
the meaning: not in the barck, but in the pith: not in the leaves of words
but in the root of the meaning. Wherefore let us (in following the Cou^fell of
these ancient fathers) seek such meanynges, and sense of these Scriptures as
may express their consent with the rest of the Scriptures. And have respect
unto the final cause of Gods purpose. Namely (as I have often said) that unto
his favor, and grace for this so free a benifite, all praise and glory may
redou^de. That al works wrought by man before justification, be nothing else
but the evil fruit of an evil tree, it is before evidently proved: And so
utterly unable to abide the presence of gods justice. Whereby it follows of
necessity, that the works alleged (in these their authorities) were not
there meant, for works going before justification; as causes thereof, but in
deed, for such works as following the same, declared Works follow
justification.
manefestly the righteousness which (to the doers of them) was offree favor
through faith imputed. For that the works of a man (by faith) already
justified, be in the sight of God allowed for ryghteous, by not having sin
imputed unto them: it is not only not denied, but most constantly affirmed.
For how can it be otherwise, but that God in beholding in them his own most
glorious Image, wherewith through grace in respect of faith they be clothed.
He must both acknowledge it, and delight therein. But that their spots and
blemishes are now covered with the righteousness of Christ, this comes not
to them either by them selves, or in respect of them selves, but only by grace
or favor through faith: as is showed before. For they being the works of a
man, already by faith justified and clothed in the righteousness of Christ:
Therefore they (thereby clothed in the same righteousness, having their spots
and blemishes through mercy therewith covered) are acknowledged for righteous.
They are accepted for good fruit, because they were brought forth by a good
free. So that faith by apprehendyng of Christ, and his righteousness in the
promise, through grace and favor, attayneth man's justification: Faith
apprehends righteousness, and works declare the apprehension.
So the works or fruits of the righteousness of ye same faith, do manyfestly
declare and witness, the doer of them to be righteous. That is, as faith
apprehe^deth righteousness in the free promise for man: so the works or fruits
of that righteousness of faith, do declare and testify that he is justified.
Wherefore, whersoeuer in the Scriptures man is said to be justified by works:
the meaning is, that he is by works declared and known to be a righteous
man. And not that the works were the cause of his righteousness. This being
thus considered, there appears between Paul, and the aucthorities by them
alleged, no strife, but most sweet agreement. For as Paul tells the means
how a man is justified: so the other show and declare how man is openly
known to be righteous or justified. Now mark gentle reader, how this
doctrine tends fully to that end, where unto Saint Paul directs his
course: Namely, that the whole glory may redound to GOD alone: and that man
may have a sure possession of Gods favor in Christ.

First, in that by iustifycation of works, this only is to be understand,
that man by works is declared to be righteous: it concludes (even as in the
answer to their former aucthorities) that all the world may acknowledge the
performaunce of Gods mercyful promise in Christ, toward the elect. Who by
their works are evidently declared Good works declare us to be righteous.
to be righteous. And besides that it reserueth the whole glory of that work
to GOD alone, forasmuch as works do only declare, and witness man's
righteousness, and challenge to be no cause of the same. Thus unto God is his
prerogative reserved unblemished: Namely all the glory.

Now touching man, in that they declare the certain possession of the
righteousness of faith, they witness in him the estate of a most quiet, and
joyful conscience, and that he is through faith, assured of the favor of God
in Christ. Now it is apparent, what righteousness of the Scripture attributes
to faith, and what to works. Namely, that by faith man apprehends Christ in
the promise, by whom he Faith apprehends Christ, by whom we are made
righteous.
is made righteous: and by works or fruits of the righteousness of faith, man
is declared and known to be righteous: and has his conscience thereby reposed
in the sure possession of Gods favor in Christ.

Thus having showed what justification the Scriptures attribute unto works, I
think it also convenient to show what faith it is, which James disableth to
justification. His words be these, what avails it my brethren though a man
say he has faith, when The meaning of S. James words.
he has no deeds? can faith save him? Here even at the first it is evident,
that S. James in this place inueyeth not against faith in deed: but against ye
bare name or title of faith: in such certain licentious Jews Christened as
(only by the same) seemed to challenge justification. For he says not,
though a man have faith without deeds: But he says, though a man say he has
faith. Whereby it is evident that he only enueyeth against the name, or title
of faith, which by them was applied unto them selves unworthily, and therefore
in vain. And doubting that some men might apply his words against faith in
deed, he makes his entrye warely, not against faith, but agynste a vain
name, or title of faith: in saying: Though a man say he has faith, and not
though a Note here the manner of speaking of S. James.
man have faith: which he might think sufficyent warnyng to all men that he
meant not to inueigh against true faith, and therefore he goes forward
labouryng against that their vain opinion, under the same name or title which
they attributed unto it, calling it faith as they did: thynkyng that (his
former warnyng) in the beginning (in saying, though a man says he has
faith) and not, though he have faith in deed, had been a suffycient warnyng,
that he meant not true faith, but only a vain opinion, termed of them by the
name of faith: and that now he might at his own liberty (without suspicion
of enueyghing against true faith) beat down that wicked opinion under the same
name or title by which they termed it: namely under the name of faith, and
thereupon he adds: can faith save him? meaning only such faith as they make
their challenge by, or as he at his entrance enueighed against: that is the
bare name or title of faith, and that this was his meaning, it is plain by
that which follows, in that he goes about to open their error as it were
by comparison: in showing how far, their vain opinion (which they called
faith) dyffered from true faith in deed, in saying: If a brother or sister be
naked or destytute of daily food, and one of you say unto him, depart in
peace, warm your selves, and fill your bellies: notwythstandyng ye geeue not
them those things which are needful to the body: what helps it? even so
faith if it have no deeds, is dead Faith with out works is a dead faith.
in it self, as though he had said unto them. Brethren what do you thynk of
faith? do ye think that only the bare name, or title thereof, is sufficient
to justification? or do ye think that true faith can see the necessity of
their needy brother or sister vnrelieued? no, no, deceive not your selves: for
love, charity, and all good works, can no more be absent True faith cannot be
without good fruits.
from faith in deed, then heat from fire: and that faith which lacks those
fruits, is no more faith, then a dead man is a man: but is in deed dead and
no faith at all, but only a bare name, or title of faith, with the vain cloak
whereof, ye beguyle your selves. Do ye think this vain braggyng of faith
amongst your selves can justify you? or do ye think that because ye believe
God, is, that ye therefore shall be saved? nay brethren be not so vainly carried
away, if that might serve the turn, the devils would be saved as well as you,
for they have that faith common with you: for they both believe that God is,
and tremble at him. But shall I by example paint unto you your vanity, whereby
you may see that your bragging title of faith, which has no fruits, nor
works to (...) ye same, is but dead, and no faith in deed? Then compare it
with the true faith, which in our father Abraham was manifest, whom the
apparaunt fruits, or works of righteousness Abraham's faith had fruits.
thereof, evidently declared, to be a righteous man. His faith lay not lurkyng
in him in idle name, without fruit or works: no, no, his faith had life,
which by the fruit was made manifest, in offering his son Isaac, being
certain, that the death, or sacrifice of his son, could nothing at all
hinder the promise of God: but that notwithstanding God both could, and would
perform his promise and word. Thus was his faith witnessed by his works.
And the perfectnes thereof made apparent, so that the truth of the Scripture
(which said: Abraham believed God, and that was imputed to him for
righteousness) was by his works made so euydent: that he was endued with
the name of ryghteous, and was called the friend of God. Whereby it is euydent
unto you, that by deeds, as the fruits of the righteousness of his faith,
his righteousness was declared: and he known for a ryghteous man: and not by
the idle name of faith only, without works, which (as I said before) is
dead, and no faith at all. And likewise Kahab the harlotte (in lodginge the
messengers of Gods people) was declared to be ryghteous. Wherefore to
conclude, lay away your vain bragges of your idle, and bare name of faith:
for as the body that wants spirit is dead: so assuredly this which you
term faith, having no works to witness the same unto you is dead, and no faith
at all, but a vain or light opinion. Thus to him (that with a single eye,
consydereth both the end of S. James his purpose, and also thoroughly the order
of his words) it appears plainly, that he enueigheth S. James enueigheth
not against a true faith but against a feigned and false faith
not against faith, in deed: but against a lose, and licentious opinion, which
those Jews unto whom he writ, had covered under the name, or title of faith.

Now touching their argument grounded upon the.xix. of Matthew: Where a
certain ruler came to Christ, and asked of him, what good thing he should
Math. 19
do, that he might have eternal life, Christ answered, if thou will enter
into life, keep my commandments: here say they, it appears, that keeping
The keeping of the commandments of God were hable to justify us, if we were
hable to observe them Leuit. 18
of the commandments (which is but works) do justify. That the keeping
of the commandments is able to justify him, that were able to observe the^,
it was never doubted of. For Moses witnesses, that he that does them, shall
live thereby: but that no man has power to keep the^, it is evidently proved
already, neither by nature, as now it is No man has nor can keep the laws as
God requires them to be kept A questyon moved by a lawyer unto Christ.
corrupt, nor by grace, in the.iiij. and.ix. chapters. Wherefore (gentle
reader) mark the circumstaunce: first who asks the question. A ruler or
Lawier, who dreamed of nothing, but the outward obseruaunce of the law.
Secondly, what is the question: namely, What good thing he might do, to have
everlasting life? Mark, that this his whole question was not otherwise to
learn the way to everlasting life, then by deeds or works: in asking what
thing he should do. Wherefore what directer answer could be given, then that
which Christ used, seeing the question was only of works? namely, keep the
commandments: seeing no other works Christ's answer to the lawiers question
could serve that turn. But peradventure some of them will say, If Christ had
not known him able to keep the commandments, he surely would have taught
him the way possible to him. Surely these be tender hearts, that will teach the
holy ghost to be pitiful: but Christ him self said, he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, that is, he came not to call such
fellows as would justify themselves: Luke 5.
but such as would humble themselves to his iustyfication. Wherefore Christ
(seeing the filthy pride of his heart) even in the due answer of his questyon,
offered him the glass of the Law, (whereof he bragged in his heart) to see
his own filthiness therein: that by the fight thereof, he might have trained
him to have framed a more humble question, concerning the way to heaven. But
what answer makes he? goes he not on in the justification of himself, in
saying? All this have I kept from my youth upward: what lack I yet? Then Christ
to open to his eyes the pack of his corruption, applies to his very heart a
corsiue, to teach him that the law is spirytual, and challenges the entire
obedience of the heart. If thou will be perfect (says he) sell that thou
have, and give it to This is a hard speech to the lovers of the world.
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me:
which when he heard, he went his way mourning, because he had great
possessions. So that it appears by ye whole course of the action, that Christ
enabled him not to the satisfying of the law: but contrariwise (by example of
his own wickedness compared with the law) he sought to teach him, being a
teacher of others, how far he him self was short from the understanding of
the Law, in supposing it to consist only in outward action. And to conclude,
Christ offered the law to this proud ruler, to no other end, then before
generally it was geeuen to all the Jews, namely to see his own filthiness,
thereby to be driven to seek relief in Christ: and it was also the very
direct answer to his questyon. Other of the adversaries cauyll thus: In deed
(say they) there be two iustifications, the one in regeneration or An other
argument of the Papists.
baptism, and that is freelye bestowed upon us, neither is it needful that
any good works should go before this justification. But now fallinge after
this regeneration, it is needful (say they) that (to the justification of us
again) satysfaction by good works must be made. The error and impiety of
this doctrine is not only manifest (by that which is said before) where it is
proved that no works, but only the works of the justified by faith, can
appear in the presence of God: but also for that it fayneth Christ in respect
of diverse times, to be a mediator of diverse power, or ability. For they
confess him sufficyent, to restore man unto Gods favor, and to justify him
that is not yet converted: but to restore him that after regeneration, The
Papists account Christ to be very weak, that being able to iustif(...) a man
before he was converted, were not also able to restore him if he fell after he
was regenerate.
by filthiness is fallen from God, they make his power to weak: and that
portion of power which in this case they take from Christ, they attribute the
same unto that man, which (of all other) may seem most hateful unto God,
namely, unto him that by cruel ingratitude, and wicked contempt, is fallen
from the grace bestowed upon him: preferring his condition before the condycion
of them, that never were converted, in giving him power to work his own
justification: which they plainly confess the other to want: and yet is the
condition of the other (in reason) to be preferred before theirs, who by their
cruel ingratitude, deserve justly the most abhorfull estate: as the holy ghost
bears witness: For it is not possible (says he) that they which were Hebr.
6.
once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become
partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of
the power of the world to come (if they fall away) should be again renewed unto
repentance, forasmuch as they have) as concerning the^ selves (crucified the
Son of God a fresh, making a mock of him: And again. If we sin willingly,
after that we have received Hebr. 10
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but
a fearful loking for judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries. And again, Christ himself says, The servant that knows his
masters will, and does it not, shall be Luke 12.
beaten with many stripes. This is the horrible estate of them, that are fallen
from Christ. And yet are the adversaries nothing ashamed, to rob Christ of a
piece of his power, or honor or his office, to painte up this their Isops crow
withal: making the power of his office or mediation in respect of diverse
times, and subjects greater, or lesser. But well has the holy ghost in the
first Epistle of S. Ihon, met with this wranglyng 1. Iho. 2
shift thus, My little children (says he) these things I write unto you, that
ye sin not: but if we do sin, we have an advocate with the father, even
Jesus Christ the ryghteous. And he it is, that obtayneth grace for our
sins. By which words it plainly appears, that when we fall after
regeneration, or baptism, Christ is our justification, even as he was at the
first, and not our Christ is our justification, both before Baptism and after.
own works: so that our first justification in regeneratyon, and our latter
with repentance, come both by one means: namely by the free gift of God
through faith in Christ. Howbeit in deed this dystinction of theirs is more
then wicked, for whosoever is by regeneration once justified, he can never
again be vniustifyed, for whomsoever God once loves, he loves him to the
end, for God is not mutable as man, neither can he deny himself. Another An
other objection.
of the shifts, which these busy hunters to rob God of his honor have
found out, is this: faith (say they) does iustifye: but faith is a work:
therefore works do iustifye. To whom we answer, The answer.
that faith in respect that it is our work expressed by our will, or
understanding, iustifyeth not: because it is feeble and weak, for no man
believes so assuredly as he is bound: nor does so earnestly assent unto the
truth of Gods promises as he ought to do. Wherefore, whersoeuer faith is said
to iustifye: faith is there taken for the obiecte of faith: Namely, for
Christ, and the mercy of God in the promise. And for as much as it is the
instrument which takes hold thereof: therefore is iustifycation imputed unto
it: According to Saint Paul's saying, Abraham believed God, and Romans 4.
that was imputed unto him for righteousness: so that faith is said to
justify because it takes hold of Christ, in Faith does justify, because it
apprehends Christ's justification.
the promise who does iustifye: and not in respect that faith is a work of
ours. Wherefore examining this argument of the adversaries: you shall see how
finely at the first, they foist in a fallax, called of the logitians fallacia
accidentis That is, the deceit of the accident. Inferring that in the
conclusion, whereunto that word (whereupon it is inferred) did not stretch it
self, in the second proposition, for where it is said faith is a work, to be
a work of ours, is but an accident unto faith, in respect of justification:
for justification comes not, because faith is a work of ours, but because
the mercy of God, does in the promise freely give it, to al beleuers: So that
faith in the first proposition is referred, and has relation, unto the object
of faith: namely, Christ, and the mercy of God, in the promise. And in the
second proposition, faith is there otherwise taken, namely, as it is a work of
ours. Wherefore, faith not being one in both propositions, the conclusion is
falselye inferred. Or more briefly, it is answered thus: Faith in the first
proposition is a relative, in the predicament of relation, as in the 8. chapter
is declared, and in the second proposition: where it is considered, as a work
it falls in the predicament of quality: whereby the argument having four
terms, the conclusion must needs be false. An other of the adversaries 1.
Cor. 13.
arguments is this, Saint Paul affirms that of faith, hope, and Faith,
hope, and love. Objection
love, love is the greatest, or most excellent: and in that the fulfillyng of
the law consists: and therefore justification is rather to be imputed to the
more excellent: then to the inferior. That love is most excellent of the three,
it Answer.
is euydent: for faith and hope have only continuance, until the things that
be believed, and hoped for, be fully in man's possessyon. At which time
they both shall end: but love does continue and florishe through all eternity,
and that it is the fulfilling of the law, is in the. 4. chapter euydent. For
who so loved God, and his neighbor, so much Love fulfilleth the law.
as he ought to do, should surely fulfill the law. But now touching their
argument, that because it is more excellent, therefore it must justify: that is
more then childishe. The ear is a far more excellent instrument, or organ of
the body, then is either the hand or mouth, for thereby we receive the glad
promyses of God, touching our whole felycytie: Should we therefore infer,
because the ear is the more excellent Organ or instrument, that therefore we
should receive our meat with our ears, and not rather with the hand and
Faith is the instrument, whereby we receive our justification by Christ.
mouth? which though they be meaner, yet are they instruments appointed to
that use: And so faith, though it be the meaner, yet is it the instrument
appointed to that use. An other of the adversaries shifts is this, works (say
they) justified not in respect yt they be our works: An other objection
but in respect that they be the works of God in us. Here is the show of a
goodlye substance, but launch it a little, and you shall find it nothing else
but an emptye bladder, puffed with wind only. Mark whose be the works
which here they Answer.
allege, are they not the works of God in us? Do they not imagine God to
work in us? but (as has been before evidently showed) God woorketh unto
salvation in none, but in those that be his children, that is to say,
justified, for they that are led by the spirit of God they are the children of
God, that is, justified. Why if they be his children already, the questyon is
ended, for those works that come after they be his children, can not be the
purchaser of that estate, whereof the doer was possessed before they were
wrought: wherefore those works do not justify him that Our justification is
done by Christ, before our works
was justified before ever he wrought them: for he was the child of God
before he wrought them, for they confess God to dwell in him, and work in
him: but God dwells, and works God works to salvation only in his
children, that is in the justified.
in none unto salvation but in his children: that is, in the justified (as it
is said before). Wherefore gentle reader, that thou may be hable to
unfold, all the subtle shyftes of the deceytfull adversaries intricate snares
of this kind, keep this for a general, and sure rule, which can never fail
thee. Mark diligently whether in that work whereby they will have justification
obtained, they auouche God to be any worker or no. If they auouche him to be
no worker, then by the. 4. and 5. chapters thou evidently see, that the work
is abominable unto him. If they avouch him to be a woorker (as in this
argument) which I am sure they must needs do: the^ say unto them, seeing God
woorketh in them to salvation, they are God by his own working and not be
ours, makes us his children
before hand the children of God, that is, justified already: for the Scripture
affirms, that they that are led by the spirit of God, are the children of
God: but none be his children till they be justified, and therefore these
works which they avouch, are the works of such as be alredyiustified: which
is not in question, for those works can be no help to obtain him that
estate whereof he was possessed, before they were wrought: and without the
possessyon whereof, they could never have been wrought. Wherefore if they
will have works to justify they must allege such works as God is no
woorker in: for God works in none unto saluatyon All good works are wrought
by God, in them that are justified by faith
but in such as be already justified: for whosoever is led by the spirit of
God, he is already justified, for he is the child of God (as I said before.)

Now touching these Scriptures which I put in the last sort, namelye, where
the righteous challe^ge and crave of god, the reward of their innocencye, and
righteousness: and as it were offer the same to be examined before his
justice: of which examples there be principally in the Psalms: whereof I will
Psalm. 7.
rehearse one or two. First Dauyd in the. 7. Psalm: Judge me O Lord according
to my innocence, and according to the cleanenes of my hands, in thy sight. And
again in the. 18. Psalm:: God has rewarded me according Psalm. 18
to my innocence, and according to the cleanenesse of my hands has he
recompensed me, for I observed the commandments of the Lord, and was not
wicked against my God, but I had al his laws before me: neither cast I his
commandments from me: I was pure before him, and abstained mine own
wickedness: therefore God has rewarded me according to my innocency, and
according to the cleanenes of my hands in his sight. Who so considers in the
Scriptures the cause, and the manner of the exclamatyon of the righteous in
their lamentable calamity; under the cruel, unjust, and merciless The
righteous being under the merciless persecution lament and (...)e.
persecutions, and afflictions of the wicked and tyrannous oppressors, shall
forthwith see ye solution of these arguments, namely, that the righteous
therein justify not themselves, neither auouche their innocence in respect
of the justice of God, but in respect of the false, unjust, and tyrannous
wickedness of the oppressor: in respect of their most horrible iniurye and
crueltye, they may well avouch their righteousness and innocencye: and
therefore they fly for succor unto the justice of God, who knows how
giltlesse they are touching the false accusation of their blood thirstye
enemies, requirynge of God in that cause to be defended from their enemies,
even as he, who knows their conscience, could testify that they had not
committed The righteous cry out, that they are no such offenders as the wicked
report them to be.
those evils, for the which their enemies most cruelly pursued them, as here
in the. 7. Psalm, David (being falsely accused by Chus, one of Saules kynsmen)
challenges the justice of God, for the defense of his innocencye in that case
toward Saul, desiring of God his deliverance according as he knew him giltlesse
toward Saul, seeing his conscience could accuse him of no conspiracy, or
treason toward him. In this sort do the righteous (somtymes) in ye scriptures
offer the innocency of their causes, before the judgment seat of God: not
alleging innocence in respect of Gods The righteous offer the innocence of
their causes to the judge meant seat of god.
justice: but in respect of the false and wicked untruths, wherewith their
enemies charged them. Wherefore in the 18. Psalm David being by the mercy of
God settled in the seat of his Kingdom, gives thanks unto God, for yt (even
according to the innocence of his heart, and cleanenes of his hands toward
Saul) he had rewarded him in deliueryng him, from the danger of so mighty, and
cruel an enemy, rejoicing in that ^he having the law of God before his David
reioiceth that he held his hand, and heart from committing of wickedness against
Saul.
eyes, had withholden his heart, and hands from committing wickedness against
his anointed Lord and king. For such was his innocence and righteousness ^n
respect of Saules wickedness, that he ^ould nothing accuse him self toward
Saul. For in making his moan to Ionathas Saules son, thus he avouches his
innocencye: What have I 1. Sam. 20.
done, says he? wherein am I faulty? what is the sin that I have committed
against thy father, that he seeks my life? And anon after he says unto him:
If there be in me any trespass, the^ slay me thy self. Hereby ye may see, the
innocence, and righteousness The innocency of David in respect of Saules
cruelty.
which David aueucheth in himself was in respect of Saules wicked and unjust
cruelty: and not in respect of the justice of God. For where soever he
handles the cause between ye justice of God and him self, there he sings
another song. Then cries he: Be merciful unto me O Lord, be merciful Psalm.
51.
unto me, according to thy great mercyes: and according to the multitude of thy
mercies do away mine offenses. Then cries he: Lord re^ Psalm. 38. 130.
prove me not in thine anger, neithe^ chastise me in thy heavy displeasure If
thou Lord wilt watch what is done amiss, Lord who shall be able to (...) bide
it. Lord cleanse me from my (...) Psalm. 19.
crete sins, and such like. Then neither talks he of his own innocencye or
righteousness: he beasteth then of no righteousness: but of mercy: Blessed are
Psalm. 32.
they, says he, whose wickedness are forgeuen, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Here is all the
righteousneshe knows of him(...) when he has to deal with the justice of
God. Thus having briefly showed by a few examples, the true aunsweres of the
principal objections of the enemy, God must have the whole honor of ma^s
salvation.
of justification of faith: and the sweet agreement thereby of the Scriptures,
in giving to God ye whole honor of man's salvation: and unto man a sure
possession of Gods favor in Justification why it is imputed to faith, and not
to works.
Christ: I will now show why justification is imputed to faith, and not to
works, and so make an end.

Touching this question there appear two just causes thereof: first for that
faith is the only mean between man, and the promise: and that which
apprehends righteousness: and worl(...) are nothing else, but as it were an
effect or fruit of the righteousness of the same faith. Therefore justification
is to be imputed to that which apprehended the righteousness, and not to the
fruit thereof. Secondly and principally, that forasmuch as the end of all Gods
works is to purchase to him self (as of right is due) all praise, honor, and
glory in the performance of his promise (as has often been said) as the
greatest prerogative he challenges from his creatures. Therefore it is of
necessity, that no part of man's justification should be imputed to works, as
unto any part of the cause thereof. For that ambitious man, should have no
color of title to any proportional part of the glory of ye work: that no
flesh might boast in his presence. And this is the cause which Paul him self
shows to the Ephesians concerning the same: For by grace, says he, ye are
saved through faith and not of your selves: it is the gift of God, and Ephesians. 2.
not of works, lest any man should boast him, that all the glory might
redounde to God alone: who as he saves us for his own sake, so by him self
only, has he begone, continued, and ended the whole work, concerning our
salvation. To whom through Jesus Christ our only and omnisufficient Savior, be
therefore all glory, honor, and majesty, kingdom, power, and dominion,
through all eternity, Amen.

A Correlary.
It is hereby manifest, that forasmuch as the only end of Good works, is to
show man's obedience to God, that God thereby may be glorified: and to witness,
and declare the possession of that true faith, whereby only righteousness is
proper to the elect of God: that by them man may yield a full testimony of his
calling and election, through Christ, into the favor or love of God. Forasmuch
I say, as this is the only end of good works, therefore he that either
teaches or does any work (having appearance of holiness) to any other end, the^
this, namely, in hope of any reward No work may be don upon hope of reward.
for the worthiness thereof: that work (what show soever it has of godliness)
is wicked, and detestable in the sight of God, in that it offers a filthy
price for that, by the free gift whereof, God seeks honor. That the price
offered is filthy, it is hereby apparent: in that all works not being of
faith, are sin. And all the works of faith proceed from the entyre
obedience of the mind unto God: but what obedience is this to challenge that
from God, by desert, which no works, no not the very works of the faithful
are able to make just title unto? as is proved in ye 9. chapter whereby it
appears to be the presumptuous work of corrupt, and ambitious man:
encroching upon Gods prerogative, namely, upon his honor, to challenge that by
desert, which no work is able to counteruaile: seeing it is proved, no work
can satisfy the justice of God. And let no man marvel that works can be
wicked, having appearance of holiness: for the Scripture testifies, that the
devil ca^ transform 1. Cor. 11.
him self into an Angel of light: that is, into ye pure Image of holiness:
therefore there is no doubt, but he is able to cloth his works with the same
livery. And to conclude: All works done to any other end (then is aforesaid)
are of the same stamp, how(...) appear in outward show: for it is not the
act, but the purpose of the doer, which God considers. God will have
obedience, and not feigned holiness. Whereunto well agrees this saying of S.
Augustine: Videtis quia non quid faciat homo, August. in epist. 1. Ioha^ nis
tract.
considerandum est: sed quo animo faciat. In eodem facto inuenimus Deum patrem,
in quo inuenimus Judam: patrem benedicimus, Iudam detestamur: benedicimus
charitatem, detestamur iniquitate^. Quantum enim praestitum est generi humano
de tradito Christo? nunquid non cogitauit Judas vt traderet? Deus cogitauit
salutem nostram quaredempti sumus: Judas cogitauit precium, quo vendid(...)
Dominum, filius ipse cogitauit precium, (...)ledit pro nobis: Judas cogitauit
precium quod accepit, vt venderet: diuersa ergo intentio, diuersafacta fecit.
Cum sit vna res, ex diuersis eam intentionibus si metiamur: vnu^ amandum,
alterum damnandum, vnum glorificandum, alterum detestandum inuenimus: Ye see
that we may not consider what a man does: but with what mind, and will he does
it. For we find God the father a worker in the same deed, in which we find
Judas a worker: we bless the father, we abhor Judas: we bless the love (in
the father) we deteste the wickedness (in Judas.) For what knowledge is given
unto mankind concerning the delivery of Christ? Did not Judas mean to betray
him? but God meant our salvation, wherewith we be redeemed: Judas had respect
unto the price for which he sold the Lord: the son him self had respect unto
the price, which he gave for us: Judas minded the price which he received for
sale of him. Wherefore the diversity of the intentes, makes the works
contrary. If we measure one self thing, by the diverse intentes of the doers:
we shall find the one to be im braced: the other to be condemned, the one to
be extolled, the other to Aduersus Iudaeos erat one.
be detested. And again Chrysostom: Etenim quod fit iuxta Dei voluntatem,
quamuis videatur improbum esse, tamen omnino Deo gratu^ est, and acceptum:
contra, quod fit praeter Dei voluntatem, ac secus quam ille vult fieri,
quanqua^ existimatur acceptum Deo, tame^ est omnium pessimum, and iniquissimum:
Of a truth that which is done according to the will of God: although it seem
to be wicked, yet is it altogether pleasant and acceptable to God.
Contrarywyse what soever is done besides the will of God, and otherwise then he
will have it done: though it be esteemed as a thing acceptable to God, yet it
is of all other the worste, and most wicked. And that thou may understand
this to be true, read the 3. of Kings the 19. chapter, concerning Achab that
took ea certain King of the Assirians, and Phinees was for man's slaughter
honored with Priesthood.

The Table, wherein note these two letters, a. b. a. signifies the first side
of the leaf, and b. the second.
A.
Abraham's faith had fruits. 112. b Adam created. 1. a Adam deceived by Eve his
wife. 4. b Adam accuses his wife. 6. a Adam the first man made us bond, and
thrall unto sin. 44. a Adams disobedience has corrupted all mankind. 12. a.
b Anavaptistes, Pelagians and Papists. 11. b Arguments made by the Papists
of good works, answered 95. a. b. 107. a. 115. a. 116. a. b. 117. a
B
BLasphemye to Christ's death and passion. 68. a
C
CHrist only takes away the sins of the world. 19. a Christ the son of
God was made man and borne of the virgin Mary. 42. a Christ was perfect God,
and perfect man. 43. b Christ is very righteousness it self. 43. a Christ is
our Advocate to the father. 44. b Christ is our justification, both before
Baptism, and after. 116. b Christ the second man has made us free from
sins. 44. a Christ became accursed, to make us blessed. 44. b Christ had paid
the full taunsome of man's transgression. 44. a Christ justifies us, before
we work. 119. a Conflictes attend continually upon true faith. 81. b Corrupt
doctrine of the Papists. 29. b
D
David reioysed in his innocence. 121. a. b Death has power over the
unrighteous. 7. b Death has power over the whole nature of man. 7. b Death is
dew to all sin. 17. a Death and damnation reigns over every man. 19. b,
Deadly sin excludes faith. 17. a Deadly sin, and venial sin what
difference. 18. a Definition of actual sin. 16. a Definition of venial
sin. 16. b Definition of love. 25. b. 26. a Definition of the law. 29. a
Degrees of perfection. 29. b Definition of habit. 49 b Definition of faith.
56. b. 57. a. b Definition of works. 65. a. b. Definition of justification.
62. b Definition of works of the faithful. 84. b Difference between
original, and actual sin. 19. a Devil is the enemy of man's felicity. 4. a
Devil and God, there is no middle estate between them. 67. a Devil, an enmie
to virtuous life. 81. a Duty or debt, has two senses or meanynges. 101. a
E.
EDen, the garden wherein man was placed at his first creation. 1. a Errors of
Papists about works. 66. b Eve the woman was goue^ unto man to be his helper.
1. b Eve deceived by the devil, 4. b Exposition of this place of John: we have
receued grace for grace. 48. b
F.
Faith and deadly sin can not stand together. 17. b Faith only apprehends
the promises of God. 47. a Faith diversely taken in the Scriptures, 55. b. 56.
a Faith, what the scholemen think of it. 56. a Faith only attayneth
instification. 70. a Faith only justifies proved by the Scriptures and an^
cient fathers. 70. b. 71. a. b 72. a. b. 73. a. b. 74. a. b. 75. a. b 76. a. b.
77. a. b. 78. a. b Faith is not the efficient cause of our justification but
God only. 78. b. 79. a Faith is aceompanied with newnes of life. 79. b. 80. a.
b 81. a Faith is made known by good works. 82. a Faith, hope, and love. 118.
a Faith is the instrument, whereby we receive justification, 118. b Faith in
Jesus Christ justifies us. 103. a Faith apprehends ent righteousness. 109. b.
110. a. b Faith without works is a dead faith. 112. a Faith that is lively,
cannot be without good works. 112. a Faith justifies, because it apprehends
our justification. 117. a Flesh is but a mass, or lump of iniquity. 8. a
Fruits of sin. 20. a
G.
GOD abhoryed man, and refused him for his work. 6. b God cursed all the earth
for man's offense. 6. b God in his creation of man conditioned that he should
not break his to (...)meant. 12. (...) God commands us to love him, and our
neighbor. 24. b God commands nothing impossible, proved false. 30. a God him
self freely procured man's redemption. 31. a God is true of his promise. 32. a.
b God gave the law to the children of Israel. 33. a God sent his prophets to
declare the promised seed. 41. b God trained man by his prophers to take hold
of the promised seed. 42. a God loved us first. 50. b God by his grace is the
only worker of man's health and salvation. 51. a God and the devil, there is
no middle estate between them 67. a God for the glory of his name does freely
save, and justify us. 10. 4a. b. 105. a. b. 106. a. b God is the worker of all
good works in his justified children. 119. a. b God must have the whole honor
of man's salvation. 122. a God wroughte in love, in sending Christ to suffer
death, to redeem man. 124. a. b God the father a worker in the same deed, that
Judas wrought in. 124. Gods unspeakable mercy declared to us in Christ. 2. b
20. b. 21. a Gods justice. 20. b Gods creatures every of them under heaven,
inuiolably observe the law of their creation, saung man only. 22. a 23. b
Good works are the feuites of good faith. 82. a Good works are to be done of
the faithful, but not as the price of our redemption. 82. b Good works are
witnesses to good says. 83. a. b. 84. a Good works for owe our justification.
89. b Good works, two things are required in them. 90. a 91. a. b. 92. a Good
works require affection of the heart. 92. a Good works, declare us to be
righteous. 110. b Grace has saved us through faith in Christ, and not of our
selves. 46. a Grace defined by the Papists. 49. a Grace of God is given us
freely, and not for merits sake. 102. b
H.
Habit defined. 49. b Holy water, nor purgatory can cleanse us of our sins.
19. a
I
IMage of Nature and Grace 1. a Image of God, what it is. 2. a Image of God in
man. 2. a Infantes have no actual sin, of their own committing. 14. a Inward
works. 65. a Innocence of man clearly lost. 5. a Judas wrought in treason.
124. a. b Justification comes by faith and not by works. 47. a 48. a. b
Justification how it is understand in the scriptures. 62. a Justification
taught by the Papists. 63. a. 64. a. b Justification follows not good works
but good works follow justification. 89. b Justification is often pronounced
upon works, for faithes sake. 96. b Justification, why it is imputed to faith,
and not to works. 122. a
L
LAberinth of error, and maze of confusion. 92. b Law declares them to be
unrighteous that have lost original righteousness. 7. b Law of God is
spiritual. 8. b Law had two offices. 33. b Law, why it was given to man. 30.
b. 31. b. 34. a Law is able to justify a man, if man could perform the
righteousness of the law. 34. a Law is impossible to man to be observed, his
nature being now corrupted as it is. 36. a. b. 37. a. b. 38. a. b. 39. a. b.
Law of God given to man in most fearful, and terrible manner. 40. b Law
brings terror and fear. 41. a Law of God is the absolute rule of
righteousness. 43. a Law might save us, if we could observe the law. 113. b
Lawyer moves a question to Christ. 114. a Love fulfilleth the law. 118. a
Love is the fulfillyng of the commandments of God. 24. b. 25. a. 26. a. 27.
a. 28. a. b
M
MAn placed in Paradise. 1. b Man made sovereign Lord ever all earthly
creatures. 1. a Man created to the excellency of Gods Image. 1. a. 2. a. 3. a
Man ashamed to confess his sin. 5. b Man and all his issue corrupted. 7. a.
b Man a mass or lompe of iniquity. 8. a Man by nature is the child of wrath.
8. a. b. 9. a. b. Man in his first creation was without sin. 10. b Man by his
rebellion, and sin, brought forth fruits of his own choice. 20. a Man made
an apt subject for the mercy, and justice of God. 20. b Man in wicked estate.
20. d Man of his own nature has affection to rebellion. 92. a Man is
justified by faith, without works. 107. a Man cannot satisfy the law. 29. a
Man is not myndefull of his duty toward God. 32. a Man's original justice.
1. a Man's glorious state overthrown. 5 a Man's works are sinful. 9 a Man's
corrupt nature. 29. a Man's duty toward God. 31. a Man's nature, prove to
rebellion and sin. 43. a Mercy, and not merits has prevented our
justification. 103. a b. 104. a
N
NAture of man is prove, and ready unto sin. 28. a
O
OBiectio^s with aunsweres. 12. a, 13. a. 35. a. 118. a Opus operantis 67. b
Original righteousness. 3. a. b Original sin, and our most heinous
infection. 6. a Original sin defined. 7. a Original sin defiled the
nature of man. 10. a. b Original sin defined by the Papists. 11. a. 14. b.
15. a. b Outward works 65. a
P
Papists, Pelagians, and Anabaptists. 11. b Papists, their unformed faith.
61. a. b Papists, their formed faith. 61. a Papists errors about works.
66. a Papists build a labirinth of error, and a maze of confusion. 92. b.
93. a. b. 94. a Papists Argument of works. 95. a. b. 96. a. b Papisticall
doctrine. 18. b. 49. a Pelagia^s, Papists, and Anabaptists. 11. b Pelagius
heresy. 50. a. 51. a Penance an apt and mete instrument for the Papists. 68.
b Perfection denied. 29. b Peter Lombard. 108. a Preparyng works what they
are. 66. b. 67. a Purgatory, nor holy water, can not take away sins. 19. a
R
RAhabs faith had fruits. 113. a Reward is not properly so called, when it is
paid to a labourer for his travel, but rather a duty. 101. b Righteous
persons complayn, and cry to God. 120. b Righteousness comes not by the law.
41. a Righteousness how it is understand in the scriptures. 62. a Righteousness,
how it is impu ted unto us. 69. b Righteousness and justification are diuerstye,
taken in the scripture. 85, a. b. 86. a. b. 87. a. b. 88. a. b. 89. a
S
SAint James meaning of works. 111. a. b. 113. b Satisfaction is the best
officer that the papists can retain 68 b Scholemen, how they handle faith.
58. a. b. 59 a. b. 60-a b Scholemen what they say of venial sin. 18 a
Scholeme^ agree in error. 18 b Scriptures that seem to promise reward to
works, are expounded. 94 b Sense of the Scripture is not in words, but in
the meaning of the same. 108 b Serpents kind to be weak and tame in winter.
14. a Sin, that is to say, every sin that deserves death, is a deadly
sin. 17. a Sin triumphs over man, and drives him from his glorious
state. a Sin and the fruits thereof. 7 a Sin by the offense of one man,
entered upon al me^. 8. b Sin wherein two things are to be considered. 11. a
Sin deadly, and sin venial, are in diverse respects but one. 18. a Sin
deadly, and sin venial what difference. 18. a Sin of man was so grenens an
offense as could net be cured, but by the death, and bloudshedding of
innocente Christ, the only Son, of God. 45. a Sins, to say there are but.
7. that be deadly, is false. 16. b Sins by faith are forgeuen and therefore
called venial. 18. a
V
Denial sins. 17. b. 18. a
W
Wisdom of God, in his creation of man. 1. a Works good are a testimony of
man's election. 66. a Works taught by papists. 66 a Works which the papists
call preparing works. 66. b Work of the worker. 67. b Works of
supererogation. 67. b. 68. a Works, no, not the works, of justified are able
to justify before God. 69 a Works of the law. 84. b Works of the faithful.
84. b Works of the faithful are insufficient to fulfill the law. 85. a.
Works are not the cause of reward but God for his own glory accepts them.
96. b 97. a Works must be done for t(...) glory of God, and not for (...)
wards sake. 97. b Work, what value they are accounted of in the scriptures.
98. a. b. 99. a. b Works, when we have wrought all that we can, say that we
are unprofitable servants. 99. b Works of supererogation are the popes
merchandise, and are most superstitious, and wicked. 99. b Works, how they
were esteemed of the fathers. 100. a. b Works can justify no man. 107. b
Works declare a righteous man. 109. b Works declare what faith has
apprehended. 109. b Works follow justification. 109. a Works may not be done
for rewards sake. 123. a. b.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printinge.
Fol. Lin. 3. a 14. wrieth, read, writes. 5. a 17. the, read, that. 9. b in
the margin, Luchirid. read, Enchirid. 15. b 3. perfection, read, imperfection.
18. b 19. thy, read, they. 20. a 10. diuiue nature, read, divine nature. 38. a
22. miserenitur, read, miserebitur. 53. b 2. then, read them. 61. a in the
first note, unformed, read, formed. in the second note, formed, read, unformed.
64. a 15. ay, read, as. 76. b 22. am, read, tiam. 77. b 3. iniquitaids. read,
iniquitates., 81. b 8. beway, read bewray. 97. b 1. showed, read shows. 98. b
in the note, Ier. 1. read, Iere. 2. 100. a 12. iustitia., read, iustitiae. 103,
b 1, inferretur, read, inferreretur. 104. b 1. of the punisheme^t, read, of
thee but punishment. 106. a in the note, praesi. read, p(...)i. 107. a (...).
says, read, faith. Ibidem b 16. non medulla, read, in medulla. 110. b 19. put
out, of. 113. b 19. my command, read, the command.


