THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF CAWWOOD the ROOKE. OR, The Assembly of Birds, with the
several Speeches which the Birds made to the Eagle, in hope to have the
Government in his Absence: And lastly, how the Rooke was banished; with the
Reason why crafty Fellows are called Rookes. As also fit Morralls and
Expositions added to every Chapter.



London Printed by T.C. for F. Grove, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
upper-end of Snow-Hill, near the Sarazens head without Newgate. 1640.

THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF Cawwood the Rooke.
CHAP. I.
IN the heat of Summer, when the Woods were lined with pleasant shade, and
filled with the cheerful Music of the feathered Quiresters. It happened that
the Eagle, the royal King of Birds, intending to leave off his government a a
while, and to live solitary in the Deserts of Arabia, made a Proclamation to be
drawn in this manner. That seeing he purposed for some reasons best known
unto himself, to retire unto the Arabian Desert, and for some few Months to
leave off all rule and dominion; he therefore tendering the welfare of his
Subjects, and being careful they might not lack one in his absence to
administer Justice unto them, thought good to signify his Royal Will and
Pleasure, which was that all Birds; of what name, color, or degree soever,
should repair unto the Wood, called Sylvia; and that there he purposed to
choose one amongst them to rule the rest; who could declare himself to be most
worthy in merit and desert. This Proclamation being written and subscribed with
Aquila Rex avium, which is in English, The Eagle King of Birds: It was no
sooner made known through all thickets, hedges, and bushie fields where Birds
do resort, but that presently their hearts were inflamed with ambition, every
one desiring to prove himself worthy of the Vice-regency or government, during
the retiring of the King. So that in a short time there were come unto the
Court of Sylvia. Rubert the Robin, Mavis the Magpie, Phillip the Sparrow, the
Blackbird, Starling, and Iackdaw, with Philomel the Nightingall, Tom Titmouse,
Parvis the Wren, Spincke the Finch, Columber the Dove, and Maybird the Cuckoo,
with many others which came with prepared speeches to make known their own
worth. But now the Eagle having seated himself on a high Cedar tree, began to
look down upon the Assembly of Birds, who sat upon the lower boughs round
about him, and by the piercing quickness of his eye, he soon perceived that
his cosen Rapax the Hawke, who was somewhat a kin unto him, and Cawwood the
Rooke were only absent. So that before he would make known his mind unto
them, he sent Flywill the Buzzard for his cosen Rapax the Hawke, and Cawwood
the Rooke; and withal fearing that the Hawke kept out of the way, because he
had committed many outrages, upon the smaller birds, he sent him a free pardon
for all his former offenses, bidding Flywill to command him to come away with
all speed.

The Morrall.
THere is no man has so mean a conceit of himself, but he thinks he
deserves honor and preferment, as may appear by the Wren and the small
Birds, who all resorted to the Court upon the Eagles Proclamation, to make the
worthiest Vice-regent in his absence. The Hawke and the Rooke keeping away from
Court, does show that a guilty conscience, is a self accuser, and makes men
afraid to come in fight, especially at any public Meeting.

CHAP. II.
How Flywill the Buzzard carried a Pardon to Rapax the Hawke, and how the Hawke
and the Rooke requited him for his pains.

NO sooner had Flywill the Buzzard tide the Pardon with a string round about
his neck, but straight he took wing, and flew away to a Wood some three
miles of, to which he knew the Hawke and the Rooke did use to resort, and there
accordingly he soon meet with them, and delivered the Pardon to the Hawke,
telling him that the King out of his free mercy, had sent him a Pardon for all
his former bloody facts, wishing him to obey the former Proclamation, and to
make all have that could be to come unto the Court. The Hawke took the Pardon*
and having read it, he gave Flywill the Buzard many thanks, for that he being
so short of wing, had took the pains to bring him these good tidings and so
walking aside with Cawwood the Rooke, as if they had consulted about going to
the Court; the Hawke told the Rooke that this Buzard, (albeit he was a kin unto
him, was a shame and disgrace unto all Hawks, being a Coward, and not daring
to cease on any thing but dead Carrion, or some scattered guts, or to take
childrens bread and butter out of their hands, all which do show the baseness
of his breeding, and that he never came out of the true Nest or Airy of the
Hawks; and therefore friend Rooke, seeing thou have been accounted a cunning
Politition in thy days, I would entreats thee to instruct me in some devise
how we might make him a way, and yet have no hand in the matter. The Rooke
scratching his head with one of his claws stood still a while, till at last
turning to the Hawke, he told him, that there was a new invention come into his
brain how to make away the Buzard, and set him going with a powder. After this
they returned again unto Flywill the Buzard, who never suspected what they had
contrived against him, but complained unto them that he had gotten a great cold
in his head, by flying so far in a rainy day, he being only used to haunt
Warrens, and there to fly from one old tree to another, and so pass away the
time. But no sooner had the Rooke heard him say that he had gotten a cold, but
he presently took hold of the occasion, telling him that there was no better
medicine for a cold than warmth; and therefore if he would but tie his head
about with a cloth, he should find that the rhume would presently void it
self, and run out of his beak in a great abundance. The Buzard being full
of pain with the headache* consented thereunto, so that the Rooke very
carefully and cunningly tied a clout round about his head, and so bid him fly
to the next tree. The foolish Buzard thinking he could find out the way for
all he was blindfolded, took wing, and flew directly against the body of a
great Oak, which beat him back so violently, that he came fluttering through
the boughs, till at last he caught hold on one of them with his talents, and
so having pearch'd himself, he thought to sit there, till the Hawke and the
Rooke, his learned Physicians did come unto him; but they flew unto an other
tree from whence they might behold the Buzard sitting very demurely by
himself. But he had not sat there long, when it happened that one came by with
a birding piece, and perceiving so fair a mark, went toward him, and taking
his aim gave fire, and shot the Buzzard that he came tumbling down stark
dead. Which when the Rooke and the Hawke perceived, they flew away toward the
Court; the Hawke being very glad that his Cosen Buzzard was brought to this
end, and so giving the Rooke many thanks for inventing this devise which had
so luckily took effect, they both flew together to the Court.

The Morrall.
SOme are so blindfolded that they cannot discern danger before it come upon
them, as may appear by the Buzard, who sat blindfolded in the tree, till the
Fowler came by and shot him. The Hawke bringing his Cosen Buzzard to an
untimely death; and shows that the rich do despise their poor kindred, and
so do expose them to danger.

CHAP. III.
How Rapax the Hawke, and Cawwood the Rooke came to the Court, and how the
Eagle declared unto the Birds the reason why he called them together.

THe Eagle being, as before mounted upon a Cedar, all the Birds in a circle sat
round about him, making such a charm of several notes, tunes, and ditties,
that if you had heard them, you would have sworn you had never heard the like.
As they were thus sitting together, in came the Hawke and the Rooke with nimble
wing, and took their place amongst the other Birds. And so the Hawke having
made obeisance to the King, began in an eloquent speech, to amplify the Kings
mercy, who had not only granted him a free pardon for all his former bloody
offenses, but also safe protection to come unto that place. But the Eagle cut
him off in his speech, saying, Cosen, I hope my mercy shall find that reward
which I expect, which is, that you will amend your life, for that is the best
way to give me thanks, and satisfy the whole Common wealth of Birds, who
else, though they dare not speak yet openly, yet in their hearts they will
condemn me of injustice, for remitting the bloody murders, and slaughters of
my Subjects which you have daily committed. But I have other matters to declare
unto you, and therefore I would have you give attention, and so with his
Scepter (which he held in one of his talents) making a sign unto them for
silence. He began his Royal speech in this manner. My loving Subjects, it
behodeth a King to be careful of his Subjects, even from the highest to the
lowest; I therefore do here profess, that all my Subjects are equally dear
unto me, so that my Cousin the Hawke is not more dear unto me than the little
Wren. It behooves me therefore that as I have made known my purpose unto you
by my Proclamation, which is, to leave my Court of Sylvia, and fly into the
solitary Deserts of Arabia; so it is necessary for the establishing of peace
and quiet in my absence, that I leave one to rule and govern over you; and to
this end I have called you to this Assembly, that whatsoever Bird among you can
prove himself to be the worthiest, either by parentage, merit, or desert, or
any other way, him I will make King in my absence. Therefore let every one
speak boldly in the behalf of themselves, and urge what reasons they can in
their own practice. The Birds hearing this began to clappe their wings, and
with chirping and chattering gave a great applause to the Eagles speech.

The Morrall.
THat when a wicked offender receives mercy, either from the King or a
Magistrate, he cannot show more Thankfulness than by amending his life; for
so the Kingly Eagle told his cousin Rapax the Hawke. Kings ought to take care of
their Subjects in their absence, as appears by the Eagles speech to the
Commonalty of Birds, whose rejoicing thereat, does show how acceptable the
gracious Speech of a King is to his loving subjects.

How Parvis the Wren made a speech unto the Eagle.
THe Wren all this while sat upon thorns, though indeed she were now upon a
higher tree than ever she was in her life before, being always wont to creep
and peep in the hedge bottom, and therefore it seems that the hight of the
tree had put high conceits into her head. So that packing up her self, and
getting upon a small twigge, from whence she might be seen of all the
company, she began most earnestly to desire the Kingly Eagle to make her his
substitute; for says she, though I am but a Wren, and of a small body, yet my
heart is as big as the best; and for my wit and policy, you may see it in
building my nest, and the workmanship thereof. And therefore though I am least
of Birds, yet if you please, I think my self worthy to bear the greatest
authority among Birds. The Wren would still have gone on, being all heart and
tongue; but that the Eagle commanded Rubert the Robin to speak next.

The Morrall.
THis shows that men of least desert will put themselves most forward, as is
seen by the Wren preferring her self before all other Birds, and the reason
is because those that have the least worth, have the greatest opinion of
themselves.

How Rubert the Robin spoke to the Eagle.
MY Lord the Eagle, I hope Rubert the Robin is not unknown unto you, whom men,
women, and children, do love, honor, and respect; no Piece is discharged
against me, no snare set for me, so that I fly with safety into houses,
butteries, and cellers, because no man will hurt a Robin. The reason why I am
beloved is for my courtesy and familiarity toward men, for if I find a dead
body in the Wood, I and the rest of my fellows do bury it with Moss and
Leaves, and for this I am called the Sexton of the Wood: Besides, I sing in
Winter, neither can the coldest frosts put me down, when all the other Birds
like cowards creep into bushes, I therefore having the better heart, and being
generally beloved, do know no reason why I may not govern the Common wealth
of Birds in your royal absence.

The Morrall.
IT is some Argument of worth in our selves when we are beloved of others, as
appears by the speech of Rubert the Robin, who urges it as a praise unto
himself, to be beloved of men.

The Owls Speech.
THe Owl being not in those times afraid of the other Birds, but esteemed as a
grave Counselor, began to speak next; but with such a hollow voice, as no man
could understand him, yet some of his words were to this purpose. May it please
your royal Eagleship, the Owl was beloved of Pallas, and the Lacedaemonians
did coin their money with the stamp and picture of an Owl, so much did the
Lacedaemonians love me. But the Birds hearing the Owl speak of the
Lacedaemonians, they fell all into a confused chirping or laughter, so that the
Owl without taking any leave flew away, and ever since that time has hid his
head in an old Ivy tree, being ashamed of day light, and shunning the company
of the other Birds.

The Morrall.
THat when men will strive to show learning at unseasonable times, it makes
them prove rediculous, as appears by the Owl, who was laughed at for his
learned speech of the Lacedaemonians.

The Speech of Philomel the Nightingall.
AFter the Owl was laughed out of countenance. The Nightingall began to
delight their ears with her sweet harmonious voice; and no sooner had she
framed her self to speak, but the Birds were ready to give attendance to her
speech; which was in this manner. Most royal Sovereign, if I should declare
my sorrows which I record by night, making the Thorn my Songbooke, I know it
would move you to compassionate my unjust ravishment; for know, that I was
daughter to a King, and ravished by my Sister Prognes husband, called Tereneus,
and afterward by some strange power, we were all changed into Birds; Tereneus
into a Lapwing, my Sister Progne into a Swallow, and I Philomel into a
Nightingall who still in lamentable tunes, setting my breast against a thorn,
do warble forth my own grief. And seeing every bird has free liberty to
praise her self, I may boldly say, that I am the honor of the Woods, the
darling of the Spring, the Lovers joy; for young men and maids will walk out
together to hear my notes, and if they hear me before May-bird the Cuckoo,
they are in good hope they shall enjoy their sweet hearts that year. I am
called Philomel for my melodious strains, my body is little, my voice is loud,
so that one said of me, Vox es praeterea nihil: That I was only a voice and
nothing else. If therefore my great birth, my former wrongs, or pleasant tunes
have any power to declare my merit, I hope the Crown and Scepter may be
worthily resigned unto me, having been sometime a Kings Daughter, and
therefore fit to be made Queen of the Woods.

The Morrall.
INjured virtue is pitied of all men, which made Philomel declare the story of
her ravishment, and by the Birds giving so diligent attention, unto her, is
showed that a well delivered speech has a great power over the mind and
affections.

The Cuckooes Speech.
MAybird the Cuckoo having heard the sweet speech which Philomel had made,
thinking he could have made as good himself, for yet he had not sucked so many
eggs to make him hoarse, and therefore getting upon a bared bough, he began to
wipe his beak, and rub it upon the tree, afterward he fluttered his wings,
and at last, fetching his breath as if he meant to make a long speech* he began
in this manner. Great King, I am the Cuckoo, Cuckoo, Cuckoo, and so he could
go no further, but still cried Cuckoo, Cuckoo, whereat all the other Birds
laughed, and the Cuckoo was much dismaide, and since then he will never be
seen of the Birds but only in May, and for that reason he is called the
Maybird.

The Morrall.
THis shows that great preparations, have small performances, and that those
whose brains seem to be in labor with a Mountain, do at last bring forth a
Mouse, as may be perceived by Maybird the Cuckoo, who made them believe that
she had great matters to speak, and at last could say nothing but Cuckoo,
Cuckoo, and so was laughed at for her pains.

The Speech of Corvino the Crow.
WHen the Cuckoo had ended with shame, as she began with great ostentation.
Then Corvino the Crow stood up, and told them he was a great Astrologer, having
knowledge in the influence of the stars, the shiftings of the winds, the
change of the weather, all which he made known unto men by voice, so that the
Shepherds are wont to say,

When the Crow does cry amain,
Then you may be sure of rain.
Besides, my craft and cunning it is such, that I am seldom ensnared and
brought to ruin, and therefore I ought for my policy to be preferred. If a
horse chance to die, I am presently upon his bones; or if a Lamb or Sheep be
weak, I pick out his eyes, and afterward do fly to some tree and from
thence do hear how the Shepherds curse me, but yet for all that I thrive the
better. If therefore Policy or Knowledge in affairs may enable one for public
government, you may make me your Substitute, and deliver the Crown unto the
Crow, for to him it belongs, if desert may bear it away.

The Morrall.
THose that have no knowledge, will presume many times to be professors of
Arts, so that Every Art has some ignorant fellows, who will pretend to have
skill therein, as Mountibankes will needs be Physicians, and fellows with a
little Lattine will needs be Scholars, as the Crow, because he cries
sometimes before rain, would therefore needs be an Astrologer.

The Speech of Mavis the Magpie.
THe Magpie after this began to chatter out her mind, saying he was once a
King, and so was changed into a Pie, and therefore he might now again be
changed from a Pie into a King. Besides, says he, I have been always
esteemed as a Poet, for I can make Verses, and chatter them out so fast that
you would wonder at it, and I can tell you the Commonwealth of birds have much
delighted in my Songs and Ditties, being excellent Rhyme with some reason, and
therefore I think they have reason to applaud me: and for proof of my skill
you shall hear some of my Verses.

Although I am no Iackedaw,
Nor house Crow that cries Caw,
Yet I am a Magpie,
That can make sweet melody,
And sing so in my mother tongue,
That all birds shall admire my song.
And no sooner had he spoke these Verses, but the Magpie seeing the birds laugh
at him, he swore they were very good lines, and that they had no more wit then
Woodcocks, or else they would have praised them.

The Morrall.
BEcause this Morrall will be offensive to some Magpies in the world, I will
deliver the Morrall to two Verses, out of Persius the Poet, entreating of the
same matter.

Corvos Poetas, and poetrias picas,
Cantare credas, Pegaseium melos.
Crow Poets, and Poeticke Pies.
Do think they make sweet Melodies.
The Speech of Anser the Goose.
AFter this Anser the Goose, and Coby the Cock, having by chance heard the
Proclamation as they were standing under a hedge, they came flying thither, but
being not able to light upon a tree, the Goose and the Cock stood at the
bottom of the tree; which when the Eagle perceived, he came down to them, and
all the birds sat round about upon the ground. Then the Goose began to speak
in this manner. Albeit I am esteemed a cowardly bird, because when I go under
a barn door I stoop down my head, yet I can speak much in my own behalf:
for to begin with former times, I, only my gagling voice saved the Capitol of
Rome, from being taken by the enemy, as I know your Eagleshippe has read in
histories; besides, if I come unto these times, how could the Lawyer^s Clarke
or Scrivener make the poor countrymen pay for their Law, unless I lent them
quills to write their bills and bonds. So that I think the Graygoose wing may
be as much feared now, as in the old time when they headed their arrows with
my feathers, for then many times they lost lives, and now their lands, while
the sheep affoords the parchment, and I afford the pen, with which the
Prodigal sets his hand to the seal, or Morgage of his whole Patrimony.
Besides, I have a great many two legged kindred in the world, who yet scorn to
acknwledge me, but the world knows them to be Geese. And therefore considering
how necessary I am, I hope you will give me pre-eminence above the other birds:
After him the Cock spoke as follows.

Coby the Cocks speech.
I Am Coby the Cock, or the bird of Mars, I fight single combats, and from the
Cockpit I bear away the bloody victory: I am the Country Clock, and tell the
Maids when it is time to rise, I call up the labourer to his work, and
proclaim daylight over the whole world. I am loving to my hens, respected of
my Dame that keeps me, and fed with the best barley she can get, and in
requital I tread her hens lustily, and make them lay eggs. To conclude, I am
come of a generous kind, being the true Emblem of valor, and so necessary
that the world could not tell how to do for Eggs at shrovetide if the Cock
should fail. And therefore if the matter might be decided by voices, I know
the Country wives would desire to have me made King, for they do all love a
good treading Cock.

The Iackdawes Speech.
THough I am last to take boldness to speak, yet I hope you will consider
that I am an excellent Linguist, and have the knowledge of many Languages, so
that when we Iackdawes are got together about a steeple, we make a chattering
noise like so many Welchmen. Besides, I have some rich treasure which lies hid
in the crown of a tree, as namely, beads, tagges of points, pewter spoones,
and diverse other things, which I meant to present unto your Eagleship, for it
is my nature to hide whatsoever I find. Besides, for my Language (as I said
before) I can speak Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, Italian as easily as my
mother tongue, but indeed few can understand me, and therefore I do lose that
praise which I deserve. However, I hope you will consider my worthiness, and
place me as your substitute, during the time that your Eagleship shall be
absent in the Desert of Arabia. And so ends Iackdaw, praying for your long
life, and to give you a taste of my Languages. Levat le Roy (...) foelicissimum.

CHAP. IIII.
How the Eagle having heard the Birds several speeches did make a Speech to
them again, and at last made his Cosen Rapax the Hawke Viceregent in his
absence.

THe Eagle like a wise King having all this while colected the chief matter of
their speeches, he began to speak unto them in this manner. My loving
Subjects, I have heard what you have spoken in the behalf of your selves. You
Robert have pleaded well for your self, and so have you Lady Philomel, and all
the rest, whose names for brevity sake I omit. But yet you have not showed me
any virtues worthy of royal dignity. For in that Philomel was a Kings
daughter, and Mavis the Pie was sometime a King, yet these are but the fictions
of Poets, and I had rather have you make it appear that your breasts are filled
with Justice, Temperance, Magnanimity, Mercy, and such other Virtues, which
are required in a King. For to boast of Parentage, or gifts of Nature, as your
fair white feathers, or of Art, as Languages, Learning, and the like, they may
be esteemed ornaments to private men: but Princes should have Power to make
them feared, and Virtue to make them be beloved* but in none of you I find
thief qualities: and therefore since you have all spoken your minds, I would
fair know why my Cosen Rapax the Hawke has sat mute all this while. The
Hawke hearing himself named by the Eagle, answered thus. May it please your
highness. I know that my former offenses, and bloody murders are so odious
and hateful in the sight of the birds, that I dare not open my beak to
pronounce a syllable in my own behalf. But yet might it please them to remit
and forgive my former offenses, and pardon what is past, I would promise (if so
be your Majesty should make me your Substitute) to rule over the Commonwealth
of Birds, with Justice, temperance, and equity, instead of killing and slaying
them with my Talents, I would protect them from the inuiry of Owls and other
blood suckers, who in the Winter evenings do pull the small birds out of the
bushes, and so prey upon them Then they should spend their days peaceably,
sleep securely, sing sweetly, feed plentifully, and live merrily. And
besides, as I have power to sway the Empire, so I promise to rule over the
Commonwealth of Birds, with Justice and equity, and to give them the better
assurance that I will not prove a Tyrant, I am willing to have my Talents pared
off. Therefore if the birds do like of my offer, to show their consent
thereunto let them clappe their wings. Which was no sooner heard, but the Birds
on condition that the Hawks talents should be pared off, they all cried with
one voice: Fiat Rex Rapax. Let the Hawke be King.

The Morrall.
A Cunning dissembler will always cover his Vice with the death of Virtue, as
may be seen by the Hawks speech, who promising to ride with Justice amongst
them, got so far into the opinion of the birds, that they were content to
choose him King, to avoid farther strife amongst themselves. Take heed
therefore of fair speeches, for all their words are mingled with dissimulation.

CHAP. V.
How Rapax the Hawke had his talents pa^ed off, and how the Eagle had resigned
his Scepter unto him, and made him King of the Birds.

AFter the birds had consented to the Hawks speech. The Hawke, because they
had no edge tools amongst them, put his talents into the clift of a tree, and
so never left pulling, till he had pulled them quite off, and yet the hope of
Soveraignety was so sweet unto him that he felt no pain therein Being thus
unable to hurt The Eagle rose out of his seat, and caused the Hawke to sit
therein, and afterward delivered his Scepter unto him, and put his Crown upon
his head, and then charged him to remember his promise, which was, to have a
care of his subjects, and be loving unto them; as also to hear their
complaints, to redress their greevances, and to yield them relief. And this
see you perform, as you tender or respect your own life; for if at my return
from the Arabian Desert. I find that you have wronged my Subjects, you shall
be sure to die for it. The Hawke answered, that he hoped his Majesty should
commend him at his return, and not find any just cause of punishment, for
though I have been heretofore counted cruel, and have plumed upon the
Carcass of many a small bird, as Larkes, and Sparrowes, and sometimes upon
Doves, Partridges, Quails, and the like, yet now your subjects shall find me
full of mercy, for indeed I was then enforced to be cruel by necessity* At
these words the Eagle took wing, so taking some few birds of note with him, he
flew away, and when these birds had accompanied him some part of the way, he
sent them back again, charging them to be careful to obey the Hawke in all
things. And so flew on to the Desert of Arabia.

The Morrall.
THe nature of man is given to seek honor, which he thinks to be a
sufficient reward for all his sufferings, as may appear by the Hawke, who
could endure to pluck off his own Talents, in hope to be made King.

CHAP. VI.
How the Hawke behaved himself after the departure of the Eagle, and how he
requited Cawwood the Rooke for teaching him to make away the Buzzard, as is
showed in the first Chapter.

THe Eagle being gone, the Hawke behaved himself very lovingly for the first
week; as Nero, the first five years of his reign was counted the best of
Kings, but afterward he proved the worst of Tyrants: so the Hawke dissembled
his nature for a week or fortnight, but afterward he had a great desire to
shed blood, and therefore he began to think how he might put Cawwood the Rooke
to death, and requite him for his former kindness in betraying the Buzzard,
and making him stand blind folded with a clout about his head, till one came
by and shot him with a birding-peece. Now to bring this to pass, he called
many of the little birds together, and told them, that what cruelty he had
formerly committed, was by the encouragement of the Rooke, who made him
believe, that seeing nature had allotted him no other food, it was lawful for
him to prey upon all sorts of birds, and that now he was afraid least he should
put into his mind, the same bloody principles again, and therefore to avoid
suspicion. My loving Subjects says he, if any of you can accuse him of any
heinous crime, (as I know he is guilty of many) I will grant you a day of
hearing against him, that so, if he cannot clear himself, he may suffer the
punishment of death, which is due unto his deserts: no sooner had the Hawke
spoken these words, but presently they told his Majesty, that they had every
one cause to complain against him, and therefore if he were once summoned to
the Court, they would be all ready to accuse him.

The Morrall.
THey who employ others in wickedness never love them any longer, until their
own purpose is effected, as may appear by the Hawke, who sought the life of
the Rooke, after he had used his invention to make away the Buzzard. So that he
which furthers a man's vice, is beloved while it is doing, but is hated when it is
done.

CHAP. VII.
How Cawwood the Rooke was called to the Court to answer for himself, and how
all the small birds brought in their accusations against him.

THe Hawke began now to make known his blooddy nature, and therefore sent
Corvino the Crow to summon the Rooke to appear at the Court of Sylvia, who
accordingly came at the day appointed, not doubting to receive any injury from
the Hawke, being always his friend, and therefore not fearing that now being
made King, he would use his power to his destruction, but it proved far
otherwise, for no sooner was Cawwood come unto the Hawks presence but the
Hawke commanded him to stand forth and answer to such matters as should be laid
against him, for says he, friend Rooke there are many complaints made against
you, and I must do justice as I promised the Eagle at his departure. When the
Rooke heard this, he began to change color, and his feathers began to stand up
on end, what thought he shall I be betrayed by a Traitor, yet at last seeing no
remedy, he was feign to stand to it, while the Birds gathered round about him,
being all ready to complain against him; and first Rubert the Robert began
his enditement.

The Morrall.
TYrants do always pretend an outward show of justice, as may be seen by the
Havvkes speech to Cawvvood the Rooke, who being afraid thereof, does show that
a guilty conscience is a thousand witnesses.

CHAP. VIII.
How Rubert the Robin complained against Cawwood the Rooke.

I Am glad that we small Birds have now free liberty to show our wrongs and
greevances, which we have received from Cawwood the Rooke, who upon a time
brought me in danger of my life, for one day as he and I were walking in a
field by a hedge side, we chanced to come where there was a turfe set up with
two sticks, and a little hole dug underneath it; I began to ask him what
it was. O says he do you not know what this is, then you have lost many a
fair worm, for it is never without one or two, and therefore (says he) if
you hop into the bottom of it, you shall find my words true, but quoth I is
there no danger in it? O no (says he) I Will warrant you for danger, whereupon I
believing him, leapt upon the forked stick, and no sooner was I lighted
thereon, but presently the turfe fell upon my head, so that I was made close
prisoner in the Pitfall, and there I continued, till at last a waggish boy, who
had made the Pitfall came and took me out, and with great joy carried me to
his mother, but she telling him that it was ill luck to hurt a Robin, at last
the boy was content only to cut of my tail and let me fly, whereby I escaped
the danger that the Rooke had brought me into, and therefore I desire that we
may have justice on him.

The Sparrowes complaint.
WIth the same malicious mind, though not in the same manner, Cawwood the
Rooke brought me in danger and peril of my life. For one frosty morning there
being a great many Limestrawes set on a dunghill, Cawwood the Rooke went
amongst them and spying me upon the top of a Barn, called me down unto him,
and hid me come to him, for there were a great many Wheat ears scattered on
the ground, whereupon I being somewhat hungry, by reason of the could frosty
weather came flying to him, and no sooner had I begun to pecke on one of the
ears, but straight the end of one of the limed strawes caught me by the back,
and another under the wing, so that I had much a do to get from thence, for
when he that watched the strawes saw me limed and taken, he came running out to
catch me, but then with all the strength I had, I made toward a hedge, and
having gotten into the bottom thereof escaped the fowlers hands. Thus I was
betrayed by Cawwood the Rooke, and I think there is no Bird but has some
accusation against him.

The Complaint of the Woodcocke.
MAy it please you, I was once coming through a Wood with this Trayter Cawwood
the Rooke, and as we went, there was two or three sticks set just cross the
path, with one great bended stick, whereon was a noose of hair. And as we
came to them I asked the Rooke what this meant, why says he it is a swing,
whereon I am wont many times to stretch my self, at these words like a
Woodcocke as I was, I went to take hold of the great stick, and thought to
have swong upon it, but no sooner had I set my foot upon the Bridge but the
Spring flew up, and caught me by one of the legs, so that there I lay
upright, and looking every hour when the Fowler would come to fetch me, and if
the hair noose had not broken, I had certainly long ere this been roasted, and
served up to some rich man's Table. The Woodcocke had no sooner ended his
complaint, but there came in a Thrush and a Starling like maimed Soldiers
hopping upon one leg, and seeing Cawwood the Rooke standing at the bar. The
Thrush, because she was the better speaker began to tell their case; how that
Cawwood the Rooke made them believe that a Birding-peece was but a pipe which
men used to play upon, whereupon one morning a Fowler coming toward us with a
Piece, we thinking to hear his pipe safe still, so that he taking his aim
discharged against us, and shot me into the leg, and my brother Starling into
the wing. Thus has the Rooke with his craft deceived us many times, and many a
bird has he brought to untimely end by his cunning. We beseech the Hawke
therefore (who we hear is left substitute in the Eagles absence) that he would
punish the cruelty of the Rooke.

CHAP. IX.
How Cawwood the Rooke, would have answered for himself, but that Rapax the
Hawke would not suffer him, but condemned him to perpetual banishment.

WHen Rapax the Hawke had heard these accusations against the Rooke, he was
very glad thereof, And yet (as it is the nature of cunning treachery) he seemed
to pity his calamity, and told him he was sorry to hear so many foul
matters urged against him. I have always (says he) had a good opinion of you,
but I see how much we may be deceived. And I wish that some other might give
judgment on your crimes and offenses, but yet since it has pleased the Eagle
to give me all power, and to put the Scepter of justice into my talents, there
shall no respect of friendship sway me, and therefore you must look for no
more mercy at my hands, then justice will permit. For albeit you are my friend,
yet I must prove my self a loyal subject to the Eagle, who has put me in
trust to see rewards and punishments equally distributed amongst his subjects,
and this I take to be the true nature of Justice. At these words the Rooke
began to prepare himself, and would feign have answered the objection of his
adversaries, beginning to show that it was not his craft, but their folly which
brought them into danger; for (says he) if Rubert the Robin will needs be
peeping into a Pitfall, who can help it? or if the Woodcocke will take a
Springs for a Swinge it ^s not my cunning but their simplicity which brings
them into danger, which by escaping they have learned more wit, and so ought in
justice to give me thanks, for now they know how to avoid the like perils
hereafter. Besides all this, you that sit to condemn me, ought not to seek my
life, but to save me from my enemies, for you know how for your sake I
contrived an excellent device to make away Fliwell the Buzzard. But at that
word the Hawke commanded them to stop his mouth, and that with a noose of hair
they should forthwith strangle him. When the Rooke saw there was no way but
death, he began to entreat for mercy, whereupon the Hawke considering better
with himself, pronounced this sentence against him. In regard that thou
Cawwood the Rooke have highly transgressed and offended against the
Commonwealth of Birds, by deceiving Phillip the Sparrow, Rubert the Robin, and
Longbill the Woodcocke, I do here banish thee out of the Country, and send
thee to live for ever in the City. Since which time the City has been
always full of Rookes. For no sooner was the sentence given but the Parliament
of Birds broke up, and the Rooke flew away to the City, where he has ever
since remained, there being diverse sorts of Rookes, as for example, your
cheating Gamester is a Rooke, and your fellows that cheat Countrymen are
Rookes, the Tapster that fills not his pot is a Rooke, and he that drinks with
you and slips away when the reckoning comes to be paid is a Rooke. And to
conclude there are so many sorts of Rookes that I cannot reckon them, for
sometimes your Rooke will be in the shape of a decayed gallant, sometimes in a
thredbare Cloak waiting at Bowling Allies, sometimes in a blew Ierkin like a
Countryman, and sometimes in the Market in the shape of a Cutpurse. And
therefore I would have Countrymen buy this Book, for though it be The History
of the Rooke, yet it will not cost them so dear, as the acquaintance of these
City Rooke.

The Morrall.
CRafty fellows, albeit they escape a great while, yet at last are brought to
ruin and disgrace, for if they come once to public trial, then all their
enemies are ready to accuse them, as appears by the Rooke, who after all his
cunning tricks was at last banished to live in the City; so that your Rooke
is borne in the Country, and bred in the City, and this is the concluding
Morrall of this Chapter.

FINIS.

