THE TABLE OF CEBES THE PHILOSOPHER.

How one may take profit of his ennemies, translated out of Plutarche.

A treatise perswadyng a man patiently to suffer the death of his friend.

The Printer to the reader.
THis table of Cebes, showing how mortal creatures, blinded by Ignorance,
wander in this world, and can not atteyne to very Felicitee, for that they be
mysled by false opinions; and wrong weenynges: was translated out of latin
into english by sir Frances Poyngz, at the request of his brother sir Antony
Poyngz, which translacion is worthy of high commendacion. And if any fault be
therein, I know well, it is mistakyng, for my copy was somewhat combrouse,
what for the enterlinyng and ill writing.

The table of Cebes.
IT chanced us to walk in the Temple of Saturn, where among many other gifts
and oblacions, that we saw, a Table was hanged up, for an offryng. In the
which was a picture very strange, conteinyng in it certain fables and
stories. The which we coud neither coniecte whereof they were, nor of what time
they were. For that that was peincted, another seemed to us to be a city, nor a
fortress, but there was in it one great circle or compass, conteinyng within
it two other circles, the one more, and the other less. There was also a gate
in the first circle, and in the gate there seemed to us a great compaigny to
stand: And within the closure there appeared a multitude of women. In the
entryng of the first poarche and circuit there stood an old man, which
seemed as though he commanded somewhat to the company, that entered in.

A fatherly man standing by us, and seeing us muse and doubt of this picture
long time among our selves, said unto us: You strangers, be not asshamed,
though ye doubt what this pycture is. For there be many, that dwell in this
city, that wot full litel what the inuencion of this Table betokens. For,
for to say troth, none of this City offered it, but a certain stranger in
time paste came hither, a wise man and a noble philosopher, following both in
word and deed the life of Pythagoras and Parmenides: who did build this
temple in the honor of Saturn, and also did offer up to the same this picture.
Did you ever, said I, know that same man by sight? Yea, said he, and had him
long time in great reverence. For all be it he was but young, yet did he
debate, and dispute, many things cunnyngly. And I have heard him talkyng
often of the inuencion of this picture. For goddis sake than, quoth I, except
ye have some other great business, declare it unto us. For we greatly covet to
know, what this fable signifies. With good will friends, quoth he, but ye
must understand, that the declaracion of it is perilous. How so quoth I?
For, quod he, if ye attentifly harken and understand that that is said, ye shall
be both wise and happy. If ye do not, ye shall be made both unwise, unhappy,
heavy and rude, and lead all your life after miserably. For this tale is like
the riddell of Spinx, that she purposed to folk: the which if any body
understood, he was safe, if he understood it not, he was slain of Spinx. The
same manner is in this tale. For folly is to me^ a Spinx. And she also purposes
to folk, what is good, what is ill, what is not good, what is not ill in this
life. These things except a man understand, he is slain of folly: But not
utterly, as he that is devoured of Spinx, but a littell and a littell in all the
whole life is consumed, like as they that be delivered continually to be
tourmented. But if a man understand these things contrariewyse, folly is lost,
the man is saved and made blisfull and happy al his life after. Wherefore attend
ye diligently and myshere me not. O good lord, into what a greedy desire have
thou brought us, if those things be as thou say? And I (quoth he) ensure
you they be so. Well thou shall not prevent us in tellyng: For we will harken
diligently, seeing the penalty is such.

He took then a rod, and poincted to the picture. See you not, quoth he, this
circuit. We see it. This ye must first know, that this place is called life:
And the great company, that stands before the door, be those that shall
enter into life. The old man, that stands above, having in his one hand a
paper, and with the other, as it were showing somewhat, is called Genius, He
commands the entrers, what they must do, if they will be kept safe in
the life. What way does he bid them go, and how, quod I? See thou not
(quoth he) hard by the gate, a certain seat, set in the place, where the
great company enters: in the which there sits a woman goodly of manners,
with a fair luryng countinance, and having in her hand a cup? I see her, but
what is she, quoth I? She is called Disceite, quoth he, mysleader of all folk.
Than what does she? She compels them, that come into the life to drink as
much of her cup as she can. What drink? It is, quoth he, error and
ignorance. What than? When they have droncke that drink they enter into life.
whether than do all folk drink error or no? All drink (quoth he) but some
more, some less. Furthermore, see thou not within the gate a great sort of
women, having diverse horishe tatches? I see them. Those be called opinions,
desires, and lusts. As soon as the company enters, those leap forth and
embrace every one of them, and afterward convey them away. whither do they
bring them? Some bring them, quoth he, to sauegarde, and some to destruction
by Disceit. O marvelous god, what a strange drink tellest thou of. But al
these forsaid women, quoth he, do promise, as though they would lead the
entrers to the best things, and also to a life happy, profitable, and
commodious: the entrers then through the Ignorance and Error, that they
drunk by Deceit, can not find, which is the true way in the life, but
wander unadvisedly: as thou see them that came in first, the which seem to
wander thither, as those women poinct them. I see that, quod I, but that woman,
what is she, the which seems as it were one blind and mad: and stands
upon a round stone? She is called, quod he, Fortune she is not only blind,
but also mad and deaffe. What does she? She walks every where, quoth he,
and from some she takes richesse: to some other she gives: and from them by
and by she takes again that, that she gave them before, and delyuereth it to
some other, both without cause, without aduisement, and inconstantly. And
therefore that token declares well her nature. what token is that, quoth I,
that she stands upon a round stone? what betokens that? Marie that her
geftes be both uncertain and unstable. Wherefore they that trust unto her,
suffer sharp and greuouse troubles. But what means the great company that
stand about her, and what be they called? Certainly they be called folk
without judgment or consideracion. For every one of them does ask those
things, that be both transitory and vanisshyng. Wherefore than do they not
look all a like, but some of them do seem to rejoice, and some of them be
sorrowful, heavy, and castyng abroad their hands? Those which seem (quoth he)
to rejoice and laughe, be of them, the which have received somewhat of
Fortune, and those call her good Fortune: But those, which seem to weep and
cast out their hands, be of them, from whom she has taken that the which
she gave them before: And those call her ill Fortune. What things be those
than, the which she gives them, seeing that the receiuours rejoice so much
in receiuyng of them, and the loasers do so much droupe and mourn for the
loss of them? Those things (quoth he) the which many folks call goods. Ye
but which be they? Richesse, quoth he, and glory, and nobilitee, and
children, and lordshyp, and kingdoms, and other such like. Why be not those
things good in deed? As of that (quoth he) we shall dispute an other time:
but now let us go forth with this tale. Be it so.

Se ye not then, after ye have passed this gate, another higher compace, and
women standing without the same circuit appoincted like harlottes? Ye veraie
well. The one of those is called Incontinence, an other Riot, an other
Couetise, an other Flattery. Why do they than stand here? They await duly
upon them, the which have received any thing of Fortune. What than? Than they
skippe forth and embrace them, and flatter, and pray them to abide with
them, seeing, that they so doing shall have a pleasant life without any
labor, grief or trouble. Than if any of them be persuaded by those women to
enter into pleasure, so long as that conversation tyckleth and delyteth him,
so long he shall think it sweet, but afterward it is not so. For as soon
as he calls him self home, he shall well perceive, that he has not eaten
pleasure, but that he has been by pleasure both eaten and wronged. For when
he has consumed all that Fortune gave him, he is compelled to be those wome^s
slave, and to suffer al things, and to be filthy, and for their sakes to leave
none ungracious deed undone: As to take men's goods from them, to commit
sacrilege, to forswear and periure them self, to betraie, to rob and roue,
and to do all other such like myscheuous deeds: But when all things do
fail them, than are they delivered to pain and tourment. What pain and
tourment is that?

See thou not behind yonder women (quoth he) as it were a littell mouth of
a cave, and a certain straict and dark place: and also there seems to ve
women foul and sluttish, and their clothes all baudie, ragged, and beggarly? I
see it well. Of these (quod he) she that has the whippe in her hand, is
called Punishment: She that has her head between her knees, is Heaviness: she
that plucketh her own hear, is Sorrow. But what misshapen, lean, and naked
fellow is he, that stands by them: and also an other foul and lean woman
like unto him? The man is called (quoth he) Wailyng, and she his sister is
called Sluggishnesse, or lack of courage. And so to those persons he is
delivered, and with them he lives in continual turment. Than again from
hence he is thrown into an other house of evil hap: and there he passes
forth the rest of his life in all misery and wretchedness, except Repentance
come to him from Fortune. Why, what shall she do? Marie if Repentance come
to him, she delivers him from all euyles: and imprinteth in him, an other
opinion and desire, that should lead him to true lernyng, and also to that,
the which is called the untrue learning. Than what is done more? If he receive
(quoth he) the opinion, the which guides him to true lernyng, by that he is
purged: and made safe and blessed, and shall be happy all his life after,
except he be again deceived by false opinion. O good lord, what an other great
peril is this? But what manner of thing, quod I, is the untrue learning? See
thou not yonder other Compass? Very well, quoth I. Also without the circuit
about the enter, there stands a woman, the which seems to be veraie
net, and pure, and to be well manered. I see her veraie well. Her (quoth he)
many foolish folk call lernyng, but she is none other in deed, than untrue
learning. And when they, that are wholly made safe, will advance them self to
true lernyng, they come hither first. Is there than none other way but this,
to come to true learning? Yes, quoth he. But those folks within the circuit
that go downward, what be they? Those be, quoth he, the lovers of untrue
learning, men deceived, and wenyng that they be very familiare with true
lernyng. What be they called? Some poets, quoth he, some orators, some
Logiciens, some Musiciens, some Arithmetriciens, some Geometriciens, some
Astronomers, some of Epicures sect, some of the Peripatetike sect, some of
the sect Critike, and all other such like. The women, the which seem to
run about, like to those we saw first, among whom thou dydst say, there
was Incontinence, and other with the^, what be they? The self same, quoth he.
Why come they in hither than? yea by Jupiter even hither: but that is seldom,
and not as they do in the first compass. And what, be not those opinions
likewise? yes, quod he. Moreover there remains in these folk the draughte
that they drank of Deceit both Ignorance, and with her also foolishness: And
they shall never be delivered of opinion, nor of other malice, till such time
as they have forgotten the untrue learning, and be entered into the true way,
and drink there a pourgeyng virtue, and cast away all the euylles they had
before, both opinions, Ignorance, and all other ungraciousness. Than under
this facion they shall be made whole. But these, the which remain still with
false lernyng, shall never be quitte of their naughtiness: nor they shall never
be without some evil, for these studies sake. But which is this way, that
leads a man to true learning? See thou, quoth he, yonder above, a place, in
the which no body dwells, but it seems to be deserte? I see it. Moreover
there is a littell gate, and a way before the gate, the which is not very
much haunted, very few folk use it, for because it seems hard to clymme
to it: and it is both rough and stony? I see it very well, quoth I. There
appears also a littell high hill, and the ascendyng up is veraie straict, and
has deep pitchlinges here and there, where one may lightly fall down hedlyng.
I see it. This is the way, quoth he, that leads unto true learning: and
truly to look to, it seems an uneasy way. See thou not also above about
the hill top a great high stone, very stiepe up on every side? I see it, quoth
I. See thou also two goodly women standing upon the stone with good
proporcion of body, and how they put forth their hands ready and gladly? I see
them, but how, quoth I, be they called? The one, quod he is called Continence,
the other Sufferaunce, they be systers. Why put they out their hands so
gladly? They do, quoth he, exhort the comers toward that place to trust,
and not to fear, tellyng them they must take a littell patience and suffer a
littell while more, and than they shall come into the good way. Tell me this,
when they come to the stone, how geat they up thereon, for I see no way, that
brings them up? These women come down from the stiepe clyffes, and draw
them up: and there they bid them rest: and within a while after they give
them strength, courage, and boldness: and they promise to stablish them in
true learning: and they show them the way, how fair, plain, and passable
it is, and pure and clean from all lettes or stoppes, as thou see. They
show them in deed. See thou not also, quoth he, before this same woodde a
certain place, the which seems to be very fair, somewhat like a meddow,
and shinyng with much light and brightness? Very well Dooest thou also take
heed in the mids of the meddow of an other compass, and an other gate? It
is so, but what is this place called? The habitacion of blessed folk (quoth
he.) For here dwell all virtues and felicitee. It must needs than be a fair
place, quoth I. Than thou see at the gate a certain woman, the which is
veraie fair, and of a constant face and behaueour, in her middel and lusly
age, and having her apparel and garments simple: She stands not upon a
round stoane, but on a square, surely set and fixed: and with her there be two
other, they seem to be her daughters? It appears so. Of these, the myddelmoste
is Learning, the other Troth, the other persuasion. But why stands this
woman upon a square stoane? It is a token, quoth he, that the way, that leads
folk to her, is to them both fyrme and sure: and the gift of those things,
that she gives, is to the receiuours sure and stable. And what things be
they, that she gives? Boldness and Assurednes without fear, quoth he. what be
they? Knowlage, quoth he, to suffer nothing grievously in this life. By God,
quoth I, these be goodly gifts: But why stands she so without the compass?
To the intent, quoth he, she may heal those, the which come thither, and
makes them to drink a pourgacion. When they be pourged, from thence she
brings them into the virtues. How is this, quoth I? I understand it not well
yet. But thou shall understand it, quoth he. In likewise as if a man, the
which is very sick, comes to a physician, the physician does first by
purgacion expel all those things, that caused the sickness: And so after
restores the pacient to his recovery and health again. If the pacient do not
obey to those things, the which the physician commands he should, not
without a cause he is cast up of the physicion, and vndooen by the sickness.
This I understand (quoth I.) Even in the same manner, quoth he, it is, when a
man comes to Learning, she cures him, and makes him drink her virtue,
first to purge him, and to cast away all the euyls, the which he had, when
he came to her. What be those? Ignorance and Error, the which he drancke of
Deceyte, and pride also and arrogance, concupiscence, intemperaunce, fury,
couetousenesse, and all other, with which he was replenished in the first
compass. Then when he is pourged, whyther does she send him? In (quoth he)
to knowlage, and to other virtues. To what virtues? Dooest thou not see (quoth
he) within the gate, a company of women, the which seem to be of good
disposicio^ and well ordered, having their apparel not gaie, but simple, nor
they be not so trymme, nor so pickedly attired, as the other be? I see them
(quoth I) but what be they called? The first (quoth he) is called Knowlage, the
other be her systers, Strength of mind, Justice, Goodness, Temperance, So
bernesse, Liberalitee, Continence, and Meekness. O these be marvelous goodly,
quoth I, In how great an hope be we now? yea if ye understand, quoth he, and
will root in you by practice those things, the which you hear. we shall
assaie as diligently as we can, quoth I. Than you shall be safe, quoth he.

When these women have received one, whyther do they bring him? To their
mother, quoth he. Who is she? Felicitee, quoth he. Who is that? Thou see the
way, that goes up to that high place, the which is the top of all the
other compasses. I see it. There is also in the porche a woman of a good grace
and favor, and sits in an high throne, dressed gentill womanlyke, and not to
trymme, coroned with a veraie fair and flourishyng garland? She seems to be
so. The same is Felicitee, quoth he. When one comes thither, what does he
there? Felicitee, quoth he, with her power crowns him, and so do all the
other virtues likewise, as a man the which has overcome marueilouse great
battles. What battayles has he overcome, quoth I? Very great, quoth he, and
great wild beasts, the which before did devour and vex him, and made him
their slave, all these has he overcome, and expelled from him: and now he is
lord over him self. Wherefore now they serve him: as he did them before. I
would gladly know, which be those wild beasts thou speak of? First, quoth
he, Ignorance and Deceyte, do not these seem to thee wyld beasts? ye and
very ill wild beasts (quoth I.) Secondely, Sorrow, wailyng, Couetousenesse,
Intemperance, and all other mischief: all those he does now rule, and is not
governed nor commanded by them, as he was before. O (quoth I) these be
goodly acts and deeds, and a victory most goodly: but tell me this, what is
the power and virtue of the corone, with the which she coroneth him? It is,
young man, a virtue and a might, that makes a man welfull. For he that is
coroned with this power and virtue, is made thereby happy and welfull, and has
not the trust nor hope of his felicity in other things, than in him self. O
what a goodly victory tellest thou. But when he is coroned, what does he, or
whither goes he? The virtues take him, and lead him thither, whence he came
before, and show him how evil and how wretchedly they live, the which dwell
still there, and in what great danger and peril they live, and how they err
and wander, and are led, as it were by their ennemies: Some by Intemperance,
some by Pride, some by Couetousenesse, some by Vaynglorie, and some by other
euylles, from the which myschiefes, to whom they were bound, they can not
unloose them self, to come hither to be made whole: but live in trouble all
their life: This they suffer, because they can not find the way, that would
bring them hither. For they have forgotten that that was commanded them by
Genius.

Me seems thou say troth, but yet in this I doubt again. Why do the
virtues show him the place, from whence he came first? He did not thoroughly
know (quoth he) nor understood any of those things, that were there, but he
was in doubt. And thorough Ignorance and Error, that he drank, he esteemed
those things to be good, which were not good: and those things, to be evil,
which be not evil: And therefore he him self lived naughtily, as the other
do, that there dwell and abide. Now he has atteined knowlage of all
profitable things, he him self lives well, and does behold other, the
which live evil. When he has looked over all, what does he, or whither
goes he? Whither so ever he will (quoth he.) For every where he is in
suertee, as he that dwells in the den of Corycus. And whither so ever he
goes, in all things he shall live well, with all suertee. And every body
shall receive him gladly, as the sick folks do the physicion. But does not
he yet fear those women, the which thou dyddest call beasts, lest he should
suffer somewhat of them? Nothing at all. He nothing shall be troubled with
Sorrow, nor with Heaviness, nor with Intemperance, nor with Couetise, nor with
Pouertee, nor with any other evil. For he shall be lord over them all: and be
safe from all those things, the which before did hurt or trouble him, as
they be, that are bitten with a serpent called Vipera. For without doubt wild
beasts, the which hurt all other folk to the death, will not hurt nor
trouble them, for because they have by this bityng a remedy to resist all
other: So in like wise nothing troubles this man, because he has a remedy
present. Me seems thou say very well: but yet tell me this, what be they,
the which seem to come yonder from the hill? Of the which these that be
crouned, seem to rejoice and be merry: and those that be vncrouned, as it were
men in despair, seem to knock their heads and legs: they are also
withholden by certain women. Those that be crouned be they, the which are
made safe by learning, and they rejoice, that they have atteyned her: But those
that be vncrouned are they, which because they did despair, came away from
lernyng, made thereby evil and wretched. but yet those without fear went to
Sufferaunce, and thence turned back again, and erred, and myssed the way.
But the women that follow after them, what be they? Heuinesse, quoth he, and
Sorrows, and Vexacions, and Shames, and Ignorancies. And it be, as thou say,
all the euylles in the world follow them. It is true by Jupiter (quoth he)
that they follow them. When these folk are come again to the first
compass, to Lust and Incontinence, they do not accuse them self, but straight
they speak evil both of Learning, and also of them that go to her: saying,
that those are wretched, miserable, and unhappy, the which leauyng the life
that they have, do live evil, and have not the fruicio^ nor use of those
good things, that they have. What do they call good things? Riot and
Intemperaunce to speak shortly. For, for to eat and drink like beasts,
they esteem to be the fruicion of the best things in this world. But the other
women, the which go thither merry and laughyng, what be they called? Opinions
(quoth he) the which after they have brought folk to Lernyng, and that they
be gone into the virtues, they go their ways to fetch other, and to show,
that those are made happy and welfull, the which they brought before. But do
not, quoth I, those opinions com in to the virtues? No (quoth he.) For Opinion
may not come in to knowlage: but Opinions deliver them that come unto
Learning. And when Learning has once received them, then do these opinions go
back again to fetch other, like as ships that are dyscharged of their
frought go again and are filled with other stuff. These things me seems
(quoth I) thou have very well expouned: but yet thou haste not declared unto
us, what Genius does command thentrers into life to do. To trust well and have
good courage (quoth he) and therefore have ye good courage. For I will expoune
all, and leave nothing. Thou sayeh well (quoth I.)

Then he put forth his hand again. Ye see (quoth he) the woman, which seems
to be blind, and to stand upon a round stone, The which I told you even
now, is called Fortune? We see her. Genius commands, quoth he, that folk
should not trust this woman, nor believe that any thing, that a body does receive
of her, is either fyrme and stable, or may have and keep it sure and safely:
nor to esteem it as his own. For nothing can let her to take away those
things again, and to deliver them to some other body: And she is wont often
so to do. And for this cause Genius does command, that her gifts should
be littell set by: And another to rejoice, when she gives them: nor to be
sorry, when she takes them away: and another to disprayse nor to praise her. For
she does nothing by reason, but all things rasshely without aduysement, and
as it happens, as I have told you before. For these consideracions he
commands, that folk should not esteem, nor have in admiracion that, the
which she does. Nor to be like the evil merchants bankers. For they, when
they have received money of a man, do rejoice, and think it is their own:
but when it is asked them again, they are myscontent, and think they be
evil handled, and do not remember, that they did receive, that that was
trust in their hands, for this intent, that when so ever the owner list,
there should be none obstacle, but that he might take it away again. Under
such manner Genius commands folk not to be affectionate to Fortunes geftes,
and to remember, that she has such a nature to take away and to transfer
those things she gave, and by and by again to give manyfolde things. Sometime
also she does not only take away those things she gave alone, but also
those things that were had before. Therefore Genius commands to take of
those things she gives, and he that has them to go his way shortly to the
ferme and sure gefte. What gefte is that, (quoth I?) The gefte that folk take
of Learning, if they be made whole there. Yea and what is that? The true
knowlage (quoth he) of profitable things, both a sure, and a stable, and an
immutable gefte. Moreover he commands to flee fast toward this knowlage.
And when they come to those women, the which as I said before, are called
Incontinence and pleasure, he commands them not to trust those women in any
wise, nor to tarry till they come to untrue Learning: There he commands them
to tarry a while and abide, and to take what so ever they will of her, as a
help or aid to a further iourneie. Than from thence to go anon to true
Learning. These be the things, that Genius commands. Who so ever beside
these things, either does any thing, or misheareth any thing, does naught
like him self perish naughtily.

So now friends the story, that is in the table, is such as I have told
you. Yet if ye list to enquire of any of these things particularly, without
disdeigne I shall tell it to you.

Thou say well, quoth I. But what does Genius command them to take of
untrue Learning? Those things that are worthy and meet to be used and
occupied. What be those? Letters (quoth he) and other sciences, the which,
Plato says, are to young folk in steed of a Bridle, to reine them from
turnyng, to other things. But whether is it necessary for a body, if he will
go to true Learning, to take those things or no? Necessitee truly, quoth he,
there is none. Yet nevertheless they be profitable, but to make folk the
better, thereto can they nothing help. Thou say than, that these things be
not so profitable, that by them men may be made better, for without them a
body may come to goodness: Yet never the less they be not unprofitable. If
I have perceived you well, ye mean this, that without the knowlage of those
liberal sciences, men may atteyne to virtue and goodness: in like manner as we
may understand a thing spoken in a strange language, without the knowlage of
that same tongue, by a spokesman, that can interpret it unto us. Yet never the
less, it were not unprofitable for us, to understand our self the language,
in the which it was first spoken in. Have not men learned in these sciences,
pre-eminence to be better than other men? How can they excel or have
pre-eminence, when men may see them deceived in the opinion of good and evil,
as other folk be: and also bound and tangled with all ungraciousness? For
knowlage of letters, nor understanding of other sciences, do nothing let, but
that a body may be also droncke, intemperate, couetouse, unjust, a traitor,
and finally a fool. Forsooth a man may see many such. Than how (quoth he)
have they pre-eminence, by reason of those sciences, to be made the better men?
it seems not by this reason. But what (quoth I) is the cause? Because (quoth
he) they dwell still in the second Compass, as it were men approachyng toward
true Learning. And what helps that (quod I,) when we may see many times,
they come out of the first compass from Inco^tinence and other ungraciousness,
to the third compass, to true Learning, the which do pass by these learned
men. And how can men learned only in these lyberall sciences excel other,
when they be more obstinate, and more unable to be taught, than other folk
be? How is that (quoth I?) For (quoth he) in the second compass that thing
that they know not, they do feign them self to know. If there were none
other thing but this, as long as they have this opinion, they must needs be
unable to be steered to come to true Learning. Moreover, see thou not an
other thing, that the opinions out of the first compass, come also into them?
Wherefore these be no whit better, than those of the first compass: except
they do repent, and be persuaded that they have not the true knowlage, but
the untrue Lernyng, by whom they be deceived. And think, that as long as they
remain in the contrary opinion, that they can never be made safe and whole.
Nor you another friends, except you so do, and that these sayings remain
steadfastly in your remembrance, till such time as ye have engendered in you by
practyse, an habit or custom. Wherefore ye must consider these sayings
continually, and not by startes, and think all other things pertayne nothing
to your purpose. If ye do not so, of these things, that ye have now hard,
ye shall have no profitte. We shall do, as ye teach us: But expoune this
unto us; Why be not those things, the which folk do receive of Fortune,
good things? as to live, to be whole, to be rich, to have glory, to have
children, to conquer and overcome, and all other things like these? Or
again, why be not their contraries evil? For thy saying seems to us
incredible, and very far from our opinion. Come of (quoth he than) and
endeavor your self to answer as ye think best, to those things, the which
I shall ask you. That shall I do (quoth I.) Than (quoth he) if a body live
evil, is it good to him to live? I think no, but rather evil (quoth I.) For
how (quod he) can it be good to live, when it is to the liver evil? Certainly
(quoth I) to them, the which live naught, me thinks life is an evil thing:
but to them, the which live well, life is a good thing. Than (quoth he) thou
say, that life is both a good thing, and an evil. Ye truly. Speak not so
incrediblie and so far out of the way: For it is impossible, one thing to be
both good and evil. For so the self same thing should be both profitable and
noisome. And one self thing always to be worthy to be elected, and at the
same one time also to be eschewed: me thincketh this far from reason. But
how follows it, that though that evil be in him that lives evil, that
therefore life self should be an evil thing? But (quoth he) it is not all one,
to live, and to live evil. Does it not seem also so to the? Yes. For I do
not think them both one. Then life self (quoth he) is not an evil thing:
for if it were an evil thing, then they, the which do live well, had in the^ an
evil thing. For they have in the^ life, the which were an evil thing. Me seems
ye say troth: for because that life happens to both, as well to the livers
well, as to the livers evil. Therefore life can another be a good thing, nor an
evil. No more than cuttyng or seryng is in them, which are diseased, either a
sick thing or a whole. Consider than this, whether had ye leauer to live
evil, or to die well and nobully? I had rather (quoth I) to die well. Than, to
die it is none evil thing, seeing that many times death is rather to be chosen
than life. It is so. The self same reason may be made of health and syckenes.
For often times is not profitable to be in health, but the contrary is to be
preferred. Such circumstances there may be, thou say troth. Come of now
than let us considre in like manner of riches. May we not see (as it chances
often to see) a man to have much riches, and yet to live naught and
wretchedly? yea very many of that sort. Than riches helps nothing these men
to live well? It seems so: For they them self be naught. Than richesse
causes not men to be good, but that does high and perfect knowlage. Your
saying seems true. Than by this reason how can richesse be a good thing, when
it helps not to make his possessours to be better. Me seems ye say troth.
And to some folk also it is not profitable to be rich, if they know not how
to use richesse. It is true. How can that thing be judged good of any man, the
which it is no profitte to have? It can not.

Therefore if a man know how to use richesse well, and as it should be, he
shall live well: If he can not, he shall live naughtily. There can nothing be
truer than this. And for a fynall conclusion, to repute and esteem these
things, as though they were good things, orels reject or despise the same, as
evil things, is the cause, that vexes or troubles the most part of people:
when they honor these forsaied things, and think by them only to obteigne
felicitee and welfulnesse. For, for to get them, they leave nothing undone, be
it never so ungracious. All these things they do only because they know not,
what is the true goodness.

Thus ends the table of Cebes.
How one may take profit of his enemies.
I Perceive my friend, that thou haste choasen a right pleasant kind of living,
void of businesses of the common wealth, wherein nevertheless thou do to the
commonwealth much profitte: being unto all them that come unto thee, and eke to
them that keep thee company, both compenable and pleasant.

But sense it is so, that we may find some country, that wants wild and
hurtefull beasts, as it is said by Creta: But yet no commonwealth has been
found, that has not nourished within it self, envy, disdeigne, and strife:
of which most commonly enmitees do grow, ye and if there were nothing else,
friendship it self turns us to enmitee, which the wise man Chion perceiuyng,
asked one that vau^ted him self to have none enmie, if he had also no freende.
Me thinks than it were meet for a man of auctoritee, and that medleth in the
rule of the common wealth, that among other business he should have also
consideracion of his enemies, and to take good heed, that this was not spoken
for naught of Xenophon: It is a substanciall wise man's part, to take profytte
of his enemies. Therefore I have gathered together those things that came in my
mind now of late, as I reasoned on this mattier. And I have written them unto
the, in as few words, taking head, as nere as I could, that I touch nothing
of those that I wrote before, in the precepts of good manner, for I see that
book often in thy hand.

To men of the old world it suffised, if they took no hurt of diverse beasts,
and in that time they fought with hurtefull beasts only for that purpose. But
they that are of later time, findyng the way how to use wild beasts, are not
only not hurt, but also they take profitte of them, feedyng them with their
flesh, clothyng them with their flecis, making of their milk and galls,
medicines for diseases, and armyng them and defendyng them with their skyns:
in so much that now it is to be doubted, that if beasts wanted unto man, man's
life should be but beastely, wild, and nedie. So likewise sense it suffyseth
unto other, to take no hurt of their ennemies: and that Xenophon says,
profit may be taken of ennemies. Belefe is not to be taken from such an
auctour, but rather the manner and way must be sought, whereby this profitte
may be gotten by them, that may not live without enmitees.

The husband man can not take from every tree the wild nature: nor the hunter
can not make every wild beast gentle and tame: so that the way has been
found, that for other uses, both unfruitful trees and wild beasts have been
profitable.

The Sea water is unmeet to drink, and unpleasant, but it nourishes
fysshes, it carries us from place to place, and it serves in bringyng in and
bearyng out wares.

But Satyrus the first time that he saw fire, when he would have taken it and
kyssed it: Ho, quoth Promotheus, thou rough knave, if thou take not heed, it
will make thy lyppes smarte: for it burns, if it be touched, it serves not
for that purpose: but it gives light and hete, and is the instrument of all
crafts, if one can use it.

It must be seen therefore, if also an ennemie, that else were hurtful and
dangerous, may be touched any other way, and give some particular use of him
self, and do us very great profit. For there are many things hateful and
grievous unto them, to whom they happen: out of the which nevertheless some
use may be taken. For thou see many use some disease of the body, for
occasion of quiet and rest. Again, labors and trauayles, that have commen by
chance, have made many man's health more perfect by exercise. Besides this, there
has been many, to whom outlawrie and loss of money has been forderaunce to
study and learning, as to Diogenes and Crates. And zenon when he heard that
his ship was drowned: Thou do very well Fortune (quoth he) in driuyng me to
my studiyng mantyll.

For like as some love things, that are good in digesting, and helefull for
the body, if they eat serpents and scorpions, they digest them: yea and
there are some, they are nouryshed with stones and shelles, by reason of the
force and heat of the spirits, that turn these things into nourishement:
where as these, that been tender and sickly, can not away with bred and wine.
So fools mar and also loose freendships, but they that are wise, can
profitablie use enmitees.

First therefore that that in enmitee is most hurtful, seems unto me to do
great profitte, if one take heed to it. What is that say thou? Truly an
enemy alwaie watchyng, marketh what thou do, and in sekyng occasion of
sclander, prieth and pereth always on thy living, percing with his sight like a
Lynx, not only the timber, the coueryng, and the walls of thy house, but also
thy freende, thy servant, and whom so ever keeps thee company, that as nere
as he may, he will know what thou dooest, pearcyng and triyng all thy
secrets. Where as our friends by our delaie and negligence, often times are
both sick, and dye without our knowlage. And of our enemies well nere we
mark their dreams. So that the diseases, the dettes, the skoldynges with
their wives, shall rather be unknown of the^, whose they are, then of their
enemies. So chiefly does be mark fautes, and above all thing, them he
seeks. Even like as these Grypes, that Priam and his children might be glad
to have had such ennemies, whereby they took heed to them selfs, and were
renowned: truly it shall withdraw, restreigne, and lead them from such
things, that should be pleasure and laughter for their enemies.

We see also these musiciens often times slake and not very hedefull, as often as
they sing in audience alone: But if there happen any dysdeigne, and strife with
other: than they do not only apply their minds better, but dress their
instruments more diligently, chose theirstringes, tune them more precysely,
in assaiyng often their accord: So who that perceyueth, that he has a
disdeigner, both of his name and of his living, takes better head to him
self, he examineth all his deeds, and redresseth all his life. For of truth
naughtiness has this propertee, that in offendyng, it fears more enemies
then friends. Therefore Scipio, when some thought Rome to be in a suertie,
because Carthage was destroyed, and the Greeks overcome: ye but now (quoth he)
we are in greatest peril, sense now we have none, whom we dread or fear.

Take with this the answer of Diogenes very excellent and mete for a
philosopher: To one that asked him, which way he might be revenged on his
ennemie: If thou make (quoth he) thy self an honest and a good man.

Most part of men are sorry, when they see the fair horse, or well praised
dogs of their enemies: And again they are sorry, if they see their land well
housebanded, or their gardeyne fair and goodly. What trowest thou than they
will do, if thou show thy self an upright man, wise, good, and thriftie,
excellent in well saying, pure and vncorrupt in mattiers of charge: In
temperaunce of thy living, sobre and mesurable, vsyng to plow a deep forow in
a wise breast, whens out do spryng goodly and fair counsayles?

They that are over come, says Pyndarus, have their tongue teyed, that they
dare not once hysce. But that is not apliable properly in every one, that is
ouercomen of their enemies. But in them only, that see them self ouercomen of
their ennemies, in diligence, in wisdom, in greatness of the mind, in
gentylnesse, and lyberalitee. These things do fold up a tongue, as says
Demonsthenes, these do shut and cloase up the mouth, these do stop the
throat, these cause silence, these cause the, that, as says Pyndarus, thou
darste not once hysce. Therefore endeavor thou thy self, sense thou may, to
seem better then they that be naught. Therefore if thou desire to grieve thine
ennemie, do it not this way, to call him leude, or dronckerd, knave, or
nygarde, or sluttishe or slouen, but rather endeavor thou thy self to be an
honest man, endeavor thy self to be sobre, and measurable, to be true, and to
entreat them gentilly and indifferently, that keep company and meddle with
thee. But if it so happen, that thou fall to chidyng and reuilyng, take heed,
that thou be clean without those fautes, for which thou rebukest an other.
Return thy self into thine own breast, look into thine own bosom, and
mark well, if there be any thing fylthie or subject to vice: Lest
peradventure some ill tongue have occasion to cast this in thy teeth: He
^alueth other, and is him self full of botches.

But if he call the unlearned, apply thou thy self to study, and quicken thy
endeavor: if he call the coward, steer thy courage, and the readiness of thy
mind: if he call the unchaste and vicious, chase out of thy mind the desire of
lust, if any such printe, unware to thee, stick in thee. For there is
nothing fouler than such rebuke, that reboundeth to the rebuker. And there is
nothing more grievous or sharper. For like as the reflection of light does
most hurt to sore eyes, so do ill words, which truth retourneth thither
as they came fro.

Truly like as the Northe^^ wind draws clouds toward it, so does ill
living draw ill speaking unto it. Therefore Plato, as often as he saw any do
uncomely, to him self was woonte to say: Am I such in any case?

Furthermore, he that has skolded with an other, if he forthwith behold his
owne-life, and redress it, chaungeyng it in to the contrary, and correctyng
it: truly he shall take great profitte by skoldyng, and otherwise it is both
taken, and also is a veraie foolyshe thing. For so commonly men are wont to
laughe at him, that is balde or crooked, and blames an other for the same
vices. But it is most of all to be laughed at, one to cast a rebuke to another,
which may have some rebuke turned to him self. As Leo of Byzantia, when a
foul crooked fellow cast unto him the sorenes of his eyes: It is natural (quoth
he.) But thou dooest carry thine own rebuke upon thy back.

Therefore beware that thou cast not adultery in ones teeth, if thou use a more
fylthie fleshly lust: nor attwyte not one of waste, if thou be a nygard.

Alcmeon laid it to Adrastus, that he was cousine to a woman, that slew her
mother. But what said he again? He tayed to him again not an others fault,
but his own, saying: Thou slewest thy mother thine own hands.

Domitius iested with Crassus on this wise: Did thou not weep, when thy
Lampraie was dead, which thou had kept in thy stewe? But Crassus
returned the check on this facion: Did thou weep at all, when thou
buriedst.iii. wives?

He that should check an other, may not be a iester, or a skolder, or a
fool: But he must be such one, on whom no check nor fault may cleue. For it
seems that god commanded this. (Know thyself) to no man more than to him,
that should blame and check an other: Least, if they say what they will, they
here that that they would not. For it is wont to be as Sophocles says: When
thou haste powered out words foolishlie, and said them with thy good will,
again thou shall here the same against thy will.

And that is the profitte and commoditee, that may be taken of chidyng with
ennemies: and no less profit comes of the the other, that is, if one be ill
spoken of, and rebuked of his enemies. whereupon it was well and truly spoken of
Antisthenes: It behooves a man for the safegarde of his wealth and prosperitee,
either to have sure trusty friends, or sharp enemies, because they in
warning, the other in rebuking, refreigne him from vices.

But truly because that now a days friendship has lost her speech to speak
freely, and flattery has tongue enough, warnyng is domme: it remains
therefore, that we must here the truth of our ennemies. For like as Telephus
could not be healed of his wound by no surgion of his own fellows, and was
healed by an other wound that Achilles his ennemie gave him in the same place:
so they that have no freendly warner, must suffer the words of an ill
willing enemy, whereby they may correct and amend their fautes. In which
time the thing it self ought to be considered, and not the mind of the ill
speaker. For like as he that thought to have slain Promotheus of Thessaly, by
chance struck so a wenne that he had, that he saved the man, and by breakyng
the wenne rid him of the peril: so it is not seldom seen, that a rebuke
cast out by enmitee and hatered, heals a sore of the mind, that was
peradventure unknown, orels unregarded.

But many that are touched with a rebuke, do not consider this, whether they
be gyltie of the shame that is laid to the^, but they look rather, if he that
laid it, have any thing in him, that may be cast against him, And like as
wrastelers in the wrastlyng place, do not brusshe away the dust, but one
arayeth an other: so with rebukes when they meet together, one of them shameth
an other. But it were more according, that he that has had a check of his
ennemie, shall take that away, that is laid against him, rather then a spotte
that one shows him in his gown.

Ye and also if one lay to thy charge a faut, that thou art not gyltie in, yet
it is to be sought, upon what causes that ill speaking did grow: and than it
ought to be taken heed of and feared, lest that unware we do any thing like
that, that is laid against us. As Lacides king of Argi^e, for his trim
bushe, and a little more pyked apparaile, was sklaundered among the common
sort, as tender and womannishe.

The same happened to Pompeie, because he skratched his head with one finger,
although he was far enough from tenderness and wantonness.

So also it did happen unto Crassus, which to by a proper ferme, often times
resorted to a woman of religion, for to win her good will.

Truly Posthumia, by reason of her liberal laughyng and talkyng with men, was
so sclaundered, that she was accused of adultry, although it was found, that
the fault was not true: Yet the bishop Spurius Minutius at her departing
warned her, that she should talk with as great dread of shame, as she did live.

And Themistocles when he offended nothing, yet he gatte by Pausanias to be
suspect of treason, because he used him so familiarly, and sent him daiely
letters and messangers. Therefore when there is any thing said against the,
that is not true, thou ought not therefore, because it is false, to let it
pass. But try with thy self, if thou have said or dooen any thing, or
assaied any thing, or if among thy familiars there has any thing been, that
has given him prouable occasion: and if thou find it, take heed and avoyde
it.

Truly if hard hap, that comes by chance teaches some, what is best to
do, as Metopa speaks in a play: Fortune in taking away that, that was
most dear unto me, has made me wise to my cost. Why should we not as well use
our ennemie for a teacher less costely, that may profitte us, and teaches us
some thing, that we knew not before? For truly many things an ennemie
perceyueth better than a freende, because that love blyndeth in the thing that
is loved, as says Plato. But unto hate is ioigned both buisie search and
bablyng.

When Hieron had his stinkyng breath cast against him of his ennemie, he came
home and chode his wife, saying: Why did not thou show me this fault? But
she that was chaste and simple, answered: I had went (quoth she) that all men
had sauoured on the same facion. So that, which may be sensiblely perceived,
and those things that be in the body seen of every man, thou shalt sooner
know them of thine enemies, than of thy friends or fellows.

Put to this, that where it is no small part of virtue to have a sobre tongue,
always obedient to reason: that thou canste not have, without thou by much
exercise, heed, and study, subdue the ill mocions of thy mind, of which
sort anger is one. For as from fools words do skape out, and as Homere
says: The fleeyng voice forsakes the cloasure of the mouth. So it is most
wont to happen to vnexercysed minds, that slyppe and slide, by vnmoderate
anger, by vntemperatenesse of mind, and by small heed of living.

Moreover, as says the godly Plato, the lightest thing that is, both god and
man punish with greattest pain. But a the other side, silence, where as it is
alwaie gyltlesse, and not only not hurtful, it has besides in chidyng, a
savor of Socrates constance, or of Hercules force rather, for he also took
less head of grievous words, then he did of flies.

Surely where as there is nothing more grave or fairer, than when thy ennemy
chydeth, to hold thy peace, as one that saileth by a greatte rock, so also
does such an exercise spread further. For if thou use to suffer thine enemies
chidyng, holdyng thy peace, thou shall very easily suffer thy wives scoldyng,
when she is angry, and bear without trouble the criyng of thy friend, and the
combre of thy brother. For of thy father and thy mother thou will suffer
knockes and strokes, and be not moved with anger.

And Socrates did suffer Xantippa his wife at home to chyde and combre him,
the more easily to keep company with other, if he used to forbear her. But it
is much better in being exercised with checkes, rebukes, and hatredes of
enemies, to use to subdue anger, and not to chafe when thou art ill spoken to.

Therefore on this wise one ought to use sobrenesse and sufferaunce in
enmitees. But symplenesse, great mind, and gentylnesse is more according in
freendships. For it is not so honest to deserve well of a friend, as it is
shame not to do it, as often as need requires. But yet it is taken for
gentylnesse, when chance gives occasion, to let pass and not to be revenged
on thine ennemie.

But he that receives not his good will, and praises not his gentilnes, that
soroweth the offense of his enemy, and helps him, if he desire it, and
takes some heed to his children, or to his house, that is in peril, truly he
has an heart of a diamant, or else of iron.

When Caesar had commanded the images of Pompei, that were cast down, to be
set up again: Thou have (quoth M. Tullius) set up Pompeis images, and
stablished thine own. Wherefore an enemy is not to be dispraised, nor to be
deceived of his honor, which is to be praised, and worthy, for because a
greatter preyse thereon comes unto them that so do praise. Beside that, he
that preiseth one, that deserves it, is better believed, when he blames, as
one that hates not the man, but that aloweth not his deed.

And that that is most godly of all, and most profitable, he shall in no wise
envy his fortunate friends, nor his familiars, when they do any thing praise
worthy, who so ever uses to praise his ennemies, and not to gnawe nor byte
at their good fortunes. Is there any thing that bredeth such profit in us, or
that ingendreth in our minds a better use, than that that takes from us
dysdeigne and envy? For as in a common wealth there are many things
necessary and yet naught, which sense they be comen in custom, and gotten
the strengthes of a law, yet shall they, to whom they be hurtful or grievous,
not lyghtlie do them away: So enmitee brings with it many vices, as
anger, suspection, reioisyng of others harm, remembrance of wrongs, and
leaves the printes of these in the mind.

Besides that many things, which if thou do them to thine ennemie, seem
neither ill nor wrongefull, so remain they in us, that skant they can be put
away, as is craftiness, deceit, and subtyltees. Whereby often times by the
custom, we shall use them to our friends, if we be not ware how to use
them to our enemies. Therefore Pythagoras commanded veraie well, when he moved
men from taking of foul, and of fisshe, and forbadde the killyng of all
gentle beasts, to the end that in beasts we should use to temper our selfs
from crueltee and rauenyng. But it is much more goodly, in being a gentle, a
just, and simple ennemie, in debates and stryfes against men, to chastise the
foul and deceitful affections of the mind, and to subdue them, to the end
that in medlyng with friends men may utterly forbear them.

Scaurus was at debate with Domitius, and sewed him: so a servant of Domitius,
before the mattier was pleaded, came unto Scaurus, and advertised him, that he
had a secret thing to tell him: but he would not suffer the fellow to speak,
but took him and sent him to his master.

Cato, when Murena did sewe him, and sought together arguments of the
accusacion, there followed him (as was the custom) they that awayted, what
should be dooen, and thee often times would ask him, if that day he would
do any thing, that might perteyne to his accusyng: and if he denied it, they
believed him and went their way. And truly that was a great token, that they
had a good opinion of Cato.

But this is the fairest of all, that once when we are accustomed to do
uprightly and justly with our ennemies, we shall never meddle deceitfully or
falsely with our friends and familiars. But because it must needs be, that
every kocke have his comb, and every mind of man of him self bredeth
strife, suspect, and envy: it were not unprofitable, among friends that have
but holow minds, as says Pyndarus, if a man pour out the purging of such
fautes upon his ennemies, and to leat it run as into a synke, far of from
his friends or familiars. Which me thincketh Onomademus an honest man
perceived, which was in Chio, when there was a mutenyng there, on that part
that had the better, and warned them of his side, not to chase them all out,
that were of the contrary side, lest (quoth he) that we begin to fall out
with our friends, if we want enmies. And if those vices on this wise should
be consumed on enmies, they shall the less grieve friends.

For truly the potter should not envy the potter, nor the singer the synger,
as Hesiodus says: and it is not meet, that a man should disdein his
neighbor, or his cosyn, or his brother, if he wax rich, and have good
fortune. But if there be none other way to rydde thy self from strife, envy
and disdeigne, than use thy self to be sorry for thine ennemies good fortune,
and sharpen the edge of anger against them. For as these connyng gardiners
think to make roses and violettes the better, if they sow oynions and garlyke
nere by them, that what so ever sower savor be in the^, it may be purged in
to the the other: so an ennemie receiuyng into him, our envy and waiewardnes,
shall make us better and less grievous to our friends, that have good fortune.

Wherefore against them must be exercised the strife of glory, of rule, and of
good gaynyng, but not so much, that we should tourment our self, though they
have more thanne we: But to mark al things by what means they pass us, and
let us endeavor us to pass them in diligence, endeavor, sobrenesse, and
warenes: As Themistocles was wont to say, that he could not sleep for
Myltiades victory at Maratho.

For he that is brought to so low mind, and faintyng for envy, because he
thinks him self passed of his enemy, in governance, or in obteignyng of
causes, or in favor, or auctoritee with friends, or with noble men, and not
rather endeavors and assaieth something in despite of him, truly he is
holden with a foolyshe and a vain envy. But he whom hate blyndeth not so, but
that he may judge him, whom he hates, and also may look with indifferent
eyes, both upon his life, and his manners, his words, and his deeds: of a
suertie he shall perceive many of those things, that he enuyeth, to come unto
the the other by diligence, provision, and of deeds well dooen. And therewithal
by exercise sharpyng the taking heed of passing him, and the study of honor,
he shall shake of all idilnesse and false heart. So that if we see that they
have gotten in the court or in the co^monwelth, any dishonest or undeserved
power, either by flattery, or by deceipte, or by false judgment, or by mede,
it shall not be grievous unto us, but rather pleasure, in laiyng together our
upright living with their naughtiness. For truly all the gold that is either
above the earth or under the earth, is not to be compared with virtue, as
says Plato. It is meet also to have alwaie in remembrance that word of
Solon: We will not says he, change the richesse of virtue, neither for the
largess that is cried by a great nombre, hired for meat, nor for honors, nor
for the chief place among the wives and concubines of dukes and princes. For
there is nothing to be wondered at, or notable, that grows of dishonestee. But
the lover is blind in that that he loves, as says Plato, and better we
perceive if our ennemies do any thing uncomely. Yet may we not, though they
do naughtily take an unprofitable gladness, or and if they do well, be
moved with an idell grief, but in each of this is to be thought, that in
being ware of the tone we may be letter then they, and following the the other,
that we be no worse.

Thus ends Plutarche to take profit of enemies.
The manner to choose and cherishe a freende.
TO fill up the padges, that else would have been void, I thought it should
another hurt nor displease, to add hereunto a few sayings, how a man
should choose and cherishe a friend. Cicero says, that Scipio complained
greatly, that men were more diligent in all things, than in freendshippe:
every man knows how many gotes and sheep he has, but no man can tell how
many friends he has: And in the gettyng of other things, men use great care
and diligence, but in choosyng of friends they be veraie negligent, nor they
have not as it were marks and tokens, by the which they may deem those that
are feet to be received into freendeship. The book says, have not friendship
with an ire full man, nor with a fool: but as Cicero says, men firm, and
stable, and constaunt, should be taken into freendeship. Of the which sort is
great scarsitee and lack, and to judge which they be, is a very hard thing,
except we make a proof, and we can not make a proof thereof till we be entered
into friendship. So, freendshippe goes before judgment.

Some there be, that a small sum of money shall show how sure friends they
be. Some there are, which a littell thing can not remove, and yet they be
known in a great need.

And if we hap to find a freende, that deemeth it a foul and a shameful
thing to set more by money than by freendship, yet where shall we find them,
that will not more esteem honors, rowmes, lordshippes, powers, and abundaunce
of richesse, than freendship? But as the same Cicero says, another profits,
honors, riches, pleasures, nor none other such like things, should be more
set by than friendship. But yet he that is a good man, shall do nothing for
his friends sake, that is either against the commonwealth, or else against his
oath or fidelitee. For the offense is not excusable, to say, thou dyddest it
for thy friends sake. And yet the same Cicero, as Gellius does recite his
words, says, that where our friend stands in ieopardie, either of his
life or of his good renoume, we may somewhat swerve aside out of the way. But
in other places he expounds him self showing plainly, that we should require
nothing of our friend, but that that is honest.

And now concerning the trust that we ought to have the our friend, Seneca
says: He that estemeth any man his friend, the which he can not trust so
much as him self, does deceive him self. And he that makes and proves
his friend with feastyng at the table, does fail. It is virtue, says Cicero,
the which both wynneth and entertaineth friends. A man should reason and
debate all things with his friend, but first he should debate and reason with
him, whether he be a friend or no. No man needs to mistrust freendshyp, but
first lear him examyne and deem, whether it be freendship or not. They do
against the precepts of Theophrast, the which love before they judge, and not
after they have demed* thou should a long time considre, whether thou
should take any into thy friendship: and when it likes the so to do, than
receive him with all thy very heart, and talk as boldly with him, as though thou
were alone. But yet live thou after such facio^, that thou commit nothing to
him, but that thou would commyt to an enmie. But for because there be certain
businesses, the which custom makes secret, make thy friend privy to all thy
cares and thoughts. Thou shall do thus if thou suppose him to be sure and
faithful. For many show the manner and way to deceive, while they fear to be
deceived. And some tell them that they meet by the way, and blow in every
man's ear, it that should only be opened and showed to friends. Again, some also
dread so much the conscience of their most dear friends, that if they may,
they will keep close within the^ all their secrets, because they will not put
them in trust therewith. None of these two ways is to be taken, for each of
them both is naught, to trust every body, and to trust no man. Of which
two fautes the first is the more honest, and the other the more sure. And
though the wise man be content with him self, yet will he have a friend, and
it be for none other cause, but to exercise freendshippe, lest so great a
virtue should lie aside. Not for that that Epicure says, that he may have
one to tend him when he is sick, or else that may succor him, if he be cast
in prison, or be poor and nedie, but that he may have one, whom sick and
diseased he may tend upon, and whom he may deliver out of ward, if he hap
to come in his ennemies hands. He that regards him self, and for his own
sake seeks frendshyp, he intends evil: and like as he begins, so shall
he end. He thincketh he has got a freende to help him out of prison, which
when he hears the chains rattell, goes his way. These freendeshyppes, as
the people says, dure for a time. He that is received into freendeship for
love of profitte, as long as he is profitable, he pleases. It is nedeful that
the beginning and endyng of freendshippe, should agree. He that begins to be
a friend, because it is expedient for him, some price shall please him against
freendship, if there be any price in it, that may please him above
freendeshyp. Thou say: To what intent should I prepare a freende? I answer,
that thou may have one, whom thou may accompany, when he is banished,
for whom thou may put thy self in danger of death. For the the other is
rather a chapmanship than a friendship, which has a respect to profitte, and
considers, what avail he may get thereby. There is nothing, that so much
deliteth the mind, as faithful freendship. And he is well happy, that
fyndeth a true freende, says the book. O how great is the goodness, when
the breasts be prepared ready, into the which all secrets may surely be
powered, whose conscience thou dreadest less than thine own, whose talkyng
eases the grefe and heuinesse of thy heart, the sentence gives ready and
quick counsel, the cheer dassheth the inward sorrow, and the very regard
and beholding delyteth? And because the use of freendeship is variable and
manifold, and there be many causes given of suspection and offense, the which
is a wise man's part to eschew, to help, and to suffer. Friends must often be
monished, and rebuked, and that must be taken freendly, when it is done of
good will. But for so much as Terence says, Truth bredeth hate, which is
as a poison to freendship, we must take heed, that our monicion be not sour,
and that the rebuke be without vile words. For vile rebukes, as the book
says, fordoeth freendship.

Thus ends the manner to choose and cherishe a freende.
A comfortable exhortacion against the chances of death, made by Erasmus
Roterodamus.
How bitter and how greuouse a wou^d perceth your Fatherlye heart for the
death of your most goodly child, I lightly coniect by mine own sorrow. And
therefore I were right much vncourtoys, if that I in so sorrowful a chance would
warn you his father to make lamentacion, when I that am but a stranger can
not choose but weep and wayle. Ye might well think me rude and untaught, if
I would go about to heal your grefe, when I my self had need of a
physician: if I would leat you his father to weep, when the tears still
abundantly trykell down from mine eien. And all be it, that the ylke stroke of
fortune ought deeper to pearce your fatherly breast: yet your great wisdom
was wont so to rule you (in all your deeds) that ye not only with a strong
and a slout mind, but also with a glad and a merry chere, would suffer and pass
over all such chances as hap to mankind. Wherefore ye ought so to settel
your self, that if ye can not as yet put away clean the sorrow of your heart
(for no man can deny but that ye have right good cause to be heavy) yet at
the least wise some what suppress and moderate the same dolor. And for what
cause should ye not clean forgeat it? Seeing that the space of a few days
will cause ideottes so to do, me thinks reason should persuade an excellent
wise man. For what seely mother does so extremely bewail the death of her
child, but that in short space of time her sorrow somewhat asslaketh, and at
length is clean forgotten? To have always a steadfast mind is a token of a
perfect wise man. But for those chances, unto the which we all equally (both
more and less) be subject to sorrow out of measure, me thinks it extreme
foolyshnes. For who is not ware (except he that myndeth nothing) that he is
borne under such a condition, that when so ever god will call him: he must
forth with needs depart hence? So than what other thing (I pray you) does
he, that bewayleth ones death, than lamentably complain, that he is mortal?
Or why should we rather sorrow the departing hence, than the entryng into this
world, consyderyng that both ar equally natural? Even in like case as though
one should give great thanckes for to be called to a great feast or dinner,
and would lamente and demean great sorrow, when he should depart away thence.

If that a man, as it were from an high lookyng place, would advise well the
condition and life of all mankind: might he not well reckon him self a nyce
fellow, if he among so manyfolde exaumples of priuacion, and among so thick
burials of young and old, would be greuousely vexed in his mind, as though
unto him only were chanced some new and great evil: and as though he only
being happy above other, would desire and look to stand without the common
lot? For whithe consideracion the excellent wise men that found and made laws
in old time, to the intent that they would some what inclyne to the affections
of parents, and to the end they would not be seen to exclude every body
from that passion, being also condemned of some of the stoicke philosophers:
they lymytted unto them a certain time to mourn, the which endured not very
long: Either because that they well understood and knew, that in those manner
of chances, the which are both commune to al folks, and also do not hap
through any injury of Fortune, but are induced by the very course and
ordynance of Nature, short mournyng should suffice: yea unto them that were
not able to moderate all affections: considering that Natures self by littell
and littell soupleth the wound that she made, and wears away the scarre: Or
else because they diligently marked, that mournyng was not only unprofitable
unto them that were bemoned, but also hurtful to them that made such moan,
and greuouse and vnquiette to their friends, acquaintance, and company.

But now if a man would consider the matter a right, does it not seem a
poinct of madness, willyngly of one harm to make twain, and when ye can not
by no manner reason recover your predestinate loss, yet wilfully to annoy and
hurt your own self? In like manner as though a man that his enemies has
spoiled of part of his goods, would in his anger throw all that ever remained
into the sea: and than would say, how he by that mean did bewail his loss.

If we will regard the noble Mimus, whose saying may beseem any Phylosophier
to speak: Thou must patiently suffer, and grutch not at it that can not be
amended: Let us call to mind the much goodly exaumple of the right excellent
king David, the which so sone as tidings was brought him, that his son, that
he so tenderly loved, was dead: he forthwith rose up from the ground, and
shaked and brusshed of the duste, he threw away his shert of hear, and so
when he had washed and annoincted, with a glad countenance and a merry chere
he went to dinner. And because his friends marueyled thereat, he said to
them: For what intent should I kill my self with woe and sorrow? For unto this
time some hope I had, that god being moved with my lamentacion, would have
saved my child a live: but now all our weepyng tears can not restore him
again to us alive: we shall shortly speed us hence after him. Who is so fond
to crouche and pray him, whom he knows well, will incline to no prayers? There
in nothing more untreatable than death, nothing is more deffe, nor nothing more
rigorous. By crafty handling the savage beasts, yea the most wyld of them
all, are made tame: There is a way to break the hard Marbull stone: and a
mean to mollify the diamante: but there is nothing, wherewith death will be
appeased or overcome. It neither spares beauty, riches, age, nor dignitee.
And therefore it ought to grieve us much the less, either because it can not
be eschewed, or else because it is equally commune to us all.

What needs me to go about to rehearse to you here the manifold examples of
the gentyles, the which with a noble and a constaunt courage took well in
worth the death of their dear friends? In which constauntnes of mind, is it
not a great rebuke for us that be christiens, to be of them over commen? Call
now to your remembrance thilke saying (well worthy to be enrolled in
writing) of Telamon and Anaxagoras: I wist well I begotte a mortal creature.

Think upon Pericles the Duke of Athenes, the which is no less renowned for
his eloquence, than he is for his force and manlynes: all be it that he
within.iiii. days space lost his ii. sons, that were endewed with right
noble qualitees, he not only never changed his chere, but also he, being
crowned (as was the guyse than) spoke and reasoned among the people of mattiers
concerning their common wealth.

Have in mind also Xenophon the worthy scoler of Socrates: to whom tidings
was brought as he was doing sacrifice, that his son was dead: he made no
more to do but put of his crown, and forthwith did put it on again, as
soon as he understood that his son was manly slain in battle. Remember
Dion of Syracuse, the which on a time (as he was secretly talkyng with his
friends) suddenly heard a great noise and rumbling in his house: And when he
had enquered what the mattier meant, and was enfourmed that his son had fallen
from on high, and was dead: he being therewith nothing amoued, commanded the
corpse (as the manner was) to be delivered to women to bury. For he said, he
would not leave of his pretensed purpose for that mattier.

Whom Demosthenes following, the.vii. day after the death of his only and most
entierly beloved daughter, being crowned and araied in a fair white garment,
he came forth abroad among the people. Of which deed the accusacion of his
foe Aeschynes, both confirms the troth, and sets out the glory. Think
also upon the king Antigonus, the which when he heard tidings, that his own
son was slain in a disordred skyrmisshe: pausyng a littell, and beholding
them well that brought him the tidings, with a stout and a constante mind
he said: O Alcynonen (that was his sons name) all to late thou perishest, that
would so foolishely cast thy self away among thy fooes, nothing regardyng
thine own health nor my monicions and words.

If ye delight more to hear the examples of Romans, behold Puluillus Horace,
to whom (as he was dedicatyng the capitol) tidings was brought, that his
son was dead: he neither drew away his hand from the post, nor turned not
his chere from religion to private sorrow. Consydre how Paulus Aemilius, when he
had within the space of.vii. days lost his.ii. sons, he came forth abroad
among the people of Rome, and there showed them, that he was very glad, that
by the lamentacion of his householde (which was but a private sorrow) he had
redeemed the envy of Fortune bent toward the^ al. Think also how Q. Fabius
Maximus (when he was consul) and had lost his son, that was than a man in
high rowme and dignitee, and greatly renowned for his noble acts he came
forth abroad among the people gathered together, and there to them he
recited the commendacion of his son.

Think on also when Cato Censorius his eldest son died, the which was a
young manne of singular wit and high prowess, and thereto elect and chosen to
be Mayer: yet was he nothing so amoued with that chance, that he would in any
thing more slackely endeavor him self about the needs and business of the
commonwealth. Ye should remember Marcius, whose surname wasking, when his son
of right noble disposicion, and that stood highly in the favor and good
opinion of the people, and thereto being his only son, was dead, he took the
loss of him with so constaunt a mind, that forthwith even from the buryall
of him he caused the Senators to assemble together to ordeyne laws concerning
their commonwealth.

Ye should not forget Lucius Sylla, whose valiant and most fierce courage
toward his enemies, the death of his son could nothing abate, nor cause that he
should seem falsely to have usurped or taken upon him to be called by this
surname felix, that is to say, lucky or welthy. When Caius Caesar (that was
Sylla his fellow in rowmeth) had invaded Britain, and had tidings that his
daughter was dead: yet er three days were fully ended, he went about his impery
all buisinesse. When Marcus Crassus (in the war that he made against the
Parthiens) beheld his sons head, the which his ennemies in skorne and
derision had set upon a morispykes end, and the more to exasperate and augment
his calamitee, they approached near to his army, and with words of reproach
and blame, they showed it up: he took in worth all that doing with so
constant a mind, that suddenly he rode forby all his battles, and said to
them with a loud voice, that that was his own private harm, but the health and
salvation of the common weal stood in the sauegard of them his men of war.
But now to ouerpasse the manifold examples of Galba, Pyso, Scaeuola,
Metellus, Scaurus, Marcellus, and Aufidius: remember when Claudius Caesar had
lost him, whom he both begotte, and most entierly loved: yet for all that he
(his own self) in the common pulpit lauded and praised his son, the corpse
being present, all only covered with a littell veyle: and when all the people
of Rome wept and bewailed his sons death, he his father wept not a tear.

And suerly like as it is a right goodly thing to follow and do as these men
did: even so were it a right shameful thing, if men should not be found as
steadfast and as stoutly minded as women have been in such case.

Cornelia saw and hehelde her two sons (Titus Graccus, and Caius Graccus)
slain and unburied: and when her friends comforted her and said, she had a
wretched chance: I will never say (quoth she) that I am unlucky or
unfortunate, that have borne such two children. But whereto do we now
repete these examples out of ancient chronicles: as though we saw not daiely
before our face sufficient exaumples? Behold your neighbors, behold your
kynsfolke and alies: how many, yea seely women, shall ye find, the which
veraie moderately take in good worth the death of their children? This mattier
is so plain, that there needs no great help of philosophy thereto. For he
that would consider well in his mind, how wretched on all sides this our life
is, to how many perils, to how many sickenesses, to how many chances, to
how many cares, to how many incommoditees, to how many vices, and to how
many injuries it is endangered: how littell and how small a portion thereof we
pass forth (I will not say in pleasure) that is not attached with some manner
grief and displeasure? and than further to consider how swiftly it vanishes
and rolleth away, that we may in manner rejoice and be glad of them that been
departed out of this world in their youth.

The shortness of our life Euripides sadly expresses, which calls the life
of mortal creatures one littell day. But Phalereus Demetrius does better,
which correctyng the saying of Euripides says, that the life of man should
rather be called the Minute of an hour. But Pyndarus says best of all,
which calls the life of man the dream of a shaddowe. He ioigneth two
special things of nothing together, to the intent that he would declare how
vain a thing this life is.

Now how wretched and miserable the same life is on every behalf, the ancient
poets seemed to perceive it passing well: the which deemed, that a man could
not more truly nor more better name mortal creatures, than surname them
veraie miserable wretches. For the first age or formoste part of man's life
(the which is reckened the best) is ignorant: The middell part of the life is
assailed with trouble and care of manyfolde businesses: and yet all this while I
speak but of them that be most luckie and fortunate.

Therefore who is he, which of veraie right will not approve the saying of
Silenus: the best is never to be borne, the next is most swiftly to be clean
extinct. Who will not allow the ordinance of the Thraciens, the which
customably use to receive them that be borne in to this world, with
lamentacion and mournyng: and again when they depart hence, they be very glad
and demean great joy? And he that by him self considers inwardly those
things, that Hegesias was wont to declare to his hearers, he would rather
desire his own death than abhor it: and would far more indifferently take
inworth the death of his friends. But now your fatherly sorrow comes forth
and says: He died ere his day, he died in his childhode, he died so passing
a good child, ye and so towardly disposed unto virtue, that he was worthy to
have lived many years: your fatherly sorrow complains, that the course of
nature is subverted, seeing that you his father an old man, should over live
your son a young man. But I pray you for the love of god tell me, what ye
call before his day: as though every day of a man's life could not be his
last day? One before he come into this world, and when uneath it has any
shape of a creature reasonable, is strangled and dies, even under the hands
of nature, workyng and formyng of it. An other dies in the birth. An other
criyng in the cradell is snatched away by death. An other in the flowryng
youth dies, when scarsely as yet it has any taste of the life: Of so many
thousands of people, to how few is it given (as Horace names it) to step
upon the gryce of old age? Without doubt god has under such a law
constituted the soul in the garrison of this littell body, that what so ever
moment he will command it to depart thence, it must by and by needs go. Nor
there is none that can of right think him self to be called forth before his
day, considering that there is no man that has a day certain to him
appoyncted: but that only is his lawful day, which so ever he our sovereign
captain would should be his last day. If we will work wisely, we should so
abide every day, as it were our very last. I pray you, what makes it matter,
seeing the life is so short and fugitive, whether we die betimes, or tarry
somewhat longer. For it skilleth no more than it does, when many be brought to
execucion, which of them should be first heeded or hanged: It is all one,
which is the first, the third, or the eight.

And what other thing else is the life it self, but a certain perpetual
course unto death? Saving that their chance is more commodiouse, the which
from so laborious an exercise of the life are dispatched betymes, But as it is
a touch of a brainles fellow to depart away from the army and break the
arraie, without the Capitaynes commandment: So it is a foolish poincte and
great ingratitude, when leave is quickly given of the capitain, not gladly to
take it: And most specially, if he that has now license to go, may depart
his way home with laud and praise, and to him no rebuke nor shame. Nor it is
not convenient, that one should sit and reckon how many years he has lived.
The age should be esteemed according to the noble deeds: And he (as Homere
says) is not reputed to have lived, that has poystered the earth, and made a
noumbre: but he the which sad and sobrely passing forth his life, leaves
behind him an honest remembrance to them that come after.

Do ye complain, that god sent you foorthewith such a child, as ye would
desire to have had many years to come? What, pardie your son died not so
soon, he was now come to the age of twenty years: at the which age (after
mine opinion) it is best for to die, for so much as than life is most
sweet. Now was he to his country very bountiful, now was he to his father
very lowly and gentle, now was he among his fellows a very merry
compaignion, and now had he a good and a perfect mind to godward. He
decessed ignorant of vices, and when he had not tasted but littell of the
calamitees and miseries of this world. But what he should have known and have
felt if he had lived longer, it is uncertain. No doubt we see veraie often
times, that the latter age does both infecte the clean conversation of young
age with more grievous vices, and spotteth, and defiles the felicitee of youth
with manifold miserable grefes. From all these euyls and perils, death
quickly withdrewe him. Now may you safe and surely rejoice and be glad,
that you have had so good and so virtuous a son, ye or rather have. But be
it, as you do suppose, that you had him, and that now ye be deprived and have
lost him. Whether of veraie right ought you rather to tourment and vex your
self for that ye have forgone him: orels rejoice and be glad that ye had such
a son? Take you heed that it be not a poincte of unkindness, that ye should
remember the request of the gefte to be restored again, and nothing to mind
the geft. No doubt a child of a good disposicion is a great geft: but yet he
is so given, that ye should take and have pleasure with him for a time, and not
that he should be yours for ever. You that be a perfect wise man, consider this
by your self, yea let us both together consider on this wise.

If a great prince should lend us a table of an excedyng great price, and of an
excellent workmanshippe, to pass our time with: whether ought we, when so ever
pleases him to demand or call for it, with a glad chere, ye and moreover
gentilly thankyng him, to deliver it again, orels with heuie and sorrowful
countenance shall we complain to him on this wise? O cruel prince, of how
precious a gefte haste thou spoiled us? How great a pleasure have thou beraft
and taken from us? How soon have thou taken from us, contrary to our opinion
this so excellent a thing? Might not he of veraie right to our so unkind
complaints answer on this wise? Have I this reward for my gentle and
courteyse deed? Remember ye nothing, save only that, that ye have forgone the
most fair table? Have ye forgot, that I of mine own good will and freely
lent it you? And that ye have now so long while, of my gentilnesse and
sufferaunce fed your eyes and delyted your mind. It was of my liberalitee
and freedom that I lent it you: and now when I require it again, I do but
right: pardie ye have had by me some advantage, ye lost nothing, save that
through your folly, ye feigned that thing to be your own, that was but lent
you. And so ye esteem it to be lost, that is restored to the owner again. But
the more precious and delectable that the thing was that I lent and leat you
have at your pleasure, the more a great deal ye ought to have thanked me. Nor
ye ought not to think it to be to soon required again, the which with out
any injury or wrong might have been kept from you.

If this reason can not be proved false by no mean of argumentacion: then
think how much more justly Nature, with such manner words, might reprove
both our lamentacion and sorrowful complainynges. And undoubted by these manner
of reasons our sorrow ought to be swaged, yea if it were so, that a man were
utterly extinct by death, and there remained nothing of us after the burial.

Now if we at the least give credence to it, whereof Socrates in Plato, doubted
nothing at all, that is to wit: the veraie manne to be the soul, and this
body to be nothing else but the pype or littell house of the soul: Or else to
say troth, it may be called the burial or prison of the soul: and when it
escapes out thereof, than at the last it comes to liberty to live much more
welthily than it did before. Wherefore than should we sorowfully blame death,
seeing that he that dies, does not peryshe, but than he seems rather to be
borne. And we ought to rejoice in the soul (which we can not with our eyes
decerne) as much and none otherwise, than we be wont to rejoice and take
pleasure in our friends that been absent. And I doubt whether is more
delectable and reioysyng to us, when they been present, or else when they been
absent: for so much as the corporal living together is wont to minyster to
us matter of displeasure, and the much being in company to gether does
somewhat abate the ioyfulnesse of friendship. If ye desire an exaumple of this
thing, be not the apostles a sufficient argument, the which than began to take
veraie fruicion in Christ, and truly to love him, after the corporal presence
was taken from them? On the same wise is the frendshippe of them that be good,
the which stedfastely persevere in couplyng and knittyng together of the
minds, and not of the bodies. And there is no violence, no space of time, nor
no distance of places, that can sever or divide the couplyng of minds. So that
me think it a very childishe poinct, to think that a freende were clean
lost and gone, so soon as he were out of sight. You may (as often as ye will)
have your son present, both in your thought and in your words: And he (on
the other side) remembers you, and perceives the tender affections of your
mind, ye and other while in your sleep both your souls embrace each other,
and talk together of some secret things. What thing lets, that ye may not
even very now imagine to live with him, with whom sone after ye ar in poinct to
live? I pray you, how brief and short is all the whole time that we live here?

Hitherto have I used the remedies, the which I might well use, if I had to do
with a painyme. Now leat us briefly consider, what godliness and christen
faieth ought to require of us.

First and formoste, if it were so, that death were a thing most miserable: yet
it behooves us to take it in good worth, seeing that there is none other
remedy. And more over, if death should clean extinguishe man, that nothing
after should remain: yet we should therewith be content, for as much as it
makes an end of many calamitees and griefs, which we suffer in this life.
But seeing that death delivers the soul (being of etheriall beginning) out
of the dongeon of the ponderous and heavy body: in a manner we ought to rejoice
and be glad of them that be departed hence out of this wretched world: and
that they be returned home again to that welthie libertee, from whence they
came. Now than considering that death (without any doubt) conueieth the good
devout souls out of the storms of this troublous life unto the port or haven
of life perdurable, and that not so much as a hear of a man's head shall
perysshe (for the bodies also at length shall be called to enjoy the same life
everlasting.) I pray you, whether ought we to mourn and weep, or else to be
glad and rejoice in him, whom death in due time takes out of this most
troublous sea of the life, and carries him into that quiet and sure restyng
place of everlasting life? Go to now a little while, and lay together the
foul enormitees, the paynfull labors, and the perils and dangers of this
life, if it may be called a life. And on the other side, reckon and cast what
commoditees and pleasures, (of that other life) are already prepared for the
godly creatures that be plucked hence away: And than ye shall soon perceive,
that no man can do more unrighteously than he, the which lamentably bewaileth
that high goodness, unto the which only we be both borne and ordained, even
as though it were a right great and grievous harm. Ye cry out, because ye be
left comfortless alone without children, when ye have begotte a son to
inhabit heaven: the holy remembrance of whom, as it were of a dyuine thing,
ye may reverence, the which above in heaven being careful for you, may
greatly further the prosperous success of your business here. For he is
another ignorant of mortal folks business, nor has not forgone with the body
the lowly reverence and tender love, which he was wont to bear to you his
father. No doubt he lives, believe me he lives, and peradventure is present
with us, and hears, and perceives this our communicacion, and laugheth and
damneth this our lamentacion. And if the grossenes of our bodies let not,
perchance we should hear him blamyng us for our weeping with those manner of
words. What do ye? will ye abridge your days, and finishe your old age with
this unprofitable, ye I may well say pinyshe lamentacion? Wherefore do you
with so unjust complaints accuse and blame destenie, Fortune and death? Have
you envy at me because I am delivered from the euylles of that life, and am
brought to this felicitee that I am in? But be it, that your fatherly
goodness and pure amitee does not envy me. Yet what other thing means this
sorrowful complainyng?

Think you this worthy to be lamented, that I am deduct and brought from
thraldom to libertee, from pain and care to pleasure and felicitee, from
darkness unto light, from peril and danger unto sure safetee, from death
unto life, from sickenesses and diseases unto immortalitee, from so many
euilles to so high goodness, from things caduke and transitory to the
everlasting, from things earthly to celestial, and finally from the corrupt
and unclean company of all people to the fellowship of angels? Tell me, I
pray you, for the great love and kyndnesse that ye bear me, If it lay in
your power to releue me again, would ye releue me? Than what offense have I
done, to deserve so great hatred of you? If ye would not relieve me again, than
for what purpose seruen all these lamentacions, the which, as I have said,
are not only unprofitable, but also ungodly? But ne were it so, that
immortalitee had a while agone clean deprived me of all sorrow, I would
likewise with weapyng tears bewail your sorrowful mournyng, and sore have
rewed upon thilke gross and dark cloudinesse of your mind. But ye say, that
you on your part weep and make lamentacion. For soth therein ye do not like
lovers: but like unto them that have a respect to them self ward, and that
will, to others discommoditee, see to their own business. Now go to, tell me,
what loss is it, that ye sustain by my death? Is it, because ye can not have
me in your sight? Pardie ye may never the less, at your own pleasure
remember me the mean time, ye and so much the more welthily, in how much I am
in sure safetee. For look that ye esteem me now delivered from all the
euylles, what so ever they be that may bechaunce a mortal man in his life:
if which your long and robustous life, for a great part, has experience. And
though that I be not with you, with lowely obeysaunce to do you service, yet
may I be a sure and an effectual advocate for you before the high maiestee of
god. And finally, how small a thing is it, that deuideth our conversation and
familiaritee? Now look that you so endeavor your self, that when ye have well
and virtuously passed the course of your life, that ye may tha^ at the hour of
death be found worthy to be conveyed hither.

If that your son, I say, should say these words to us: might we not well be
ashamed thus to lament and mourn as we do? With these manner of resons I am
wont to ease the grief of mine own mind: of the which I would that you should
be part taker, not all only that ye have any great need of those remedies:
but I demed it agreeable, that ye should be partaker of my consolacion, of whose
sorrow, I was partener. But briefly to conclude, all that has been at length
reasoned: by this manner mean, ye shall assuage the smartyng sorrow of your mind.

My son is dead, ye begot a mortal creature. I have lost a great jewel: ye
have yielded it again to him that freely gave it you. It is a right grievous thing
to be thus destitude: It should be the lighter born, that may be redressed by
some mean. He has left me his father alone comfort less. What does it
avail to weep and wayle for that that can not be remedied? Or why mourn you
for that, the which chances to so many thousands as well as to you? Alas I
can not choose but weep for the death of my son: ye but he that dies well,
does in no wise peryshe. But he died to soon: He that dies well, dies not
to soon. He died long before his day was come: there is no man that has a
day certain appoincted unto him. He decessed in his flouryng youth: It is than
best to die when to live it is most sweet. He died a very young man: so is he
withdrawn from the mo euyls and troubles of this life. I have lost the best
child that any man could have: Be glad that ye had such one. He departed out
of this world an innocent: No death should be more desired and less bewailed.
Ye but it is not lefull for me the mean while to have fruicion (...)


