THE CHRISTIAN DIVRNAL.

Written in French By Fa. Nic. Caussin of the Soc. of JESUS. And transsated. by
T. H.

AT PARIS MDCXXXII



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LADY Viscontesse Savage.
MADAME, Though heaven has propitiously disposed your well-rectifyed Soul to
Piety, and that many books of this kind want not to entertain your pious
retirements, in the sweet solitude of Meditation; yet may I boldly say, this
Manual of devotion has somewhat new, and attractiue in it, to add increase of
fervor to your best progressions; and will (I doubt not) under the happy
patronage of your Honor (as from so noble an example) gain the serious
attention, and good opinion of many, who shall read it. Congested Rules, and
multiplicity of precepts, which only augment the bulk of Books, and little
edify, or inform the mind, are here purposely avoided. Short acts of
Devotion, and pious aspirations more penetrate and being (as in this Diurnall)
put into method, win upon the drowzy soul, and open the heart to more
awakened thoughts of salvation. My aim in this Translation, excellent Lady, is
your particular co^tentement, and consequently in some measure to discharge the
obligation I owe to your much Honored Family, the known worth whereof, though
it can receive little illustration from the weak endeavors of mype^; yet,
should I not at least, thus gratefully remember it, having so fair an
opportunity, as this present Dedication, would make him guilty of ingratitude,
who with his readiest service resolves ever to remain,

Your Honors humblest servant. T. H.

THE DESIGN of the Author.
I Have spoken of the practice of ver tues in the book of the holy Court.
Behold hereof a small scantling in daily actions, which rather ought to
entertain your heart then your eyes, or hands. It is short in reading, but if
you consider it in action, you shall find in one day, years and ages of
felicity.

The truth is, we have at this time many spiritual Books, which answer one
another, like Eccho's.

This age is as fruitful in words, as it is barren in good works, and seems
willing to speak much, and do nothing; suffering the best part of wit, to
vapor out either by the Pen, or Tongue.

Notwithstanding in matter of Piety, there is some appearance one cannot say too
much the same, which is never done enough; and that in such a penury of worthy
acts, we should not be sparing of good words.

I offer unto you this short Treatise: carry it in your hands, as the little,
Clock, which a great Prince bare in a Ring: it strikes all the hours of the
Day, and correspondeth to Reason, as true Dyals with the Sun.

If you read it attentively, you shall find it great in its littleness, rich
in its poverty, and large in breuity.

Great books make us sometime more learned, but not ever more innocent. This
puts wisdom into practice, and good success into piety: you shall know
what it is in often reading it, and in doing what it says; for it has no
other Caracters of its merit, but that of your virtues.

Division of the Diurnall into four Parts.
I. Actions of Devotion. II. The practice of Virtues. III. Affairs. IIII.
Recreation.
THE CHRISTIAN DIVRNALL. THE FIRST PART. The importance of well ordering every
action of the day.
SECTION I.
ASage Father of the desert, cyted by Pelagius a Greek^ author, being asked
whether the path of perfection were long or no, said: All virtues came
together, and that if a man would, he might in one day arrive at the measure
of Divinity, according to its proportion. Verily all our virtues are included
in our actions, and our actions in the hours, and the hours in the day, and
the day in the month, and the month in the year, and the year in the ages.
Every day is a brief Table of our life; and the means to become quickly
perfect, is to perform all daily actions with great consideration, and
perfection. Behold a pourtraict heerof, the lineaments of which I have partly
drawn from a man endowed with much wisdom, Religion, and integrity, whom I
would gladly name, did I not fear to be troublesome to his humor, able to
endure any thing, but his own^ praises.

SECT. II. Morning.
IT is a long time, since the Sun for your benefit drove away the shadows
of night, to the end you might rejoice at the fight of the great spectacle of
the works of God, and yet are your curtaynes shut up, to entertain you with a
shady image of death. Arise from your bed, and think this goodly Star which
makes you begin the course of this day, will ere night perform the passage of
ten or twelve millions of leagues. And how many steps will you advance to
virtue? This indefatigable harbinger is gone forth to score you out the lodging
of a Tomb; so many minutes are so many points deducted from your life. Will
you not follow the counsel of the son of God, and do good whilst it is day?
A great night will very speedily inuolue you under its wings, wherein you shall
no more have further means to travel.

Take every day as a day in harvest: take it as a Fair, or Mart, take it as a
day, wherein you are to labor in the mines of gold: take it as a Ring, which
you are to engraue, adorn, and to embellish with your actions, to be offered
in the evening at the altar of God.

Represent unto your self a notable consideration of S. Bernard, that your
actions pass, as not passing; for every good work you do is a grain of seed
for life eternal. Say, as did Zeux^^ that painter so renowned^ Aternitati
pingo: I paint for eternity.

Follow the counsel of S. Thomas; Do every action in the virtue of lesus
christ desiring to have all the good intentions, and affections of the Church
militant, and triumphant. Do it, as if thero^ depended the praise of God, the
good of the whole world, al your happiness, and as if it were to set a seal
upon all your works.

Begin from the evening the purpose of good works, which you are to perform
the next day, what points you ought to meditate on, what vices you should
resist, what virtue exercise, what affair^ you are to handle, to make all
appear in its proper time with a well matured providence. It is the thread of
Ariadne, which guides our actions in the great Labyrinth of Time, otherwise
all runs to confusion.

Exercise sometimes the curiosity to know of what color the day-breake of
morning is, outstrip the steps of light, according to the counsel of the
Wisema^, to praise God. Take good head, least you imitate that Hog Epicurus,
who boasted to have waxed old, and never to have seen the Sun either rising, or
setting. It is a good custom to rise in the morning, but very difficult to
persuade woman so, and all the Antipodes of nature, who change dayinto night,
and night into day. That famous Appollonius held in his time for an Oracle of
the world, coming very early in the morning to Vespasians gate, and finding
him awake, coniectured thereupon, that he was worthy to command an Empire, and
said to him who bare him company, (...), vndoub^edly this man will be Emperor,
since he is so watchful.

All that which you are to dispose the day unto, is divided into, four parts.
Devotion, Practice of virtues. Affairs, and Recreation. Devotion should carry
the Torch, and open the gate unto all our actions.

Make account at your awaking, to give all the first fruits of your facultyes,
of your senses, and your functions to the divine Majesty. Let the memory
insta^tly remember it self, that it must do the work of God. Let the
understanding cast a consideration upon its Creator, like a flash of
lightning. Let the Will b^ enkindled with his love. Let the heart shoot forth
some fiery shafts, some desires, and some affections wholly celestial. Let the
mouth and tongue endeavor to pronounce some vocal prayer to the most holy
Trinity. Let the hands figure on the forehead, and breast the sign of the
Cross, since they are lifted up to heaven. Let the arms, and feet shake off
the sluggishnesse of sleep, as S. Peter did the chains at the voice of the
Angel. Behold a good beginning, how to offer ones self to God. The hair was
pulled from the victime, and put into the fire before it was sacrificed; so
must you draw away at your awaking those slighter actions, to give beginning to
your sacrifice.

SECT. III. Five singular Actions to begin the Day.
THis Action ought to serve as a preparatiue for another devotion much longer,
and more serious, which you are to make in your Closet at your coming out of
bed. If you have so great a pomp of attires to put on, that you must employ
some notable time to cloth your self, it is a miserable servitude: do not
think this is the way to render your Tribute to God, but attire your self
correspondently, so much as is necessary for decency, and health. Then bending
your knees, perform five things, Adoration, Thanksgiving, Oblation,
Contrition, and Petition.

I will here trace out unto you the manner how to frame these actions, which
you may read at times; and I will add examples, and forms partly drawn out of
Scripture, and fit to be daily repeated.

SECT. IV. Of Adoration, the first act of Devotion.
YOu are to note, that Praise is one thing, honor another, reverence a third,
and adoration a fourth Praise properly consists in words, Honor in
exterior signs, Reverence in interior respect, but Adoration considered in
its extent, comprehends all those acts with much more eminency. For Adoration
is an act of Religion, whereby we do homage to the sovereignty of God with a
low submission, which is not in that degree communicable to any creature.

This Act is formed, and composed of four things, which be (as it were) its
elements. The first is a strong imagination of the greatness, and excellencies
of God. The second, a consideration of our abiectnesse compared to this great
Majesty. The third, a flaming act of the will, which upon this thought is wholly
powered out into reverence. And the fourth, an exterior refle^^on from the
mouth, and postures of the body, which witness the ressentment of our heart.

The Soul then to discharge her self in this act of Adoration, first
conceaueth God, great, terrible, replenished with Majesty; she conceaueth him
as a sea infinite in essence, bounty; beatitude, which encloseth with in it
self all being, al goodness, all truth, and not only encloseth, but from al
eternity preuenteth it with an eminency incomparable.

She beholds the whol^ world in the immensity of God, as a Sponge would be in
the midst of the Ocea^, an Atome in the Air, and a little Globe of glass
enchased in the primum Mobile. She knows God, as the foundation of all
possible things, the essence superessentiall of all things, which are, and
are not, without which nothing subsists, either in act, or power, nor has it
any handle, whereby the understanding may lay hold of, to have the knowledge
thereof. She figureth God unto herself as the beginning, and end of all
things; the Creator, the Founder, the Basis, the Support, the Place, the
Continuance, the Term, the Order, the Band, the Concord, the Consummation of
all creatures, retayning in it self all the good of Angels, of men, and
universal nature, which has all the glory, all the dignityes, all the riches,
all the treasures, all the joys, all the blessings, as very well Lessius
explicateth in his treatise of Infi^ity.

This soul not content, leasurely walks in these fourteen Abbysses of
greatness, which are in God, to wit, Infinity, Imm^nsity, Immutability,
Eternity, Omnipotency, Wisdom, Perfection, Sanctity, Benignity, Power,
Providence, Mercy, lustice, and the End whereunto all things tend. She first
considers every perfection absolutely, then by comparison, and application
making a circle about her self, and comparing this Infinity of God, to her
nothing, this Immensity to her littleness, this Immutability to her
inconstancy, this Eternity to the shortness of her temporal life, this
Omnipotency to her weakness, this Wisdom to her ignorance, this Perfection
to her defects, this Sanctity to her vices, this Benignity to her ingratitude,
this Power to her poverty, this Providence to her stupidity, this Mercy to her
obstinacy, this Justice to her iniquity, this End whereunto all things incline
in great dependenci^s which spring from her infirmityes.

It abides there wholly ravished in God, as a small Ant would be in the Sun,
and not unlike Aristotle, who (as it is said) being not able to understand the
flood, and ebb of an arm of the Sea, threw himself into it: so she likewise
ingulfeth her self in so many wonders, not willing any longer to measure her
love, by the ell of her knowledge.

She is entraunced in this great labyrinth of Miracles much more then the Queen
of Saba in the palace of Solomon, and necessarily she must in the end break
out into an exterior act, and say: My God, and my All, the God of myhart, my
portion, and mine inheritance for all eternity!

SECT. 5. Example of Adoration.
PVrsuing this course you shall worship God, prostrate on the earth, resounding
as a small string of the great Harp of the world, offering the whole vniu^rse
to the Creator, as a votiue Table hung up on his altar, and entirely resigning
yourselfe to his will. To this act, agreoth well the Hymn of the three
Children in the Furnace, who called all creatnres, as by a list-rolle to the
praises of God: or else take the form which the Angels and Saints used in
adoring this sovereign Majesty, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hoastes, who
have been, who art, and shall come; thou art worthv, O Lord our God, to
receive, as a tribut, all glory, al honor, all virtue; for thou art the
Creator, and absolute master of all things. It is thou, who have created both
heaven and earth, with all their ornaments: thou who bindest the Sea by thine
omnipotent word: thou who signest the Abisses with the seal of thy name;
terrible, and prayse-worthy for ever: thou who make the pillars of Heaven to
tremble under thy feet: thou who strikest terror into al creatures by the
unsupportable luster of thy Majesty: thou who sit in the pauillion of thy
glory upon the wings of Cherubims, and from thence do measure the depth of
the abyss. I adore thee, my God, from the center of my Nothing, with all the
creatures of the world, making into thy hands a full resignation of all that,
which I am: and desiring to depend for the present and for all eternity upon
thy holy will.

SECT. 6. Of Thanksgiving, which is the second act of Devotion.
IT is an act very necessary considering the benefits, which we continually
receive from the hand of God. It is not fit we resemble the clouds, which cover
the Sun after it has raised them up, but that we rather conform our selves
to the mirror, which re^dreth the image so soon as the face is presented.

We ought not to suffer any benefit to pass, coming to us from this
sovereign hand, of which we represent not the lively figure in our grateful
remembra^ces. And if those ancient Hebrews (according to the relation of
Josephus) set marks, and forms sometimes on their arms, otherwhiles on their
gates, to declare unto all the world the benefits which God had conferred on
their families; is it not a matter very just, that we endeavor to acknowledge
in some manner the liberalityes of the divine majesty?

This act, consists in three things. First in the memory which presents to
the understanding the benefits received: and this derstanding co^sidereth the
hand which gives them, and to whom, and how, and wherefore, by what means,
and in what proportion: thereupon is framed in the will an affectionate
acknowledgment, which not being able to become idle, unfolds it self in
exterior acts, to witness the seruour of its affections.

To practice it throughtly, a lift must be made to your self of the benefits
of God, which are contained in three forts ^^ goodness, and mercy.

The first is, that, by which he has drawn this great universe from Abysses,
and darkness of nothing to the light of essence and life, for our sakes
creating a world, with so much greatness, beauty, vtility proportion, order,
vicissitude, continuance; and preserving it, as with the perpetual breath of
his spirit, affording to every thing its rank, form, propriety, appetite,
inclination, seituation, limits, and accomplishment. But above all, creating
Man, as a little miracle of Nature, with the adornement of so many pieces, so
well enchased, to bear on the brow thereof the rays of his Majesty.

The second benignity is, that, whereby he has determined to raise in man
total Nature to a supernatural condition. And the third, by which he has
tra^sferred humance Nature fallen into sin, into miseries, and into the
shadow of death; to innocence, felicity, light, and life eternal.

It is the incomprehensible mystery of the Incarnation of the Word, which
co^prehendes six other benefits, to wit, the benefit of the doctrine and
wisdom of heaven conferred on us; the benefit of the good examples of our
Savior; the benefit of redemption; the benefit of adoption into the number of
the children of God; the benefit of the treasure of the merits of Jesus Christ;
the benefit of the holy Eucharist. Besides these benefits, which are in the
generality of Christianity, there are to be represented oftentimes, with much
humility, the particular favors received from God in birth, breeding,
education, instruction, in talents of mind and body, in means and abilityes,
in friends, in alliance, in kindred, in vocation, state and profession of life,
in continual protection, and deliverance from so many perils, in the
vicissitude of adversities, and prosperityes, in the manage of degrees of age,
wherein every one in his particular may acknowledge infinite passages of the
divine Providence.

And all this falling upon the soul with consideration of the circumstances of
each benefit, draws in the end from the will, this act of gratitude, which
makes it say that, which the Prophet David spoke: My God, who am I, and what
is the house of my Father, that has hitherto bred me?

SECT. VII. The manner of Thanksgiving.
PVrsuing this, you shall then give thanks for all benefits in general, and
ticulerly for those, which you presently receive, and which are at that time
proposed unto you; to the end you may season this act with some new taste. The
Church accommodateth us with an excellent form of Thanksgiving to God, in the
Hymn Te Deum laud^mus. Or you may well say with those blessed souls.

To thee, O my God, benediction, light, wisdom, thanks, honor, power, and
virtue, in the reuolutio^ of all ages, for ever more.

My God, the glory which thou do merit, be rendered to the throne of thy
Majesty; and be thy holy peace on earth granted to men of good will. My God, I
laud, I bless, and adore thee. I yield thee thanks for the greatness of thy
glory, and be^^fits. Great God, King of heaven and earth, eternal Father, and
absolute Lord of all things. And thou also my Savior Jesus, only Son of the
heavenly Father, true God, true man, who take away the sins of the world,
and sit at the right hand of the living God. And thou holy Ghost
co^substantiall with the Father, and with the Son, most Holy Trinity, receive
my prayers in thanksgiving.

SECT. VIII. Of Offering or Oblation: which is the third act of Devotion.
REligion, and Sacrifice began from the worlds infancy, and have ever been tied
to geather with an inseparable band. God who gives all, would that we give
him; and persuadeth that we take out of his coffers, what cannot be found in
our Nothing. Observe now (I pray) a matter co^siderable, that as in the law of
Moses, there were three manner of sacrifices, to wit, Immolations, Libations,
and Victimes; Immolations, which were made of the fruits of the earth;
Libatio^s of liquors, as oil and wine; Victimes of beasts: so likewise God
requires, that for fruits you affoard him your actions; for liquors, your
affections; and your self for Victime. This is done by the act of Oblation, or
Offertory, which is a way of sacrifice, whereby we offer our selves, and all
that belongs to us at the altar of the divine Majesty.

That this act may be well performed, it is necessary at the first, to have a
chaste appreh^nsion of the power, and dominion which God has over us: Secondly,
a most intimate knowledge of the dependence we have upon him, representing unto
our selves, that we not only received Being, and all that which consequently
depends thereon, from his goodness, but that we also are supported
perpetually by his hand, as a stone should be in the air; and that, if he
never so little remit thereof, we should be dissolved into the Nothing from
whence we were extracted. From thence will arise an act of lustice in the
promptness of the will we shall have to yield to God what appertains to him,
and as heretofore the Holocaust was the most noble of all Sacrifices, where
the Host was wholly consumed, in honor of the divine Majesty: so should we
imitate this excellent work of Religion by consecrating to God, not only our
actions, and affections, but al we are, wishing to be annihilated, and
dissolved for him, if it may be for the glory of his divine Majesty.

But if this annihilation cannot be real, it must be at the least formed in the
mind in a very singular manner, acquiring to our selves as much as possibly we
may, 12. sorts of disengageme^ts, wherein consists the perfection of the
Holocaust.

The first is, a discharge from all affection of things temporal, so that we
no longer love any thing, but for God, and according to God. The second is, a
dis-entanglement from proper interest in all our actions. The third, an entire
mortificatio^ from sensuality. The fourth a separation from amities sensual,
natural, and acquired, not suffering them any longer to lay hold on our heart,
to the prejudice of virtue. The fifth, a banishment of wordly imaginations, in
such manner, that their only representation may breed in us an auersion, and
horror. The sixth, an enfranchisment from worldly cares not necessary to
salvation. The seventh, a freedom from bitterness, and perplexityes of heart,
which ordinarily spring from overmuch love conferred on creaturs. The eight, a
courageous flight from all sorres of vanities of the mind. The ninth, a
contempt of sensible consolations, when God would have us to be weaned from
them. The tenth, an abnegation of scruples of heart, and proper fantasies, to
follow the advice and command, of those who govern us. The eleventh, a
mitigation of the distu^bances which happen in aduersityes. The twelfth, an
absolute mortification of judgment, and will: so that we follow all the
inspitations of God, as true Dyalls do the Sun.

He, who therein has proceeded so far, makes a true annihilation of
himself, and an excellent oblation of all that he is: nay if you cannot wholly
give the Tree with so much perfection, at least yield the fruits desiring in
conclusion to offer up all your facultyes, your senses, functions, words,
works, and all you are; remembering the saying of S. Iohu Chrysostom: That it
is the most wicked avarice that may be, to defraud God of the oblation of ones
self. Offer your Memory to the Father, to replenish it as a vessel of
election with things profitable; your Understanding to the Son, to enlighten
it with eternal verityes; your will to the holy Ghost to enkindle it with holy
ardour; consigne your body to the B. Virgin to guard it under the seal of
purity. Say particulerly to the Word Incarnate, what the devout S. Gertrude did.

SECT. IX. The manner of offering ones self to God.
O My sweet Savior illuminate my intentions with thy lights, and support my
imbecillityes by thy mercyes. I at this present recommend the little service I
do to the ineffable sweetness of thy heart, and henceforth set it before thine
eyes, to direct, correct, and perfect it. I offer it unto thee with all I am in
the full latitude of my a^fections, both for my self, and all the faithful,
and I offer it in the union of that most exact attention thou use, when thou
prayedst upon earth to thy eternal ^ather.

SECT. X. Of Contrition, the fourth Act of Devotion.
IT is an act most necessary, in such perilous encounters, and so great frailty
wherein we ordinarily live. The learned Theodoret in his questions upon the
Scripture says, there are three kinds of life signified by three sorts of
creatures, whereof mention is made in the sacrifice of Abraham in the 15.
Chapter of Genesis. There is a life Animal, represented by foure-footed
beasts. 2. A life mourning, figured in the Turtle. 3. A life white and pure,
whereof the Dove is the Hierogliphick. Animal lives are the most frequent in the
world; Douelike lives are very rare; but there is not any Dove so pure which
has not ever some need of the mourning of the Turtle. Behold the cause why we
ought not al most to pray at any time, without stirring up some acts of
Contrition. Every one knows Contrition is a detestation of sin, beyond all
things most detestable, which takes its fource from the love of God, and from
the hope of his mercy, and ought ever to be accompanied with a firm purpose of
amendment. The first foundation of it is the belief of a living God, of a God
cleere-sighted, of a God dreadful in all his judgments, whereby is procured a
fear, awed with the pains due to sin in hearts the most stupid. This is the
Thu^derstroke which causes Does to fawn, and rayseth tempests, and
earthquakes in the soul. Then Hope reareth it self above the Horizon,
dispersing amorous rays with a certain confidence we have to obtain pardon
of our sins in submiting us to the yoke of penance. Afterward, the love of
God begins in the soul to free, and discharge it self from interests of
the earth, to produce in the end this celestial dolor which is created as
pearls from the dew of heaven. O a thousand times happy those, who wash
themselves with the waters of snow, whereof holy Job speaks, and purify
themselves in the wholesome poole of Penitence.

Stir up oftentimes acts of Contrition in general for all sins, and
particularly for some defects, and imperfections, which most surcharge you,
with a firm purpose to resist the^ stoutly, and utterly to extirpe the^ by the
help of God. Say for this cause, what follows.

SECT. XI. A form of Contrition.
O Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, unworthy that I am to
bear the title of a son, having repayed so unspeakable a goodneswith
contempt, and such benefits with ingratitude. I complain not of the
punishments co^tracted by my rebellion; but I bewail a God offended, who ought
to be loved, and honored above all things. Where shall I find torture enough
to revenge me on my self, and reares sufficient to wash away my offenses?
Father, the aspect of my sin shall henceforth be more hideous to me, then
Hell. Use me as one of thy mercenaryes. My God, thou art our Father, and we are
naught else but earth, and slime in comparison of thee. Thou art our workman,
and we all as clay in thy hands: My God be not angry with an object so fe^ble,
and wretched. My God remember not the sins of my forepassed life.

SECT XII. Of petition or request, the fifth Act of Devotion.
A Great Emperor arriving in Egypt, to witness the zeal he bare to the
public, said to the Egyptians: Draw from me, as from your river Nilus: but
what may be drawn from a man, but hopes, which are cracked as bubbles in the
water, to the same proportion they are raised. It is from God we must draw,
since he is a fountain which perpetually distilleth, and who quenching the
thirst of all the world, has himself but one, which is (as says S. Gregory
Naztanzon) that all mortals should thirst his goodness.

We must necessarily beg of God, since our necessityes enforce us thereunto,
and his bounty inuiteth us, we must ask that he has appointed us in our Lords
praye^, which is the abridgement of all Theology: we must demand it in the
name of the Son, and with confidence to obtain it; we m^st beg it for the
Church, for the Pastors, for our most gracious King for public necessities,
for our selves, for our neighbors; we must ask for spiritual and temporal
blessings, so much as shall be lawful according to occasions, never
forgetting the dead. For which purpose it is good to have a collection of
prayers for all occurre^ces, as a little Fort furnished with all manner of
pieces of battery, to force even heaven it self with a religious fortitude,
and a pious violence.

At the least pray daily every morning, that thou may not offend God
mortally, not be wanting in grace, light, and courage to resist those sins, to
which thou art most inclined; to practice the virtues most necessary for thee;
to be guided and governed this same day under the providence of God, in all
which concerns the weal of soul, body, and thinge^ exterior. To
participate in all good works done thorough Christendom; to obtain new
graces, and asistances for the necessities of our neighbors, which may then
offer themselves, and that by the intercession of Saints, where with your
prayer must be sealed. Say for your self, and all those, who concern you,
what S. Thomas used.

SECT. XIII. A form of Petition.
MY God give both to me, and to all those whom I recommend in my prayers, an
understanding, which may know thee, an affectionate devotion, which may search
for thee, a wisdom that may find thee, a conversation that may please thee, a
perseverance that may boldly wait on thee, a confidence which may happily
embrace thee. My God so handle the matter, that I may be wounded with thy
sufferings in penitence, that in this life I may use thy blessings in grace,
and enjoy in the other thine eternal comforts in the bosom of glory. So be it.

SECT. XIIII. Of the intercession of Saints, of which we make use in the
petitions we offer to God.
AS for the intercession of Saints it is good to recommend your self very
particularly to the Mother of God by this ancient form.

O my most Holy Mistress, I put my self to day, and so all the days of my
life into your protection, and (as it were) into the bosom of your mercyes. I
recommend unto you my soul, my body all that belongs to me, all my hopes,
all my affairs, all my difficultyes, my miseries, my consolations, and above
all the manner of my death, to the end, that by your merits, and prayers all my
actions may be directed according to the most holy pleasure of your Son.

O most mild virgin, succor the miserable, asist the weak, comfort the
afflicted, pray for the people, be the advocate of persons Ecclesiastike,
protectrix of the devout sex. So use the matter, thatal those, whocelebrate
your memory, may at this time taste your favors: but most especially obtain for
me of your Son a profound humility, a most unspotted chastity, progression,
and perseverance in goodness, and affoard me some small participation in the
dolours you suffered on the day of his passion, adding thereunto also a spark
of that great devotion you did use in the holy Communion, after the Ascension
of the Word Incarnate.

For your Angell-Guardian, saying.
O God Omnipotent, and Eternal, who have created me to thy Image, and deputed
one of thy Angels to defend me, though I be most unworthy of this favor: Give
me grace I may now to day avoid all perils of soul, and body under his
direction, and safeguard, and so use the matter, that in the end after the
course of this life, I may partake in Heaven of his glory, whom I have on
Earth for protector.

And to all the Angels, in making prayer by the imitation of the Church.
O God, who with admirable order gouernest the ministry of Angels, and men, so
do by thy mercy, that those who are present, and perpetually attend in Heaven
before the throne of thy Majesty may likewise on Earth be guides, and
protectours of our life.

And for all Saints.
PRotect thy poor people (o Lord) and as they have a singular confidence in
the protection of thy great Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and in all the rest
of thy Apostles, and in all Saints of both sexes, who now survive in Heaven,
preserve by thy gracious assistance, and for ever defend them.

Then in memory of those, whose fectiualls the Church at this present
celebrateth, and whose names are couched in the Martyrologe.
LET all thy Saints (O God) who are honored through all the parts of the world
assist us, that we recording the memory of their merits, may be sensible of the
favor of their protection. Give peace to our times by their intercession, and
for ever banish all malignity from thy Church. Prepare our way, our actions,
our wills, in a comfortable prosperity, affoarding beatitude to our
Benefactors, for the salary of their charity, and to the souls of the
faithful departed, eternal rest. I most humbly beseech thee through thy well
beloved Son.

I speak this briefly, supposing that for your other more enlarged devotions,
you will have either a book of meditations, as those of Father Bruno, or a
collection of prayers, as those of Ribadeneira, and the interior occupation of
the R. Father Cotton, which is very devout, and most proper for persons of
quality.

You shall find that these five acts well practiced, will give you full scope
of prayer, and entertainment with God upon all occasions.

SECT. XV. Of the time proper for spiritual Lesson.
IF you will believe me, at the very same instant of the morning when your mind
is most free from earthly thoughts, you shall do well to use some spiritual
reading, one while of precepts, another while of the lives of Saints,
remembering that which S. Isidore spoke in his book of sentences; That he who
will live in the exercise of the presence of God, ought often to pray and read.
For when you pray, you speak to God, and when you read God speaks to you.
Good sermons, and good books are the sinews of Virtue.

Do you not observe, that colors (as philosophy teaches us) have a certain
light, which during in the night becomes dull, and (as it were) buried in
matter: But so soon as the Sun rayseth himself above the earth, and
displayeth his beams over so many beautyes languishing in darkness, he
awakens them, and makes them appear in their true luster, So may we (truly)
say, we have all, certain seeds of Wisdom, which amidst the vapors enforced
by passions, remain (as it were) wholly smothered up, if the Wisdom of God,
which speaks in holy scripture, and good spiritual books, excited them not,
giving them beauty, and vigor to vnkindle the passage of our actions to
virtue. Perpetually call upon the Father of Lights, to direct your reading,
before you take a book in hand. Read little, if you have little leisure, but
with atten^ion; and ever stay upon some sentence, which returns again to
your memory during the same day. You shall find that good books only teach you
that which is truth, commau^d nothing but good, and promise naught but felicity.

SECT. XVI. Of other Acts of Devotion: and first of Mass.
Mass should be heard every day, if it were possible, and at a certain hour,
in the manner, as we have expressed in the practice of this Exercise: and it is
one of the principal Acts of devotion, the form whereof ought to have five
conditions, Consideration, Feruor, Comeliness, Example, Union. Consideration
for the understanding; Feruor, for the will; Comeliness, for the body and
exterior gestures; Example, for your Neighbor; Union, for God. Consideration,
not to go thither through Custom, or Complement, Hypocrisy, or compulsion; but
with reason, and reverence, as to the Treasury of the sufferings, and merits of
Jesus Christ. Feruor, to pray there devoutly, purely, and ardently, dismissing
at that time the thoughts of all other affairs. Comeliness, in avoiding
tattle, ill postures, and the irreuerences of so many ill instructed persons,
who shall in the end find the vengeance of God in the Propitiatory. Example, in
edifying all there present, who ordinarily derive great apprehensions of God,
by beholding in the Church the devotion of persons of quality. Union, in
dilating your heart and soul, in the heart and soul of the Son of God, by an
inward, and hearty affection, having at that time neither eyes, ears, nor
thoughts, but for his love; according to the saying of an ancient Father, who
affirmed that no man behaved himself devoutly enough in the Church, if he
thought there were any thing else in the world, but God, and himself.

It is muh to the purpose to have good prayer-books, where the offices be
distinguished for every day of the week, and to say them according to your
leisure, and with a well-rectifyed, and perseuerant piety.

It is a familiar, and well accommodated devotion to hear Mass well, which is
done by conforming your action to that of this great Sacrifice. Mass has five
principal parts. The first consisting in the confession and praise of God. The
second in the instruction of the Epistle, the Gnospell, and Creed. The third in
Oblation. The third in Oblation. The fourth in Consecration. The fifth in
Petitions and Prayers, which are especially made at the end.

At the Consiteor, you shall implore the divine assistance to direct this Act
well, you shall coufesse your sins: and likewise God in the Hymn of Angels,
which is ordinarily repeated in this place, endeavoring to imitate the
reverence of those Heavenly Quires.

At the instruction, if you understand not the words of the Epistle, and
Ghospel, which is then read; Read, and meditate attentively at that time on
some sentence of the little abridgement of the doctrine of Jesus Christ. A
little to taste leysurely the words of our Savior is a great spur to
perfection; and it oftentimes happens, that many have been converted by a
good Word, which penetrated very far into their hearts.

SECT. XVII. An abridgment of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ to be used at Mass.
I Am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: No man comes to the Father, but by
me. John. chap. 14.

The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand: Be penitent, and
believe the Gospel. Marc. chap. 1.

Come to me all ye that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh you: Take
up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart,
and you shall find rest to your souls: For my yoke is sweet, and my burden
light. Matthew. 11.

Al whatsoever you will that men do to you, do you also to them: For this is
the law and the Prophets. Math. 7.

This is my prec^pt, that you love one another, as I loved you: Greater love
then this no man has, that a man yield his life for his friends: you are my
friends, if you do what I command you. John. 5.

Love your enemies, do good to the^ that hate you and pray for the^ that
persecute you, that you may be the children of your Father in Heaven, who
makes his Sun to rise upon the good and bad, and raineth upon just and unjust.
Math. 5.

Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful: ludge no man, and you shall
not be judged. Cond^mne no man, and you shall not be condemned.

Forgive, and you shall be forgiven. Give, and there shall be given to you. Luc.
6.

See, and beware of all avarice: For not in any ma^s abundance does his life
consist, of those things that he possesses. Luc. 12.

Enter by the narrow gate: because broad is the gate, and large is the way that
leads to perdition, and many there are, that enter by it: How narrow is the
gate, and strait is the way that leads to life, and few there are, that find
it? Math. 7.

He that takes not up his Cross, and follows me, is not worthy of me. Math.
10.

You shall be afflicted in this world: but take courage, I have vanquished the
world. John. 19.

Behold I am with you all the days, even to the end of the world. Math. 28.

Watch, and pray, that you may not fall into tentation. The spirit is prompt,
but the flesh is frail. Math. 26.

Let your loins be girded, and candles burning in your hands, and you like to
men expecting their Lord, when he shall return from the wedding; that when he
does come, and knock, forthwith they may open unto him. Luc. 12.

Look well to your selves, ^east perhaps your hearts be ouercharged with
surfeiting and drunknesse, and with the cares of this life. Luc. 21.

Behold the hour, when all those, that are in their graves shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and such as have done well shall come to the
resurrection of life, but those who have done ill, to the resurrection of
judgment.

SECT. XVIII. What is to be done at the Offertory in Mass, and other ensuing
Acts.
AT the Offertory you shall endeavor to stir up in your self a great reverence
of this incomparable Majesty, who comes to replenish this sacrifice with his
presence; and you shall say: My God, dispose me to offer unto thee, the merits
of the life, and Passion of thy well beloved Son. At this present, in the
union thereof, I make oblation unto thee of my understanding, my will, my
memory, my thoughts, my words, my works, my sufferings, my consolations, my
good, my life, all that I have, all that I can ever pretend unto: and I offer it
unto thee, as by the hand of the glorious Virgin Mary, and the holy Angels,
who are present at this sacrifice, to present unto thee the prayers of all this
faithful company.

Afterward at the Preface, when the Priest inuiteth all the world to lift their
hearts up to God, or when the Angelical Hymn is pronounced, which is called by
the Ancients T^isagion, these words may be said, drawn from the Liturgy of S.
James, and S. Chrysostom.

To thee the Creator of all Creatures visible, and invisible: To thee the
Treasure of e^ernal blessing^: To thee the fountain of life, and immortality:
To thee the absolute Master of the whole world, be the praise honor, and
worship yielded, which thou deseruest. Let the Sun, the Moon, the Quire of
Stars, the Air, the Earth, the Sea, and all that is in the Celestial, and
Elementary world bless thee. Let thy Jerusalem, thy Church from the first
birth thereof already enrolled in heaven, glorify thee. Let so many chosen
souls of Apostles, Martyrs, and Prophets; Let Angels, Archangels, Thrones,
Dominations, Principalityes, Powers, and Virtues; Let the dreadful Cherubins,
and Seraphins perpetually sing the hymn of thy triumphs.

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hoasts, Heaven, and Earth are filled with the
glory. Save us, thou, who do inhabit Heaven which is the Palace of thy
Majesty.

After Consecration at the Adoration of the Host Saint Thomas said.
MY Lord Jesus, thou art the Son of the Eternal Father. It is thou, who to
redeem the world have clothed thy self with our flesh in the womb of a
Virgin. It is thou, who having overcome the Agonies of death, openedst heaven
to us. It is thou, who sit at the right hand of the Eternal Father, and who
shall judge the living, and the dead. My God help thy servants, whom thou have
Redeemed with thy most precious blood.

Having adored the Host, say this Prayer of S. Bernard in his Meditations upon
the Passion,
O Heavenly Father, Behold from thy Sanctuary, and Throne of thy glory this
venerable Host which is offered to thee by our Bishop, lesus thy most innocent
and sacred Son, for the sins of his Brethren; and mollify thy heart upon the
multitude of our offenses, and miseryes. Behold the voice of the blood of this
most innocent La^be which cries out to thee, and himself all crowned with
glory, and honor, stands before thee at the right hand of thy Majesty. Look
(O my God) on the face of thy Messiah, who has been obedient to thee, even to
death, and let not his sacred wounds be ever far distant from thine eyes, no
more then the remembrance of the satisfaction he presented to thee for the
remedy of our crimes. O Let all tongues praise, and bless thee, in remembrance
of the super-aboundance of thy bounty, thou who have delivered thine only Son
over to death upon earth, to make him our most faithful Advocate in Heaven.

FOR PETITION. At our Lords prayer, when you have said it, repeat these words
of the Liturgy, here before alleged.
MY God be mindful of all Pastors, and faithful People, who reside in all
Regions of the habitable world, in union of the Catholic Faith, and preserve
them in thy holy peace.

Good God, save our most Gracious King, and his whole Kingdom: lift up the
prayers, which we offer to thy living Image, upon thine Altars.

My God Eternal, remember those, who travel by Sea, or Land, and are exposed
to so many dreadful dangers. Remember so many poor Pilgrims, Prisoners, and
Exiles, who sigh under the miseries of the world.

My God, remember the sick, and al those who are in any discomfort of mind:
Remember so many poor souls toyled out with acerbities, who implore thine
assistance: Remember also the conversion of so many Heretics, Sinners, and
Infidels, whom thou have created to thine own image.

My God, remember our friends and benefactors; take this great sacrifice for
the living and the dead, and so do, that all may taste the effect of thy
mercyes; dissipate scandals, wars, and Heresies, and affoard us thy peace,
and Charity.

And at the end of Mass.
MY God, power down thy graces upon us, direct our steps in thy paths, fortify
us in thy freare confirm us in thy friendship, and in the end give us the
inheritance of thy children.

It is also very expedient to have your devotions ordered for every day of the
week.

SECT. XIX. Devotions directed for the days of the week.
IF you desire this distinction of days, I tell you that some dedicate Sunday
to the most holy Trinity; Monday, to the comfort of faithful souls, which are
departed into the other world; Tuesday, to the memory of Angels; Wednesday, to
that of the Apostles, and of al Saints; Thursday, to the veneration of the
Sacrament of the Altar; Friday, to the mystery of the passion; and Saturday, to
the honor of our Blessed Lady.

Others employ their remembrance to be particular for every day: as for Su^day,
the glory of Paradise; Monday, the iudgme^t-day; Tuesday, the blessings of
God; Wednesday, death; Thursday, the pains of Hell; Friday, the passion;
Saturday, the virtues of our Lady, as heretofore. It is the Counsel of S.
Bonauenture, in his lesser works.

We derive also a singular practice of devotion for every day of the week from
the Hymns of S. Ambrose, which the Church for ever makes use of. For from
thence we learn to thank God, for every work of creation, and to make the
greater world correspond with the less.

Sunday, which is the day, wherein the light was created, we should render
thanks to God, that he has produced this temporal light, which is the smiling
of heaven, and the joy of the world, distending it as a piece of cloth of gold
over the face of the air and earth, and enkindling it as a torch to behold his
works by. From thence penetrating further, we will give him thanks, that he
has afforded us his son, called by the holy Fathers, the Daybringer, to
communicate unto us this great light of says, which is, as says Saint
Bernard, A copy of the Eternity; we will humbly beseech him, this light may
never be Eclypsed in our understandings: but may daily replenish us with more
and more knowledge of his holy will. And for this purpose, we must hear the
word of God, and be present at divine Service with all feruor and purity.
Carefully preserve your self from pollution through any disorder, on the day,
which God has reserved to himself, and from giving to Dago^ the first fruits
of the week, which you should offer up at the feet of the Arc of Covenant.

Monday, which is the day, wherein the Firmament was created to separate the
waters, the Celestial from the inferior and terrestrial waters; we shall
represent unto our selves, that God has given reason unto us, as a firmament
to separate divine cogitations from animal; and we will pray unto him to
mortify in us anger, and concupiscence, and grant us a perfect maistery over
all the passions, which oppose the law Eternal.

Tuesday, the day wherein the waters, which before covered the whole element of
the Earth, were ranked in their places, and the earth appeared to become the
mansion, nurse, and tomb of man; we shall figure unto our selves the great
work of the justification of the world, made by the Word Incarnate, when it
had raised up a huge mass of obstacles, as well through ignorance, as sin,
which covered the whole face of the world, and that he has made a Church,
which appeared as a blessed Land, laden with fruits, and beauties to eleuate
us in faith, and bury us in hope of the resurrection. We will beg of him to
take away all the hindrances of our soul, so many ignorances, sins,
imperfections, fears, sorrows, cares, which hold it, as in an Abyss, and
that he would replenish us wi^h the fruits of Justice.

Wednesday, wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars were made; we shall propose unto
our selves for object, the beauty, and excellency of the Church of God, adorned
with the presence of the Savior of the world, as with a Sun; of the B. Virgin,
as a most resplendent Moon, and with so many Saints which are as stars of
the firmament; and we will humbly entreat of God to embellish our souls with
the lights and virtues suteble to its condition. And above all, that he would
give us the six qualityes of the Sun Greatness, Beauty, Measure, Fervor,
Promptness, Fruitfullnesse. Greatness, in the elevation of our spirits above
all things created, and in a capacity of heart which is never filled with any
thing, but God; Beauty, in gifts of grace; Measure, in the sway over passions;
Feruor, in exercises of Charity; Promptness, in the obedience we owe to his
law: Fruitfullnesse, in production of good works.

Thursday, the day whereon God (as says S. Ambrose) drew birds, and fishes out
of the waters, the Birds to fly in the air, and the Fishes to abide in this
inferior element; we shall imaginewith our selves the great separation, which
shall be made at the iudgment-day of God, when of so vast a number of men,
extracted from one, and the same mass, some shallbe raised on high to people
Heaven, and enjoy the sight of God: others made a prey for hell, and exposed to
everlasting torments, and in this great abyss and rerror of thoughts, we will
beseech God to hold us in the number of his elect, and affoard us the favor to
score out our predestination, in our good and laudable actions.

Friday, whereon other creatures were brought forth, and man was created who
was at that time appointed over the^ for governor and king, we will propose
unto our selves the greatness, excellency, and beauty of this man, in the
Talents which God has given him, as well of grace as Nature: what a business
it has been to keep the hands of the Creator employed in his production:
hands (says S. Basil) which were to him as a womb; but how much more has it
cost him to make him a new, drawing forth so much travel, such quantity of
sweat, and blood from the Son of God, who annihilated himself for him,
cherished, and fostered him (says S. Thomas in his treatise of Beatitude) in
such sort that he, who were not well instructed by Faith, would say: Man is the
God of God himself. Thereupon we will beg that we may not frustrate the merit
of the life of God, given to eternize ours, and we will practice some kind of
mortification, to bear God in our flesh (as says S. Paul) and to conform us
to the sufferinges of the King of the afflicted.

Saturday, which is the day whereon God rested after the creation of the world
we will meditate upon the repose, which the beatifyed souls enjoy in heaven.
There is no more poverty, maladyes, sorrows, cares, calumnyes, persecutions,
heat, cold, night, alteration, clamor, nor noise. The body rests five, or
six foot under the ground, free from the relapsing employments of a life,
frail, and dying. It is in the sepulcher, as an invincible sortresse, where it
no longer fears debts, Seriants, prisons, fetters. And the soul, when it is
glorified leads the life of God himself, a life vital, a life lovely, a
life inexhaustible, for which we oght to sigh, take pains, and beg it often
of God with tears in our eyes, and groans from our heart; as says S. Augustime.

It is necessary on the same day to make a reuiew of the whole week, to
examine the state of your soul, your passions, your affections, your
intentions, scope, proceedings, and progressions.

And especially when the month is spent, to consider diligently, what God
would have of us, whatwe of him, and what course we take to please both him,
and our selves: what desire we have of Perfection, what obstacles, what
defectes, what resistance, what means; and to manage all our endeauours under
the protection of the Saint we shall take for our Patron in the month following.

SECT. XX. Devotion for the hours of the Day.
THE Church likewise assigns us a practice of devotion for all the hours of
the Day, if we will rightly apply it. For it seems the has a purpose to make
of a Christian champio^, a true bird of the Sun, which saluteth (as it were at
all Hours) this bright star, seeming to applaud it by her song, and the
clapping of her wings, she desires, that in daily imitation of her, we loose
not God out of our fight, and that we abide in perpetual sentinel, humbly to
beseech and adore him.

At the Prime Hour.
(Not speaking at all of the nightly exercise) this inuiteth us in the hymns
of S. Ambrose to beg five things: the protection of God for all the day;
peace; discreer government of the senses; repose of the heart; mortification of
the flesh.

At the Third.
Which is the third Hour after the rising of the Sun, the hour wherein the
Holy Ghost descended in the form of fiery tongues on the Apostles, we pray the
same Spirit to replenish, with vigor and flames our understanding, our wills,
our senses, our harrs, our tongues, our mouths, so that our neighbors may be
enflamed by our good examples.

At the Sixth.
Which is the hour of noonetide, we behold our Sun of justice, to entreat of
him four things, to wit, Alienation from feruours of concupiscence,
Mortification from choler, Health of body, and Tra^quility of mind.

At the Ninth.
Which is about three of the clock, when the Sun is already bending toward
the West, we cast our eye upon our great Star, and demand of him, that as he
is the immovable Center round about, when the whole world is turned, and
holds the beginning, and progress of light in his own hands, he first
afford us happy vespers; secondly a Constancy in goodness; thirdly, a happy End.

At Vespers.
When darkness draws near, we beseech the divine Majesty to gather to
himself our hearts oppressed by sin, and in themselves divided by so great a
diversity of actions, that he will cleanse, and direct them in the way of
eternity, so, that deprived of this temporal light, we may make a sweet
retreat into the bosom of God, who is the fountain of intelligible light;
and that ending our life as we finish the present day, we may gain the prize
of Beatitude.

At Compline.
When darkness now covers the face of the earth, we will a^ range our
seluas, as little birds under the wings of God, beseeching him, that according
to his customary goodness, he hold us under his protection; that he chase away
from our sleep evil dreams, and the fantasies of Night, hindering the crafty
surprizalls of our Adversary, who roameth up and down about us, as a roaring
Lyo^, besetting the sheep-cote.

These devotions are grave, authentic, and able thoroughly to instruct a
Soul, that will practice them.

SECT. XXI. Of Confession: an Act of devotion very necessary; with counsel
upon it.
I Rank amongst the devotions of the week, Confession, and Communion; for
(for such as will lead a life pure, there is no excess ar all) if the week
circu^uolued they discharge themselves of this duty. And although I have spoken
amply enough according to my scope, of the practice of these exercises, in
Treatises which I have compiled thereof, and that it were as to carry a drop of
water into a river, to write of it after so great an abou^dance of books: yet
am I bound by the necessity of my dessigne, to tell you in few words, that to
make your Confession good, it ought to have the qualities of a Mirror. 1.
Solidity, 2. Lively representation, 3. Clearenesse.

1. Solidity, in going thereunto with much consideration of your misery, of your
sins, and imperfections.

2. Much reverence toward the Majesty of God, who bears sway in this
Sacrament.

3. With a reasonable examination of your conscience.

4. A distaste of your offenses, more for the interest of God, then for any
other consideration.

5. An accomplishment of the penance enjoined, and a true amendment.

Lively Representation.
1. In avoiding confessio^s made by rote, which have ever but one and the same
sound, or those which are over dry, or are not sufficiently explicated, or such
as are too much filled with history, and cloyed with superfluity.

2. In representing perspicuously the state of your soul, and succinctly
discovering the condition thereof.

First, in acts of devotion which more particulerly concern the divine
service, accusing your self of intentions less pure, of negligences,
irreuerences, and voluntary distractions, contempt of holy things, coldness in
faith, and voluntary distractions.

Secondly, toward your self, in the direction both of your interior, and
exterior, namely in sins of Vanity, Pride, Sensuality, Intemperance,
Curiosity, Impurity, Idleness, Pusillanimity, Anger, Envy, Iealousy,
Quarrels, Auersion, Impatience, Murmur, Lies, Detractions, Injuries, Oaths,
False promises, Babble, Impertinent tattle, Flattery, Scoffs, and Mockery.

Thirdly, toward your Neighbonrs, as well Superiors and equals, as
Inferiors, unfolding the defects that may have happened in the duties, which
Charity, or Justice obliges you to render to every one, according to his
degree.

Examine here every word, and you therein shall find matter of accusation.

As for clearenesse of Confession, it consists in explication in terms
simple, honest, significatiue. Those who confess often may be very short,
specifying only (when all things are light) seven or eight articles, or less
also of note, happened since their last confession.

S. Bernard in the book of the inward House, which is the Conscience, has
framed a little form of Confession, causing the penitent to say before his
Confessor such like words.

Father, I accuse my self to have been troubled with anger, moved with envy,
puffed up with pride: and besides, I am fallen into an inco^stancy of spirit,
scoffs of the mouth, slanders, and excesses of the tongue.

I accuse my self rather to have judged of my Superiors, then obeyed them;
that being reprehended for my faults, I have murmured, and showed my self
refractary in matters of duty.

I accuse my self, to have preterred my self before those who were better
the^ I, vaunting, and boasting with much vanity, and presumption al whatsoever
is mine, and despising others with taunts and irrisions.

I accuse my self to have reglected the duty of my charge, and sought
ambitiously into that of another.

I have had neither respect to obedience, nor modesty in my words, nor
discipline in my manners: but much selfe-opinion in my intentions; obstinacy in
my hatt, and vain glory in my words.

I accuse my self to have been an Hypocrite, stiff in hatred, and auersion
from my Neighbor, biting, and bitter in words, impatie^t to be under
subjection, ambitious of honor, covetous of wealth, slothful in works of
devotion and charity, not sociable in conversation, and many times uncivil.

I accuse my self to have been ready to speak of the actions of another,
rash to censure, contentious in argument, disdainful in hearing, presumptuous
in speaking to others, dissolut in laughter, excessive in pleasures of rast, of
game, and costly in apparel, burdensome to my friends, troublesome to the
peaceful, ungrateful to those who did me any good, ha^sh and imperious to
such as were under my charge.

I have boasted to have done that which I have not, to have seen what I have
not, to have said what I have not; and on the contrary to have dissembled, and
denied to have seen, what I have seen, spoken what I have spoken, and done
what I have done.

I accuse my self of carn all thoughts, impure remembrances, dishonest
apprehensions, whereunto I have not used resistance speedy enough.

Those who live more dissolutely, shall find (as says Harmatolus a Greek
Author) that they have great accounts to make to the executioner of
Concupiscence.

Behold the cause why they may well examine themselves concerning Kisses,
Touchinges, Softnes, Pollutions, Fornications, Adulteries, ill use of marriage,
and other sins, called Monsters: adding also Impietyes, Sorceryes,
Diuinations, false Oaths, Periuryes, blasphemies, Calumnyes, Co^tentions,
Disobediences, Iniustices, Oppressio^s, Falsehoods, Thefts, Vsuries,
Sacriledges, and such like.

It is not to be thought one can make a form of Confession, as it were a
Buskin for all legs: consciences are as faces, every one bears with it, its
diversity: that which S. Bernard speaks in general, may serve for a
direction, yet ought it to be particularized, and circumstanced, showing the
intention, quality, quantity, manner and continuance of a Vice.

SECT. XXII. Behold here an excellent prayer of S. Augustine for this exercise
of penance, drawn from a Manuscript of Cardinal Seripandus.
MY God, see here the staynes, and wounds of my sin, which I neither can, nor
will hide from the eyes of thy Majesty. I already bear the pain in remorse of
my conscience, and in other sufferings ordained me by thy providence for my
correction: but I endure nothing, that may equal my demerit. One thing amazeth
me that I so often feeling the pain of sin, still do retain the malice and
obstinacy thereof: my weakness boweth under the burden, and my iniquity still
abides immovable. My life groneth in languishments, and is not amended in its
works. If thou slacken the punishment, I defer my amendment, and if thou
chastise me, I can no longer continue. I confess my offense in thy correction,
and after thy visitation, I no longer remember my sorrows; whilst thou have
the rodd in hand to scourge me, I promise all; and if thou with-holdest it, I
perform nothing. If thou touch me, I cry out for mercy; and if thou pardon, I
again provoke thee to strike. My God, my Lord, I confess unto thee my
miseries, and implore thy clemency, without which there is no salvation for me.
My God give me what I ask, though I deserve it not, since without any merit of
mine, thou have extracted me from nothing, to beg it of thee.

SECT. XXIII. Of Communion, which is the principal of all the Acts of
Devotion: with a brief Advise on the practice thereof.
As for receiving, remember the six leaves of the lilly which it should have; I
mean, Desire, and Purity before you present your self therein; Humility, and
Charity in presenting your self; Thanksgiving, and Renouation of mind after
presentation.

And if you desire to know the quasityes, which will make you discern a
lukewarm Communion from a fervent, I say, that a good Communion ought to be
lightsome, tastfull, nourishing, effectual. Lightsome, in illustrating you
daily more and more with reflections, and verityes of faith, which may
transport you to the love of things divine, and contempt of worldly, frail,
and temporal. Tastfull in making you to relish in will, and sense, what you
know by the light of the understanding. But if you have not this taste in
devotion tender and sensible, be not amazed thereat. For sensible devotion will
oftentimes happen to him, who has left Charity, as is observed by that great
Doctor Richardus upon the Canticles: Affectuosa dilection interdum afficit
minu^s diligente^. It is enough that you have in the upper region of your soul
good habits of virtue. Nourishing, in holding your self in a good spiritual
way, good thoughts of heavenly things, good affections toward the service of
God free from dryness, meagernesse, and voluntary sterility. Effectual, in
applying your self instantly to the exercise of solid virtues Humility,
Patience, Charity, and to the works of mercy; for therein behold the most
undoubted note of a good communion.

It is good to present your self in it with sincere intentions, which are
pondered, and fitted to occurre^ces; communicating (as S. Bonauenture observes
in a little Treatise he composed of preparations for the Mass) one while for
the remission of sins, another while for the remedy of infirmities, sometime
for deliverance from some affliction, sometimes to gain a benefit, sometimes
for thanksgiving: Sometime also for the help of our neighbor, and above all
for the souls in Purgatory. In the end to offer up a perfect praise to the
most holy Trinity, to record the sufferings of Jesus Christ, and daily to
increase in his love. For this purpose you may repeat, before you communicate,
this prayer of the great Saint S. Thomas.

O most sweet Jesus, my Lord, and my Master, Oh that the force of thy love
more penetrating then fire, and much sweeter then honey, would engulph my soul
as in an abyss, drawing it from affections inordinate toward all things
under heaven, that I may dye in thy love, since thorough love thou have
vouchafed to dye for me on a Cross.

And after Communion to make these petitions of S. Augustine.
O My God, that I might know thee, and likewise not be ignorant of my self;
and that there where thou art, might ever be the end of my desires. My God that
I might have no hatred but for my self, nor love but for thee, and tha^ thou
be the beginning, progress, and end of all my actions. My God, that I might
humble my self even to Abysses, and magnify thee above the Heavens, having my
spirit no otherwise employed but in thy praises. My God, that I might dye in my
self, and live in thy heart, and that I cold accept all which comes from thy
providence, as gifts from Heaven. My God, that I might pursue my self as an
enemy, and follow thee as a singular friend. My God, that I had no other
assurance, but the fear of thy holy name, nor confidence but in the distrust
of my self. My God, when will the day come, that thou take away the veil of
the Temple, and that I may see thee face to face, to enjoy thee eternally?

THE SECOND PART OF THE DIVRNALL. Of acts of Virtue.
SECT. I. Twelve fundamental considerations of Virtues.
YOU must undoubtedly persuad your self, that the chiefest devotion
consists in the practice of good manners, without which, there is neither
solid Piety, nor hope of Salvation.

Paradise is replenished with happy souls, and Hell with wretched. But the
world wherein we live, has great diversity of merchants; some trafike in
Babylon, and others in Sion, some through evil trade, and disorder in their
carriage insensibly hasten to the utmost misery, which is a separation from the
life of God in an eternity of punishment. Others go in a direct line to the
prime, and sovereign happiness, which is the vision, fruition, and possession
of God, in an Eternity of inexplicable contentments. If you desire to take this
way, I counsel you to set oftentimes before your eyes these twelve
co^sideratio^s, which I have inserted in the holy Court. For in my opinion they
are twelve great motives to all actions of virtue.

The first is the nature, and dignity of man, to wit, that the first and
continual study of man ought to be man himself, to behold what he has been,
what he is, and what he shall be. What he has been, Nothing; What he is,
a^reasonable creature; what he shall be, a guest of Paradise, or of hell; of an
eternal felicity, or of an everlasting unhappiness. What he is according to
nature; a maister-piece, where many Prerogatives meet together; a body
composed of a meruaylous Architecture; a Soul endowed with Understanding,
Reason, Spirit, Judgment, Will, Memory, Imagination, Opinions: A soul, which
flies in an instant from one Pole to the other, descends even to the Center
of the world, and mounteth up to the top, which is in an instant in a thousand
several places; which imbraceth the whole world without touchingit, which
goes, which glittereth, which shines, which diggeth into all the Treasures
and Magazins of nature, which finds our all sorts of inventions, which
inue^teth Arts, which governs Commonwealths, which disposes worlds.

In the mean time she beholds about her self, her passions, as an infinite
number of dogs, that bark at her happiness, and endeavor to bite her on
every side.

Love fooleth her, Ambition turmoyleth her, Avarice rusteth her, and Lust
inflames her, Vain hopes sooth her, Pleasures melt her, Despair ouerbears her
Choler burns her, Hatred fills her with gall, Envy gnaweth her, lealousy
priketh her, Revenge e^rageth her, Cruelty makes her savage, Fear frosteth
her, and Sorrow consumes her. This poor Soul shut up in the body, as a bird
of Paradise in a cage, is altogether amazed to see her self assailed by all
this mutinous multitude: and though she have a Scepter in her hand to rule, she
notwithstanding often suffers her self to be deceived, ravished, and dregged
along into a miserable servitude.

Then see, what man is through sin, vanity, weakness, inconstancy, misery,
malediction.

What he becomes by Grace? A child of light, a terrestrial Angel, the son
of a celestial Father by adoption, brother and coheire of Jesus Christ, a
vessel of election, the temple of the holy Ghost.

What he may arrive unto by glory? To be an Inhabitant of Heaven, who shall see
the Stars under his feet which he has over his head, who shall be
replenished with the sight of God, his beginning, his end, his true, only, and
original happiness.

The second, the benefits received of God, considered in general, as those of
Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Vocation, and in particular the gifts of
the body, of the soul, of Nature, of capacity, ability, industry, dexterity,
Wariness, Nobility, Offices, Authority, Means, Credit, Reputation, Good
success of affairs, and such like, which are given to us from heaven, as
instruments to work our salvation. And sometimes one of the greatest
blessings, is that which few esteem a benefit; not to have al these helps
which lead a haughty spirit, weak, and worldly, even into a headlong
precipice; but quite contray, their better wants, in the opinion of the world,
put him into the estimation of heavenly things; man seeing what he has been,
what he is, and what he must be; from whence he comes, whither he goes, and
that the union with God (his Beginning) is his scope, butt, and aim; if he do
what reason dictats to him, he presently resolves to have neithersinew, vein,
nor artery, which tends not to his end, to subiugate his passions, and no
longet to serve creatures, but so far as he shall know them auailable to
arrive at his Creator. Seruae commissum, expecta promissu^, cave prohibitum.
Every creature says these three words to man: O man preserve that which is
given thee; expect that is promised; and avoid what is forbidden thee.

The third consideration, is the passion of the Son of God, a bottomless
abysle of dolours, scorns, annihilations, love, mercy, wisdom, humility,
patience, ch^tity, the book of books, the science of sciences, the secret of
secrets, the shop where all good resolutions are forged, where all virtues
are purifyed, where al knots of holy obligations are tied. The School where al
Martyrs are made all Confessors, all Saints. Our weakness and faintness
comes not, but for want of beholding this table of Excess Who would ever
open his mouth to complain of doing too much, of sussering too much, to be too
much abased, too much despised, too much turmoyled, if he considered the life
of God, delivered over, and abandoned for him, to so paineful labor. so
horrible confusions, so insupportable torments: Nolo viuere sine vulnere, cum
te videam vulneratum. Oh my God, my wounded God as long as I shall see thy
wounds, I will never live without wound.

The Fourth, the example of all Saints, who have waited on the King in the way
of the Cross, when we consider the progress of Christianity, and the
succession of so many ages. Wheresoever our consideration sets foot, it
finds nothing, but the blood of Martyrs, combats of Virgins, Prayers, Tears,
Fastings, Sackcloth, Hairecloth, Afflictions, Persecutions of so many Saints,
who have (as it were) won heaven by maine force: such have been found, who
here to fore filled sepulchers with their members, torn with the engines, and
swords of persecution, and yet were alive to endure, and suffer in their
bodies, having more wounds, then parts of their bodies to be tormented.
Demorabantur in luce detenti, quorum membris pleni erant tumuli, says S. Zeno.
Is it not a shame to have the same name, the same Baptism, the same
profession, and yet to be always desirous to tread upon Roses; to be embarked
in this great ship of Christianity with so many brave spirtis, which even at
this hour daily do wonders, and go under hatches to sleep in the bottom of
the Vessel, as needlesle outcasts, and the very scorns of reasonable Nature.

The fifth, the peace of a good conscience, the inseparable companion of honest
men, which sugreth al their tears, which sweetneth all their acerbityes, which
dissolueth all their sharpness; a perpetual ba^quet, a portatiue Theater, a
desicious Torrent of inexplicable contentmentes, which begin in this world, and
which are many times felt even in chains, prisos, persecutions. What will it
be when the consummatio^ shall be made in the other world; when the curtayne of
the great tabernacle shall be drawn; when we shall see God face to face, in a
body impassible as an Angel, subtle as a ray of light, swift as the wings of
Thu^der, radiant as the Sun, and when he shall be beheld among so goodly, and
flourishing a company, in a Palace of inestimable glory; and when one shall
lead no other life, but that of God, of the knowledge of God, of the love of
God, as long as God shall be God: Nescio quid erit, quod ista vita non erit: vbi
luet quod non capit locus: vbi sonat quod non rapit tempus: vbi olet quod no^
spargit flat us: vbi sapit quod non minuit edacitas, vbi haeret quod non
diuellit eternitas, said S. Augustine What will this life be, nay what will
this life not be, since all the goods thereof, either are not, or are in such a
life: Oflights, which place cannot comprehend; of voices and Harmonyes, which
Time cannot take from us; of odours, which are never scattered; a feast, which
never is finished; a blessing, which Eternity well may give, but of which it
never shall fee an end.

The sixth, there is to be considered on the other side the condition of this
present life: A true dream, which has the disturbances of sleep, and never
therepose; a childish amuzeme^t, a toil of burdensome, and euerrelapsing
actions, where for one Rose, a thousand thorns are found; for one ounce of
honey, a Tun of gall; for bl^ssinges in semb^ance, evils in substance. The most
happy there, count their years, and cannot reckon their griefs; the carreires
of the greatest honor are there all of Ice, and oftentimes not bounded, but
with headlong ruins. His felicities are floating Islands, which always recoyle
backward at that time, when we think to touch them with our fingar. They are
the feast of Heliogabalus, where are many inuitations, many ceremonies, many
reuerences, many services, and at the end thereof we find a Table, and a
banquet of wax, which melts before the fire, and fromwhe^^e we return more
hungry then we came. It is the enchanted Egg of Oromazes wherein this Impostor
vau^ted to have enclosed all the happiness of the world, and in breaking there
was found nothing but wind: Omnia hae co^spectui nostro insidiosis coloribus
lenocinantur: vis illa oculorum attributa lumini, non applicetur errori, says
S. Eucherius. Al these prosperityes flatter out senses with an imposture of
false colors: why do we suffer those eyes to be taken in the snars of error,
which are given us by heaven to behold the light, and not minister to lying?
Yea, that which greatly should distaste us in this present life, is, that we
live in a Time stuffed with maladies, as old age with indispositio^s: we live
in a world greatly corrupted, of which may be said; it is a monster, whose
Understanding is a pit of darkness; Reason, a shop of malice; Will, a hell,
where a thousand passions outragiously infect him. His eyes are two
conduitpipes of fire, from whence fly sparkles of concupiscence; his tongue an
instrument of maledictio^; his visage a painted Hypocrisy; his body a sponge of
ordures; his ^handes the Talons of Harpies: and finally seems to have no
other faith but infidelity; no law but his passion; no other God but his own
belly. What contentment can it be to live with such a Monster?

The seventh: If there be pleasures in life, they do nothing but a little
slightly ouerflow the heart with a superficial delectatio^. Sadness diueth into
the bottom of our heart, and when it is there, you will say, it has feet of
lead, never to forsake the place: but pleasure does sooth us only in the
outward parts of the skin; and all her sweet waters run down with a full
speed into the salt sea. Behold wherefore S. Augusti^e said, when any
prosperity presented it self to his eyes, he durst not touch it. He looked
upon pleasure, as upon a fleeting bird, which seems (as it were) ready to be
seyzed on, and flies away as soon as ever he sees himself almost surprised.

The eight: Pleasures are borne in the senses, and like abortiues are consumed
in their birth: Their desires are full of disturba^ces, their access is of
violent, forced, and, turbulent agitations. Their satiety is forced with shame,
and repentance; they pass away after they have wearied the body, and leaus it
like a bunch of grapes, the juice whereof is crushed out by the press (as says
S. Bernard.) They hold it a goodly matter to extend their fulness; it must
end with life, and it is a great hazard, if during life it self they serve not
their Host for an Executioner. I see no greater pleasure in this world, then
the contempt of pleasure: Nulla mayor voluptas, quam voluptatisfastidium, says
Tertullian.

The ninth: Man which wastes his time in pleasures, when they are slipped away
much like waters engendered by a storm, finds himself abandoned, as a
Pilgrim despoyled by a thief. So many golden. haruests which time presented
unto him are passed, and the rust of a heavy Age furnishes him with nothing,
but sorrow to have done ill, and inabilities of doing well: what then remains
to be said, but as the miserable King who gave his scepter for a glass of
water: Alas, must I for so short a pleasure loose so great a kingdom?

The tenth: Evil always bears sorrow behind it, but not true Penance. It
is a most particular favor of God, to have time to deplore the sins of our
passed life, and to take occasion by the for-locke. Many are packet away into
the other world, without having at any time thought upon their passage; and
some suppose they shall have many tears at their death, who have not one good
Act of repentance; they bewail the sins which forsake them, and not God whom
they have lost. True Contrition is a hard piece of work; how can he obtain
it, who has ever sought to neglect it? Facilius inueniqui innocentiam
seruarent, quam qui congrue paenitentians agerent, says S. Amborse.

The eleventh: In the mean time Death approaches apace; it expects us at
all hours, in all places, and you cannot attend it one sole minute; so much
this thought displeases you. The decrees thereof are more clear, and
perspicuous, then if they were written with the beams of the Sun, and yet we
cannot read them. His trumpet sounds perpetually, more audibly then thunder,
and yet we hear it not. It is no wonder, that David in the 48. Psalm calls
it an Aenigma, every one beholds the table, and few know the sense of it.
Notwithstanding it case concluded, we must take a long fare well from all things
which appertain to life., that can extend no further, then life it self; and
it is a case concluded also, that serpents, and worms must be inherited in a
house of darkness. It is a goodly lesson, whosoever can well learn it. To
know it well once, it must every day be studied. Nothing is seen every where,
but watches, clocks, and dyalls, some of gold, some of silver, and others
enchased with precious stones. They advertise of all the hours, but of that
which shall be our last, and since they cannot strike that hour, we must make it
sound in our conscience. At the very instant, when you read this a thousand and
a thousand (perhaps) of souls vnloosned from bodies are presented before the
Tribunal of God: what would you do, if you were presently to bear them
company? Omnia ista cont^mnit^ quibus solutus corpore non indigebis. There is
but one word. Timely despise in your body, the things of which you shall have
no need out of your body.

The twelfth: your soul shall go out, and of all the attendants of life shall
have nothing by her sides, but good and enill. If she be surprised in mortal
sin, Hell shall be her share. Hell the great lake of the anger of God; Hell the
common sewer of all the ordures of the world; Hell the storehouse of eternal
fire; Hell a depth without bottom, where there is no evil but we may expect,
nor good to be hoped.

These twelve Considerations are very fit to be monthly meditated on, at
leisure.

SECT. II. Seven paths of Eternity, which conduct the Soul to great Virtues.
THese twelve Consideratio^s well weighed, cause us to take a serious
resolution to hasten directly to good, whereof if you yet desire some notable
demonstration, I tell you, that S. Bonauenture shows us with a finger seven
fair paths, and seven large gates, which lead us in a right line, to this
most happy Eternity: and I heartily wish we had as much courage to follow them,
as he grace to unfold them.

First, seeing the beginning of your virtues, and felicities consists in the
knowledge of God, and the condition of the other life, of which one cannot be
ignorant without some crime, and which is never well understood without profit;
you must know, the first gate of Eternity is to have good, and sincere
intentions in the matter of things e^ernall. To conceive a strong resolution
to work your Salvation, at what price soever: To hold all temporal things as
wild birds, which look upon us from the branch of a Tree, make us some light
chirping-musicke, and then fly away: To think, that in having a vicious soul
in remarkable ornaments of fortune, is to hold a leaden sword in an iuory
scabbard: To banish thoroughout all the course of your life, and exercise of
Charges, intentions evil, hypocritical, impure, and me^^enary; to go to God,
to do for God, to intend the honor and glory of God, above all things.

You shall make no slight progresle, if you will tread this path. From thence
you shall come to the second, which is the meditation of things Eternal,
wherein the kingly Prophet exercised himself, like a brave champion, when he
said: I have considered elder days, and have set before mine eyes years
Everlasting. This good intention, which you shall undergo to tend to Eternity,
will d^ily furnish your thoughts with an eternal God, a Paradise eternal, a
Hell eternal, a Life everlasting. And as the Ewes of Jacob by looking on the
party-colored wands, brought forth variously spotted lambs: so in
contemplating this eternity, all you do will be colored with Eternity. And if
some temporal pleasure be presented unto you, or any accommodation of fortune
to commit a sin, you shall say that which the Orator Demosthenes did of the
beautiful Lais, when an excessive sum of money was demanded of him to see
her; I will not buy repentance at so dear a rate; I am not so ill a merchant as
to sell the eternal for the temporal.

Having passed thorough this gate, you shall come to the third, which is the
gate of light, called Conte^plation of things Eternal: There it is, where
matters divine are beheld, not only by form of discourse, and rational
argument, as one makes an account upon some receite; but they are seen with
the light of the illuminated Understanding, as if with one glaunce of an Eye,
we should behold an excellent pourtraiture of a brave Master, with an
admiration almost insensible. So S. Tiburtius saw Paradise, when he walked
upon burning coals: so all the Saints beheld Beatitude among so many
afflictions; they stood immovable, oppressing even the dolor of body, by the
inundation of the minds contenteme^t.

From this stepp we necessarily encounter with the fourth Gate, which is a most
fervent love of things eternal. For as S. Thomas has well said, the sight of
a temporal beauty makes a temporal love, oftentimes filling the soul with
fire, and flames: so the contemplation of the Eternity creates Eternal Love,
which is an affection burning toward God, and all that which belon geth to his
glory, as was that of S. Mary Magdalen, who says in Origin, that Heaven, and
the Angels are her charge, and that she could no longer live, if she beheld not
him, who made both Heaven, and the Angels: she had passed the seas armed with
monsters, and tempests, having no other sails, but those of her desires to
meet with her beloved; she had thrown her self athwart slames, and had a
thousand times grappled with lances, and swords to cast her self at his
feet. It is a meruaylous Alchimy, when one is arrived at the perfect love of
God, it changes iron into Gold, Ignominies into crowns, and all sufferings
into delights.

At the fifth gate which is called, the Revelation of things eternal, God
speaks at the ear of the heart, and replenisheth a soul with goodly lights,
and knowledges, even then darting upon it (as says Gerson) certain lightning
flashes of Paradise, as if a torch reflected some rays through the creuisses
of a door, or window: So (says he) our Lady was enlightened in this life with
liueiy apprehensions of Beatitude which shot forth before her eyes, like flying
fires.

And as the know ledges of our Understanding, are nothing without the feruours
of our will; from this gate we pass along to the sixth, which is called, the
Antipast of Experience, by which we early begin to taste in this life the joys
of Paradise, and contentments which cannot bevnsolded. A hundred thousand
tongues may talk to you of the sweetness of honey, yet never shall you have such
knowledge of it, as in tasting: So a world stuffed with books may tell you
wonders of the science of God, but never shall you understand it exactly, but by
the taste of experience. True science (as says S. Thomas upon the Canticles^)
is more in relish, then in knowledge: In sapore, non in sapere. I had rather
have the feeling, which a simple soul may have of God, the all the defini:
ions of the Philosophers.

Lastly the seventh gare of Eternity is called, Operation deifying, or
diuinized which S. Denis terms, (...), then it, is when a soul works all
its actions by eternal principles, in imitation of the Word Incarn^te, and a
perfect union with God, S. Clemens Alexa^drinus calls him who is arrived to
this degree, (...), a little God, who conuerseth in mortal flesh: and adds,
that as all good Orators much desire to be come like unto Demosthenes, so our
principal mystery in this world is to procure unto our selves the resembla^ce
of God. It is that wherein consists all our perfection.

SECT. III. Of Perfection, and wherein it consists.
NOW, to the end this doctrine, which is some what too sublime may not dazzle
your fight, nor enkindle your boldness, I will discourse unto you a most
famisiar Theology, to wit, that there are two sorts of perfection, the one of
glory, and the other of pilgrimage.

That of glory, is reserved for the other life, and that of pilgrimage is at
this present our principal affair. It is ordinarily divided into the
perfection of State, and the perfection of Merit. Perfection of state is as
that of the Ecclesiastical degree of Prelates, magistrates, and Religious also,
who are obliged by the duty of their profession, to virtues more eminent.
Perfection of merit is that, which consisterh in good manners. Go not about to
busy your self upon perfection of state, but live contented with the codition,
where in the Providence of God has rancked you, holding it for a marter
undoubted, that the greatest Philosophy in the world, is well to perform your
office. It imports not upon what stuff you work, so you work well, for it
is the manner, and not the matter, which shall gain estimation. Great dignities
are oftentimes great masks under which there is no brain; and little fortunes
may perform with slender voice, actions, that will prove to be of no slight
account with God.

Apply your self stoutly to the perfection of merit, which rests in the
regular government of the Heart, the Tongue, and Hands, in perfect charity.
Addict your selves to the practice of singular and solid virtues, which beget
on earth all wonders, and in heaven all crowns.

SECT. IV. Of Virtues, and their degrees.
IF you desire to know the name, the qualities, and degrees of it, I will
rehearse a wise saying of Pla^^, that there are four sorts of Virtues. The
first, are Purgatiues; the second, Illuminatiues; the third, Civil; the fourth,
Exemplar. Purgatiues; serve to discharge our hearts from vices and
imperfections, ordinary to depraved Nature; Illuminatiues, establish the soul
in a serenity, which resulteth from a victory gained over passions; Civil,
apply man to the duty he owes to his neighbor, every one in his degree, and
to a good conversation among men: Exemplar are those, which make the greatest
progression into perfection, and may be considered as models, from whence
others who behold them, are to draw forth a copy.

Handle the mattor so, that your Virtues may arrive to such a degree, that they
not only may purge your heart, illuminate your soul, dispose you to good
conversation; but serve others also for a light to manifest you in them, by the
imitation of your good examples.

I add also in few words, definitions and acts of virtue, by which you may
direct your manners.

Of Prudence.
Prudence, according to Aristotle, is a Virtue, which orders, and prepares
al things that concern the direction of our life.

Richardus de Sancto Victore
assigns it five parts, to wit, Judgment, Deliberation, Disposition,
Discretion, Moderation. Judgment discerns good from evil: Deliberation
shows how to do all things advisedly: Disposition shows us the order w^
must observe: Discretion teaches us how we must sometimes give way to
occasions, and yield to humane in firmities, not peremptorily sticking upon
particular opinions: Moderation holds the balance and measure of each
affair.

The effects thereof, according to Albertus Magnus are; To proceed to the
knowledge of God, by the knowledge of ones self; to see what is best in every
thing, and to embrace it; to weigh the beginninges, progressions, and issues of
affairs; to govern your thoughts that they go not out of God; your
affections that they be not too much employed upon creatures; your intentions,
that they be without mixture; your judgments, to direct them from evil, and
apply them to good; your words, to polish them; your actions, to measure them;
all the motions of your body, to guide them fairly; To guard your self from
four Rocks, which disturb al affairs, to wit, Passion, Precipitation,
Vanity, Selfopinion; to hold this seceret in great esteem; to know, to elect,
to execute.

Devotion.
Devotion is a promptness of the spirit unto things which concern the service
of God, the parts whereof are, Adoration, Thanksgiving, Oblatio^, Penance,
Prayer, Mortification, Union with God by contemplation, Freque^tation of
Sacraments, Conformity of will to the divine providence, and to the zeal of
souls.

Of Humility.
Humility according to Saint Bernard, is a Virtue which causes a man to
disesteeme himself, through a ptofound knowledge he has of himself; the
principal points whereof are; to understand ones self well; little to prize
our self; to fly from humane praises; to hold the senses discharged from the
itch of renown; bravely to dispose worldly things; to love an obscure life;
to protest, and freely confess your falts; to harken willingly to counsel, to
yield to others; to submit your wll, and judgment to obedience; to avoid
splendor and pomp in things which appertain to us; to co^uerse freely with
the poor.

Of Poverty.
Poverty is the moderatrix of Covetousness, which regards temporal things:
the parts thereof are; to cut off superfluities; to have no inordinate care
over temporal things; to bear patiently the want of things necessary; to
enter into a perfect nakedness of spirit.

Of Obedience.
Obedience, according to S. Bonauenture, is a reasonable sacrifice of power
will, and according to S. John Climacus a life without curiosity, a voluntary
death, a most confident danger. The points thereof are; to perform what is
commanded readily, stoutly, humbly, indefatigably, though it be contrary to
your own inclination; to make an entire resignatio^ of your own judgment,
opinion, and will; to be imperiously sent upon hard, and difficult employments,
and to hasten thither gladly, without slacknesle, excuse, or reply; to be
indifferent for all things; to desire naught, nor refuse any thing; to appoint
your self nothing, nor presume at all; to be more inclined to things humble
and painful, then splendid, and less laboririous.

Of Chastity.
Chastity, is an abstinence from impure pleasures, the parts whereof are;
purity of mind and body; Careful watch over the senses; Flight from occasions;
Honesty of speech; Mortification of curiosity; Exact behavior; Heedfull regard
o^ ones self.

Of Modesty.
Modesty, is a composing of your self, which consists in the government of
the whole body, gesture, attire, game, recreation; and above all, of the
tongue, wherein is to be repressed Detraction, Contention, Boasting, Discovery
of secrets, Idleness, Imprudence, Importunity, Irreuerence, False silence.

Of Abstinence.
Abstinence is a Virtue, which moderateth the concupiscence that relates to
the delectatio^ of sense. The parts thereof are; to have no other rule but
necessity in all which conce^neth the pleasures of body; to fear the least
staynes of all those things which reason judges dishonest, and to maintain
your self in all holy shamefastness; to observe the fasts commanded, and to
add some of devotion; to banish all curiosity of diet, clothing, and sensual
pleasures.

Of Fortitude.
Fortitude is a virtue which confirms us against the pusillanimity that may
hinder good actions. It has two arms, whereof the one is to undertake; the
other to suffer. Aristotle affords it four parts, which are Confidence,
Patience, Love of labor, and Valor.

Of Patience.
Patience is an honest sufferance of evils incident to nature, the points
thereof are; to endure courageously the loss of goods, sickness, sorrows,
injuries, and other accidents. Neither to complain, nor groan, but to hide
your ill with discretion; to be afflicted in innocence for justice, ye^ and
sometimes by good men; to desire, and embrace persecutions through a generous
desire to be conformable to the patience of the worlds Savior.

Of Justice.
Justice is a Virtue, which gives to every one what appertains to him, and
all the acts thereof are concluded in this sentence, which says: You must
measure another by the measure you desire for your self.

Of Magnanimity.
Magnanimity according to S. Thomas, is a virtue which inclines to great
things by the direct ways of reason. The acts thereof are, to frame to your
self an honest confidence by purity of heart, and ma^ners; to expose your self
reasonably to things difficult and terrible, for the honor of God; to be
neither bewitched with prosperity, nor dejected by adversity; not to shrink at
obstacles; not to rest upon mean virtues; ^o despise complacences and menaces
for the love of ver tue; to honor God alone, and for his love to make no
esteem of all frail and perishable things; to preserve your self from
presumption, which oftentimes vndoth high spirits, under pretext of
magnanimity.

Of Gratitude.
Gratitude is the acknowledgment and recompense of benefits received as much as
one possibly can. The acts thereof are, to retain the memory of a benefit, to
profess and publish it, to render the like, without further hope of other good
turn.

Of Amity.
Amity is a mutual good well grounded upon virtue, and community of riches.
The acts thereof are; to choose friends by reason, for virtues sake;
communication of secrets; sufferance of defects; consent of wills; life
serviceable, and ready for good offices; protection in aduersityes; observation
of honesty in all things; care of spiritual profit, accompanied with
necessary advise lovingly, and reverently.

Of Simplicity.
Simplicity is nothing else, then the union of the interior man with the
exterior. The acts thereof are; to be free from disguize; never lie; not to
faigne, or counterfeit; not to presume; to avoid equivocations and doubleness
of speech; to interpret all you see in the best sense; to handle affairs with
sincerity; to leave multiplicity of employments, and vndertakinges.

Of Perseverance.
Perseverance is a constancy in good works to the end, through an affection to
pursue goodness, and virtue. The acts thereof are; stability in good; repose
in your ministeries, offices, and ordinary employments; constancy in good
enterprises; flight from innouations; to walk with God; to fix your thoughts
and desires on him; neither to give way to acerbityes, nor sweetness, which may
divert us from our good purposes.

Of Charity toward God and our Neighbor.
Charity the true Queen of Virtues, consists in the love of God, and our
neighbor; the love of God appears much in the zeal we have of his glory;
the acts thereof are; to embrace abject, and painful things, so that they
advance the safety of a Neighbor; to offer unto God for him the cares of your
mind, the prayers of your heart, the macerations of your flesh; to make no
acception of persons in the exercise of charges; to let your virtue be
exemplar; to give what you have, and what you are for the good of souls, and
the glory of God; to bear patiently the incommodityes, and disturbances which
happen in the performance of duty; not to be discoraged in the successes of
labors improsperous; to pray fervently for the salvation of souls, to assist
the^ in matters both spiritual and temporal, according to your power; to root
out vice, and plant virtue, and good manners in all who depend on you.

Of Charity in Conversation.
Charity in ordinary life consists in taking in good part the opinions,
words, and actions of our equals; to slander no man, nor desp^se any; to
honor every one according to his degree; to become affable to all the world;
to make your self helpful; to suffer with the afflicted; to take part in the
good successes of those, who are in prosperity; to carry the hearts of others in
your own bosom; to have more good deeds, then specious complements; to be
diligently employed in the works of mercy.

The devout S. Bonauenture deciphereth unto us, certain degrees of virtue,
very considerable for practice, whereof you may here pattly see the words.

It is a high degree in the virtue of Religion perpetually to extirpate some
imperfection; and much higher also to increase in virtue; and most eminen^ to
be insatiable in matter of good works, and never think to have done any thing.

In the virtue of Truth, it is a high degree to be true in all your words; and
much higher also to defend truth stoutly; and most elate to defend it to the
great prejudice of those things, which are dearest to you in the world.

In the virtue of Prudence it is a high degree to know God by his creatures;
and much higher also to know him by the Scriptures; but most of all to
contemplate him with the eye of Faith.

It is a high degree to know your self well; and much higher to govern your
self well, and to know how to take a good aim in all affairs; but most
eminent readily to manage the salvation of your soul.

In the virtue of Humility it is a high degree freely to confess your faults;
much higher to bow under greatness, as a Tree surcharged with fruit; a most
clate degree courageously to seek out humiliations, and abasements, so to
become conform to the life of our Savior.

It is a high degree (as says an ancient Axiom) to despise the world; and
much higher to despise no man; and most elate to despise ones self; but yet
more superemine^t to despise despite. In these four words you have the whole
latitude of Humility.

In Poverty, it is a high degree to forsake tem^^^all goods; and much hig^^^
also to forgo sensua^^ ^m^es; and most e^ate to make a divorce from your self.

In Chastity it is a high degree, to restrain the tongue; more to guard all
the senses; more to preserve the purity of body; more to make a separation from
worldly vanities: but most high to banish Pride, and Anger, which have some
affinity with Uncleanness.

In Obedience it is a high degree to obey the Law of God; and much higher to
submit ones self to the commands of a man, for the honor you bear to the
soueraygne Master; and much higher to submit your self with an entire
resignation of opinion, judgment, affection, will; but most of all, to obey in
matters difficult, gladly, courageously, and constantly, even to death.

In Patience, it is a high degree willingly to suffer in your Goods, in your
Neighbor, in your good name, in your person, for expi^tion of your sins; and
much higher also to tolerate the asperities of an enemy, or of an ungrateful
man, you being innocent; but most elate to bear Crosses, and afflictions, and
to embrace them as liueryes of Jesus Christ.

In Mercy, it is a high degree to give temporal things; more high to pardon
imuryes; most high to oblige those, who persecute us.

It is a high degree, to pity all the persecutions of body; and more high to
be zealous for souls; and most eminent to compassionate the torments of our
Savior in the memory of his Passion.

In the Virtue of Fortitude, it is a high degree to conquer the world; much
higher to subdue the flesh; most elate to vanquish ones self.

In tempera^ce it is a high degree well to dispose of eating, drinking,
sleeping, watching, game, recreation, the tongue, words, and all gestures of
the body; a much higher degree well to govern affections; but most of all
wholly to purify your thoughts, and imaginations.

In justice it is a high degree to give unto your neighbor what belongs to
him; a much higher degree to ask a reason of your self; but most of all to
offer up to God all satisfaction, which is due to him.

In the virtue of Faith, it is a high degree, to be well instructed in all you
should believe; and much higher to believe it simply, and religioufly; more
high also to profess it by your good works; but most high to confirm it by
the l^sse of goods and life, when there is need.

In the virtue of Hope, it is a high degree, to have good appr^he^sio^s of the
power of God; more high to recommend al your affairs to his holy providence;
more high to pray to him, and serve him with fervor, and purity, without
intermission; but most high to confide in him, in our most desperate affairs.

Finally, for the virtue of Charity, which is the accomplishment of all other,
you must know there are three sorts of them. The first is the Charity
beginning. The second, the more confirmed. The third, the perfect.

Charity beginning has five degrees. 1. Distaste of passed crimes. 2. Good
purpose of amendment. 3 Relish of the word of God. 4. Pro^ptnesse to good
works. 5. Compassion of another ill, and joy at his prosperity.

Charity more confirmed has five other degrees. The first is, a great purity
of Conscience, which is purged by a very frequent examen. 2. The weakening of
Concupiscence. 3. Vigorous exercise of the inward powers. For even as the good
operations of exterior senses, are notes of health of body; so the holy
occupations of the understanding, memory, and will are the signs of spiritual
life. 4. A prompt observance of the law of God. 5. A tastful knowledge of
verityes, and Maxims eternal.

Perfect Charity also reckons five other degrees. 1. To love your enemies. 2.
To take contentedly, and suffer courageously all adversities. 3. To have no
humane respect, but to measure all things by the fear of God. 4. To be free
from all love of creatures. 5. To yield up your life, to save a neighbor.

There are added also nine other degrees of seraphicall love, which are,
solitude, silence, suspension, inseparability, insatiablility,
indefatigability, rapture, languor, ecstasy, which would deserve long discourse,
but it is out of the purpose, I intend here.

SECT. V. Of four orders of those, who aspire to Perfection,
COnsider at this time what virtues, and in what form you would practice them;
for there are four sorts of people, which aspire to Perfection.

The first are, very innocent, but little valiant for the exercise of virtues.
The second, besides Innocence, have courage enough to busy themselves in worthy
actions, but are very sparing toward God, and do measure their perfections by
a certain Ell, which they will not in any kind exceed, wherein they are not
unlike the Ox of Susis, who very willingly drew out of a well his usual
number of buckets of water; but whatsoever could be done, it was impossible to
make him go beyond his ordinary proportion. The third order is of the fervent,
who are innocent, courageous, and virtuous without restriction, but they will
not take charge of others, supposing themselves troubled enough, with their
own bodies, wherein they may oftentimes be deceived.

The fourth rank comprehends those, who b^ing enabled through much industry,
do charitably open themselves to the necessities of a neighbor, when they are
called for advise, thinking it is to be in some sort evil, not to be good, but
for ones self.

Observe what is required of you, and be an emulator of the most abundant
graces. But if the multiplicity of these degrees of virtue do perplex your
spirit, I will discover to you a way of perfection much shorter, and more easy.

SECT. VI. A short way of Perfection, practiced by the Ancients.
THe Ancients had this custom to accommodate all virtue to certain heads,
and some addicted themselves with so much fervor, and perfection to the
exercise of one sole virtue, that possessing it in a supreme degree, with one
only lincke they insensibly drew the whole chain of great actions. One
dedicated his whole life to the manage of the tongue, another to abstinence,
another to meekness, another to obedience. So it was found at the death of a
holy man named Or, (as Pelagius relareth) that he had never told a lie, never
sworn an oath, never slau^dered, never spoken but upon necessity. So Phasius
in Cassianus said upon his deathbed, that the Sun had never seen him take his
refection: for he every day fasted till that Sun was let. So John the Abbot
witnesses, that the Sun had never seen him in anger, that he never had done
his own will, nor had ever taught others any thing, which he had not first
practiced himself. There was need of much fortitude of spirit to come to this.
If you desire matters more imitable, rest assured you shall lead a good life in
disposing your self perpetually to the practice of these three words, To
Abstain, To Suffer, To go forward in well doing, as says S. Luke in the Acts
of the Son of God. 1. In abstayning from all unlawful things, and sometimes
also from pleasures lawful, by virtue. 2. In mortifying concupiscence, anger,
desire of estimation, and riches. 3. In guiding your Senses, your Will, your
Judgment, and ever gayning some victory over your self by the maistery of your
passions. 1. To suffer, by enduring the burdens of life with great patience,
esteeming your self happy to participate in the pains of our Savior, which
are the most noble marks of your Christianity. 2. By endeavoring to use a
singular meekness in suffering the commands, and defects of others. 3. By
undertaking some austerityes of body, with counsel. 4. By holding a firm
footing in good, already begun: For as said the ancient Marcus the Hermit;
The wolf, and the sheep never agree together, to breed up their young: so
travel, and distant never made up a good virtue.

To go forward in well doing by becoming diligent, and obliging toward al^ the
world, every one according to his degree: but above al, have still before your
eyes the listof the works of Mercy, as well spiritual as temporal, as a
lesson whereon you are to be seriously examined, either for life, or death
eternal. And for this purpose some Saints had for all books these words in
their Library. Visito, Poto, Cibo, Redimo, Tego, Colligo, Condo.

Consula, Castiga, Solare, Remitte, Fer, Ora.



To visit To quench thirst To feed Redeem Cloth Lodge Bury To teach Counsel
Correct Comfort Pardon Suffer To pray for the dead.
The best science of one man is to oblige another. The time will come when
death will disarray us even to the bones, and leave us nothing but what we have
given to God.

SECT. VII. Means to become perfect.
FOr this purpose you must perpetually be watchful over your actio^^, and be
like a Seraphim all sprinkled over with eyes, and lights, as Bessarion said,
you shall know your progression in virtue, when purged from greater sins, you
begin to apprehe^d the least, when you shall feel your self free from ardent
desires of interest and honor, when you shall free your tongue from slander
and vanity, when your heart becomes very much purifyed in its affections, and
that you draw near to indifferency. The means to make your self perfect in
this manner is. First, to be inflamed with a fervent desire of perfection.
Secondly not to neglect the extirpation even of the slightest imperfections.
Thirdly to have a good directour, who may be unto you, as the Angel Raphaell
was to the young Toby, and consequently to confer with spiritual men very
often, and to be enkindled by their example. Fourthly to make a poesy of
flowers of the lives of Saints, to take into you the odor, and imitation of
them. Fifthly to render your self constant in good purposes, and to offer them
up to God, as by the hands of our Lady, and your Angel Guardian.

SECT. VIII. How one ought to govern himself against Temptations,
Tribulations, and obstac^es which occur in the way of Virtue.
FInally, seeing in the practice of virtues you must still have arms in hand,
to destroy the powers of our adversary, and to advance the affairs of
salvation, recall to memory the twelve Maxims, which I proposed against those
obstacles, which may happen.

The way to resist temptation is not to frame within your self a spiritual
insensibility which is moved at nothing. It is hard to attain it, so sensible
is self love, and had you it, it were to be a stone, not a man. It is not to
drive away one temptation by another, and to do one evil to be freed from
another; for to pursue that course is to wash your self with ink. It is not
to hide your self upon all occasions, and never to do good for fear you must
fight against evil, but manfully to resist in the manner I will show you. The
great spirit John Picus Mirandula has collected together twelve notable
Maxims, the practice of which is most profitable to wage war in spiritual
co^bat against weakness.

The first Maxim. That you must be tempted on what side soever it happen: In
hoc positi sumus. It is our profession, our trade, our continual exercise. The
Eagle complains not of het wings, nor the Nighttingale of her song, nor the
Peacocke of her train, because it is by kind, and it is as natural for a man
to be tempted, as for a Bird to fly, to sing, to prune her seathers. If you
forsake the way of spiritual life, fearing to be tempted, and turn head
toward worldly contentments, hold it for an infalliable verity, you shall
thereby be the further engaged, and which is worse, without comfort, honor,
merit, or recompense: you shall leave a paper cross, which if you well knew how
to manage, would load you no more then feathers do the Bird: you will forsake
it (say I) to take another hard, uneasy, and bloody, which will put you into
confraternity with the bad thief. The great Prelate of France Sidonius
Apollinaris relates, that a certain man called Maximus being arrived at the
height of honor by unlawful, and indirect ways, much grieved from the first
day, and breathing out many sighs, spoke these words: Felicem te Damocle, qui
non longius vno pra^dio regni necessitatem tolerauisti. O Damocles, I esteem
thee most happy to have been a King only the space of a dinner time. It is now a
whole day, that I have been so, and can no longer endure it.

The second. Remember that in the affairs of the world, we fight a long time,
we travel more painfully, we reap more fruitlessly, the end of one toil is
the beginning of another. In paines-taking there is no other hope, but ever to
labor, and a temporal toil does many times draw after it an eternal pain.

The third. Is it not a mere folly to believe a paradise, an eternal life, a
Jesus Christ, who made unto himself a ladder of the Cross to ascend to the
throne of his glory; and you in the mean time to be desirous to live here
with arms acrosse, to see the Master open the way of heaven thorough so many
thorns, and the servant not to be willing to tread, but upon flowers? To see
under a head all wasted, and worn with sufleringes, a delicate member, as one
should put feet of flax to a brazen Colossus?

The fourth. Were there no other fruit in temptation, but the conformity, which
we thereby have with Jesus Christ who is the sovereign Wisdom, it were to be
highly reco^penced. A brave Captain said to a Soldiar who dyed with him: Thou
who would have been unknown all thy life time, it is no small honor for
thee to dye this day with thy master: and who would not hold it a great glory
to have the son of God for Captain, for companion, for spectatour, for
theater, for guerdon in all his afflictions, and tribulations? Who would not
account it a great dignity to be daily crucified with him, to distend his
hands, and arms upon the Cross, in withholding them from viole^ces, rapincs,
ruins, wherewith the spirit of lying transporteth us? To fetter your feet in
hindering the^ to run after the unbridled desires of your heart. To make
bitter your tongue in subduing the pleasures of your taste. To wound your body
in beating down the incitementes of flesh, by a holy mortification. To lessen
your self by the contempt of honor according to the example of him, who being
able always to walk upon the wings of Cherubims, would creep among us like
a little worm of the earth. What a glory were it to say with S. Paul, Ego
stigmata Domini Jesus in corpore meo port.

The fifth. Not to confide in humane remedies, when you undertake to overcome a
temptation; It is not a thing which depends merely upon us; It is necessary
God go before, and we thereunto contribute our free will: If he watch not over
our heads, it will be a hard matter for us to keep Centinell. No creature is
so feeble, as he, who holds himself for strong, being only armed with his
own confidence: Multa in homine bona fiunt, que non facit homo. Nulla vero
facit homo bona que non Deus praestet vt faciat home, says the Council of
Orange. Many good things are done in man, which man does not, and man does no
good which God does not. Who thinks to resist temptations without his help, is
like him that hastneth to the wars, and stumbles at the threshold of his own
door. And therefore an effectual means in this battle is to insist much on
prayer, especially at the first aproach of a temptation.

The sixth. When you have vanquis^ed a temptation, take very good heed you
forsake not your hold, and wh^ly slacke^ your courage, as if there were no
other enemies to be opposed. As distrust is the mother of safety, so over much
security is the gate of danger. If your enemy sti^^ roame up and down like a
roaring Lyo^, become you on the other side a watchful Lion in the centinells
of the God of hoastes, and take for your devise, Super speculam Domini ego st^.

The seventh. Content not your self only not to be beaten, but assail your
enemy: when Satan sets a snare to entrap you, make it an instrument of merit.
If he present a good work to you, which glittereth in the world thereby to
te^pt you with Pride, make a good work of it, and leave vanity, referring all
to the greater honor of God.

The eight. When you are in the co^bat, fight with alacrity, as if you already
were certain of the victory. Turn away the eye of you confideration from what
you suffer, and hold it perpetually fixed upon the reward. A great unhappiness,
which makes many to fall headlong into temptation, is that they have their
minds so stretched and bent upon the thought of pains, that they cannot abide
to behold the reward which waits on the^. When the forty Martyrs were in the
frozen lake, thirty nine of them looked back upon their future crowns, and
one of them (vnhapily) thought of nothing but his punishment. All of them
remained victorious, except this wretched creature, who soyling the glory of
his patience, came out of the poole to die presently after in his infidelity. Do
you not magine that which comforted our Savior on the Cross in the
bottomless Abisse of Calumnyes, and Dolours, was a mirror of glory, wherein he
saw all his sufferings in crowns? Behold the course which is to be held. To
stay a little on the present, and rest in a strong apprehension of the future.
And ever to have these words of S. Paul in your heart: Momentaneum, and leave
tribulationis nostrae, aeternum gloriae pondus operatur in nobis. Fight then
with courage, as if it were the last temptation which should assail you, and
be persuaded, that herein is the sum of your predestination: when you have
overcome it, govern your self like a man readily pressed to enter again into
the list, and make one victory the degree for another.

The ninth. Though you be valiant, brave not danger, tempt not temptation by
casting your self into the occasions thereof, thorough presumption of heart: He
that much affects hazard, instead of finding glory therein, shall trace out
his own Tomb.

The tenth. A sovereign means to conquer temptations, is seasonably to
discover the countenances of them freely, to open your heart to your ghostly
Father to declare your thoughts, to know them well, to consider their nature,
to see the strengh they have upon the spirit. It ordinarily happens what the
good Epictetus says: It is not the thing that troubles us; it is our
phantasy. How many temptations would be vanquished by sligh^ing the^, if one
took but a li^le leisure to laugh at them? We make Elepha^^s of flies, and of
little dwarfes who by stealth pinch us, we frame Giants. We rese^ble young
children, who for fear of a vizard hide themselves with tears in their nurses
bosoms, but take a way the mask, and give it the^ to handle, they will make
sport with it. How many things seem terrible, and impossible to us, which we
find ridiculous, and easy to overcome, if we but never so little touch them with
a finger? In temptations of pusillanimity it is good to represent to your self
these false Giants, as Dwarfes; but in that of concupisce^ce you must not
despise any thing, rather lay hold of little threads, as if they would become
huge Cables. Both in the one, and the other there is nothing to be don, but to
dash the little Babylonians against the stones: withstand beginnings, and suffer
not our enemies to fortify themselves to our disadvantage.

The eleauenth The stone of offense, and scandal is, that they lively
represe^t to their imagination, the sweetness of sin, and never consider the
pleasure which is derived from the victory over sin. So soon as a man is
plunged in the puddle thereof; behold a blushing soul drenched in
pensiveness, melancholy, and despair, to whom a loathsome pleasure, which
passes as a dream, from a dream furnishes him with a huge heap of scorns
sorrows, and consusions. But quite contrary the soul, which has resisted,
finds it self content, generous, elevated, satisfied with holy comforts, which
come from the Paradise of God. Few men reuolue this thought, which S. Cyprian
much reco^mendeth: Behold why the number of the damned is very great; and yet
does it not leeme to you very reasonable, that a man, who a thousand times has
yielded to temptation, once in his life should taste the sweetness which is in
victory over temptation, to rejoice for ever? Many have been put from great,
and evident precipices by often po^dering these words. Well! To yield, what
will be the end? To purchase repentance so dear? To resign as a prey to an
unhappy moment of pleasure, the renown of so many years? Where is thy says
promised to God? Let us at the least seek out a place, where he is not: and
where is he not? So many Stars, so many Intelligences, where with the world is
replenished, are so many eyes of God which behold thee. He himself discovers
thee, even to the bottom of thy conscience; take leave of him, if thou will
sin; but how will thou beg it of him, and how obtain it? A little
patience; this temptation is a cloud, which will pass away. Thou go about
to commit a sin, the pardon whereof is very uncertain: but it is undoubted,
that in all eternity, when thou have acted it, God himself cannot do so, that
it be not done.

The twelfth. Think not you are the lesle acceptable to God, when he suffers
you to be tempted, yea with dishonest thoghts which to chaste souls are very
yrkesome. Alas why? If S. Paul, that Cherubim scorched with celestial ardours,
who fixed his foot upon the front of the stars (according to the opinion of
S. Ambrose, Theophilact, and Oecumenius) has felt the stinges of concupiscence
in a flesh, rapt to the third heaven; think you, in that you have some good
dispositions of well doing, you ought to be freed from wars of Nature, which
ever keep in humility your spirit, a little too indulgent to it self?

Finally follow the counsel of Cassian, daily consider the passions which grow
in your heart, as a Fisherman beholds the fish swiming in the water, of purpose
to catch them. Look^ on that which is most predominant in your heart, from wha^
root it ryseth, when it began, what progression it has made, what empire it
ordinarily usurps on your soul, what effects it produces, whether it be
sensual or spiritual, what things use to foment it, what remedies have most
served to direct it. Provide counsel, and means to extirpat it, proceed
therein with courage, and feruout as to the acquisition of an incomparable good.

SECT. IX. Remedies Against passions and temptations which proceed from every
Vice.
FIrst to consider, that Passion is a Motion of the sensual appetite which
proceeds from the imagination of good, or ill, with some stirring of the body.

2. That there are eleauen passions, six in the appetite of Concupiscence,
which are, Love, Hatred, Desire, Loathing, loy, Sadness. Five in the appetite,
of Anger, Hope, Despair, Confidence, Wrath.

3. That there are two ways to overcome al passions, the first whereof is a
precaution of the mind against the occasions, and vain apparences of all
things in the world. The second is a serious employment, on better things, as
Prayer, Study, Labor, and Affairs: but above all you must ask of God the
light, and strength of his holy grace, which infinirly surpasses all humane
remedies.

Against Gluttony.
1. Represent unto your self the miserable state of a soul defiled and
drenched in flesh. 2. The hardness of heart. 3. The dullness of the
understanding. 4. The infirmityes of body. 5. The loss of goods. 6. The
stain of reputation. 7. The horror at the making of the members of Jesus
Christ the members of an unclean creature. 8. What an indignity it is to adore,
and serve the belly as a brutish, and abject God. 9. The great inundation of
sin, which proceeds from this source. 10. The punishments of God upon the
voluptuous.

Against Sloth.
1. The ceaselesse trauailo of al creatures in the world natural and civil.
2. The easines of good works, after grace given by Jesus Christ. 3. The
anxiety of a mind wandering, and uncertain. 4. The shame and contempt. 5.
Confusion at the day of judgment. 6. Irreuocable loss of Time.

Against Covetousness.
1. The disturbance of a hungry spirit. 2. The insatiablenesse of desire. 3.
The wars and battles one must often have to satisfy one sole desire. 4. The
dishonor of denial intolerable to a generous soul 5. The dependence and
servitude must be undergone, to please those from whom we expect the
accomplishment of our desires. 6. The easiness to offend God, through too much
greediness of temporal things. 7. The caytiffe, and fle^ting pleasure taken
in things, that are most ardently desired 8. That God many times permits us
the accomplishment of out desires, as a punishment for our imperfections.

Aga^ust carnal Love.
1. To consider the barre^nesse of worldly loves, which in deed are the true
ga^dens of Adonu, where nothing is to be gathered, but silly ^owres e^uironed
with many thorns. 2. To set an estimate on things, and not to be dece^ued
with sembi^nces. 3. To guard your senses, to ^schew the accidents, and
occasions of sin, and above all to have a patticuler recourse to God, upon
the first impression of thoughts. 4. To pull your self by main force from
the presence of objects, and to reflect on serious purposes, and good
employments. 5. Often to represent to your self the imperfection, the
ingratitude, the leuity, the inconstancy, the treachery of ^reatures which we
most seruilely affect.

Against Sadness.
There is a holy sadness, ^^ that which we have upon the passion of our
Sauiour^, or for sins, which is the gift of God, and not a punishment.

There is one furious, that has no ears, and which is rather cured by
miracle, then precept.

There is another, natural, which grows from humor: and another vicious,
which is nourished by ill habits, and negligence of salvation.

1. Against the same we must consider that our desires, and love do oftentimes
cause all our sadness: and that the true way to lessen the cares which consume
us, is to sweeten the sharp, and ardent affections we have toward worldly
things.

2. The little love us have of God, causes us many times to be troubled at
frivolous things, whether they threaten, or happen to us. He that thoroughly
would love this great God which deserves to possess the whole love both of
heaven and earth, should no longer entertain fear, nor sadness for any
thing, but for the loss of God; which indeed no man loeseth, if he do not
willingly forsake himself.

3. There is naught therein but the tears of the damned, which are reme^ilesse
A man who may persist in the way of paradise should not take unto him the
condition of a little Hell; and he who may hope for this great All, must not be
sad at any thing.

Against Envy.
1. To e^^eeme nothing great in this life, is the way not to envy at all. 2.
Only to love the great inheritance of the land of the living, which is never
lessened by multitude, and portion of those who possesle it. 3. Attentively to
consider the motives, which excite us to love a neighbor, as the participation
of one same nature.

THE THIRD PART OF THE DIVRNALL.
SECT. I. Affairs, and their importance.
THE third e^ployment of the day, is in the affairs we handle, whether it be
for the public, or for the particular in the government of your family, or
discharge of some office. Good devotion is a good affair, and there is nothing
more to be feared, then Idleness, which is the very source of sin. He who
takes pains (said the ancient Fathers of the desert) is tempted but with one
Devil; he who is idle, has them all upon him. No man is so noble, who ought
not to find out so^e manner of occupation. If Iron had the practice of reason,
it would say, it better loved to be used by force of labor, then to grow rusty
in the corner of a house.

SECT. II. Two heads, to which affairs are reduced.
WE must consider in affairs, the Substance and the Form. The substance; for
it is great prudence to make good choice in this point, to undertake good
employments, and to leave the bad, the dangerous, and burdensome, which do
nothing but hinder the mind, and choke the sense of devotion, principally when
there is no obligation to enterprise them. Those are truly sick in good health,
who interpose themselves thorough curiosity, to know, to do, to solicit the
affairs of others. It suffices (said the Emperor Antoninus) that every one
in this life do that well, which is his vocation. The Sun plays not the
part of the rain, not the rain of the Sun. Is it not a mere frenzy to see
men in the world, who have no other action, but to attempt all, and do nothing?

As fir formein the exercise of charge, offices, and affairs, there must be
used science, conscience, industry, and diligence. Science, in learning that
which is profitable to be known for discharge of ones duty. 2. In informing
your self of that which you cannot apprehend of your self. 3. In harkening
most willingly to advise, by examining, and po^dering it with pruence, and
wholly gouern^ng you^ self by counsel. 4. Co^sciencein performing all matters
with good intentions, and much integ^ty, according to laws both divine, and
humane. 5. Industry, in doing all things discree^ly, and peaceably, with more
fruit the^ no^se: in such sort that no anx^ety be showed in affairs like unto
that Prince, of whom an Ancient said, tha^ in his most serious enployments he
seemed ever to have a vacancy. 6. Diligence, carefully spving out occasions,
and doing every thing in time, and place, without disorder, confusion, passion,
have, irresolution, precipitation. For behold these are def^cts which
ordinarily destory good government. He who has never so little wit, and good
disposition shall ever find wherein to busy himself, especlally in works of
mercy, amongst so many objects of the miseries a neighbor.

SECT. III. Of the government of a Family.
THat man has no small business upon his hand, who has a family to govern. A
good Father who breeds his children well, that they one day may serve the
commonwealth, performs an important business for the public. A mother who
trayneth up a little Samuel for the service of the Tabernacle, as did S. Monica
her son Aug^stine, obliges all posterity. A master, and a mistress who
hold their domestique servants in good order, merit much before God, and men.
Four things very considerable, are to be used; Choice, Discretion, Example,
Entertaiment. Choice, in the consideration of the quantity, quality, capacity,
sidelity of those whom you take into your service. As for quantity, it appears
it ought to be proportionable to your estate, and revenues: it is a great
folly to make ostent of a number of servants for mere vanity. As did Herod the
sophister according to the relation of Philostratus, who allowed his son
twenty four pages, every one of which bare the name of a letter of the
Alphabet; for so blockish was this child, that h^ could not otherwise learn^
the first Elements.

Stars, which hau^ least circuit are nearest the pole, and men who are least
perplexed with affairs, most approach unto God. A great Retinue, is a note of
great scarcity: were ther^ a Beast, such an one as the Hebrew tables have
feigned, to whom we should da^ly give all the grass upon a thousand
m^u^taines for his allowance, would you account him more happy, then a
Nightingale, which is satisfied with a few seeds, or a Be^ which lives on dew?
The rich has use for many Pistolets, the poor of a little bread: both are
indige^t, but the one is less, then the other, since he has less need. A
great number of servants is not to make a man the more happy: for there is not
any one a greater Master, nor better obeyed, then he, who knows how to serve
himself.

For quality, Take good heed, least you resemble sorcerers, who care not to
hold the devil in fee, so they may make use of his service for their
pretension: you either must take your servants good, or you must make them so:
in the one there is good hap, and in the other oftentimes much difficulty. For
many are like the Ass of S. Vincent Ferrerius, who did more for a Carter that
called on the devil then for his Master, who lead him along in the name of
God; which the holy man seeing, he put him away, not being able to endure such
brutishness in a beast: and can you think, that for the necessity of your
affairs it may be lawful for yon to tolerat^ a man, who has neither God, nor
conseience; that so thereby your children may at first suck in the venom of
his conversation?

For capacity, It is most certain, that besides honesty there must be ability
in charges: and allthough it be said the Saints are ready to do all, yet God
does not ever give them both the desire, and means to entermeddle in all
sorts of affairs. Our abilityes are limited, as our spirits; and every one
has his particular talent, which ought to be understood by those, who will
make use of it.

For fidelity, It is one of the qualityes, which she Gospel allows to a
good servant. You have reason to exact it, and prudently confess it, not by
suspicions, and iealousyes, which serve to no other purpose, but to provoke
those who have a disposition to do well: oftentimes a man is made faithful in
thinking him so: and many by fearing perpetually to be deceived, have taught
others to deceive, teaching them the ready way to sin by their distrust (^s
says the Roman Philosopher.) You must afford your officers the command, and
liberty, which their charges require, not arguing them every minute upon
trifles; yet you must carefully reserve the state of your affairs for your
own knowledge. For it is as great solly indifferently to trust every man, as
to be diffident of all the world.

SECT. IV. Of direction in matter^ spiritual.
When you have happened upon a good choice, the government is no hard matter;
for S. Augustine says, there is nothing so easy, as to persuade good among
those, who have a great desire to put it in execution. Govern your family in
that manner, as the good S. Eleazar did his, of which the reverend Father Binet
has framed so native a pourtraict. First banish vice, and scandal from your
house: let loue-daliances, and such ordures never approach, no more then the
serpent to the flower of the vine: let not surfeit, and drunkenness, nor such
exce^se know so much as gare: le^ gain of hazard find no harbor: let there
neither unclean word, nor blasphemy be heard, because as Nabuchodonozor caused
the Pages, which were to attend on him to learn his language; so the Devil
teaches those his dialect, who seem already to be in his pouer.

Vice being exiled, accustom your Housholdpeople to some devotion, causing
them carefully to hear Mass, especially on Festiuals commanded, inuyting them
to frequent the Sacraments according to their rank, by assembling them as did
S. Charles Borromeus in the evening, or at some hour of the day to repeat
certain prayers together, if conueniency of place permit; as also to see how
they are instructed in the articles of Faith.

Your example will do more, then all your words; for the life of a good
master, and mistress is a perpetual Ce^sar in a house. Those who seek to
gain their good opinion, desire to be like them, and by that means whilst
they endeavor to be loved, they become honest. We live in an age, wherein we
have more need of examples, then precepts. Servants stick to the pillars of a
house, as Iuy to great trees, and in a word, at the command of great men, all
affections are of wax, so flexible they become.

It is fit likewise for entertainment of this opinion, that you be liberal
according to your means, in the dispose of your family, honorably
accommodating the expenses which is requisite, both according to necessity, and
decorum. For we use Nets of thread to take fish, and threeds of gold to catch
men.

Besides, forget not in the whole manage of your affairs to call very
particularly upon the assistance of God, saying oftentimes over these words of
Solomon in the book of Wisdom, the 9. Chap. My God give me the wisdom
which waits on thy throne, se^d it me from the sanctuary of heaven, and the
seat of thy Majesty, that it may be with me, travel with me, and make me know
thy blessed will to put it in execution.

Preserve your self from indiscreet have in the b^gining of a work, from
anxie^y in the progression, and despair in the end. If your project your
proceed well, give thanks unto God, and example of modesty to your neighbor.
But if matters succeed not to the tune of your will, practice to pursue the
love of the divine providence, which composeth all the harmonyes of the world:
you have power over your design not over enents: you are to pray matters may
happen, not as you wish; but to desire them, as they prove. Accustom your
self not to be contristated at worldly accidents, no more then you would be
for an ill dream: all here beneath pa^^eth away as a dream, and we do much
if in loosing all, we retain this belief: but by a long ^oothing of ou^
proper wills we have even forsaken (as says Cassianus) the shadow of patience.

SECT. V. Advise for those, who are in employments, and gouernementes.
SAint Bonauenture has composed an excellent Treatise, which he terms, the
wings of the Seraphim, wherein he gives most sage instructions to those, who
are in office, and government, whereof here in part behold the quintessence,
and marrow which I entreat you to relish well. He gives his Seraphim six
wings. The first is, the zeal of the honor of God, which you shall exercise
in observing four things, to wit.

1. Neither to commit, nor show to those under you, the least suspicion of
evil, or sin.

2. Not to give way to it in any kind, not withstanding the allureme^ts which
you may have upon the one side, and the importutunityes that will assail you
on the other.

3. Never to be ple^sed, that an evil act be done, although it come not to
your knowledge, for that would be to betray your conscience.

4. To correct, and take away disorders, as much as you can possible.

The second wing which you ought to have, is the spirit of compassion to help
the sick, the aged, the feeble, the faint-harted, the afflicted, for they are
poor Porcupines, laden with prickles, and acerbityes, to whom you must serve
for a Sanctuary, and Rock of refuge: Petra refugium Herinaceis.

The third. Patience in so many travels, and cares, which be (as it were)
inseparable from charges, and governments. Patience in ill success of
affairs, which do not always prosper to the proportion of our pains, and
good endeavor. Patience, to tolerate the ungrateful, who many times throw
stones at those who give them hony-combes; not much unlike the Atlantes, that
shot arrows against the Sun. Patience in the occasion of words, and
affairs treated with certain people, who are quickly offended, and fretted in
their harness. It is a great virtue to mollify them with a swetetnesse
peaceful, si^e^t and charitable, as if one should cast oil into a tempestuous
sea. An Ancient said, That he who could well endure an injury was worthy of an
Empire. His sole silence will disarme a passionate man, and prostrate the self
same at his seet, who ^eemed to thunder over his hea^.

The fourth wing is Example, which is observed in three things. 1. in putting
into practice the good consells and precepts, which we teach others by word. 2.
In managing dignity in a manner (...) ha^sh, hau^thty nor arrogant, bu^ mild,
affable and communicatiue. 3. In entertaining also a gravity, honest and
moderate that the ch^racter may not be vilifyed which God impresseth on thos^,
whom he calls to charges, and commands.

The fifth and principal wing is called Discretion, without which all virtues
become vices: for the hono^r of great actions consi^teth not so much in doing
good, as in doing good, well.

This discretion consists in four things. To govern the good with good
iu^gment: to correct evil; well to administer the ^e^porall affairs wherewith
one is encharged: and among these encombrances to support, and preserve ones
self as fresh water in the salt sea.

The manage of good is maintained, in three especial acts. The first, to
cause those under us, straig^htly to observe things necessary, and which
cannot be omirted without disorder, or scandal. The second, to entertain, and
sweetly attract every one according to his condition, capacity, and judgment
in works the most perfect wherein they have not a formal obligation. The
third to dispose with agood Economy, charges and burdens, according to their
inclinatio^s, and stre^gh of spirits, whom you are to govern.

As for correction, either they are slight faults of persons well conditioned
whom you are to correct, and those are co be handled with much sweetness; or
they are covert vices of some malign consciences, which you neither ought, nor
can discover: but here you must use much industry, patience, and wisdom to
vn-neastle vice, and draw the winding serpent out of his Cave, as by the hand
of a midwife (as the Scripture speaks;) or they are sins of desperate
people, who offend with hope of amendment, to the infection of a multitude: and
here it is where you are to be fortifyed with all your power, so to take away
the evil, and the evil doers.

As concerning temporal affairs, use the^ in such sort, as we have said
before, and take good heed you entangle not your mind therein, as a fish in the
Net, depriving them of the liberty of the children of God, to serve the earth.

But above all, ever look well into your self, as the prime piece of your
government. Let your conscience be pure, confident, and peaceable, speaking,
and doing all things with great consideration, and never despising their
counsel, who are able to advise you.

Finally, your sixth wing is Devotion, which is divided into three sorts: the
one common; the other singular; the third continual. The common consists in
exactly performing the duties of piety, which are with in the limits of your
profession, and to do them by the way of imitation of that celestial warfare,
which is perpetually employed in the praises of God, and by way of edification
of those to whom you ow this good example. Singular devotion obliges you to
seek^ a particulat refuge in the Tabernacle, following the steps af Moses
according to the necessityes of your charge. Cont^nuall devotion ^yeth you to a
most fervent exercise of the presence of God, which you shall witness by
having a desire to please him in every place, in all occasions, and in all
actions, and by dedicating to him all your works before you begin them, and at
the end of the^ to set the seal of thangsgiuing due to his divine Majesty

Imprint very deep into your heart this speech of S. Bernard, which is read in
the first book of Consideration, the fifth Chapter. Cum omnes te habeant, esto
etiam tu ix habent^bus v^us. Quid solus frau^arts m^nere tui? vsque quo vadens
spiritus, and non rediens?

It you be a man full of affairs, and that all the world have a share in you,
take a part in you^ self, as well as others. Frustrate not your self of a good
so justly yours, and be you none of those who travel incessa^tly, and never
return again to their lodgings.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE DIVRNALL.
SECT. I. Recreation, and necessity thereof.
FOrasmuch, as concerns Recreation, which is used in company, at repast, in
honest games, in walks, in good conversation, it is necessary to direct the
mind, and repair the forces. Cassianus in his 24. Collation Chap. 21. tells,
that a Hunts man having found on a time S. John Evangelist playing with a
Partridge, was amazed how a man of so great reputation could entertain
himself with so slight a recreation. The Saint seeing this man had a bow in
his hand, asked him, why he did not always carry it bent and he thereunto
answearing, it would mar it; the A postle the^ replied, so it is with the
mind of man, which needs must sometimes be unbent, to shoot the b^tter.

SECT. II. Pleasures of ^ast.
Note, for he says Unbent, no^ vnloos^n^d: preserve your se^ues ^o^ th^se
excesses, which render men now a days as glu^ouous in the eyes, as belly it is
a stra^^ge vanity to l^ue the reputation of knowing the tastes of good
morsells, to let all your mind to serve that part of the body, which has least
spirit in it, and to cherish a renown which is only fa^ned with the sumes of
the Ki^chin.

Use not your belly, as Caligula did his horse; for he aff^arded the great
attendance and cu^osityes of a Prince to a beast, to whom Nature allowed
nothing, but oars and hay. And you would do the like, if you bestow so much
cost and endeavor to pamper the most bestiall part in you, which the diume
providence would have to be sparingly nourished. These great feasts which begin
by vanity, and are extended with so much riot, are ever ended in folly, and
very often in repentance. Nothing else is gained from the pleasures of the
throat, but a body more crazy, a prison of flesh more straight, and a sepulcher
more stinking. Unhappy are the banquets, which the hunger of the poor,
accuses before God: it is above sixteen ages ago, since they burned the
tongue of the rich Glutton, buried in hell: so many Tons of delicious wine
having not left him one only drop of refreshment.

If you desire to know what the banquets were of ancient Christians, which
ought to be the model of ours, the excellent Tertulli^ frames a discourse
thereof in his Apology. Our feasts (says he) show in the beginning of their
name, what they are: They are called Charityes, because they are instirured for
the comfort of the poor. Our Table resembles an Altar, and our Supper a
sacrifice; we look not back at that time, upon what it cost us; it is a gain
to make expense in the name of piety. Our Table has nothing, which sauoureth
of baseness, sensuallity, or immodesty; we there feed by measu^e, we there
drink according to the rules of chastity, we satiate so much as is necessary
for those, who must rise at midnight to offer their prayers to God; we there
speak, and converse, as in the presence of God, with hands washed, and
candles lighted; every one repeateth what he knows of holy Scriptures, and of
his own invention, to the honor of God. Prayer concludes the banquet, as it
began it. From the table we go unto the exercise of modesty, and honesty; you
would say in beholding us, that it were not a supper we took, but a lesson of
sanctity.

Out alas! Compare the Feasts of many Christians to these same, and you shall
parallel the table of Centaures to that of Angels.

SECT. III. Of Game.
FRet not you self likewise at those games of hazard, which have in the^ so
much avarice, fervor, and flames. Should a man commit no other sin, but to
converse about the third part, or moity of his life with Kings, and Knauc^ of
Cards being invited to the conversation of Angels, he should do no small hurt.
But besides this, evil game is the inue^tion of the fiend Zabulon, as S.
Cyprian observes in the Treatise he composed touching this subject; it is the
altar of Fortune detested by the Prophet; it is shop of deceit; the ^choole of
Coueto^snesse; the appren^iship of blasphemy; the skirmish of choler, where
are made amityes enraged, thefts unpunished, curious throatcutting, and from
whence one oftentimes carries away naught but a tempest in the mind, gal in
the heart, and wind in the purse. Who can at the last judgment day of God
excuse a man that gameth with full hands, and keeps back the wages of a
servant, or the life of a poor creature, that pineth, and quaketh at his door?

The soldiers of Pilate cast dice on the garment of the son of God as on the
blood, which droped from his body, but they were Hangmen, and I^fideils: who
would not tremble at a Christian that among so many images of the suffering of
the son of God, without any regard of time of God or men, plays away the
blood, either of his domestiques, whom he neglects, or of the poor, whom
he dispoyleth? take away these sollaces, which are brought forth, as the
Salamander, in the tears of heaven.

Clemen^ Alexandrinus in his Peda^ogue w^ll discovers that these games of
Cards, and dice, and such like were ill received into the primitive Church: for
he reaches, that such pastimes are often, as a bubling of delights ill
rectifyed, and an indigestion of evil idleness.

If we must needs game to give satisfaction to others we ought (at the least)
to take care, this be for some good purpose; that it be among our ^qualls, and
free from passion, little, and m^derate, and to the profit of the poor.

SECT. IV. Of Dancing.
FOr daunces, balls, and sog^, that is tru^, which is said by the holy Bishop,
and excellent Author in his Introduction; they ressemble M^shromes, the best of
which are worth nothing. Riot, vanity, foolish expense, maskes, good cheer,
night, youth, love, liberty are as dangerous counselors of wisdom, as evil
inst^uc^tours of Modesty. One may therein bless himself by miracle, but some
are daily lost by infirmity: if we be more weak, then miraculous, we ought to
seek for that safety in the flight from occasions, which w^ cannot find in the
strength of our souls.

The Fable tells, that the Butterfly asked the Owl, how she should deal with
the fire, that had findged the tipps of her wings? and he counseled her, not
to behold so much as the smoke thereof. With what conscience can a faithful
soul frequent wordly recreations which have laid so many blemishes upon its
purity? Must we expect until we be on fire, to be freed from the flame? I
wonder at those, who would spiritualize dancing, and make it agree with
frequent Co^munions; they in conclusion shall find the employment of the
Emperor Adrian, who put Adonis into the cradle of Jesus. There must be so many
circumstances of the intention, time, place, persons, and manner to season such
pleasures well, that the abse^ce from them would be much more easy, then the
best use.

SECT. V. Of wanton Airs, and Comedyes.
IT you speak of wanto^ Airs, of the reading of naughty books, of unchaste
Comedyes, and Stageplayes, your Conscience which is the schoole-mistresse of
the soul will perhaps dictate more of it unto you, then you are willing to
believe. Such recreations serve as Harbingers to disorder, as hands to
sensuality, tinder to sin, and scandal to virtue. Evil at that time enters
into you, thorough all the gates of the senses, and issues not out again, but
by the posterne of penance, which is not always open to our indispositions. A
young Soul is surprised therein, as in a golden snare; it seems that to
describe a sin, is not only to teach it, but to command it. For we are at
this time in an age, where to know, and do ill, have not (as it were) any
Medium to separate them, and if we be virtuous oftentimes, it proceeds rather
from ignorance of vice, then precepts of virtue, says Saluianus.

SECT. VI. Of pleasure in walking, and running.
REcreatio^s the most innocent are ever the most commendable, as are those
which are taken in the country in the exercise of the body: for the Country
life (says the worthy Columella) is the cosen german of wisdom.

Take away the co^forts which are had in churches, in matters justice,
learning, arts, and co^merce, what are great cittyes, but great p^isons? Men
live there as birds in cages, they throng one another, and bedawbe each other
by a frequent, and contagious conversation. The turmoyle of affairs, the
importunity of visites, the sottish tyranny of complements, deceive them of the
moity of their life. In the Country the heavens, the air, the earth, the
waters, which the Cittyes bereave us of, are afforded us with far more
liberty. There it is, where all the creatures of God speak to us face to face,
to tell us the wonders of the Creator. The Christians of the primitive Church
made Hermitages of their Farms, to found a retreat from affairs of the world,
and to observe fit times for reposes but many now a days make of their gardens
Temples for Belphegor, where no other Diuinityes are adored, but the belly,
riot, game, and impurity.

Many use ayre-takings, and barley-breakes, where they run not far without
stumbling: for they rather ressemble the list of Atalanta, and Hippomenes. then
the race, where S. Paul exhorted the Christians to run. There it is where the
sense, flattered with a thousand delicious objects, put themseues into the
field, where the blood is enflamed, the tongne vnloosned, concupiscence
enkindled, and where false liberty renteth often a piece of the scarce, which
was (as yet) over the face of Modesty, and audaciously becomes a Portresse to
Love. Such are the sacriledges, which dry up years, which bring disorder into
seasons, sterility into the entrails of the earth, and despair into our
miseryes.

SECT. VII. Of four Conditions of Recreation.
YOur recreation ought to have four notable things: Choice of persons, Good
intention, Innoceney, Moderation. Choice of persons, avoiding evil company, as
the most dangerous shelfe of life; for the friendship of wicked men is like to
bundels of thrones, which keep together to burn, and crackle in the flames.
Your friendship should be virtuous, saythfull, disinteressed, if you from it
desire to derive any fruit.

Good intention: such as would be fit to cherish health and strength to serve
the soul; for a good man ought to seek for merit even in play, and repast, as
S. Francis, who rose in the night, and fed before a poor hungry friar, to take
from him the shame he had of eating at an extraordinary hour.

Innocence: For there must consideration be used therein, least nature be
dissolved into a brutish life, altogeater unworthy of a generous heart. Behind
then comes gluttonny, intemperate gain, bold scoffing, and detraction, which
in this Age is very hard to be avoided.

The most ordinary book in companies of men is man himself: you shall find
very few who are now adays delighted to talk of the old and new Testament;
nay verily, not so much as of ancient Roman Consulls, or Egyptian Pyramides,
or of the antique wars of Caesar. Men study the books of time, talk of
garbes, habits, co^tenances, conditions, of affairs, customs, and allyances:
and allthough we have no purpose to offend any, yet is it a matter very easy in
so great variety of discourse to let many words fall, which are of much less
value, then Silence. It is a singular industry to make a good matter slide into
company, whether it be upon occasion, question, consequence, narration, or
proposition, as the rouere^d Father Iaquinot observes, in his Address.

Moderation, since (as says the Wiseman) as we must not excessiuely glut our
selves with honey: so ought one to take heed, that recreations which are made to
refresh the mind, tend not by exorbitancy to dissolution. It must be observed
what tym^, place, and persons require, and to find out your self in some
recreation, you must not go out of your self by profusion.

SECT. VIII. Of v^cious conversation: And first of the Impertinent.
THe Hebrews say, Game, Anger, Glass, and Conversation, are the windows of
the soul, which many times cause her to see more then she would. That man is
wise, who maks use of the meeting of company, as of a file to polish the mind,
and ever to render it more apt for its functions.

Vicious conversation is drawn (as it were) to three heads, to wit, the
Impertinent, the Vain, the Malign. Impertinent, as the clownish, the sottish,
the troublesome, which happens to many thorough the want of prudence,
fashion, and ciuility.

Theophrastus, one of the quaintest wits of Antiquity relates some passages
thereof, which he says he observed in his time, arguing a great weakness of
judgment. Some (says he) seek to lay hold of one going upon an important
business, to tell him (as they pretend) a matter of great importance, and when
it is spoken it is found to be nothing else, but a mere foppery. Others inuit
a Traveler, who comes out of the country extremely weary, to walk up, and
down. Others draw a man out of a ship ready to dis-anker, to entertain
follies on the shore. Others come to bear witness. when the cause is
determined, and bring along with them sweating full many a drop, the Physician
to se^ one newly deceased.

Others boast they know the way well, and promise the rest to be their guide:
but do wander in the very beginning, and protest they have lost their ayme^.
Others make enquiry very grossly into affa^es, and hasten to ask a General
of an army whither he goes, and what his design is. Such also (says he) are
to be found many times so r^sticall, that admiring nothing of all that which
deserves admiration in civil life, stick upon the way to behold an Ox, as
men in rapture; and in company have no better behavior, then to take their
dog by the muzzle, and say: Oh what a brave beast is this, how well he keeps
the house. Such conversation is able much to vilify a man, and to take from him
all the estimation he may gain in his profession.

SECT. IX. Of vain Conversation.
Vain conversation is that of bablers, flatterers, vainglorious, and such
like. This poor Theophrastus in my opinion fell into the hands of a tattler,
since he so well describes a man, who with much passion spoke the praises of
his wife, and then told all he had dreamed the night before; then what he had
eaten at diner, then that he had an ill stomach. From thence taking his flight
he discoursed of ages, and assured him that men of these times were much short
of the Ancients.

Afterward he told, that Corn was cheap: that there were many strangers in
the City: that if it h^p^pened to rain, the year would be f^uitfull; that he
had a field to be ploughed; that Dan^ppus gave the greatest w^^light at an
offering; that there were so many stairs in such a piece of building, and that
he had numbered them, and a thousand other the like. Such people (adds this
Author) are more to be feared then a fever. He that desires to live at rest,
should seldom keep them company. Horace makes mention of one very like, who
made him sweat down to the heels, and when he saw him so vexed, that he knew
not which way to turn him: I well see says he, sir, that I am troublesome,
but there is no remedy; for since I have met with you, it is fit I wait upon
you, having naught else to do.

Flatterers are much more acceptable, though they are many times, more
dangerous: for they will tell you all the world casts an eye on you; that
you are much esteemed, and that all the town talks of such a cause, which
succeeded well with you; that you have an excellent wit, handsome body, a good
grace, a dainty garb; that any thing sits well upon you, and that it seems
when nature made you, she brake the mould, because she cannot possibly frame
the like. If you speak, they proclayme silence to all the wo^ld; then as
oracles they extol your words, and if you scoff at any one they burst
themselves with laughter to please you, and deify all your imperfections.
Behold the true poison of friendship, and hood-winking of humane life.

The Vainglorious will ordinarily entertain you with their own praises, and
have a thousand slight singularityes in their carryage, their attire, their
speech, their houses, their train to give notice thereby they have some
advantage above others. The fore-me^tioned author says he has observed those,
who accounted it for a great glory to have a Moore for a lacky, so to be the
more noted; and if they sacrificed an ox, they set the horns over their
gates, to let the world know of their offering; and to conclude, were so great
lovers of themselves, that they made Epitaphs even upon the dogs of their
houses, specifying their age, their qualityes, and conditions. These are
testimonies of a soul very frivolous, and void of all manner of humility.

SECT. X. Of malign Conversation.
Malign conversation is the worst of all: as that of the harsh, who render
themselves unsociable in company; that of the opiniatiue, who bear for their
devise, Yea, and No, and are euervpon contradictio^s even in truths the most
evident: that of the crafty, an^ (...), who endeauoar to discover all the
secrets of others, while they in the mean sp^ce hide thems^lues under a Mask
of dissimulation, and in perpe^u Il labyrinths of words, fa^gning to be
ignorant of all they know, to know wha they know, not, to retain no memory of
a promise, to seem to wish the^ well, whom they would d^ceyne, and many such
like things: those of the proud, who ^^ld^yhe, and contemn ^l^ what themselves
are not: those of the cholerique, who are displeased upon every occasion: those
of scoffers, Buffons, and slaunderers, who are obscene, biring, and offensive
in all causes.

It were a long business for him, who would examine all this particularly: and
I freely had discoueted it in a Treatise of manners, and passions, wherein I
had a hope to give my Reader contentment, were it not, that the design of this
little book diuerted me from it.

It would be to little purpose to make so long a work of it, and it is ever
much better to conclude well, then enlarge ill.

SECT. XI. The condition of good Conversation.
I Will in few words tell you, S. Bernard, S. Thomas and other learned men are
of opinion, that in conversation one must render himself affable, and amiable,
yet not too familiar, not curious in other men's affairs, not suspicious, light,
riotous, discontented, affected, magistral, captious, exceptious, no scoffer,
melancholique, trifler; not churlish, ceremonious, talkatiue, not too plyant,
and smooth, not chollerique, jealous, proud, nor vain, as those who through
vanity (which is only rich in fooleryes) perpetually idolatrize themselves, as
a Deity. But one must govern himself with great discretion and modesty, he
must gain without debasing, laugh without bursting, take recreation without
effeminacy, be constant without obstinacy, prude^^ without crast, simple with
out doubleness, he must often dissemble ill, advance good, correct his own
faults by those which disple^se in another, ever to bear away from the garden
of graces some fruit into the house; and if any secret be there learned, which
were fit to be concealed, to make your heart a sepulcher for it.

You shall find, there are ordinarily five qualityes, which make a conversation
very amiable. The first is an obliging fashion, which sweetly sows good
turns, from which in time, and place, we behold recompenses to arise. The
desire to do good to all the world is a hook we must continual hold in the
water; for men are thereby more profitably taken, the^ fishes: and such there
have been, who opportunely giving a glass of water, have gained the prime
dignityes of a Kingdom, as as we know by the history of Thaumastus, and King
Agrippa.

The second, an as^^bility joined to a grace, and sweet behavior, which has
most powerful charms over souls, that are naturally inclined to honesty. It
is nothing to do well, and not do it hansomly: a benefit given with frowns is
a fl^^ty loa^, not taken but for necessity.

The third, an awakened and wary prudence, well to discern dispositions,
capacityes, manners, humous, affections, and pretensions of those with whom we
converse, and to adapt our proceedings to the temper of every one.

The fourth, Humility without sottishness, or servile bassenesse, ready to
give way to reason, and not to persume of proper forces.

The fifth, whereof we have spoken heretofore, is a discreet patience to
suffer men, and affairs without disturbance, in such sort, that it may ever
keep your heart in a good posture, yea even in unexpected, and thorny accidents.
Who well understands this mystery is worthy to command over men, virtue having
already set him in a place next approaching to Angels.

It is a good rule for fair conversation to propose to your self some person
renowned for a perfect carryage, to imitate him. So S. Paul the Apostle says
to the Galathians (according to the Gteeke Text) he came to historify the groat
S. Peter; for he beheld him as an Historian should a Monarch, whose prowess he
intendes to write, or as a Painter a model, to draw out the copy.

So S. Augustine remitted those to the conversation of S. Paulmus, who desired
to profit in virtue, Vade in C^pa^tam, disce Paulmum.

But the most effectual precept is to think, how the Word Incarnate would
converse if he were in our place: for following his example, we should do that,
which ^oseph did in Egypt of whom the Scripture in the Psalm ^04. according
to the Hebrew, said, that he hanged the Princes of King Pharao's court about
his heart.

The Reverend Father Gontery, a man of great judgment, and like virtue has
written a little treatise of Conversation, wherein he far descends into
particulars. He that will read it, shall therein find prudent instructions.

SECT. XII. Conclusion of the Diurnall.
IN the evening before rest you are to make the Examen of Conscience, which is
the little Co^sistory of the soul (as Philo terms it) where having given
thanks to God, and inuoked his holy grace, you must recall your thoughts, your
words, your actions, your defects, and neglects to an account: that you may see
the gain, loss, and reckonings of that day, so to advance good, and correct
evil, remitting the one to discretion, and the other to the mercy of God.

Remember this word, which S. Bernard spoke in the Book of the interior House,
as an Oracle, that one of the principal mirrours to see God in, is, A
reasonable Soul, which finds it self out.

There it is we are to set the Conscience in a throne with scepter in hand, and
all passions, and imperfections vndersoot.

There it is, where she is to take the liberty to say unto you: Wicked servant,
behold a day lost. What sluggishnesse at your rising? what heaviness at
prayer? what negligence in labor? what great words, and little works? To what
purpose is this curious interrogation, and temerarious judgment? these wand^ing
eyes; these straying thoghtes? what, must you needs be a^gry for so slight a
cause in such a meeting? Must you so freely speak, and murmur at the actions
of another? must you take repast so sensually, and so greedily seek for your
ease in, and thorough all; and so of the rest. But if by the grace of God you
find some kind of virtues, yet must you well examine, and ^i^t them, as the
per^ume. which was set before the Tabernacle, to present them before the face
of God and say for conclusion with all humility, what the holy man Fa. Rob.
Southwell did: Quid fuerim scio, quod fui pessimus: quid sim nescio, qui^ de
gratia incertus; quid ero ignoro, quia de salute dubious: quod fui Domine
ignosce, quod sum corrige, quod ero dirige. My God, I know what I have been
(to wit) most wicked; I know not what I am, since I am still uncertain of the
state of grace. I know not what I shall be, being every moment doubtful of my
salvation. God pardon me what I have been, correct what I am, direct what I
shall be.

This done say the litanies or some other vocalprayers happily to conclude the
day with acts of Contrition, of Faith, of Hope, of Supplication for the living,
and dead.

Say here.
LIght of the children of Light, bright Day which have no Evening; Behold the
world bu^yed in the darkness of night, and the present day fully finished,
wherein I see, as in a b^iefe table, how my life shall have an end. My God what
benefi^s do I behold on thy part, and what ingratitudes on mine? Preserve that
in me which is thine and wash away with the precious blood of thy son, what
is mine; shelter me under the wings of thy protection among so many shadows,
phantasmes, and snares of the father of dark^esse, and grant that though mine
eyes be c^osed up with sleep, my heart may never be shut against thy love.

Finally, fall a sleep upon some good thought, that according to the Prophet,
your night may be illuminated with delights of God: and if it happen you have
some interruption in your sleep, supply it with iaculatory prayers, and
elenations of heart, as a^^ciently did the Just, called for this cause, The
Crickets of the night. By this means you will lead a life full of honor,
repose, and satisfaction toward your self and you shall make of every day a
step to Aete^nity. The marks which among other may give you a good hope of
your predestination are twelve principal.

1. A faith, lively, simple, constant. 2. A purity of life, which is ordinarily
exempt from grievous sins. 3. Tribulation. 4. Cleme^cy, and Mercy. 5. Poverty
of spirit, dis-engaged from the earth. 6. Humili^v. 7. Charity toward a
neighbor. 8. Frequentation of the Sacraments of Confession and Communion. 9.
Affection to the word of God. 10. Resignation of mind to the will of the
sovereign Master. 11. Some notable act of virtue exercised by you, upon some
occasion. 12. Devotion toward our Blessed Lady in the honor of whom you
shall do well every day to observe three things.

The first is, to present unto her an oblation every hour in the day of an
Angelical Salutation, when at the sound of the Clock you recall your heart
within it self.

The 2. to practice some mortification of spirit, or body by, a motive of the
imitation of her Virtues.

The third, to give some alms either spiritual, or temporal in her honor.

You will find this Diurnall little in bulk, and great in virtue, if to relish
it well, you begin to practice it. It contains many things, which deserve to
be meditated at leisure: for they are serious, and sage precepts, selected from
the choice of the moral doctrine of holy Fathers. But if they seem short, they
are not therefore to be the less valued: remember, the brave workman Myrmecides
employed more time to make a Be, then a silly Architect did to build a House.

FINIS.
DEVOVT ASPIRATIONS FOR THE Actions of the Day.
In the Morning.
I Will pray unto thee in the morning: in the morning thou wi^^ he^re my voice.
Psalm. 5. ^ 4.

Thou sh^lt enl^ghten me with the rays of thy face, and the wild beasts
(which are passions) shall go into their dens. Psalm. 103.

My days are as the days of a hired man, whilst the time of the day of
Eternity rise over me, and the shadows of the night of this world do vanish.
John 7. and Cant. 4.

At the beginning of any good Work.
It is written of me in the beginning of thy Book, that I do thy Commandment.
My God, I will, for I bear thy law, engraven on the midst of my heart. Psalm 39.

In good Inspirations.
God has opened the ears of my heart, and I will beware how I gainsay him.
Isay 50.

For Mass.
I will go, and I will see this great vision. Exodus 3.

O how lovely are thy Tabernacles, Lord God of Hoastes. Psalm. 63.

At spiritual lesson.
Speak, O Lord, for thy se^uant hark^^neth 1. Reg. 3.

In speaking.
My ha^ na^h uttered a good word; I will tell my works to the King Psalm. 44.

At Resection.
Thou openest thy hand, and ^h^u fillest every creat^re wi^h blessing. Psalm.
144.

In prosperity.
Let my tongue cleave unto my i^wes, if I remember not ^hee in the beginning of
all my i^^, and prosperityes. Psalm. 136.

Inaduersity.
God mortisyeth, and quikneth. 1. Reg. 2.

If we have received good from the hands of God, why should not we receive
ill? Job. 2.

Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his
glory? Luc. 24.

In the affairs, and cares of the world.
Man passes as an image and he is troubled in vain Psalm. 38.

In Calumnies.
If I did please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Galat. 1.

In praises.
Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thee be glory given. Psalm. 113.

Against the vain hopes of the world.
As the dream of them that rise (O Lord) in thy city thou shall bring their
image to nothing. Psalm. 72.

Against Pride.
He that exalts himself shall be humbled. Luc. 14.

Avarice.
It is a more blessed thing to g^ue then to take. Act. 20.

Uncleanness.
Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? 1. Cor. cap. 6. v. 15.

Envy.
He that loves not his Neighbor, remains in death. 1. John 3.

Gluttony.
The kingdom of heaven is neither meat, nor drink. Romans 14.

Anger.
Learn of me, for I am humble of that. Matthew. 1^.

Sloth.
Cursed be he who does the work of God negligently. Hier. 48.

Rules of Faith.
God is not known but by himself. From God must be learned, what is to b^
vn^erstood of God. Hilar ^b. 5. de Trinit.

God calls not us to a blessed life by difficult questions: in simplicity he
is to be sought by piety professed. Idem lib. 10.

Transgress not the ancient bounds, which thy Fathers have put. Prou. 12.

Many grave considerations justly hold me in the bosom of the Catholiqu^
Church. The consent of people, and nations. The authority of the Church it
self, which is risen from miracles, norished by hope, increased by Charity,
established by it^ antiquity. The succession of Bishop^ holds me therein, which
beginning by that Sea, and authority of S. Peter (unto whom God recommended
the care of his flock) has maintained it self to this present time. Lastly,
the name of Catholic holds me. S. August lib. de (...). (...), and contra
epist. F^ndam.

It is an extreme folly to dispute against beliefs generally received into the
Church. S. August. Epist. 1. 18.

Let us follow generality, antiquity, consent: let us hold what was held
throughout, every where, and by all, so that it be authorized by the divine law
and tradition of the Catholic Church.

Not to know any thing beyond it, is to know all. Vincent. Lyrin. against
profano noueltyes. Tertullian in his Prescriptions.

Act of Faith.
O Lord I believe, help my incredulity. Mar. 9.

I know my Redeemer lives etc. Job. 9.

Of Hope.
Although I shall walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will not
feareuill, because thou art with me. Psalm. 22.

With him I am in tribulation: I will deliver him, and glorify him. Psalm. 90.

Of Charity.
What is to me in heaven? And besides thee, what would I upon earth? My flesh
has fainted, and my heart. God of my heart, and God my portion for ever. Psalm.
72.

O Lord feed me thy suppliant with ceaselesse influence of thy Divinity: this I
beg, this I desire, that seruent love may penetrate me, replenish me, and
change me into it. Blo^^.

FINIS.

