A PETITION APOLOGETICALL, PRESENTED TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, BY
THE LAY CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND, in July last.

In eo quod detractant de vobis tanquam de malefactoribus, ex bonis operibus
vos considerantes, glorificent Deum in die visitationis.

In that wherein they misreporte of you, as of malefactors, by the good
works considering you, they may glorify God in the day of visitation.

1. Pet. 2. v. 12. Printed at DOWAY by JOHN MOGAR, at the sign of the Compass.
1604.

THE PREFACE.
REVEREND SIR. There came to my hands by the way of Bruxels, on the xxviij. day
of this month, a certain Petition or Apology of the lay Catholics of
England (as I stand informed) presented to his Highness about the later end of
the parliament: which seems so conformable to reason, so absolute in form of
their submission, and so admirable for the assurance by them offered for their
Priests and Pastors: that the publishing thereof cannot but give contentment
(in my opinion) to all sorts of men, that desire both to be clearly informed
of the true state of things, and that justice and equity should take place,
according to men's comportments and deserts, and not according to the
preiudicate opinions of such, whom nothing but the blood and utter beggering
of Catholics can satisfy. And therefore I thought good, in more public
manner then it was before, to make the world acquainted therewith.

Reasons of publishing this treatise.
THE publishing of this Apology cannot but t His Majesty's honor and service.
end much to his Majesty's honor, and more to his satisfaction and security;
for so much as the Catholics affectionate services and obligations therein
contained, must needs be arguments of some supereminent virtue and goodness in
his sacred personage, that could draw from them at all times such
extraordinary effects of love and devotion: and the more manifest the
protestations of their purgations shall appear to the world, the more manifold
shall be their bonds and obligations of performaunce, and perseverance therein.

The Protestant Prelates.
The Protestant Prelates cannot with reason disalowe thereof, because herein is
nothing required at their hands, but a reasonable conference, and satisfaction
in points of their mission and vocation: And when they shall make it evident
out of the written word, that they are the true Sheepheardes and Pastors sent
from God to have charge of souls, they make profer without delay to follow
them, and with all conformity to obey them, and hear their voices: which when
they shall prove, the controversy is charitably composed, and though they
fail of their proofs, yet they remain as they do with their wealth, their
wives, their pleasures, and palaces: the poor Catholics desiring only a
secret and silent permission of such Pastors, as shall show to them and the
whole world, sufficient evidence and approbation for the charge of souls they
undertake.

The Puritans
The Puritans herewith cannot be offended, if they peaceably, and precisely
seek after contentment, and not contention: because they shall find diverse of
their maxims zealously, or rather odiously conceived by them against
Catholics, overthrown and euacuated by most evident demonstration and
instances in matters of fact, practice and experience: especially in that
point of conditional subjects, which is so much urged by the Ministry.

Academikes of Oxford and Cambridge.
The flourishing and learned Academikes of Oxford and Cambridge may perceive
hereby that Catholics know their Priests intus and incute, and take them
neither for ignorant in divinity, nor dunces in humanity; neither for
Catalines toward their Senate, nor for Absolons toward their David, that
dare adventure life, and living for their virtues and loyalties. And I imagine
that if your Ministers were put to the like plunges, they would hardly find
the like pledges: wherefore I could wish that your Ministers would endeavor
rather to excel and surpass them in their Godly qualities, then in their
pamphlets and pulpets to urge the State to suppress them with severe
exilementes and edictes, which are nothing but arguments of their fear, and
whetstones of the others fortitude.

The Artisans, and Prentises.
The Godly and zealous Artisans and Prentises of London, and other places, may
learn hereby to moderate themselves a little in their outrageous alarmes of
Stop the Traitor, when they see an Innocent Priest pass their streets: for
by reading hereof they may be rightly and truly informed and instructed, how
far the poor Innocent men are from treasons, and all treasonable purposes.

The Catholics of England.
The Catholics at home must needs hereby be comforted, and animated in well
doing, and faithful serving, and obeying their Sovereign in pace and gaudio,
if they may be permitted; and if not that, yet in suffering with alacrity what
shall be imposed upon them for their Religion, when by this Apology they shall
be disburdned of those former clogges and imputatims of disloyalty, and
treason.

The Catholics abroad.
The Catholics not only here in Flaunders, but in the whole Christian world
besides must needs be hereby much edified, and excited to the sincere
practice, and profession of zeal and piety toward God: of fidelity and
obedience toward their Princes: and of a Reverent respect, and regard
toward their Priests and Pastors, when they find in this present Apology,
so rare and remarkable an example of English Catholics constancy in the one,
and conformity in the other: and such confidence for the third, that sithence
the Apostles time, and the days of the privative Church of England, never the
like President, either in the time of peace, or persecution has been heard or
read of; that the sheep should engage them selves for their shepheardes, and
make voluntary profer to be bound body for body, and life for life for their
fidelity, except that famous Protomartir of England, S. Albane, who was to them
herein a patron and president: the end of whose blessed conversation, our
English Catholics beholding, do Imitate his faith and fortitude, and do
succeed him in a reuerenciall but and devotion toward their Pastors. Which
heroical mind and resolution of our said English Catholics must needs be as
famous to posterity, as it is repugnant to all worldly wisdom and policy; and
must also needs be accompanied with as much honor and merit in the sight of
God, and all good men; as it cannot but be incombred with dangers and
difficulties in the sight of flesh and blood, and of all those quorum Deus
venture est, Whose God is only their belly, profit, and pleasure in this world.

Of this Apology two copies were sent over, the one to France, and the other
to Flaunders: all one in sense and substance, but it seems that the copy
sent to Flaunders was taken verbatim out of the first fountain and original:
And that the other which came to Paris, was not all together so ample and
complete. Therefore I have thought good to advertise you, that I have followed
and setforth that copy, which I found, or at least presumed to be most
consonant to the good minds and affections of them, whom it most concerned.

And thus willing you to make your profit spiritual of these my endeavors, and
of the sequent Apology, desiring God that it may serve to mollify the hearts of
our heavy adversaries, and fortify and corroborate the Saints and servants of
God in well ^^ing, and patiently suffering, and carrying the Cross of Christ,
and Crown of thorns which prick to the quick on every side, I wish you the
two most precious Jewels that can happen to a Christian soul.

Gratiam in hac vita, and gloriam in futura.

From my study in DOWAY, this 16. of OCTOBER 1604. Your very loving Son and
servant in CHRISTO DOMINO. IO. LECEY.

A PETITION APOLOGETICALL, PRESENTED TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, BY
THE LAY CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND, in July last.
CHAPTER 1. The cause of our silence.
MOST MIGHTY AND GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN. Many are the reasons that have caused us
to expect with perpetual patience, and profound silence, your Majesty's most
gracious resolution for some benign remedy, and redress of our most grievous
calamities and afflictions: as the confidence of a good cause: the testemony of
an incorrupt conscience: the memory of our constant, and continual affection
to the undoubted right and Title, in remaynder of your renowned Catholic
Mother, to the Crown of England: the imputations, Crosses, and afflictions we
suffered many years therefore: the public and grateful acknowledgme^t that
your said glorious Mother made thereof, at the time of her Arraynement and
execution, in the presence of the Lords there assembled for her conviction,
uttering these words: Her blood is shed, and yet remains peace and authority
to work them redemption of her so desired.
Woe is me for the ^oore Catholics, and the miseries I foresee they are like
to endure for their irremoueable affection to me and mine; If I were as free as
mine estate and innocence requires, I would gladly redeem their vexations
with my dearest blood.

The same zeal and promptitude after her decease, we showed in your Majesty's
right and pretention to the Crown of England, the oppositions were made by us
and our Catholic brethren and friends abroad and at home, leaving nothing in
our power undone, that might lawfully advance your Majesty's rightful Title,
as Heir apparent to the Crown of England, against all practices or projects
to the contrary.

The L Mont eagle, M Fran. Tresham, Sir Levvys Tresham, in the Tower of London.
Our forewardnes in proclayming your Majesty without any further warrant then
the right, and justice of your Title, and the loyalty and affection of our
hearts.

Sir Thomas Tresham at Northampton
The dangers and difficulties that some amongst us passed in performing thereof
in times so green and doubtful.

The Vicount Montiguelargly casting money among the people.
The general joy and applause showed by us, with remarkable signs of infinite
contentment at your Highness entrance into the Realm, with dutiful offices of
joy and readiness to proclayme and receive your Majesty, were performed by
Catholics, with such alacrity in most places of the Realm, and those in such
The L. Winsor, The L. Mordent.
distance one from the other, that they could have no intelligence one with
another, how they should behave them selves in that occasion: which makes it
evident, that so general a consent, in so suddayne and important an affair,
of persons so by places divided, could not proceed from any other fountain,
but from an universal and settled devotion to your Majesty's undoubted Title.

All which offices of our love and loyalty, we assure our selves, are as well
known to your Majesty, as your Majesty's Candor and Clemency is known unto
us, and by us blazed throughout the Christian world: And not by our tongues and
pens only are these your heroical virtues made so notorious, as they are by
the often public and gracious promises also, and protestations, which your
Majesty (out of the infinite bounty and magnanimity of your mind) has made,
as well to Princes abroad, as to private Men at home: as well before as after
the Queens death, as well before as after your entrance to the Realm; both in
private, and in public; both in Palace, and Parliament, that you would have
no blood for Religion, that you would have no sale money for conscience
contrary to the word of God, that you would reuiewe the laws made against
Catholics, and give order for clearing of them by reason, in case they have
been in times past farther, or more rigorously executed by the Judges then the
meaning of the law was.

The intended performaunce of which your most gracious promises received a
memorable commencement in July last past, some few days before your Royal
Coronation, when by special order of your Highness, without any suit or motion
of the Catholics, certain Recusantes of the best quality and ability, out of
diverse parts of the Realm, were sent for to Hampton Court by the Lords of
your Majesty's privy Council, and were by them very respectively and courteously
used, and also assured by the said Lords that your Majesty's Royal pleasure
and Clemency was to exonerate the Catholics of this Realm from henceforth, of
that pecuniary mulcte of xx pound a Month for recusancy: The xx pound a Month
for Recusancy released by the K. voluntary promise in July. 1603.
which your Majesty's grace and relaxation, the said Lords signified that they
should so long enjoy, as they kept them selves upright in all civil and true
carryage toward your Majesty and the State, without contempt: whereunto reply
was made, that recusancy might be held for an act of contempt: It was answered
by the Lords of the Council, that your Majesty would not account recusancy
for a contempt: And this your Majesty's gracious order and pleasure, the said
Gentlemen recusants, were willed to signify to all other Catholics.

Which grace proceeding from your Majesty's mere Clemency and voluntary good
will, in that most dangerous time of the discovery of the conspiracy of the
Lord Gray and Cobham, seemed to us so inviolable and so little subject to
change or alteration, that comparing these bountiful effects with the repose
and trust, which your Majesty (in your Printed book to your peereles Son)
seems to put in them that were faithful and resolutely affected to your
Mother, and with the speech your Highness made the first day of the Parliament
tending to some more temperate course in matter of Religion then was of late
used, we had great reason to abstain from farther importuning your Majesty,
either by friends or petition, but to exspect with silence, patience, and all
humble submission, how your Majesty should please to dispose of us, without any
diffidence or distrust, either in our own merits, or your mercy.

CHAPTER 2. The Reasons that have driven us to breach of silence, and to a
necessary and just defense.
BUT alas (DREAD SOVEREIGN) we see our silence, modesty, and simplicity so
abused by some indiscreete Ministers, who in their books and Sermons make it
evident, that they think no abuse or indignity offered us, sufficient to
satisfy their rigorous minds, or suppress our righteous cause, that we are
driven thereby to break our determinate course of silence, urged and enforced
thereto by these sequent occasions.

First, that we see our selves, as superstitious persons, The first reason.
excluded from that supreme Court of Parliament, that was first founded by and
for Catholic me^, was furnished with Catholic Prelates, Peers, and
Personages, and was endowed with those goodly privileges and prerogatives by
Catholic Princes, and so continued from the first conversion of our Nation
from Paganism for so many hundred years without alteration, till the times of
Edward the vj. a Child, and Queen Elizabeth a Woman: and by the laws made by
Catholics in those Parliaments, the honor, peace, and wealth of this Realm
has been, and is maintained, and your Majesty's right and succession to the
Crown, mightly (against all your adversaries) fortified and supported.

The 2. reason
We see daily bills and books exhibited against us in Parliament and else
where, taxing us very unjustly with most odious names of heretics, sectaries,
superstitious persons, and Idolators.

The 3. reason.
We hear that your Majesty is often solicited to extirpate the very root,
raze, and memory of us out of your Dominions, and rather to admit Miscreants
and Jews then Catholics.

The 4. reason.
We hear a new motion is made for the reuyuing of the former Capital laws,
and pecuniary payments, and other penalties, rather charging us with a heavier
hand, then easing us of our former burdens: we hear that men are to pay for
their Wives recusancy, which in the hardest and heauiest times never was
admitted: that the having or keeping of a Schoolmaster (not allowed by the
Diocesan) is to be punished with xl. shillings a day: that all such as go over
to study in foreign parts without special license, are to be disabled of
all Inheritance, Lands, Legacies, or other goods, chattels or possessions
whatsoever. These instances duly considered, cause us greatly to fear, that
your Majesty may in time, by the importunat and daily clamors, and
calumniations of our adversaries, be incensed and incited against us your most
faithful subjects, who living in certain security of their own innocence,
and your Majesty's mercy and bounty, labor not by unquiet oppositions to
contradict the false informations of our aduers part, but only rely upon the
providence of God almighties protection, and your Majesty's, who tanquam Pater
patriae is and ever has been, the certain sanctuary, and common support of
all just and innocent men. And since the discharge of our mind, can in our
poor opinion bring no other inconvenience, then light to your resolutions, in
such things as your Highness is now to determine of in this present Parliament,
being the fittest time for your Majesty to hear the desires and requests of
your people, and we having no other means to make them known, but by this our
dutiful Petition, we are the boulder to present unto your Majesty's view this
our simple and sincere Apology: least God should be offended with us for our
silence in matter of his honor: least the Christian world should condemn us
of negligence in defense of our poor distressed cause: least our Children and
posterity should argue us of carelesnes and pusilanimity in a cause concerning
their lives, estats, and their very souls salvation: finally least our
adversaries should insult over us and repute us tanquam confitentes reos, if
after so many blows given, we should not hold up the Buckler-hand to save our
heads from utter confusion and destruction, and leave some monument to our
posterity of our zeal and devotion in negotio animarum, and of our duty and
affection, in cultu Principum.

Yet so desirous we are to give your Majesty all possible contentment and
satisfaction, so loath not only to commit, but to conceive any thing that might
justly offend your Grace, that being by the reasons aforesaid pressed to put
pen to paper, and to have recourse to your Highness by way of intercession, we
seek not for all that to importunate your Majesty with concourse of
multitudes, nor with the subscriptions of thousands of your lay Catholic
subjects hands As the Millenary Ministers lately did.
(as some others have done, in alio genere) for the furtherance of their
affairs: but some few of us only in the name of the Catholics of all degrees
(who every way join with us in our submission and purgation) do present this
our sincer Apology and humble Petition, wherein if we seem more tedious forth:
diverse important points we must necessarily handle by this occasion then is
convenient for men that deal with so mighty a Monarche, busied so extremely
with the weighty affairs of so many Kingdoms: pardon (O noble Prince) this
our indecorum, for that we are driven to touch somewhat in this discourse,
which in Parliament we should have said, if we thither had bin admitted: that
which to our adversary we would utter, if they had the patience to hear us:
and that which we should answer to their sinister suggestions, if we might
have that access to your Royal person, as the extremity of our cause
requires, and the true and hearty affection we bear to your Majesty and the
common wealth of your Potent Monarchy deserves. It is not our meaning (most
mighty Monarch) being mere lay men, that make no profession of lettres, to
examine curiously and contentiously all that our adversaries have thundered of
late against us, or to dispute with them in mood and figure, which combat we
leave to the divines of both parts, when your Majesty shall think good
thereof: but with due respect to give your Grace an account and reason of our
belief and Religion, and a full and ampl security and satisfaction, of our
fidelities and submission.

CHAPTER 3. The Estate and quality of your Majesty's Catholics subjects.
FOR the clear understanding of which two points, may it please your Grace to
consider; first what is the state and condition of your faithful and Catholic
subjects both for number, quality, and desert; next what Religion it is they
profess, and upon what grounds; lastly what they are of your Majesty's
subjects of their Rank, that for former or future services, and submission in
all civil and temporal causes, against all both domestical and foreign
enemies, have and will go farther, or venture more willingly their lives and
livings for the honor and defense of your person, greatness, and posterity,
then they, and their friends both have, and will do.

In delivery of which points, we hope your Majesty will expect no farther art,
or eloquence then may be required of men plunged, and perplexed with the flux
and reflux of perpetual vexations, which is truth that craves justice, and
tears that cry for mercy.

It is evident (DREAD SOVEREIGN) that the subjects of your Majesty's Realms
of England and Ireland consist of Catholics, Protestants, Puritans, and other
sectaries: the Catholics and Catholikely affected in this Realm, not
withstanding the long persecutions in the late Queens days, were at the
entrance of your Majesty to this Realm, esteemed to be as many, as any other
of the said professions of Religion: and as for Ireland few there are of that
nation, An Irishman a Protestant is cara auisin terris.
that are of any account or freehold, but are professed Catholics, besides
those that are Catholikely affected.

And as for the Catholics of this Realm, it is well known that their
Ancestors have deserved well of this common wealth both in war, and peace,
both at home and abroad, and for their fidelities, and laudable services have
bin advanced by your Majesty's progenitors, under whom they lived and served,
from whom we hope that in no point we degenerate; only that which in them was
esteemed the polestarre of all their virtues (to wit) the Catholic Religion,
is in us punished for wickedness and impiety.

This did our Catholic Parents, dignified by your Majesty's Catholic
progenitors, leave us to succeed them in: their Religion toward God; their
fidelity toward our Princes; and their native freedom in this your Realm of
England, which we have lost of late years under the Reign of our late Queen,
for no other crime or offense, then for that we endeavored to serve God as our
Catholic Forefathers have done before us, ever since the conversion of our
Country from Paganism; and to save our souls, which are more precious in his
sight, then all the Kingdoms in the world: and although we were debarred from
all offices and dignities, and lived as it were in perpetual banishment and
confinement: yet was it never heard that any one of our number of such
suffering recusants, ever lifted up a finger to the least damage, or detriment
in the world of our Prince or Country. And thus by these few lines your Majesty
may see the multitudes condition, and disposition of your Catholic subjects;
who humbly prostrate at your Majesty's feet, crave to be restored to their
former and ancient freedom.

What we have here spoken, or shall hereafter speak of our hard usage in our
late Queens days, we are driven thereto by necessity, for moving your Majesty
to commiseration, by comparing in your wisdom the grieuousnes of our
punishment, with the quality of our deserts, that there upon you may temper the
asperity of the former proceedings against us, which our late Sovereign her
self in her late days began to do, giving the world to understand by the
last proclamation that ever she made in that kind, that she began to
distinguish between Religion and Treason; and as well therein, as in diverse
other books and proclamations tending to that purpose, before published upon
any notorious execution done upon Catholics, she diverse times, and by her
Ambasadors to diverse Princes abroad did promise and protest, that her will and
intention was not to punish her subjects for their Our late Queen ever made
profession that she meant never to punish for Religion.
Religion and conscience, whereby we conceived some hope, and found some effect
a little before her Majesty's death, and in this mind and disposition God did
take her, and your Majesty found us: which considered, we hope your Majesty
having no occasion to hate us, and we many old and new occasions to love you,
that you will rather imitate your predecessor in her first, best, and last
disposition tending to mildnes, mercy, and moderation, then in her other hard
and sharp courses: sithence the fruits and effects of the one, were The
fruits of a svveete and mild course.
joy, peace, abundance, and universal union, and combination of minds and
affections, both at home and abroad (which your Majesty seems most to desire)
and the harbingers and handmaydes of the other, have been The handmaids of
blood and persecution.
wars, discensions, discontentments, blood, and beggary; (which your Grace
cannot so well digest.) And that appears most evidently by the first twelve
years of the late Queens Reign, which as they were free from blood and
persecution, so were they frawght with all kind of worldly prosperity; no
Prince was for that space better beloved at home, or more honored or respected
abroad, no subjects ever lived with greater security or contentment; never was
the Realm more opulent or abundant; never was both in Court and Country such a
general time of triumph, joy, and exultation: but no sooner did she begin to
alter her course, and to enter into blood, but all was filled with fears and
suspicions at home, with wars and divisions abroad, and with continual
fright and allarames of strange attempts, either against her person or state:
and in fine when her treasure was exhausted, her subjects and Kingdoms
extremely impouerished, and all the Kingdoms almost about us disgusted, and
in open terms of jelosie and hostility with her, she began again to
think of her former fortunate days, and to incline to a milder course, as the
only means to settle her and her Realm in peace, security, and former
prosperity: which times compared together, do demonstrate that the severity of
laws made against Catholic, were the forerunners of infinite mischiefs and
miseries. And least your Majesty beholding such bloody and strange laws made
against us, with their rigorous execution by the space of so many years in so
long a Reign, as was that of our late Queen; might thereby conjecture that
such new and never hard of decrees, could not without urgent or notorious
occasions have been invented, constituted, and so severely executed; least
this apprehension of these former proceedinges might make the like impression
in your mind, and auersion from us; we humbly crave your Majesty's gracious
ears and attention: And when you shall reuiewe, and consider deeply the laws
made against us, and compare them with the objected crimes, that then some
ouerture may be proposed to the present Parliament for clearing the laws by
reason, which is the soul of the law to them, that distinction may be made by
justice between the innocent and guilty persons: for howsoever the late The
reason that might move the late Queen to make laws against Catholics.
Queen might have pretention to make them, both by reason of her
illegittimation by her own Father in public Parliament notoriously diuulged,
and the jelousie she ever stood in of the Queen your gracious Mother, both for
the back and alliance she had with France, and the right she seemed to have
by the sentence of the Church, pronounced against the divorce of her Father;
and the diverse censures and excommunications promulgated against her: Yet your
Majesty (of whose rightful succession and most lawful, and legittimat
possession of this Crown, Satan himself being put to his shifts can make no
doubt or difficulty; against whom no Co^petitor either has, or had purpose,
or power to contend; Vide D. Giffordes commission and Monsieur de Bethunes
lettres.
whom the Sea of Rome is so far from censuring, that she has already
censured all those that shall any way seek to give you any disturbaunce or
molestation; and with whom all the Princes in Christendom are in perfect
peace and amity; and whom Catholics have as yet no way offended, but by all
means endeavored to serve, satisfy, and content.) His Majesty has no such
reason to continue the laws against Catholics, as the late Q. had to inact
them.
Your Majesty (we say) for these respects, has no such apparent cause to
continue those laws, as the late Queen had to inact them, the reasons and
foundations of those laws, being by this happy mutation of state, time, and
persons utterly removed.

If then (DREAD SOVEREIGN) we have been, are, and will be (as we have and
will demonstrate) as loyal, faithful, and affectionate to your Majesty, your
predecessors and posterity, and even to those Princes that dealt most hardly
with us, and to the good and peaceable estate of our Country, as any sort of
your Majesty's subjectes within the Realm of our Rank whatsoever; we see not
how by authority we can be driven to forsake our Catholic Fathers faith and
belief, unless authority can by reason convince us, that our faith is
Infidelity, our Religion superstition, and the service we use Idolatry, or the
Doctrine we receive heresy. These are points first to be decided and
determined amongst Deuines and learned men of both parts; and therefore that
Magistrates should proceed against us, as men convicted of those crimes,
before our cause be heard and determined, by them that are by God appointed to
handle those high and important points of divinity; we hope your Majesty's
clemency and piety will not permit: But judgment being past on our side
already, in so many general Councels abroad, and conuocations and Parliaments
at home, commending and approving the faith we profess, what reason can give
life to that law, that does reuerse a sentence so authentically given, without
the full form of justice and process therein required?

CHAPTER 4 The reasons why we are so resolute in our Religion.
Reasons of Religion.
THE first reason that we give of our faith and Religion (SACRED SOVEREIGN) and
why we ought not to suffer therefore as delinquents is, that neither obstinate
pride, The 1. reason.
nor presumptious pertinacy, nor dislike of order or Discipline, nor contempt
of authority, nor curiosity, affectation of nouelty, or coffeehouse in our
private humors makes us so constant and resolute in the profession thereof:
but our consciences merely so informed and enforced in manner, by the instinct
of Gods grace, and revelation of his holy word and will* but our understanding
captiuated in obsequium fidei by most evident In no Religion but the Catholic
only do all these Testemonies concur.
Testimony of holy Write, of Unity, Universality, Succession, Antiquity, and
authority of Scriptures, Fathers, Saints, Doctors, Councels, Parliaments,
Virgins, and Martirs, which all concur only, and jointly in the Catholic
Religion, and in no other profession whatsoever: which considerations
accompayned with the fear of Gods judgments, the danger of Hell fire, and the
desire of eternal Salvation, command us by the rules of reason, in the
practice and profession of that Religion, to obey the law of God before the
law of Man.

The 2. reason.
It is an instance and maxim that suffers no exception, that never any
general or universal innovation, or alteration in matters of Faith or
Religion from badde to better, has been heard of, either in the whole world,
or in any particular nation, be it either from Iudaisme, Gentilisme, Paganism,
Atheism, or Idolatry, but that the commission and vocation of the messengers
have been authorized Domino cooperante and sermonem confirmante sequentibus
signis: Mar. 16.
our Lord working with all, and confirming the word with signs that followed:
which sithence our new messengers and reformers, as yet, have not duly, nor
clearly showed (pretending as they do to purge Christendom of superstition
and Idolatry) how can they in reason crave at our hands, credit, or
conformity to the new laws made on that behalf? God is ipsa vita, lux, and
veritas. God that is the life, The 3. reason.
light, and truth it self cannot give commission, credit, and authority, to
death, darkness, and falsehood; but it is most evident and cannot be doubted of
or denied, that the first Apostles and Conuertors of this our nations of
England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and Germany, were sent from the Church of
Rome, and delivered us the same Roman faith we now profess; the same Mass,
and the same Sacraments; and preached the self same Doctrine, Mar. 16.
Domino cooperante and sermonem confirmante sequentibus signis: our Lord
working with all, and confirming the word with signs that followed. Reason
then concludes thus, that either God in this case has given testemony to
falsehood, or else the doctrine confirmed by the testemony of God is true and
auowable, and not to be forsaken for fear of any humane laws, till we have
like testemony from Heaven to the contrary; and when our adversaries shall duly
reprove ours herein, and make their own mission as manifest by the word of
God, then if we do not conform our selves to the new laws imposed upon us,
worthily we are to endure these late inflicted penalties for matter of
recusancy.

To convince us then, that either we have not the true Scriptures, The 4.
reason.
or interpret them not as we ought, or that we dishonor God in honoring his
Saints, or err in the number, or nature of our Sacraments, or that our
Doctrine is false and defective, and to condemn us, and punish us therefore as
Heretics and Idolators; requires in all reason an absolute commission from
God: the which when it shall be produced, willingly we will obey.

If they allege Scriptures, the Scriptures are common to us both, The 5
reason.
yet more likely in reason to be ours then theirs; because that if the Church
of Rome had not conserved them, and communicated the same unto us, our
adversaries had been at this day Scripturelesse: the very original Bible, the
self same numero which S. Gregory sent in with our Apostle S. Augustine, being
as yet reserved by Gods especial providence as a Testemony, We received the
Scriptures from the Church of Rome.
that what Scriptures we have, we had them from Rome, and have nothing of our
reformers, but that we have not so many books of Scriptures discanonized and
rejected, because they be express Testimonies against their new and negative
Religion.

If they stand upon the sense and true interpretation, we stand on that point
more confidently then they, they having no further warrant then their private
spirit, and we relying on the assistance of the holy Ghost therein promised to
his Church for the instruction of all truth; which is Columna and firmamentum
veritatis, the pillar and foundation of truth. If they sly to the Fathers, for
one place evil understood and some time falsified, some time mutilated, and
some time wholly corrupted, we produce a thousand, not by patches nor mammocke
as they do; but whole pages, whole chapters, whole books, and the uniform
consent of all the ancient Fathers and Catholic Church.

If they press us with their passed Parliaments and Princes, for one of theirs
we have an hundred, and for a Child King, and a Woman Queen, we have for us so
many, so Holy, so Wise, so Learned, so Religious, so Victorious Princes, as our
Histories without them would be very barren, our Names obscure, our Clergy
miserable, our Bishops beggarly, our Parliaments confused, our Laws
intricated, our Universities without Colleges, our Colleges without
Scholars, our Scholars without maintenance. Reason then the life of the
law, requires to our understanding more ample and authentical evidence,
before we be condemned by law, as superstitious or irreligious.

The faith we profess, The 6. reason. Romans cap. 1.
is that faith and Religion which S. Paul to the Romans so highly commends,
which therefore is called Catholic and Roman, because The Church of Rome even
was and is the Mother Church.
all the Churches in the world either did in their beginninges, or do for the
present agree uniformly with the Sea of Rome in union and communion of faith,
doctrine, and fellowshippe; having recourse thereto as to the Mother Church.
From the Pastors and Prelates of this Church, to wit, from S. Gregory the
Pope S. Augustine the Monk
S. Gregory the Pope and S. Augustine the Monk, we received the benefit of our
conversion and regeneration; from them we received the self same Doctrine,
Discipline, Service, Sacraments, Feasts, and laudable Cermonies, which are by
us held, practiced, professed, and defended with the effusion of our bloudes at
this very day, and this we find verified by the Histories of S. Bead, Cambden,
Stovve, Hollenshed, and Sauel^.
S. Bead, Cambden, Hollenshed, Stowe, and that Tripartite History set out by
Master Sauell.

The 7. reason.
From this Church of Rome we received our Bible, our Gospel, our Creed, our
Cannons; which are the same through the whole Christian world among Catholics,
both for the translation, sense, and interpretation.

The 8. reason.
This Church is by your Majesty and by the learned sort of the Protestants,
acknowledged to be the Mother Church; we hope then we are excusable, that
reverence and love our dearest Mother, from whose breast our forefathers and we
have received the sweet milk of our souls.

The 9. reason.
There was never yet since the Incarnation of Christ any heresy that crept into
the Church of God, but we find the names of the authors of such heresies: we
find by the Church of Rome Councels called to condemn them, and Doctors
employed to confute them: there is not the least Ceremony or circumstance that
has been added, for the greater Majesty and solemnity in Gods divine service,
but the year is known when, and the Pope by whom it was ordained.

If matters then of so small moment pass not without recording, reason would
that the laws that must condemn our Mother Church of Idolatry and
superstitions, should tell us the authors that first corrupted her integrity:
but if the first jnuentors and jnstitutors of the Mass, of Purgatory, of
prayer to Saints, and the like supposed errors, cannot be produced, doubtless
we must attribute them, as we do indeed to Christ and his Apostles: and as
derived from such infallible authority, we are bound in all equity to follow
them.

The 10. reason
But if by the fruits your Majesty will give judgment of the tree, the fruits
of our Religion are Love, Unity, Concord, Piety, acts of Charity, and
Devotion: as Fasting, Prayer, Alms, building of Monesteries, erecting of
Universities, founding of Hospitals, converting of Nations, calling of
Councels, confuting of Heresies, obedience to our Princes though they be
Pagans and Infidels, and that for conscience sake, Calu. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 4
lib. 4. cap. 10. 6. 5.
whereas both practisers and professors of the Religion which we are so pressed
to embrace, do far differ from us in those points, teaching under color of
the liberty of the Gospel, Knox in his exhortation to England printed at
Geneua. 1559.
contempt of power, and authority Luther in his book de potestate seculari:
and in his comment upon the 1. of S. Peter, cap. 2.
neglect of laws, Goodman in his book of obedience: all vvh^ch teach contempt
of authority, and neglect of laws in the places cited.
and obedience. The examples are to late, and lamentable in your Majesty's
Realm of Scotland, and in the Persons of your gracious Mother, and
Grandmother; Father, and Grandfather, to pass with silence the tragedies by
such like, played in sundry other Countries. Reason then the life of the law
will acquit us, if we prefer a Faith that has taken so deep root, whose
goodly fruits we daily see and taste, before a slender, slight, green,
and far less fruitful plant.

About twenty four years now past, when a certain conference was held in
the Tower between Master Campion, and Master Sherwin Catholic Priests, and
some of the selected learned Protestant divines, there were then in prison in
the Fleet, diverse Catholics both of honorable and vvorshippefull degree, for
Testemony of their conscience only; as the Lord Vaux, Master Thomas Somerset
brother to the Earl of Worcester, Sir Thomas Thresham, Sir William Catsby, and
others: who offered the warden of the Fleet (to procure them license of the
privy Council, to be present at that conference, and to have that question of
reparing to the Protestant Church discussed and decided) one hundred French
Crowns for every day that this question should remain thus under examination:
but their request could not then be admitted, albeit the said warden did
undertake the suit, and confidently promised to effect it, and seriously
labored it as well by his honorable friends in Court, as by all other means
he could possibly.

The same offer of conformity, and desire to be satisfied in this point, which
we made then, we in humble wise make now, and that with so much the more
greater efficacy, as your Majesty has a most full and ample possession of our
hearts and affections, for manifold important respects, both for the love your
gracious Mother did bear us, and the cause for which we suffer: as also for
the often (to us most comfortable) protestations your Majesty has made, and
that in public and in private, that you have a mind free from persecution,
or thrawling your subjects in matters of conscience; that you would not
increase our burdens with Roboam; to which adding your Clemency of which we
have tasted, and your Gracious promises where with we live in hope, and your
daily discourses springing from your native bounty and benignity; make us
strain our selves to the uttermost, to give your Grace satisfaction. And
therefore if we may obtain this favor at your Graces hands, to be assured in
conscience, by the decision of the learned Deuines of both sides, that the act
of going to the Protestants sermones and service, is not a damnable sin: then
if after such A most humble and reasonable request A Council, conference of
disputation.
dispute, decision, and information, we shall refuse to conform our selves to
your Majesty's will and example, we think then there is reason to give life
and reestablishment to the laws made against us. And this may suffice (we
hope) for discharge of the dutiful respect we bear to your Majesty, and
desire we have to give your Grace all possible satisfaction in matter of our
belief and Religion.

CHAPTER 5. The proofs of the lay Catholic fidelities.
Reasons of loyalty.
AND now we come to the matter of our loyalty and obedience (GRACIOUS
SOVEREIGN) in the defense whereof we are driven by the necessity of our
affairs; and importunity of our oppugners, to insist more particulerly, then
otherwise were convenient in respect of our own modesty, or your Highness
bounty and magnanimity; who never yet omitted to recompense and pay, suo loco
and tempore, love with love, subjection with protection, and virtue with honor.

For the full and final clearing therefore of that point of disobedience, and
disloyalty, wherewith we are so often charged rather in hatred of Religion,
then of any ground or substance that ever could justly be showed: may it
please your Highness to consider that there be Three ways of trial.
three ways for a prudent and circumspect Master, to try out the honesty, and
fidelity of his servant accused of treachery.

Former behavior.
The first, by making inquisition of his former life and behavior, what Master
he served before, in what estate, and for how long time, and with what
success and trustines.

Present carriage.
The second, to look narrowly into his present quality and carriage, and to be
assured how he is and has been affected to him, his forefathers, friends,
and dependers.

The last, to compare his actions and comportments, as well past as present,
with those that traduce him; and to see what caution he can give (to stop his
enemies suggestions) for his future fidelity.

Comparison betvveene the Catholics and new Clergies comportments
To this form of trial (DREAD SOVEREIGN) we submit our selves, our lives and
actions, and will indeauoure to give you full satisfaction in all the foresaid
points of our carriage: Vt obstruatur os loquentium iniqua, to the end that the
mouth of him that speaks wicked things may be stopped, that you may (not
withstanding what exclamations soever to the contrary) serve your self of our
poor forces, lives, and habilities, in all your fortunes and employments
against all your foes and enemies whosoever.

To begin then where we left when your Majesty made your happy enteraunce
into this Realm, and to put you in mind by what degrees, and for what
deserts we were brought into that miserable estate your Highness found us in.
It is well known that before our imprisonment and restraint, upon the statute
of recusancy, for the only Testemony of our consciences, some of us did bear
offices in the common wealth, and were dignified by the late Queen: in which
charges and negotiations (without vaunt be it said) our carriages were
Catholic behauiours before their restrainte and disgrace for recusancy.
civil, laudable, and loyal; and some of us lived without charge, yet not
without credit and estimation, of worshipful and honest men, and were as well
accepted and reputed in the Countries and Provinces where we dwelt, and had
commandment in, as were any other of our neighbors of the like calling and
degrees.

After our restraint our Their demeanure after their restrainte
behavior was such as became Catholic Christian subjects toward Christian
Magistrates, with all humility, respect, modesty, and subjection; ever either
readylie doing what they enjoined, or patiently suffering what they imposed.

The long time of our persecutions: the number of them that were afflicted: the
diversity of their ranks and qualities, and of their humors and dispositions:
the perpetuity and variety of temptations and tribulations: the infinite
indignities we passed through for so many years, if they had fallen out among
any other constitutions of men then Catholic, they might have wroung (very
probably) out of men well mortified and patient, some action of dislike, or
perilous practice of coffeehouse, when such multitudes of all degrees were
so assailed; especially of people so resolute in that supreamest degree of
fortitude: which is as Aristotle defines it, Tristia pro virtute tollerare, to
endure heavy things for virtues sake, a point very dangerous, and whereof
there want not plenty of lamentable events, rising from cases of desperate
necessity: which Abner the general of Saules army objected to Ioab David's
Lieutennant, in these words: Exclamauit Abner ad Ioab and ait: Reg. 2 cap. 2.
number vsque ad internecionem tuus mucro d^saeuiet? an ignoras quod Desperatio
periculosa.
periculosa est desperatio? vsquequo non dicis populo vt omittat persequi
fratres suos? And Abner cried out to Ioab, shall thy sword be cruel even to
the death? Know thou not that desperation is perilous? Why do not thou
command the people that they cease to persecute their brethren?

But this may we glory in, (REDOVBTED SOVEREIGN) that in all this time, no
diligence of our Adversaries, no Malice, no Polecy, no Curiosity, no Argus eyes
(of which there was great store, greedely prying into all our doings) could
ever epsy the least shadow of disloyalty, in any one action of the public
weals professors and most sufferers in the cause, notwithstanding the long and
perpetual course of their seruitudes and vexations.

The true reason whereof is, the Doctrine we are taught by the Religion which
we profess; which tells us, that we must obey our Princes: Non propter
iram, sed propter conscientiam: not for any indignation, but for conscience
sake; and that to resist them, is to resist Gods ordinance: and this is the
bitte and bridle that every true Catholic carries in his mouth, to restrain
him from that by grace and fear of Gods judgementes, which flesh and blood
otherwise with the lively sense and feeling of insupportable miseries and
afflictions, might drive him unto.

In this case of our The lay Catholics fidelity to the late Queen.
dutiful behavior in the late Queens days, fiant immici nostri iudices, let
our enemies be our judges therein: let the Roles, Registers, and Records
speak, sithence the great penalties imposed upon us for recusancy, what has
been our Innocence, our Integrity; our vnimpeachable carriage and demeanor:
how free we have been from the least suspicion of treason and practice, as it
pleased the Lords of the late privy Council to tell us, Catholics justified
by the Lords of the Council.
that the reason of our imprisonment was not in respect of any doubt made of
our loyalties, but only to prevent the Spaniardes hopes of our assistance in
their pretended invasions.

In the year The carriage of Catholics the year 88.
Eightie-eight, when the Spanish Armado came with inte^tion to invade this
Realm, our offers at Eely to the Lord North (then Lord Lieutenant in those
parts) in the presence of the Deane of Fely, and many others else of
worshippefull calling there present at that time, for the hasting away of the
forces of those Countries to Tilbery-Camp, were these: we beseeched and
instantly importuned, that we might be employed in those services, in the
defense of our Prince and Country, and not endure that dishonor, that the
whole Realm should be indaungered, and we no unworthy members thereof and no
mean freehoulders, should be exempted from that so behoofefull and honorable
service: we with voluntary adventure of our lives and worldly fortunes Their
offer of service in person.
offered to serve in Person with our Sons, Servants, and Tennantes, at our
own charges; as desirous most joyfully to embrace that opportunity, to make
manifest our loyalties in our Prince and Countries cause: we desired to be
placed in the first front of the battle: we offered to serve in the places
of the hottest and most dangerous service: and if we might not obtain that
favor of trust and service, for greater security, and lively demonstration of
our true English hearts, we did offer, and implore to be placed They offer to
be placed unarmed in the forefront of the battle.
unarmed in our shirts, before the foremost ranckes of our battles, to receive
in our bodies the first volly of our enemies shot, to leave an undoubted
Testemony by that our death to stop the mouths of the serpentine maligners
of our unspotted integrity, and true English loyalties.

But if none of these instant requests would be granted us, yet those hands
which should have valorously been used against the enemy, should be
zealously lifted up to God for the delivery of our Prince and Country, and to
obtain renowned glorious victory against the Inuador; wherein we failed not,
answereable to the duty of loyalest English Subjectes, all which was offered
by us to be performed, notwithstanding the late Queen was twice They play
the parts of good subjects notvvithstanding al excommunications.
excommunicated. And this is a demonstrable and undoubted argument, that we
are not conditional Subjectes, a calumny so frequent in the mouths of the
Ministry, and by them endlesly objected against us.

The like offer to that the Catholics at Eelie made, the The like offer made
the L. Vaux.
Lord Vaux (then prisoner likewise, for Testemony of his conscience, under the
charge of the Arch-bishoppe of Canterbury) offered, and in like sort would have
done all the Catholics in England, upon like occasion and opportunity.

When the Spanish Armado was dispersed, and their forces defeated, the
Vice-Chauncellor of Cambridge associated with the Deane of Eelie, sent to Eelie
to the Catholic recusants there imprisoned, from the Lords of Queen
Elizabethes privy Council, with A form of submission sent down to the
Catholic from the Council.
a form of protestation of their duty and allegiance, penned by the said
Queens learned Council, with direction and commission to take the said
recusants subscriptions thereunto, being altogether unexpected of them, they
being close prisoners, and having no intelligence at all of any Commisioners
reparing to them: So soon as these Commissioners had read some part of their
commission to the Catholics there, they forth with were severally divided, and
in close prison restrained. And notwithstanding the said formal original sent
purposely for them to subscribe unto: yet the Commissioners (as it seemed for a
more trial, or for a more advantage taking against the Catholics there) taxed
every of them to set down immediately the protestation of their allegiance and
duty, to like purpose as was set forth in the original sent to them from the
Lords of the Council, which the Catholic Gentlemen were permitted to have
but one only time read unto them. This several form of submission in such
strict order exacted by the Commissioners, was in that The Catholics exhibit
a form of submission far more complete then that which was sent them.
ample manner performed by the said recusants, that the said Commissioners
(singulerly extolling and greatly preferring the same, before the said
original) accepted thereof, and required not at all the Catholics to
subscribe to the said original so penned by the said Queens learned Council,
and addressed by the Lords of the privy Council: to whom the said
protestations being sent, and by them perused, they received such a full
approbation, that after that time never any odious imputation or calumniations
against the fidelity of the Catholics, prevailed.

The like was the valor, The fidelity of Irish Catholics.
fidelity, and laudable service of the Irish Catholic recusants at Kinsale in
Ireland, Anno 1600. who joining their forces with the late Queens against the
Spanish power, and against their own Countrymen and Kinsmen, expelled with
their assistaunce, the Spaniards; and were special means to keep Ireland in
obedience to the Crown of England: which otherwise (in the opinions of the
Commanders of the English forces then there) had been utterly lost. And none
of judgment there doubted, but that it was in the power of those Irish
Catholic Earls, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen and their followers, to have
betrayed then that Realm of Ireland, to the hands of the Spaniards; if either
zeal of extirping the Protestant religion thence, and firm establishing of
the Catholic religion, could have prevailed with them; or dread of
Excommunication hindered not the Irish Catholics to do the duties of good
subjects.
excommunication, or threatening of the powerful inuader, proclayming by sound
of Trumpet, and deuulging proclamations that his sword should no more spare a
Catholic recusante disobeying that excommunication, then it should do a
Protestant resisting in arms. And this singular act of loyalty, so shortly
after seconding and confirming the like of the English Catholics in
Eighty-eight, without all gayne-saying conuinceth, that the English and Irish
Catholic recusants, are not English and Irish Catholics no conditional
subjects.
condicionall subjects, but most true loyal and faithful subjects to their
Prince, and to the Crown of England; therein giving place to no subjects of
those two Realms whosoever, or of what degree soever: and whose proof and
trial herein, far excels all other the subjects of those Realms; if
pre-eminence should in that behalf be attributed to any profession of Religion
in the said Kingdoms.

This argument of our former behavior, and of our obedience under the
severity of the late Queen, may in all reason assure your Majesty, that in
matter of our loyalty we are like pure Gold, fined and refined in the fine of
many years probation, and therein not to be any way stained.

The second trial of our fidelities consists in matter likewise of fact
Catholics behavior toward his Majesty's Predecessors and him self.
toward your Majesty's Predecessors, your Title in them, and in your self,
and the effect of our love and affection performed in all occasions, that might
give contentment to your Majesty, both before and since your entrance into
this your Kingdom of England; which we will endeavor to touch as briefly as
we can.

It cannot be denied then in the first rank of these our comportements, but
that we our selves in our times, and our Catholic Parents before us at all
times of opportunity offered, have declared our deuouted affections to your
said Highness Catholics alvvayes affected to the K. Title to England.
right to this Crown, the testemonies whereof are in printed books and
public facts so manifest to the world, that we need not long dwell on that
point: vouchsafe therefore patience we beseech you (DEAR SOVEREIGN) to hear
some instances of the Blessings and benefittes his Majesty has received by
Catholics.
blessings and the benefits your Majesty has received by Catholics, and by
our services and fidelities.

King Henry the vijth. and his eldest Daughter (from whom your Majesty has
received lineally and directly your birth, right, and natural succession to
this Crown) were most zealous and religious Catholics: and for that singular
affection he did bear to the Henry the 7. prefers the Scottish King before
the Frensh.
Scottish nation, principally for their great zeal at all times to the
Catholic religion, preferred the same before France, bestowing his said
eldest Daughter on your Highness great Grandfather, and the younger upon the
French King, by which happy marriage came that lineall and rightful descent of
blood, that made your Majesty's renowned Mother Heir apparent to this Crown
of England, who also was the undoubted His Majesty's Mother lineall heir to
King Edward the Confessor.
lineall Heir to King Edward the Confessor by his sister Margaret, Queen and
Saint; and consequently your Majesty from your Catholic Mother, and her
Catholic Predecessors, has not only received the hereditary succession of the
Kingdom of Scotland, but also a double right to the Crown of England, as His
Majesty true heir both to the Saxon and Norman Princes.
heir to the Saxon lineall line by a holy Saint and Catholic Queen, and
heir to the Norman line by a most worthy Catholic Prince, and a blessed
Martyr, and all them united in her, and now duly descended to your Majesty.

Queen Mary
It was the pious and virtuous Queen Mary and her Catholic subjects, who
cancelled the forged will of her Father King Henry the eight, exceeding
prejudicial to your right in this Crown, that disproued it in Parliament, and
deposed the Protestant usurping Queen Jane Queen Jane set up by Protestants,
deposed by Catholics.
set up then by the Protestants to the disinheriting of Henry the eight his
daughters Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, and his eldest sisters issue, who
was your Majesty's great Grandmother, and whose issue were in all right to
have been preferred before her younger sister, Grandmother to the usurping
Protestant Queen Jane; who so deposed by that renowned pious Catholic Queen
Mary, the Crown (by her royal providence) was reserved to the rightful, and
lawful heirs thereof, consequently descended now to your Majesty,
conformable to the law of God, Nature, and Nations.

The serpentine inuectiue made by Hales and other Protestants, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabethes reign, directly against your Majesty's Title, thereby
intending Hales inuectiue against the Title of Scotland.
the advancement of a pretender, potently in those days possessed in the
breasts of no mean multitudes, was upon the setting forth thereof in the time
of Queen Elizabeth indelayedly undertaken, fully answered, and learnedly
confuted by Hales ansvvered by Justice Brown and M. Ployden both Catholics.
Sir Anthony Brown then one of the Justices of the common Pleas, and lately
before in Queen Mary's reign had been chief Justice of the same Court, and
M. Edmund Ployden famous Lawyers, with the assent of other Catholic Divines,
civil Lawyers, and Gentlemen of good worth, judgment, and experience.

How many Havvardes, Persies, Pagets, Vaux, Treshams, Throghmortons,
Salisburies, Abington
families of Catholics have endured great damages and detrimentes in renown
and state, for desire they had to maintain the right of your most blessed
Mothers Title in remainder, and adventures made to relieve her, and deliver the
afflicted Princess out of her captivity; with much abundant love, tears, and
affection, your sacred mother testified publicly at the end of her life.

Since your Mothers death, we remained ever Catholics behavior after the
martyrdom of his Majesty's Mother.
constant to your Majesty's right to the succession of this Crown, not ebbing
and flowing in our affections, but resolute ever to live or die with your
Majesty in that most just pretense: but if any particular person in foreign
countries has spoken or written to the contrary, for his private and
particular pretentions, he is to answer for himself, and his own fact, for
therein we disclaim: which party (as we are credibly informed) has both
before and sithence the Queens death, done great diligence to give your
Majesty satisfaction. And your Majesty is not ignorant, (we are assured) what
has been the carriage, opinion, and opposition of us and our friends even in
that particular in the favor and defense of your Majesty's right, both within
and without the Realm: what The dangers, damages, and disgraces, which M.
Charles Paget, Cap. Tresham, M. John Stonor of Stonor, and diverse others
suffered therefore, are notorious.
dangers we have passed at home, and what slanders and damages very many of
our Catholic brethren have suffered abroad, for showing themselves Scottish in
faction (as we were termed, that Scottish infaction what.
is firmly, and immoueably affected to your Majesty's right of succession to
this Crown.) your Majesty have heard, and we have felt and shall feel, our
honors and estates thereby being extremely diminished and eclipsed whiles we
live, unless your Majesty's pious and royal heart vouchsafe to repair and
relieve the same.

Neither did your Majesty's His Majesty's zeal in the Protestants Religion did
nothing diminish the Catholics forvvardnesse toward his right and justice.
zeal in the Protestant religion, any way alter or diminish the just conceit,
and dutiful consideration we carried to that justice and right, which God and
nature had prepared for you from your cradell.

If then our carriage and affection to your Majesty was such, when your
Religion was to ours so different, your Person to us unknown, your fortune
doubtful, the factions diverse, the oppositions in all likelihood very great,
and the event of your affairs very uncertain: what may your Majesty presume
of us now? or rather what may you not promise, and assure to your self of our
fidelities, in this time of your Majesty's present prosperity, and fruition of
this Crown, having proved our selves so faithful to your Majesty in times of
your expectations?

And to conclude, such is the The confidence Catholics have in his majesty's
royal dealing with them.
confidence we have in your Majesty's clemency, and so far we rely upon the
bounty of your nature and royal proceeding with us, that whereas the not
payment of twenty pounds a month for recusancy into the Exchequor, (at the
terms by law prescribed) puts us absolutely into your Majesty's hands and
mercy, for two parts of all our lands and revenues during our lives, and
makes us a pray to the discretion of our enemies and promotors, disabling us
to sell our goods, to let or set our lands for our relief, to make joyntures
for the maintenance of our wives, or estate of lands to our children, albeit
by not payment of the said sums at the terms aforesaid we fell within the
lapses of the Laws in such extreamitie of danger, that our case was not to
be relieved but by special act of Parliament: yet such of us, as at Wilton in
November last past had recourse to the Lords of your Majesty's most honorable
privy Council, to be secured from the said forfeiture; which otherwise we
were to incur in default of payment, as is before said, they were (far
besides their expectation) taxed by the Lords of a kind of difidence, or
chalenging your Majesty with breach of promise for the casing us of the said
mulcte-money, in sort as it was delivered us in Iulie precedent at
Hampton Court, whereupon we resolved absolutely to put our whole Estate into
your Majesty's hands, that your Majesty may see, how we prefer the credit
and confidence we have in your Majesty's justice, equity, conscience, and
mercy, before our own security, our lands, goods, and liuinges; and so do
we still remain in the same predicament: where if every penny had been a
pound, and every of our mole-hilles mountains, we would (upon such urging of
our diffidence) have prostrated all the same at your most Royal Majesty's
feet.

CHAPTER 6. Ths carriage and behavior of our Accusers.
The carriage of our Antagonistes.
IT rests now lastly to consider what has been the behavior of some of our
accusers (the Ministers we mean, and some hot spirits of their adherentes
and followers) from time to time in your Majesty's affairs (that has so
cherished, dignified and advanced them) and to other their lawful Princes,
that have not so fully concurred with them in matter of religion as your
Majesty does, vt contraria iuxta se posita magis clucescant, that contraries
compared together may the more cleerelie appear.

If you demand what they were that accounted it a matter treasonable to
retain any book or paper in favor of your Majesty's Title, and that in
public books called your Mothers right to this Crown a pretended Title.
Agendum est obsignatis tabulis: and we must needs tell you that it was a
Student of Lions Inn a Lawer by profession, and a Protestant in Religion, that
in a book printed Anno 1584. and entitled ( A discovery of treasons against
the Queens Majesty by Fraunces Throgmorton) amongst other his treasons, Page 3.
he reckons this for one in these words. There were also found among other
his papers 12. petegrees of the descent of the Crown of England printed and
published by the Bishop of Rosse in the defense of the pretended Title of the
Scottish Queen his Mistress. What could be more unjust and injurious to that
blessed Lady and all her posterity, then in a book printed in defense of an
execution of justice, to call her Title false pretented and unjust, and account
the evidences and records thereof as treason in the highest degree?

If inquiry be made who they were that in prejudice of your Majesty's right to
this Crown did set up the usurping Queen Jane, descended from the younger
sister of your Majesty's great Grandmother, that was the eldest daughter to
King Henry the vijth. Our histories tell us that they were The Duke of Nothumb.
the Dukes of Somerset, Suffolk, and other Protestants, and all the Protest.
Bishops Clergy and Council, of K. Edward and principally the clergy.
enemies to the Catholic faith which we profess, and the first aduauncers of
the new Religion in this Country.

If we call to mind the complotters and compassers of the murder committed on
the Person of your Highness His majesty's Father and Grandfather slain.
Father and Grandfather, and the barbarous butchering of your Mothers
Secretary in her Royal presence, and the miraculous escape of your Graces
person by Gods singular protection, when a His Majesty pursued in his Mothers
womb, and miraculously preserved.
chardged pistol put to your Mothers womb by one of the traytorous race of
the Gowries, to have distroyed you both at one blow, could not give fire; we
find by the printed monumentes of Scottish Annals that the actors, authors,
and inuentors of those tragedies were not of the Catholic religion.

If we demand who they were that took The Ministers and Presbitery authors of
these tumultes.
arms against your Majesty's gracious Mother, that ouerthrewe her in the
field, that laid violent hands upon her sacred Person, and imprisoned her in
Lawghleuen, that deprived her of her Crown, and expelled her out of her
Kingdom, and procured afterward her captivity in this Realm: no man is
ignorant that the The Earl of Moray. Knox the Cataline of Scotland.
Bastard of Scotland with the Presbitery and that runnegate Friar John Knox,
mortal enemies to all order, rule, and authority, were the Architects of these
detestable actions.

How zealous Bothvvell and Govvry, two pillars of the Presbitery.
Bothwell and Gowry were against poor Catholics; and what pillars and patrons
they were of the Presbitery, the world knows, but your Majesty by experience
can best testify what perilous, turbulent, and seditious members they were of
the common wealth, and how often your sacred Person was indaungered by them,
and others of their profession.

Moreover, we hope that we may without offense to any, confidently affirm,
that they were not Catholics that caused your Mothers untimely death: the
memory of which times, for many respects we had forborne to touch, but only to
remove the odious and unjust imputations, diuulged in the time of this present
session of Parliament against us in a certain libell, or rather a clamorous
calumnions inuectiue, published in this present session of Parliament, against
a most modest, learned, and submissiue supplication dedicated to your Majesty
in March last: where the Libeller calls Catholics to the Bar, and would
have then indighted, and pass their trial for that matter: Sutclifes own
words in the 8. chapter of his said libell.
Which done (says he) his Majesty may easily perceive that they are to be
hated, and abhorred as causers and contriuers of all his Mothers troubles and
calamities, his proofs are the author of the Jesuits Catechism The author
of that Catechism an inueterat enemy of that order and therefore more credulous
then convenient in matter of theirs dishonor.
written in disgrace of that order, which book is of as great credit (with men
of tender consciences, and upright carriage in matter of truth and equity) as
Lucians Dialogues, Watsons Quodlibets, or Esopes fables, and what this
Catechiste wrote of private passion, without any authentical warrant, this
libeller does urge with the like perturbation. And here (DREAD SOVEREIGN) we
might as readely, as lively, produce a world of inuinceable proofs in reproof
of this libeller, by proving the actors of that complotment and tragical
proceeding not to have been any one of them Catholics, or their well-willers,
but (we carefully shunning to charge any with bloody imbrumentes in that
lamentable fact of Englands agony,) and only to free our selves from that most
odious, impudent, and falfe calumniation, we soly resort to matter of highest
record, daily extant to be seen of all men in public printed statutes, being
the forerunners of that strange execution of your blessed and most glorious
Mother. Whereby it is most evident and well known (etiam lippis and
tonsoribus) to blind men and barbers, that they were not Catholics that made
and enacted those statutes of the thirtenth of Queen Elizabethes Reign, for
the 13. Elizabeth Limitation of the right of the Crown.
limitation of the right of the Crown, to the disposition of the Lords and
Parliament from the free right and course of blood and descent. That made it
treason in the same Parliament, to Treason to say that the persons Titles and
possibilities of all pretenders to the crown be not subject to the acts made
in Parliament.
hold or say that the common laws of England, and statutes to be made in
Parliament, are not of sufficient validity to govern the persons, and to bind
and limitte the Titles of any that has any possibility to the Crown.

They were not Catholics that made it treason in the same Parliament,
Reconciliation, treason.
to absolve from sin and reconcile, or to be so absolved or reconciled. Agnus
Dei, Beads, or Crosses praemunire.
A praemunire to bring in any tookens called Agnus Dei, or Crosses, Pictures, or
hallowed Beads, or to have or receive them.

They were not Catholics that the 23. of Queen Elizabethes Reign made it
treason 23. Elizabeth treason to persuade men to the Catholic religion.
to persuade men to the Catholic religion, and the loss of 200. marks to
hear 200 marks for laing, 100 marks for hearing a mas.
Mass, or to pay xx. pound monthly for xx. pound a month for recusancy.
refusing to go to the Protestants service: or the forfeits of x. pound
monthly for such as should keep any x. pound a month for keeping a
schoolmaster.
Schoolmaster not allowed by the Bishop of the Dioces, and refusing to go to
Church.

They were not Catholics who made an act 27. of the said Queen by virtue
whereof your gracious 27. Eliz. the act was made which caused the death of
his Majesty's Mother.
Mother lost her life; and in the same Parliament it was made treason for all
In the same year it was made treason to be a Priest and come in or remain in
the land, and felony to receive or relieve them.
Priests or Religious men that had taken orders by any foreign authority, to
remain or come into this Kingdom, and felony to relieve or entertayne them.

It was made treason to be brought up in the Seminaries, praemunire to send
thither any relief.

In the 28. of the said Queen, it was enacted that the two parts of the
lands and leases of such recusantes, as should fail to pay the xx. pound a
month in the Exchequor at the terms prefixed, should be seized into the
Queens hands.

In the 35. it was enacted that every 25. Elizab. certain recusants were by
an act then made to abjure the realm
recusant above the age of sixteen years, being not worth twenty marks
(exceeding his confined limittes) should abjure the Realm, and if he refused
to abjure or returned after abjuration, to be accounted a fellon.

Item that the party should pay ten pound a month that Ten pound a month for
keeping a recusant in the house.
keeps any recusant in his house after warning.

In the same Parliament, recusantes are The same year was the statute of
confinementes enacted.
restrained to their certain usual, and common places of abode, and are not
to remove above five miles thence without license of the Bishop and two
Justices, upon pain of forfeiting of all their goods, and all their free and
coppyhold lands, and annuities during life: and all such recusants that had
not lands of twenty marks value by year, or goods of forty pound, if
they conformed not themselves, or repaired not to their places of limitation,
shall abjure the Realm. By the course and contriuing of such capital and
cruel laws at the same time, and in the same sessions, as well against
Catholics, as against your gracious Mother; it seems by all probability (to
persons esteemed of judgment and great experience, in the insight of worldly
driftes both in this Realm, and in foreign Regions) that the principal mark
which was aimed at in those times, was at the self same season by severity and
shadow of the same laws an instance to ruinate and overthrow the The person
of his Majesty's Mother her right and Title and the Catholics, cause, all
shot at by the same laws, and at the same time.
person of your gracious Mother and her right, and the professors of the
Catholic religion; supposing that those three must either stand or fall
together of necessity: but non est consilium contra Dominum: there is no
council against God: her right and posterity has (God betha^ked) prevailed,
and the poor Catholics from that time to this, the more they have been
oppressed, the more they have increased, which cannot fall out otherwise,
unless it prove false which God has said by the mouth of his Saints and
servants: Preciosa in conspectu Domini mors Sanctorum eius, precious in the
sight of our Lord is the death of his Saints. Et sanguis Martirum semen
Ecclesiae, the blood of Martirs, the seed of the Church. We accuse no man in
particular in this case, and could have been content: vlcus hoc intactum
leuiter pertransire, to have slightly past over this boch untouched, but that
this respondent would needs deal with us, as Putifars The libeller like
Joseph his Mistress and Susannas judges.
wife did with holy Joseph, or the carnal judges with the chaste Susanna,
(viz.) put us to our plunges, and purgations for such crimes, as were proper
and peculiar to themselves.

Never was it heard of that in England or Scotland any Minister or Ministers
ever suffered any thing for that gracious Lady, or your Majesty's Title, but
infinite are the In Scotland, Setons, Gordens, Simples, Maxuelles.
families of the Catholics that have suffered for them both. As the Seatons,
the Gordens, the Simples, the Maxuells in Scotland: the In England, Havvards,
Persies, Pagettes, Treshammes, Throgmortons, Salisburies, Abington, Winsor.
Hawards, Persies, Vauxes, Pagets, Treshams, Throgmortons, Winsors, Salisburie,
Abington, and diverse other worthy Gentlemen in this Land, the shipwrackes of
whose opulent abundant states and fortunes, are invincible testemonies of the
Libellers falsehood and folly in this his objection, and of the constant
fidelity of Catholics to your Majesty and all your race and predecessors, in
all their fortunes whatsoever.

And thus your Majesty does see the comparison of our former times, and our
precedent behauiours, with our present affection and future assurance: If then
we be not rewarded, and respected as all others are of other professions that
have done their duties, as we did, in aduauncing your Majesty's affairs, and
acknowledging your rightful Authority: yet at the least we hope that it will
not be thought reasonable, that we should be left in the same mass of misery,
which your Majesty found us in at your entrance.

Make us then (SWEET SOVEREIGN) as able as we are wiling to serve you, not by
new dignities and authorities, but by restoring us to our pristine honors,
and honest reputations, and to our birthright freedom, and liberty by your
only Peerles justice, clemency, and benignity; permitting us to live in peace,
and comedere buccellam nostram sine dolor, to put a bitte of meat into our
mouths without sorrow, without frights, without slights, and without
circumuentions of our Adversaries: our wounds are so deep and dangerous in
matters of our honors, states, and liberties, that no Physician can cure us
but your self with the sovereign balm of your renowned Clemency. What
pleasure or profit can redowne to your Majesty's person or estate, if we your
approved and assured servants and subjectes rotte in prison, die in banishment,
and live in penury and disgrace; for no other crime or offense, but for the
constant profession of that Religion, which in conscience we are persuaded to
be the only true worship of God, and salvation of our souls? Of which our
faith and belief, we have rendered so sufficient reason, that we hope, it will
fully satisfy and content, so wise, learned, politic, and discreet a
Prince, as your Majesty has showed your self to be in all occasions presented
to make trial thereof, which makes us the more confident in our just and
reasonable defense, because we sue to a most wise, just, and learned Monarch.

And albeit more then this can hardly be required of men, whose fidelities are
so sufficiently tried and testefied (as appears by the whole substance and
tennor of this our Apology) yet pro abundantiore cautela, we humbly lay down
at your Majesty's feet this form of submission, and security following, in
behalf of our Priests and Pastors.

CHAPTER 7. The form of the Catholics submission.
IF we may be permitted to enjoy some quiet, grave, The lay Catholics
submission.
and virtuous Clergy men for the comfort of our souls, we doubt not but to
give your Majesty a far greater security for the few hundreds of our
Priests, then was given for the many thousands of Queen Mary's Priests, and
Prelates in the late Queen Elizabethes days; against whom, albeit above
10000 Clergy men left their livings, rather then they would leave their
religion.
ten thousand of them, did abandon their Ecclesiastical Liuinges, rather then
they would conform themselves to the times (especially the All Queen Mary
Bishops forsook their Prelatures, rather then they would forsake their chief
Pastor.
holy Senate of Bishops, no one excepted) yet in the time of the said Queen,
for the space of thirty years extreme and restless persecution, no capital
laws were made or executed. And in the The book entitled execution for
treason, and not for religion, made by the late L. Burleigh.
book entitled Execution for treason, and not for Religion, composed and set
forth by the late L. Burleigh then high Treasourer of England, on whom for his
great wisdom and polecie, the menaging of the Common wealth of this Realm
(under the Queen principally depended) Anno 1583. and Anno Regni Eliz. 26. it
is in express words set down what favor these Priests found, in terms as
follows. And though there are many subjects known in the Realm that disser
in some opinions of Religion from the Church of England, and yet do also not
forbear to profess the same; yet in that they do all profess loyalty and
obedience to her Majesty, and offer readely in her defense to impugn and
resist any foreign force, though it should come or be procured from the Pope
himself, None of Q Mary's Priests or Prelates persecuted for region.
none of these sort are for their contrary opinions in Religion persecuted, or
charged with any crimes or pains of treason, nor yet willingly searched in
their consciences for their contrary opinions that savor not of treason. After
which Narration, he reckons up great numbers, as D. Heath, Archbishop of
York.
D. Heath, Arch-bishoppe of York, B. Poole. B. Tunstall, B. White, B.
Oglethrop, B. Thurlby, B. Watson, B. Turberuill: none of all these were pressed
with any capital pain, though they maintained the Popes authority, against
the laws of the Realm: he recounteth Abbot Feenam.
one Abbot and diverse Deanes, whom he commends for learning, modesty and
knowledge, and concludes that none None of all these held or punished as
traitors, though they maintained the Popes authority against the laws of the
Realm.
of these, nor yet diverse others of the like moral, and indifferent carriage,
were ever called to any capital, or bloody question upon matter of Religion;
nor were not deprived of any of their goods, or proper liuelihoods: of the
like indulgence and lenity mention is made in the same book, used toward the
layetie in wonderful pleasing words as follows.

There are great numbers of others being lay men and of good possessions in
Lands, and men of credit in their countries, that do enjoy their estates,
though they hold contrary opinions in Religion for the Popes authority, and
yet none of them have been sought hitherto to be impeached in any point or
quarrel of treason, or loss of life, member, or inheritance: So that it may
plainly appear, it is not, nor has not been for contrary opinions in
Religion; or for the Popes authority alone (as the Adversaries do boldly and
falsely publish) that every person has suffered death since her Majesty's
Reign: yet some of this sort are well known to hold opinion, that the Pope
ought by authority of Gods word, to be supreme and only head of the Catholic
Church throughout the whole world, and that the Queens Majesty ought not to
be To deny the Q. to be supreme gouernesse over Ecclesiastical persons not
persecuted with charge of treason.
gouernesse over any her subjectes in her Realms, being persons
Ecclesiastical: yet for none of these points has any person been persecuted
with the charge of treason or in danger of life.

If then this were the case of Queen Mary's Priests, and other quiet and
faithful subjectes in the late Queens days, we hope that our Priests (being
as well qualified in all respects to our Princes good liking and satisfaction,
as they were; both for quiet behavior, civil life, and sincere affection to
your Majesty's service) may for our comfort obtain as much grace now, as they
did then, without any such assurance as our Priests shall put in. And to make
the case yet more clear, and uncontrollable; we add further, that since No
religion can consist without Priests and Pastors.
no Religion ever did or could consist without Priests, Pastors, and men to
whom the disposition of divine mysteries did belong, we hope that our desire
to have the benefitte of such Clergy men, as may stand with the safty of our
Prince and Country, is conformable to reason, as commanded by the rules of
conscience, charity, and Christianity.

And that it may be more apparent to the world, that this our lowely Christian
desire, and humble demand, shall not any ways be prejudicial to your
Majesty's Royal person or estate, we offer to answer person for person, and
life for life, for every such Priest The Catholics offer for their Priests.
as we shall make election of, and be permitted to have in our several howses,
for their fidelity to your Majesty and to the state; by which means your
Majesty may be assured both of our number, and carriage of all such Priests as
shall remain within the Realm, for whom (it is not credible) that we would
so deeply engage our selves without full knowledge of their dispositions: their
being here by this means shall be public, the places of their abode certain,
their conversation and carriage subject to the eyes of the Bishops,
Ministers, and Justices of peace in every province and place where they shall
live: by which occasion, there may probably arise a kind of virtuous, and not
altogether unprofitable emulation between our Priests and your Ministers, who
shall exceed and excel the other in virtuous living, and exemplarity of life,
and other acts and exercises of piety and devotion, which must needs turn
to the edification of the people, and extirpation of vice; and we shall be so
much the more circumspect and careful of the comportmentes of our said
Priests, as our estate and security does more directly depend upon their
honesties and fidelities.

To conclude, we do and ever will (REDOVTED PRINCE) acknowledge your Majesty
our lawefull King and Sovereign Lord, and will Catholics opposition against
all pretenders.
defend and maintain your Majesty's Heirs and your Successors possession,
right, and Title, with life and liuelihood against all pretendantes to the
contrary.

Further more, we will Their profer to reveal and vvithstand all treasonable
at temptes.
reveal, and to our powers withstand and prevent any conspiracy, or intended
treason against the person of your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, and we
will to our power defend your Realms and Dominions against all invasions, or
foreign enemies, upon what pretense soever.

We do, and will acknowledge due unto your Majesty from us, what soever is
due for a subject unto his Prince and Sovereign, either by the law of nature,
or by the word of God, or has been used by any Catholic subject toward
your Highness Catholic Progenitors; and this we will perform by protestation,
The Catholics oath, and protestation.
oath, or in such other manner, as shall seem best to your Majesty.

And this same oath and protestation, our Priests so permitted, shall take
before they shall be admitted into our howses, otherwise they shall not have
releife of us.

In this sort (we doubt not) but that your Majesty may both in honor and
security, take protection of our persons, mittigate our former afflictions, and
be assured of our future loyalties, loves, and affections, if you but please to
take the view (which your Majesty may do in this our Apology) of the rules
of our Doctrine and Religion, in those cases of the experience of our former
actions, and of the absolute complete form of this our submission and
allegeaunce: which bands as they are most voluntary on our parts, so are they
far Voluntary submission far to be preferred before counterfeit conformity.
more honorable, profitable, and durable for your Highness security, then all
the laws and rigours in the world.

And to say the truth, what greater glory or triumph can so magnanimious a
Monarch as your Majesty is, have in this world, then to see and behold so many
thousands of your faithful Citizens and subjectes, manumitted from
servitude, refuscitated (as it were) from their sepulchers, recalled from
banishment, delivered from prisons, rendered to their wives and children, and
restored to their pristine honors, and honest reputations, by your Majesty's
only peereles Clemency and benignity; and to march before your triumphall
chariot, with all insignes of liberty, love, freedom, joy, and estimation? of
whose affections your Majesty can be no less assured, then a merciful Father
of dutiful children. Quos genuit in visceribus charitatis and pretatis suae:
whom he has begotten in the bowels of his charity and piety.

And if that renowned Roman was wont to say, that he had rather More glory in
saving one Citizen then in vanquishing a camp of enemies.
save the life of one Citizen, then overcome a whole camp of his enemies, what
now shall your Majesty gain in giving life and liberty to so many thousands
(who are sick of the late Queens evil) whom no physic can cure, but the
sacred hands of our anointed King, and are like to the Cicero the praetor and
patron of Sicily
Sicilians, whom none but Cicero or the Flaminius restored the Grecians to
their ancient liberties.
Grecians, whom none but Flammius could deliver from the heavy yoke, and
insupportable servitude, which the Pretors and Princes their predecessors had
imposed upon them.

We are but half men, if men at all, whom in these later days and times no
man durst defend, countenance, converse with, or employ, and (as your Majesty
has well said) we are in deed but half subjects, not that our bodies,
minds, wills, wits, understandings, senses, memories, judgementes,
intentions; or our breathes, bloudes, or lives are divided, or deuouted to the
supreme honor or service of any terrene creature, other then your Majesty
only; but that the In what sense the Catholics may be called half subjects
better half of our liuinges, goods, friends, and fortunes, wherewith we
should be the better able, and have greater courage to serve your Majesty, are
taken from us, and yet your Majesty's coffers little the better therefore.

Our desire then is (most gracious Prince) to become your Majesty's whole
subjectes, and your Majesty may so make us in the twinkling of your eye, or
stamp of your foot, wherewith you are able to raise up more armies, then ever
Pompey the great could do (from whom the metaphor is borrowed) in all his
pomp and presumtious pride.

Vouchsafe then (DREAD SOVEREIGN) to make us as other your subjectes are of
all professions, entire and absolute Englishmen; The conclusion with an
Apostrophe to his Majesty.
for nothing (by Gods holy assistance) can or ever shall divide us from our
subjection and dutiful affection to your Majesty, but death which is vltima
linea rerum, the last period of all things: for all other deuisions we
renounce, from all other services we disclaim, but that only which is due to
God in the supernatural course of our salvation, which being governed by
secret influences, and supernatural concurrences of his grace, we alotte to
God without diparagement to your Majesty, assuring our selves that your Majesty
(so conversant in all good writers, and perfect Theology) is well assured,
that there is no division so honorable for a Prince, as that which was
attributed long sithence to Caesar, and now is not improperly applied to your
Majesty.

Jupiter in coelis Caesar regit omnia terris
Diuisum imperum cum Jove Caesar habet.
Whiles this Apology or Petition was a printing, there came to my hands the
copy of a letter written by the late banished Priests, to the Lords of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Council, which for the coherence of the
argument, I thought good to annexe hereunto.

THE COPPIE OF THE BANISHED PRIESTS LETTER, TO THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S
MOST HONORABLE privy Council.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE OUR VERY GOOD LORDS, THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST
Honorable privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE. As we have suffered for Christ his sake, and the profession
of the true Catholic religion, (which he planted with his precious blood) many
years imprisonment, and deprivation of all worldly comfortes and commodities:
so do we with the like patience and humility endure this hard and heavy
sentence of exile, which is a certain kind of civil death, or rather a
languishing and continual dying, especially to them that have the honor and
safety of their Prince and Country, in that recommendation, as we ever both
have had, and have. Notwithstanding least it might be imputed unto to us
hereafter, that this banishment was rather an extraordinary favor and grace,
then an undeserved punishment or penalty: we thought it our duty to let your
Honors understand, that as we are content with patience and humility to
suffer, and support whatsoever you should impose upon us for our Religion: so
are we bound with all, to make protestation af our innocence, according to
that of S. Peter: Nemo vestrum patiatur vt fur, aut latro, aut maledicus, aut
alienorum appetitor: si autem vt Christianus, non erubescat, glorificet autem
Deum in isto nomine. May it please your Lordships therefore to understand, that
the quality and condition of those that are comprehended under the self same
sentence of banishment, is very different and considerable, both in honor and
conscience: among the which some there are that came voluntarily into prison,
upon a proclamation set out by your Lordships in the late Queens days and
name, with assurance of favor upon such their submission: some came neither
voluntarily into the prison, nor into the Realm, and therefore not subject to
any censure: and all of them have been ever most faithful servants and
affectionate well-willers of his Majesty, and have to show under the great
zeal of England his Majesty's gracious general pardon, by which they are
restored unto the peace of his Majesty, and place of true subjects: since
which time they have committed nothing against his Majesty's quiet Crown and
dignity; as being ever since in captivity: and therefore in the rigor and
extreamities of those laws (which in their best sense and nature were ever
held, both extreme and rigorous) cannot be punished by any form or course of
law, with so severe a correction, as aqua and igne interdici, to be deprived
of the benefit of the common Air and Elements of our most natural and dear
Country. Yet sithence it is your Lordshippes pleasure we should be transported,
we are content (in sign of obedience and conformity to that we see is your
order) for this time to forbear the Realm for a while, and to absent
ourselves; reputing our selves notwithstanding, as men free from all danger or
penalty of laws; and neither by this fact of banishment, nor by any other act
of our necessary return into our Country hereafter in worse estate, then your
Lordships found us in the prison, when your Lordshippes warrant came for the
carrying us out of the Realm. And so hoping your honors will conceive of us,
as of men that have the fear and grace of God before our eyes, and the sincere
love of our Prince and Country in our hearts, and dutiful reverence and
respect to your Lordshippes in all actions: we humbly beseech your honors,
that if we happen for want of health, or other helps necessary for our
relief, to return hereafter into the Realm, this banishment may not any way
aggrauate our case, or make us less capable of favor and grace, then we were
the xxj. of September when your Lordshippes order came to remove us from post
to pillar, from prison to exile: and so desiring God to inspire your
Lordshippes (upon whose resolutions dependes the repose of the Realm, and the
salvation or perdition of many thousand souls) with his holy grace and
assistance in all your most grave and weighty determinations, in most humble
and dutiful manner we take our leave, from the Sea side this 24. of SEPTEMBER.
1604.

His Majesty's true and loyal subjectes, and your honors most humble
servants, The late banished Priests.


