THE HIDDEN TREASVRE: OPENED IN TWO SERMONS Preached by ZACHARY CATLIN Minister
of Gods word at Thurstone in SVFFOLKE: UPON MATTHEW 13.44.

These things have thou HIDDEN from the wise and prudent, and have REVEALED
them unto babes. MATT. 11.25. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for ROBERT DAVVLMAN
at the sign of the Brazen-Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

THE HIDDEN TREASVRE. The first SERMON.
MATTHEW. 13.44. Again, the Kingdom of heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in a
field, which when a man has found, he hides it, and for joy thereof goes and
sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.


THis Parable (welbeloved in the Lord) is entire within it self, and has no
dependence on any thing before delivered; only this word [Againe] Againe]
gives us to consider our blessed Saviors frequent use of Parables, as in
other of his Sermons, Cohoerence.
so in this very Chapter, which I may call a Nest of seven Parables closely
couched together; Without a Parable spoke he not unto them, says the Text,
verse 34. and the reason is given, verse 35. Verse. 34. Verse. 35.
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet saying, I will open
my mouth in Parables.

Hence observe that it was our Saviors usual custom to preach by Parables,
that is, Observe.
to borrow similitudes from earthly things in our ordinary callings, Parabola
est sermo similitudinarius, qui aliud dicit, aliud significat. Aquin. Reason.
Simil.
to the end that he might by these things, that are obvious to sense and
reason, closely instill and insinuate into the minds of worldly and natural
men, things of an heavenly and spiritual nature with the more facility and
greater delight; even as skillful Physicians are wont to minister unto their
weak patients bitter Pills lapt up in sugar. For this reason our Savior
borrowes similitudes from Husbandmen, from Merchantmen from Fishermen, from
Leaven, from Mustardseed, from Pearls, and from Treasures, to illustrate unto
his hearers matters concerning the Kingdom of God.

Use 1. By which course of our Savior the best Preacher that ever was, we his
scholars may see what a workman in his trade a Minister of Christ ought to
be, what a cunning Fisher for souls, what a wily Proteus to insinuate the
meaning of his doctrine into all capacities, and the love of it into all
affections, Genesis 27.4. 1 Cor. 9.22.
dressing for every Isaac such meat as his soul loves, and with Paul that
Master Builder becoming weak to the weak, and all things to all men, that by
all means (through Gods blessing) we may win some.

Nichodemus hearing the doctrine of the newbirth, Joh. 3.
dreams again of entering into his Mothers womb; and the carnal Capernaites
hearing of eating the flesh of Christ, John 6.
dream of tearing it with their teeth; But our blessed Savior in every common
thing he sees or meets withal, can epsy something spiritual and heavenly:
Joh. 4.
In the water of Jacobs Well he can see the water of life; in the stones of
the Temple he can read the destruction of Jerusalem, Luke. 21.6.
and the end of the world: and in Seed, Tares, Leaven, Pearls and Treasures he
can discern the Kingdom of God, as the Text says, The Kingdom of God is
like a Treasure. In like manner, if we had heavenly hearts, every thing we see,
and hear, and meet withal, would be unto us a Zacheus his Sycamore tree, Luke
19.4. Deuteronomy. 34.1.
from whence we might see our Savior; and Moses his Mount Nebo, from whence we
might behold the Land of Promise. And thus much of our Saviors use of Parables
in general.

In the Parable in particular, Text it self.
the scope and aim of is our blessed Savior is, to teach us to prefer grace
and glory, Scope.
called here [the Kingdom of heaven] before all other things whatsoever, and
for the acquiring and enjoying of them, to deny our selves, and all our
carnal lusts, yea, gladly to renounce the whole world, that nothing might
entangle us from the fruition of so great a good. To accomplish this his aim,
he sets an high price and estimate upon them, and greatly extols and sets forth
the excellency of Gods Kingdom, by comparing it in the next verse to a
precious Pearl, Verse 45.
and here in this verse to a Desirable Treasure, for the obtaining where of he
would have us to sell and part with all that we have. A needful exhortation,
as in those, so in these our days, wherein (alas) carnal men do not duly
prize the spiritual blessings and graces of God, being bewitched with the
baits of Satan, and inticements of this present world. And thus you have the
general scope and drift of this notable parable of the Treasure.

In the words themselves we have two things to be considered: The two parts of
the Text.


to be employed is set forth unto us in the Text by four several
circumstances. Four circumstances.


1. The Name. 2. The Value. 3. The Place or Situation. 4. The Difficulty of
finding and obtaining it.
[Againe, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in a field.]

What to be done. Five things.
five things are to be done. The first General part. The Purchase it self.
1. Circumsta^ce The NAME, Kingdom of Heaven.
as God shall assist and the time permit, and first of the Purchase it self
about which we are to be employed: which (as you have heard) is set forth unto
us by four circumstances: and first of all by the NAME, The Kingdom of
Heaven] what that is, seeing Interpreters give little satisfaction, under
correction of better judgment, I will lay down mine own opinion. Dan 2.32.
The Prophet Daniel in his second Chapter tells us of four earthly kingdoms,
compared by him to four several metals, Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron, and
in the 44. verse Verse 44.
he tells us, that in the days of the fourth Kingdom or Monarchy, the God of
Heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, but shall break
and consume all these kingdoms, and shall stand for ever; and more
particularly in the seventh chapter and 13. verse, Dan 7.13.
he tells us, that the Ancient of days shall give to the Son of MAN a
dominion everlasting, and a kingdom that never shall be destroyed; yea, the
Saints of the most High shall take the kingdom and possess it for ever and
ever, verse 18. verse. 18. The Kingdom of the Messiah
Of this kingdom of the Messiah prophesied of by Daniel, I make no question
but John the Baptist the Messiahs Harbinger and forerunner, is to be
understood, when he cried, saying, Repent, repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand, Mat. 3.2. Matthew. 3.2. vide Mat. 26.28 and. 21.9.
and of this Kingdom spoke our Savior in this place, Again, the Kingdom of
heaven is like to a Treasure hid in a field, etc.

And this kingdom is that gracious and spiritual Regiment by which the Lord
Jesus, God and man, What it is.
as King of the Church, rules in the hearts of true Believers, giving them
those three privileges spoken of Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

And this Regiment being but one, Two degrees of Christ's Kingdom. 1. Of Grace.
yet has two degrees. The first is called the kingdom of Grace, by which he
communicates himself to the souls of the faithful by his Spirit, through the
outward Ordinances of the Word and Sacraments in this life present.

The second degree is called the Kingdom of Glory, 2. Of Glory.
by which he gives them perfection of holiness and happiness by an immediate
fellowship with the blessed Trinity for ever in the world to come.

This government of Christ consisting in these two degrees, Three reasons of
the Name.
is called here by the Name and Title of the Kingdom of Heaven, for these
three Reasons, as I conceive.

The King came from Heaven. 1 Cor. 15.47. John ^.13.
as other Kings are, but The Lord from Heaven, as Saint Paul says, Who came
from heaven, and is ascended thither again, and sits at the right hand of
God in glory.

The government is spiritual tending to heaven.
but properly over their souls and consciences, and consists not so much in
external things, tending to outward peace and tranquillity, as in inward and
spiritual things rending to, and ending in an heavenly life; this our Savior
himself professes, saying, My Kingdom is not of this world; though it be in
this world, John. 18.36.
yet it is not of this world, or worldly.

Hebrai utuntur g^^^^^ve vice Epithe i, regnum caelorum.i. caeleste. Every
subject of Christ is a King. Revel. 1.6.
Heavenly Kingdom, by way of excellency, Because it excells all earthly
kingdoms.
because it excels all terrene kingdoms, as far as heaven excels
earth, both in holiness, in happiness, in largeness and in continuance: As
namely, to instance one particular; All the subjects of this kingdom are Kings
to reign here and for ever. In earthly Kingdoms the King indeed is rich, and
glorious, and honorable, but the subjects may be mean and poor enough,
begging their bread from door to door; but in Christ's Kingdom, every Saint,
every believer is a King: Rev. 1.6. He has made us Kings and Priests unto his
Father, says S. John; Kings to reign over sin, Satan, and the world, and
Priests to offer unto God the Father spiritual sacrifices upon the Altar of
Christ's merits: And again, verse 9. Verse. 9.
I John am your brother and companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and
patience of Jesus Christ: He is a companion with them, and they with him in
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, though it be a kingdom of tribulation, and
therefore of patience; according also to that which Daniel had foretold, The
Saints of the most High shall take the kingdom and possess it for ever and
ever, Dan. 7.18. Dan. 7.18.
And thus, beloved, you see what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven, as also
the reasons of the name.

And here I pray you to note with me, Note. Grace and Glory both one Kingdom.
that the Kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of Glory have both one and the
same name, are both styled The Kingdom of Heaven, and no marvel, for,





Quid est gratia, nisi gloria inchoata? and quid est glora nisi gratia
consummata? Lyra.
What is grace but glory begun? and what is glory but grace consummate and made
perfect?

Hence we gather this instruction, Doct. Heaven must here be purchased or
never.
that whosoeevr will enter into the kingdom of heaven; he must do it in this
present life: The Kingdom is here to be purchased, and heaven is on earth to
be obtained, or else it is lost for ever; he that will reign in that of
glory, must first be a subject in this of grace: Rich men are charged in this
life to lay a good foundation of aeternall life. 1. Tim. 1.19.
Here is laid the foundation of that building, whose top reaches up to heaven:
Except ye be regenerate and borne again ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, says our Savior; Ioh. 3.5.
implying that regeneration and the newbirth give us entrance and admission
thereunto; and most plainly, Matthew. 18.3, 4. He that is converted, and
humbles himself as a little child, Mat. 18.3.4.
the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven: he that would be
perfitly holy there, Heb. 12.14.
must be initially holy here, he that would be perfitly happy there, must begin
to be blessed and happy here. Rev. 20.6.
In a word, we must in our life time enter into the Suburbs of the New
Jerusalem, the City of the great King, and that by the low and narrow gate of
repentance and conversion, if ever we look at our death, to be admitted into
the City it self through the beautiful gate of glory.

Get grace if thou will have glory.
now to become the Subject of Jesus Christ: submit to the gracious regiment and
scepter of his Word and Spirit: Romans 14.8.
live to God, not to thy self: by faith and not by sense: rule over thy lusts
that would rule over thee: 2. Cor 5 7.
be a little King in thine own bosom. If thou art risen with Christ, and
ascended with Christ, Phil. 3.20.
thy heart and conversation is in Heaven: and no question but thou shall at the
day of thy Death enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nay happy soul, take this
for thy comfort, thou have an Heaven upon earth, The faithful have eternal
life already.
thou have taken possession of it already. Believe not me, believe the holy
Scriptures. This is life eternal to know (aright) thee, and him whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.2. Ioh 3.36.
He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life. He has that life begun
in his soul that never shall be put out again: and by the lively fruits of
faith this life may be known: as Saint John says, By this we know that we are
translated from death to life, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
because we love the brethren: a point of unspeakable comfort to the child of
God, if it be well weighed.

Enemies of Christ hope for heaven in vain.
rebels against Christ, enemies of his gracious government, that say with those
in the 19. of Luke, ver. 14, Noturnus hunc regnare, We will not have this man
to reign over us, that will have their wills, and fight for their lusts, alas,
they have no grace in them, have neither ability to do good duties, nor make
conscience of doing them: Let all such know, in vain they expect at their
Death to enter into Heaven. Indeed they bow their knee to Christ, and call him
King, but in the mean season they put into his hand a Scepter of Reed, and so
mock him, and yet they look when they dye to be caught up into Heaven in a
whirlwind with Elias. 2. Kin. 2.11. 1. Cor. 4.20.
But be not deceived, God is not mocked, The Kingdom of God is not in word,
but in power, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.20. And again, 1. Cor. 6 9. Simile.
The unclean and unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: For as the
Heathens so placed the two Temples of Virtue and Honor, that no man could
enter into that of Honor, but first he must pass thorough the other of
Virtue; In like manner the Lord has so placed these two parts and degrees of
the Kingdom of Heaven, that no man can possibly enter into that of glory: but
first he must pass thorough this of grace. And this shall suffice for the
first circumstance, by which this Purchase is set forth unto us, and that is
the NAME or title, The Kingdom of Heaven.

The second follows, and that is the value. The Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a TREASVRE. The second circumstance.


But what is a Treasure? Thesaurus (says Musculus) est copia facultatum and
bonorum ad omnem eventum jam parata, The value. It is like a Treasure.] What a
Treasure is.
A Treasure is the abundance of riches laid up in store for all assayes.
Thesaurus constat de Raris, pretiosis, durabilibus, says Hugo, It consists of
things rare not common, precious not vile, durable not of small continuance. In
a word, it is a great mass of silver, gold, jewels, precious stones, great for
quantity, rich and excellent for quality, containing much in a little, ready
for all occasions, laid up as we say for a rainy day, and therefore is peculiar
to Kings and Princes. Now Grace is a Treasure says our Savior: Solomon, The
merchandise of wisdom (that is, of Grace) is better then of Silver, and the
Gain thereof then of fine Gold: Grace is a Treasure. Pro. 3.14, 15.
She is more precious then Rubyes, and all Desirable things are not to be
compared to her. Take trial in one or two graces. A meek and a quiet Spirit
in the Hidden man of the heart, is a better ornament to a woman, says Saint
Peter, then all outward adorning, plaiting of hair, wearing of gold, or
putting on of apparel: for it is in the sight of God (...) of great price and
value. 1. Pet. 3.4. 1. Pet. 3.4.
when a woman meekely submits her self unto her Husband as her head for the
ordinance of Gods sake, this one grace is worth all the outward ornaments and
abiliments in the world. See it in another grace: The Trial of your Faith (that
is, Bifeild.
your Faith which is tried and approved) is much more precious then gold that
perishes, 1. Pet. 1.7.
says S. Pet. Lo, Faith is precious as gold, as tried gold, yea more, yea
much more precious the^ tried gold for gold perishes, V. 8.
but faith saves. Faith unites the soul to Christ, Col. 2.3. Deus est summum
bonum, and fons omnis boni.
in whom are hid the Treasures of divine wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2.3. and
by Christ it unites us to the Father and the holy Ghost, it makes God the chief
good, and fountain of all good, to be our God and portion.

As for Glory, that is a Treasure indeed, a Treasure laid up in Heaven: Glory
is a Treasure also.
there is perfect Holiness, perfect Happiness. Aderit omne bonum, aberit omne
malum, There is the presence of all good, and the absence of all evil.
Augustine.
There is no sin, no sorrow, no want, no annoyance, no fear of change, there
is more then eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
ear has heard of, or man's narrow heart can comprehend. In a word, it is a
Treasure that cannot be valued, that cannot be wasted.

that the Kingdom of Heaven is a Treasure, let this set an edge upon that
Exhortation of our Savior, Seek Gods Kingdom first Mat. 6.33.
Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness. Let it
move us to set our first and best affections and endeavors on grace and glory.
We covet riches, we covet Treasures, Lo the only true riches, Quis nisi
mentis inop^. (...). Luke 16.11. Mat. 6.19. Pro. 10.2.11.4.
and heavenly Treasure. Treasure on earth cannot be secured from the Canker,
from the Thief, says our Savior: but these are durable. The Treasures of
wicked men profit nothing, neither do Riches avail in the day of wrath, but
Righteousness delivers from Death. Once cre ye die one grain of Faith,
though as small as a grain of mustard seed, will be worth all the perishing
gold of India. For the end of your Faith is the salvation of your souls, says
Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 1.8.
Take therefore to heart the Exhortation of our Savior, Lay not up for your
selves Treasures upon Earth, etc. but lay up for your selves Treasures in
Heaven, etc. that is, make sure in this life of grace for glory.

See the rich estate of Christ's Subject.
He has faith more precious then gold; he has Christ the perfect Gain: he
has God the fountain of all good to be his God; bound to him by fatherly
love, by promise, by covenant, by oath, never to fail him nor forsake him,
Heb. 3.5.
but to provide for him in all his wants, to protect him in all dangers; and
finally to possess him of a Crown and Kingdom incorruptible.

Poor Christians why envy ye the outward prosperity of carnal worldlings, who
have their portion in this Life, Psa. 17.14.
whose belly God has filled with his hidden Treasures, says the Psalmist?
meaning the hidden treasures of the earth, which they are stripped of at death
like that rich fool, Luke 12.

Why droope your spirits under outward want and pressures? David could say, The
Lord is my portion I have goodly heritage, Psalm. 16.5, 6. Ps. 23.1.
Ps. 16.5, 6. And again, The Lord is my shepherd, I shall want nothing. And
Paul could say of himself and Timothy, We are as poor, yet making many rich;
2. Cor. 6.10.
as having nothing, yet possessing all things. How can he want any thing which
tends to true happiness, that is at the Well head? All things are possible to
him that believes, Mar. 9.23.
says our Savior: Et habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia, says a Father,
he has all things at least in some sort, that has him that has all things.
Saint Paul sweetly, All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
and you Christ's, and Christ Gods. God and Christ are yours, and so all things
are yours, things present, and things to come. O beloved, comfort your selves
and one another with these words, Know your happiness, you are Lord
Treasurers, you have the Kingdom of heaven the true Treasure.

The third circumstance. The Place.
But to come to the third circumstance of the place or situation, Quae regio in
terris? In what place is this Treasure to be found? our Savior tells us, In a
Field. In a Field.]
] And that Field is no other but the Word of God, which is compared to a green
pasture, Psalm. 23.2. but in this place to a Field, and that for three Reasons.

Ager est Euangelium, says Calvia, Praedicatio verb^, says Musc: Scriptura.
Ierom. Hugo.
Propter laborem, for the labor. In gardens and orchards is pleasure and
recreation, in houses and chambers is eating and drinking, and amorous
delights, but Ager ab agendo, in the field is labor and toil, Ibi foditur,
ibi aratur, ibi sudatur, there men dig and plow, and harrow, and sweat, and
toil. Ager est Scriptura, says Hugo, quia agendo and laborando acquiritur
scientia, For the labor.
the word is compared to a field, because by labor and industry we attain to
heavenly knowledge.

Propter sterilitatem, for the barrenness of it in the conceit of carnal men.
For as Treasures (says Iunius) are not found in rich pastures and From the
barrennes and plainnes.
fruitful meadows, but in sterile and barren grounds, so heavenly wisdom is
not found in the witty devices of Poets, or subtle and profound Speculations
of Philosophers, but in the plain and simple word of God.

Propter amplitudinem, for the largeness. I have seen an end of all
perfection, says David, For the largeness. Ps. 119.96.
but thy Law is exceeding broad. I have seen the bounds of Towns, of
Kingdoms, and of Countries, yea the Sea and Land has bounds and borders, but
thy Word is exceeding broad. For it teaches the whole Will of God, and the
whole duty of Man: the beginning of All things in the Creation, and the end of
All in the dissolution of the world, the right knowledge both of God and of our
selves; of the mercy of God reaching as high as the highest heavens, of his
justice reaching down to the nethermost Hell. In a word, 2 Timothy 3.17.1^. (...).
it is able to make the man of God perfect and absolute, and to make us all wise
unto salvation, A^oro plenitudinem Scripturae, says Tertullian, I admire the
largeness and fullness of the Scripture. Let twenty able Divines preach on
this one verse, yet twenty more may come after them, and twenty more after
them, and still find a living vein of exquisite matter. A large field indeed,
wherein long-lived Methuselah may walk all his life, and yet not find out the
dimensions of this field. O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
Romans 11.33.
how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out!

The Word of Grace, Act. 20.32. The Word of eternal Life. Ioh. 6.68. Act.
20.32. Jo. 60.68.
and (that we may see the correspondency of Scripture with Scripture) The word
of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.19.
in 19. verse of this chapter, because in it the Kingdom is to be found. Is.
53.1. 1. Cor. 1.18.
In a word, It is the Arm of God, Is. 53.1. and the power of God to salvation,
1. Cor, 1, 18.

David said of Golias sword, so say I of the Word of God; 1. Sam. 21.9.
There is none to that: for it has pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. 1. Cor. 1.21.


As for them that despise the Word of God read and preached, and delight to
walk elsewhere, as in wanton play-bookes, poetical fables, philosophical
discourses, well compiled Historyes, politic Laws or Statutes, either they
seek not grace and glory, or at least, they seek them where they are not like
to find them, and like the Sadducees, They err not knowing the Scriptures.
Mat. 22.29.


But beloved, remember ye that saying of David, that the man is blessed that
has not walked in the way of sinners, Ps. 1.1, 2.
but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate day
and night. I say to you as Booz to Ruth, Ruth. 2.8.
Go not to gleane in an other field, neither go from hence, but abide ye
here. Walk in this field more or less every day: especially on the Sabbath
day, and meditate herein day and night. When many revolted and went back from
Christ, he turning to his Disciples, said unto them, Will you also go away? So
say I to you, Joh. 6.67.
some run to Brownisme, some to Familisme, some to Anabaptisme, some to
Papisme, some to flat Atheism: will you also go away? Let each of you answer
in the secret of his heart, with Simon Peter, verse 68. 68.
Master, whither, or to whom shall we go? Thou have the Words of eternal
life. And this of the third circumstance, The place or situation of the
Treasure.

I come unto the fourth and last, and that is, The fourth Circumstance. The
Difficulty.


The difficulty of finding and obtaining it. It is Thesaurus absconditus, a
Treasure HIDDEN in the Field, The Kingdom of Heaven is like, etc. Our Savior
does not liken it to an open Treasure in the Kings Court or Exchequer, It is an
hidden Treasure. Non apertus in aul^, sed absconditus in agro.
but to a Treasure hid in a field.

Nature her self has hidden gold and silver in the inward mines and bowels of
the earth, far remote from the eyes of men, as foreknowing that they would
prove occasions and incentives of pride, ambition, and covetousness,
contention, war and bloodshed. And as Nature, so experience teaches men to
hide their Treasures. Depraedari desiderat (says Gregory) qui Thesaurum in via
publica portat. Gregory.
He desires to be lightened of his Treasure, that carries it in open view. Isa.
39.1.6.
Hezekiah shows his Treasure to the Ambassadors of Babel, and shortly after
they were fetched away to Babel. Is. 39.4.6. Treasures you see are to be Hidden.

In like manner, Grace and Glory are hid Treasures, Doctr. Grace and Glory are
hidden.
hidden in the Word, and hidden in themselves, and in the world.

In the Word.
but deep and low in the marrow and bowels of it. Latet Christus (says Hugo
Hugo.
) in cortice literae, vt Moses in fiscella scirpea, Christ lies hid in the ryne
of the letter, as Moses in the Arc of Bulrushes, Exodus 2.3. Exodus 2.3.
and Great is the mystery of godliness, says Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 3.16. 1.
Tim. 3.16.


As for Glory, it is indeed described in the Word, yet alas very darkely and
obscurely in types and shadows, as of Crowns, of Kingdoms and of Treasures.

Grace and Glory are Hidden from the men of the world, To wordly men. Mat.
11.25. 1. Cor. 2.14.
as our Savior says: And S. Paul tells us, That the Natural man perceives not
the things of God, he savours them not, they are foolishness unto him, The
Cross of Christ is a scandal, Faith is a fancy, Mortification is only a
bridling of nature, Sanctification is but Hypocrisy, and an outward show, yea
Heaven it self is but a Dream or ^able, like the Poets Elysian fields,
Platoes Commonwealth, or Moors Vtopia; at least they think as slightly of it
as of some far country that little concerns them; they cannot with the eye
of sense or carnal reason see the spiritual beauty of it, and therefore are
so far from desiring with Saint Paul to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
that they say in their hearts with profane Esau, Tush, what is this birthright
to me? and with that Cardinal, that would not give his part in Paris, for his
part in Paradise.

Grace is an hidden and secret work (...), Grace is a secret work. Romans 7 22.
1. Pet. 3.4.
In the Inner man, as Saint Paul says: (...), in the hidden man of the heart,
as Saint Peter phraseth it. It makes no glorious show or splendor in the
world, it alters not the visage or person of a man, it sets no Crown on his
head, it puts no gold ring on his finger, or gorgeous attire on his back. The
Kingdom of God comes not, Luke 17.20.21.
says our Savior (...) with observation, or as Agrippa and Bernice came with
Fes^^s to keep the Assizes, Act. 25.24.
(...) with great pomp and glory: No, no, (...), says our Savior, it is
within you, it is seated in your mind, Luke 17.21.
will and affections. Grace makes an ignorant man wise to salvation, a covetous
man liberal, a proud man humble, a drunkard sober and temperate, a^ unbeleever
faithful, a worldling heavenly minded; in a word, it makes the Kings daughter
all glorious within, it is a secret work.

Psalm. 45.13.
Yea further, it is oftentimes so hidden in the children of God under many
outward infirmities, Grace overwhelmed in Gods children under Crosses 1 John
3.1. Esa. 53.3. Psa. 73.15.
of poverty, infamy, and crosses, that as Saint John says, The world knows
them not, can see in them no form, beauty or comeliness, that they should
desire them, but as the Psalmist says, they condemn the Generation of the
righteous; and no marvel, for they are Gods hidden ones.

And yet further, And under corruptions and sins.
it is often so hidden in them under many sinful corruptions, as ignorance,
unbelief, pride, hypocrisy, anger; yea and sometimes gross and open sins as
in the case of David and Peter, that not only carnal men cannot see their
grace and goodness, but even themselves do question whether they have any
true grace in them or no, and though they have it, yet they want the feeling
and comfort of it for a time, crying out with David, Ps. 77.8. Joh. 2.4.
The Lord has cast me off for ever, and with Jonas, I am cast out of his
sight: and no marvel, for I am but an Hypocrite, I have no truth of grace in
me.

And as for Glory, as the excellency thereof appears not to the carnal eye
of sense or reason, it being within the veil. Heb. 6.19. Heb. 6.19 (...).
so through the weakness of our faith, even we that believe, do see the
beauty of it but dimly, as he in the Gospel saw men walking like trees: and a
far off, as Moses saw Canaan from the top of Pisgah. Deuteronomy 34.
Only now and then in the vigor of our Faith, we may with Moses, Heb. 11.27.
Act. 7.56.
see him that is invisible, and with Stephen, see Heaven opened, and Christ
Jesus ready to receive us, and yet so, as when we shall come thither, we shall
be forced to say as the Queen of Saba, 1. Kin. 10.7.
The one half of this Glory was not told me in mine own Country. And thus we
see the truth of the point.

Musculus. Be not offended that few regard it.
that the Kingdom of Heaven a tam paucis ambitur, is so little sought after or
regarded, and so much neglected and despised in the world. It Is a Treasure
indeed, but HIDDEN and unknown; and because unknown, therefore undesired.
Ignoti nulla cupido, Men see not the hidden excellency of the Scriptures, and
of Grace in them, and in Gods children, in whom it is overwhelmed with
infirmities and corruptions. Mar 4.11.
To you (says our Savior to his faithful disciples) it is given to know the
Mystery of the Kingdom of God, to them without, all these things are done in
parables. Indeed the Scriptures and Religion, for the power of it, are to them
a mystery, Joh 4.10.
a parable and a very riddle. If thou knew the gift of God (says our
Savior to the Samaritan woman) and who it is that speaks to thee, thou
would have asked, so say I of the men of this Generation, If they knew the
worth of Grace, and the happy estate of Gods children, they would not so
neglect and contemn as they do, both the word and Christ, Faith and Glory.

As our Savior spoke in great compassion and sorrow over Jerusalem now ready
to perish, O Jerusalem, Luke 19.42.
Jerusalem, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things that belong unto thy peace: but now they are HID from thine eye: So say
I with a bleeding heart over many of you my brethren: If you had known, even
you, at least in this your day, the things that belong unto your peace. If the
drunkard, the swearer, the blasphemer, the Sabbath-breaker, the adulterer, and
the covetous worldling did know the things that belong unto their peace, they
would not so neglect and undervalue the Kingdom, the word of God, the graces
of the Spirit, and the joys of Heaven, but alas, alas, these things are hidden
from their eyes, 2. Cor. 4.7.
in whom the God of this world has blinded their minds, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. But let no wise man think
the worse of Religion, because it is so commonly neglected, for as the Apostle
says, 2. Cor 4.3.
If our Gospel be Hid, it is Hid to them that perish. And as it is true of
knowledge in general, so of divine and heavenly knowledge in particular,
Scientia non habet inim^cum nisi ignorantem, it is hated of none, despised of
none, but such as do not discern the hidden excellency of it, V. 7: (...).
because we have this Treasure in earthen vessels, as the Apostle speaks in
the same place.

Grace and Glory be a Treasure hidden in the Word, how careful should we be to
follow the counsel of our Savior in Io. 5.39. Search the Scriptures
diligently. Joh. 5.39.
(...), Search the Scriptures, for in them we look to have eternal life? How
should we search and dig in these holy Mines as with spades and mattocks, not
for the literal meaning of them, but especially for the spiritual. How should
we follow the counsel of Solomon? Cry for knowledge, Pro. 2, 3, 4.
and call for understanding, seek her as silver, and search for her as for HID
TREASVRES: V. 6.
for then says Solomon, We should understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God, then should we perceive the excellency of Grace not only
by speculation in our brains, but even in our hearts and souls we should
taste and feel the goodness and sweetness of it to our unspeakable comfort. When
we come at any time to read or hear the Word, how should we pray with David,
Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may beheld the wonderful things contained in
thy Law. Psalm. 119.18.
And when the eyes of our minds are opened to behold them, how should we praise
the Lord in the words of our Savior, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, Mat. 11.25.
because thou have Hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes, Even so O Father, because it seemed good in thy
sight. V. 26.
And thus you have heard the first general part of the Text, namely the
heavenly purchase, set forth unto us by four several circumstances, the name,
the value, the place, and the difficulty of obtaining: We should now proceed
to the second general part, namely, to show what is to be done about the
obtaining of this Purchase to our selves. But the handling hereof will require
another hour. Let us therefore pray to God for a blessing upon that that has
been already spoken.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE HIDDEN TREASVRE: OPENED IN A SECOND SERMON UPON MATTHEW 13.44.

Preached by ZACHARY CATLIN Minister of Gods word at Thurstone in SVFFOLKE:

To him that overcommeth I will give to eat of the HIDDEN Manna. REV. 2.17.
LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for ROBERT DAVVLMAN at the sign of the
Brazen-Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

THE SECOND SERMON.
MATTHEW 13.44. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto Treasure Hid in a
field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof, goes
and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field.


HAving spoken of the first general part of this Text, in the former Sermon,
namely of the Heavenly purchase about which we are to be employed, entitled by
our Savior, The Kingdom of Heaven, likened for value to a Treasure, placed
and situate in a field, yea and said to be Hidden in that field to note the
difficulty of obtaining it, The second general part. What is to be done to
obtain the purchase.
J now proceed unto the second general part propounded at the first,

Namely, what is to be done by us about the acquiring of it to our selves; and
here our blessed Savior propounds unto us for out direction the example of a
worldly wise man in this parable, in whose steps we are directed to tread, and
they are five. In five particulars.










He hides it (says our Savior) and for joy thereof goes, and sells all
that he has to buy that field.

He finds it. Note. Finding is Gods free gift 1. Sam. 9. Acts 9.
So the Lord does oftentimes prevent us with his Grace, while we are conversant
in the field of the word for by-respects. As Saul seeking his Fathers asses
found a kingdom, so Paul seeking the blood of Martyrs, in the way to Damascus,
found the blood of Jesus and this kingdom of heaven. In like manner, the woman
of Samaria seeking the water of Jacobs Well, John 4.
found the God of Jacob and the water of life. And so the Jailour and many
others, according to that notable saying of the Lord himself, Act. 16. Isa.
65.1.
Isa. 65.1. I was found of them that sought me not. And it is truly affirmed
by Hilary, Hilary.
Thesaurum in venisse gratuitum est, It is the free grace of God preventing us,
that any man should find the Treasure, for flesh and blood reveals it not,
etc. Mat. 16.17 Matt. 16.17.


Yet we must seek Gods Kingdom and righteousness. Mat. 6.33. Pro. 2.4.
It is the express precept of our Savior elsewhere, Seek ye first of all the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, Mat. 6.23. and the counsel of Solomon,
Pro. 2.4. Seek her, that is wisdom or grace, as silver, search for her as
for Hid Treasures. Labor we therefore for illumination, for conversion, for
repentance, and for faith: and take we this for our comfort, Motive.
The Lord will reveal this Treasure unto us, he will enlighten our minds, and
sanctify our hearts, he will let us see our sins, and withal his mercy in
the pardon of them, and the way how to get the dominion over them. For if he be
found of them that seek him not; how much more will he be found of us if we
seek him in uprightness of heart. For so says our Savior expressly, Matt.
7.7.
Seek and ye shall find, and again, Every one that seeks finds; Be
exhorted therefore in the words of the Prophet, To seek the Lord while he may
be found, and to call upon him while he is near, Isa. 55.6.
seek the Lord in his Temple, and the heavenly Treasure in the field of his
Word.

He reioyces.
though not of the words, as they lie in the Text.

Finding even of an Earthly Treasure brings no question, great joy,
especially in this golden age of the world. But to find the pardon of our
sins, So must we.
to be assured of the love of God in Christ, and that we shall overcome Satan
and all our corruptions, and finally attain eternal life, this must needs
bring Joy unspeakable and glorious, as Saint Peter calls it. 1. Pet. 1.8.
Zacheus found this Treasure, and he Rejoiced. The Iaylour found this Treasure,
and he Rejoiced. Luke 19.6. Act. 16.34. Act. 8.39.
The Eunuch found this Treasure, and he went on his way Rejoicing. Act. 8 39.
And David professes of himself, Psa. 119.162.
I rejoiced in thy Word as one that finds great spoils.

Indeed all believers have not this joy alike. Caution.
Some have it more at their first conversion and less after; some less at
first and more after, and never any have it at all times alike but with some
remission of degree, and intermission of feeling. But this is a certain truth,
that it is to be found more or less in all those that find this Treasure.

Let this be our chiefest Joy. Jer. 9.23.
the object only of grief and sorrow: and all petty joys of worldly
pleasures, profits and honors, in companion of this. Let not the wise man
(says the Lord) glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his might, nor
the rich man in his riches (that is to say, comparatively) but let him that
glories, glory in this, Luke 10.20.
that he knows me to be the Lord. Rejoice not in this (says our Savior)
that the spirits (or devils) be subdued unto you, but rather, that your Names
are written in Heaven, that you are enrolled as Subjects into this Kingdom.
And in this rejoice and spare not: the true ground of sound comfort is in the
grace and favor of God manifested to us in our true conversion.

I wonder they that want it can be so merry, and that those that have it can be
so sad. Rev. 3.17.
If we have found our selves heretofore most miserable poor and naked, out of
Gods favor, in the cords of sin, in the jaws of Satan, every moment in the
danger of hell fire, and now by the mercy of God find our selves delivered
from these miseries, and enstated in a Kingdom and a Treasure, how can we
possibly be sad? Let us with David check our selves for our lumpish
pensivenes. Why art thou thus cast down O my soul, Psalm. 43.5.
and why art thou thus disquieted within me? and make conscience of the
Apostles earnest charge, Rejoice in the Lo d evermore, Phil. 4.4.
and again I say Rejoice, for the fruit of the Spirit is joy and peace, and
the Kingdom of God is Righteousness and Peace, Romans 14.17.
and Joy in the Holy Ghost. In a word spiritual joy is a certain consequent
and assured note of one that has found the Treasure.

The 3. Duty. He hides it. Lyra.
Thirdly, having found it and rejoiced in it, he hides it again. Lyra
observes that a Treasure hid in any man's ground, is ordered by the civil law
for the common peace of men, to be equally divided between the finder of the
Treasure, and the owner of the Land. It is naught, it is naught says the
buyer, but when he is gone aside he boasts. Prove. 20.14. Pro. 20.14.
So wise and wily are the children of this world in their generation, as our
Savior observes, Luke 16.8. Luke 16.8.


As this man, so generally all men use to hide their Treasures, lest other men
should defraud them, at least share with them, and so their Dividend and share
should be the less.

Indeed there is no such cause in Christ's Kingdom in that respect. There is
grace and glory enough for us all.
For besides that God cannot be mocked, or beguiled of his Treasure, There is
in the Word Grace enough for us all, and though we be many hearers, yet every
hearer may have all. And in Christ there is merit enough to supply us all, and
in heaven is glory enough to make us all fully happy. Joh. 14.2.
In my Fathers house (says our Savior) are many mansions, many dwelling
places, room enough.

And indeed, such is the nature of spiritual graces and blessings, that the
more they are communicated unto others, the more they are increased in
themselves, like the widows oil that multiplied more, the oftener it was
powered from vessel to vessel. 2. King. ^.2.


Nevertheless, How we must hide our graces.
to hold proportion to the parable in the application of it to our selves, I
conceive it is fit for us to Hide our Treasure also and that in three or four
respects:

1. In an holy Jealousy of our selves.
First, at our first conversion and entrance upon profession, hide it in an holy
jealousy of our selves. Be not too confident of our selves, but examine
thoroughly our estate, lest we be in a spiritual dream or delusion. Be wary
lest the shows of grace deceive us, and Satan that impostor put upon us. There
is something like faith that is not true Faith, something like true Repentance
that is not true and unfeigned repentance. Psalm. 4.4.
Examine your selves therefore upon your beds and be still, Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith, Prove your selves, and then you may know indeed
that Christ Jesus is in you except ye be Reprobates. 2. Cor. 13.5.


Secondly, in humility.
Secondly, Hide it in humility. Be not as Pharisees that do all to be seen of
men, that Pedlar-like set all to open view, and Player-like are ever upon the
stage. But let us, beloved, have more grace in our hearts then we are wont to
make show of to the world, and do more good and holy duties then we cry at the
market Cross. Let us be like humble David that Hid the Word of God in his
heart, and true members of the Spouse of Christ that is said to be All
Glorious within.

Thirdly, in an holy fear of losing it. 1. Cor. 10.12. Rev. 2.5.
Thirdly, Hide it in an holy Fear lest we lose it Non tam ut alij non videant,
quam ut ipsi non perdant. says one, He that stands let him take heed lest he
fall. He that loves, let him take heed lest he leave his first love, Rev. 2.5.
the fear of losing is the mother of care of not losing, and an excellent
means to prevent falling away, Rev. 3.11.
Hold fast therefore that thou have, that no man take thy crown.

Fourthly, in an holy self-love. Haba. 2.4.
Lastly, Hide it in an holy self-love. The just man (says the Prophet
Habaccuk) shall live by his own Faith. The faith of the believing Husband
cannot save the unbeleeving wife, nor the faith of the wife, the unbeleeving
Husband, and so it is between parents and children, pastor and people:
howsoever therefore the Church of Rome extends the Communion of Saints, even to
the partaking of other men's merits, and has erected a Common Treasury in the
Church: Let us follow the counsel of the Apostle, Let every man prove his own
work, then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, For
every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.4.5. (...).
and if any foolish Virgin shall say unto us, Give us of your oil, for our
lamps are out, let us answer them as the wise Virgins did, Not so (Ne non
sufficiat nobis and vobis) lest there be not enough for us and for you, Mat. 25
8, 9.
but go ye rather to them that sell and buy for your selves.

Fourthly, says our Savior (...). 4. Duty. He considers what he has to do.
He goes his way, that is (if there be any Emphasis in this word) he withdrawes
himself for consideration. As Solomon says of the wise woman, Pro. 31.16. she
considers a field and buyeth it, so he considers with himself what was to
be done for the purchasing of the field, and obtaining of the Treasure. Abit,
that is, studiose conatur; says O^cumenius.

Consideration necessary when we enter upon profession.
and to stand for the truth against all opposition, and rather to lose our
livings, liberties, and lives, then to make shipwreck of Faith and good
conscience, is no slight or easy matter. The marriage of our souls unto the
Lord Jesus for ever and ever, is not to be taken in hand rashly or unaduisedly,
but soberly, discreetly, and in the fear of God. Let us therefore when we
begin to build our Tower, Luke 14.28. (...). 31. (...)
sit down first and count the cost whether we have sufficient to finish it.
And when we go to war against the enemies of Christ's Kingdom, sit down
first and consult of our ability. When we go about to make this purchase, let
us consider seriously what it will or may cost us, lest we begin rashly and
hotly as many do, and be not able to go through, but give over in the plain
field. In a word, that which Christ would have us to consider is this, That
whosoever resolves not to forsake all that he has, cannot be his Disciple,
Luk 14.33.
and whosoever resolves not to sell all that he has, cannot purchase this
field and Treasure. And so I come to the fifth and last, but not the least duty,
He sells all that he has and buys that Field.] Observe here, The 5. Duty. He
sels all and buys the field.]
beloved, that he buys the field not so much for it self, as for the
Treasures sake. So Lyra: emit aegrum, ut habeas jus possidendi Thesaurum. He
buys the Field for the Treasures sake.
not propter se sed propter aliud, not for it self, but for grace and glory:
but of this after in the application of the parable.

He pays nothing for the Treasure. Grace and glory are the free gifts of God.
as I conceive, our Savior would intimate unto us, that the Treasures of the
Kingdom are unvaluable, and are the gifts of God, not the purchases of men
with money or moneys worth. Deus donater est non venditor, says Philo, God is a
free giver, and not a Merchant of his grace or glory: The Papists indeed have
coined for themselves a money of merits to buy the Kingdom of Heaven with all.
But Saint Paul tells us, Ephesians. 2.8.
that By grace we are saved, through faith, and that not of our selves, it is
the gift of God. And though sinners purchase hell, Romans 6.23.
yet the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. And
again, Non sunt condignae passiones nostrae, the short sufferings of this
life, (...), of this short moment, are not worthy of the glory which shall be
revealed. Romans 8.18.
They are worthy say the Papists, they are not worthy says Paul, and whether
of these we should believe, judge ye. But to end this point, I say to such
merit-mongers, as Simon Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8.20. Thou and thy
money perish together, Do thou think the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost
can be bought with money? or that any thing we can do or suffer, can be
aequivalent to the Kingdom of Heaven?

Now because this fifth and last point is of great use, in the spiritual
meaning of it, In the 5. duty I consider 3. particulars.
I pray you observe with me therein these three particulars.







For the first, we must sell all: First, We must sell all.]
not that God is a seller of his graces, or desirous to be enriched by our
losses, but that we our selves may be qualified for his Kingdom, we must part
with something, nay with all that we have, and those are either

Things lawful or things unlawful.

And first we must sell all unlawful things, that is, 1 Unlawful things.
We must part with all our sins and sinful lusts and courses. Whatsoever
offends us, or causes us to offend, though as near and dear as our right
hand, or right eye, we must cut it off, and pluck it out, and cast it from us.
Matt. 5.29. Mat. 5.29. Tit. 2.11.12.
The Gospel that brings salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness, and all
our worldly lusts. Repentance is godly sorrow for all sin. Gal. 5.17. (...).
Mortification is the death of all sin, and Sanctification is the contrary to
all sin: in a word, The Spirit and the Flesh are contrary one to the other, and
in continual battle, There is no concord between Christ and Belial, no
fellowship between righteousness and unrighteousness. 2. Cor. 6.14, 15.
Grace and a settled purpose to live in any one sin, (...) Harmony. Secondly,
all lawful things.
are incompatible, and can never stand together.

Secondly, we must sell all our lawful things, all our worldly profits,
pleasures, honors, friends; yea and life it self also.

Matt. ver. 21. If thou will be perfect, Matt. 19.21.
go and sell all thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have a
Treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me. Ans.
But know, beloved, that was but a particular commandment of Trial to him,
not a general rule for all perfect Christians As for these Popish votaries,
the world is awake, and sees their craft in casting away a little of their
own, to enjoy the plenty of other men's, they profess beggary and possess
Kingdoms.

For our selves, blessed be God, we may use and enjoy the good things of the
world. He that said, Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20. Romans 13.9. Ephesians. 4.28.
allows us something of our own. He that said, Thou shall give alms, allows
us something wherewith to do it of our own. Our Savior himself had a bag
or purse of which Judas was the steward, and John the beloved Disciple took the
mother of our Savior from the Cross (...), says the Text, to his own home,
Ioh. 19.27. Joh. 19.27,
In a word, its a ruled case, Acts 5.4. Act. 5.4.


How we must sell all lawful things.
Yet notwithstanding we must sell all, part with all, four or five ways.

Paul, accounting All things doung and dross in comparison of Christ, Phil.
1.8. (...). Off al to dogs.
and with blessed Moses, esteeming the rebuke of Christ (and much more Christ
himself) greater Riches then the TREASVRES of Egypt. Heb. 11.26.
For this is a certain truth, Coelestes divitiae non nisi contemptu saeculi
possidentur, It is impossible to gain spiritual riches till in our hearts we
contemn Earthly. Greg.


Paul, Act. 20.24. (...). I make no reckoning of them.
I pass not at all for these things, neither is my life dear unto me, so that
I may fulfill my course with joy.

Abram, who going up to Mount Maria to offer sacrifice to the Lord, left his
servants and his asses at the foot of the Hill. Genesis 22.5. Genesis 22.5.


Luke 16.9.

Paul, I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and of those Saints of whom he says, they took joyfully the spoiling of
their goods, Heb. 10.34. and of holy and patient Job, The Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken, Heb. 10.34. (...). Job 1.21.
now blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.21. And thus you see the first
particular how we must sell all we have.

2. We must buy the Field] Of the Word.
In the second place. As we must sell all, so must we also buy the field.] that
is, as you have heard, the Word of God, which may further be confirmed by that
precept of Solomon in plain and express terms, Prove. 23.23. Buy the truth and
sell it not; And that is to be done two or three ways.

1. Buy the Bible.
First literally, buy the book of God in which the Treasure lies hid. Let not
the book of the Law depart out of thy mouth day nor night, says the Lord to
Joshua. Josh 1.8. Josh. 1.8.
Let it not depart out of your hands, say I to you. I wonder to see any house
without this household stuff, or any hand of him or her in the Church that is
able to read, without this word of life. Chrysostom.
It was Chrysostomes usual Exhortation, O vos Laici emite Biblia; O you
Lay People buy you Bibles: Buy you Bibles says Chrysostom. Nay burn your
Bibles say the Papists, or you your selves shall be burned, so contrary are the
Spirits of Papists to the Spirit of God, and of the holy Fathers.

Secondly, maintain the Preaching of the Word. Act. 8.31.
Secondly, because thou can not understand and apply the Word aright, without
a Guide, as the truly Noble Eunuch ingenuously confessed of himself. Act.
8.31. Thou must therefore buy the Word of God preached, that is, thou art bound
according to thy calling and ability, to maintain the Preacher of Gods Word
liberally, and that with all alacrity: Let them (says the Apostle) that are
taught in the Word make their Teachers partakers of all good things. Gal. 6.6.
Gal. 6.6.
that they may be able to do their work to purpose and with joy, and not with
distraction and grief of heart, for that is unprofitable for you.

As they say of keeping cattle hardly, so say I in this case, Simile.
if you pinch your pastures, you pinch your selves, and famish and starve your
own souls. O that the unconscionable tithe payers, and Church-robbers of this
Land had hearts to consider this, and that we did all prize the Word as he
did, that said, The Law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold
and silver. Psalm. 119.72. Psalm. 119.72.


Thirdly, we must buy the Truth, not with money only, but principally with
labor and industry. Thirdly, Buy the truth with diligent labor.
Men indeed must sell for money, for Printers and Ministers cannot live upon
the air; But as the Heathen said, Dii labor hominibus vendunt: God sells
knowledge and grace for labor, Seek her as silver, search for her as for hid
Treasure, Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Prove. 2.4, 5. What will it profit us my brethren, Prove. 2.4,
5.
to have the Word of God in our houses, if we neither read it nor meditate
upon it? or to have a good Preacher in the Town, if we either hear him not,
or take little or no pains in hearing, but let the Word go in at one ear,
and out at another? nay, beloved, we must search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. 1.
Joh. 4.1.
and try the spirits whether they be of God, we must take heed how we hear,
and what we hear, Luke 8.18.
and ingraft the Word when we have heard it, yea and incorporate it into our
souls, I mean into our minds, our wills, Jam. 1.21. (...).
and our affections, and then have we bought the Truth and purchased the Field.

But we must remember in the third place, Thirdly, Buy the Field for the
Treasure.
we must buy the field of the Word, not for it self, but for the Treasure in
it, I mean for grace and glory, as we see this man (...), says the Text, for
joy of the Treasure, Get grace out of it. (...).]
goes and buys that field, not another, it was not so much the Land as the
Treasure he aimed at. Many simple people rest in this that they have a Bible,
or a Testament, and other good books in their houses, or a good Preacher in
the Town, or in some neighbor Parish; and thence conclude they cannot
possibly do amiss. Just like that idolatrous Micah, Judges 17.13.
in the 17. of Judges, ver. 13. that reasoned after the same manner. Now I know
the Lord will do me good, now that I have a Levite to be my Priest. What is
this but to make an Idol of the Bible, Vex audita perit.
and an Idol of Preaching? but such Idols cannot save thee: for the Bible may
be burnt to ashes, and the sound of Preaching vanishes in the air, and all the
Sermons preached formerly in this Church are past and gone. But the Word of the
Lord, says the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.25.
endures for ever, even this Word which is preached unto you, namely, as it
works in us Grace and Glory, V. 23. (...).
for so it lives and abides in us for ever. Get thou therefore not the shell
only, but the kernel, not the bone only, but the marrow, not the field
only, but the Treasures invaluable contained in the same. And thus beloved we
have run through the second General part of the Text; namely, what is to be
done of us for the obtaining of the Purchase, and of the five several duties,
comprehended in that general, and have insisted especially upon the last of
them, as being of the greatest weight, wherein we see the absolute Necessity
that lies upon us of selling all, of buying the field, and taking possession of
the Treasure. What now remains but to shut up all with an use or two, by way
of Application of this that has been spoken to our selves.

Use. First of Reproof of the Higling Chapmen of this Age. Number. 23.10.
Which first of all, does serve for the sharp reproof and taxation of the
trifling and higling Chapmen of this age, that have a good mind (as we say) to
the Treasures of Grace and Glory: they wish with Balaam, That they might dye
the death of the righteous, Number. 23.10. And with the young man in the Gospel,
they come to the Minister and say, Good Master what shall we do that we may
inherit eternal life. Matt. 19.22. Mat. 19.22.
something they will do, and something they will give, but yet for all this,
they will not come up rou^dly to Gods price, but when they hear that they must
sell all, That will not part
then with that young man they go away sorrowful, and never bargain any
further. 1. With unlawful things.


For first they cannot find in their hearts to part with all their sins and
unlawful lusts, although they might as well spare them as water out of the
ship. Naaman will keep his bowing in the House of Rimmon, Herod will reserve
his sweet Herodias, Ananias will give part to God, and keep back part for
himself, but not one of many will part with all; such an one is as rare as a
black Swan. The truth is, Beloved, we love our lusts too well; One is all for
pride, another all for revenge, a third for drunkenness, a fourth for adultery,
a fifth for gaming; some for one lust; some for another; but almost all men are
for one or other. What is this but to make our belly our God, our lust our God,
Phil. 3.19.
and to be lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, as the Apostle
speaks? 2. Tim. 3.4.
not that ever any were so simple as to say thus with their tongues, or to
kneel down and worship their bellies for their God: but he that knows the
heart and raines, tells us that thus it is, and the Apostle tells us that in
the last days thus it should be. Lo then, unlawful things will not be parted
withal for the Treasures sake.

of this Life, Much less will they part with lawful things.
Heavenly Treasure? I speak not this (Beloved) as if I thought there were none
such to be found; some, yea many there are I doubt not; and I pray God increase
the number of them: but yet in respect of the multitude, they are as rare as
Black Swans. The most part of men every where dote upon the world, loving it
only and altogether, or at least in the first and chiefest place. How many
Esaus are there in the world that say, Tush what is this Birthright to me, give
me the pottage so red? Genesis 25.32.
How many Gadarens that will rather part with their Savior, Mar. 5.17.
then with their very Swine? Mar. 26.15.
How many Iudasses that will sell their Savior and their Souls for thirty
pieces of silver, nay for a farthing token? Troche ludunt, prandium perdunt
pueri: Children, says Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
will play with their tops, and play away their dinners, and most men
childishly, for toys and trifles lose their God, and heaven, and their own
precious souls. Hagar now adays has beaten her Mistress Sarah out of
doors, Genesis 16.6.
I mean, the love of the world has beaten the love of God and of Religion out
of our hearts; The world, the world, that's our Treasure. If our Saviors rule
be true, That where our hearts be, there are our Treasures also, Matthew 6.21,
Mat. 6.21.
then it is most plain, that we have laid up our Treasures upon Earth, for
our thoughts, our words our works, our company are all worldly, all earthly.
All the day, all the week, yea and the Sabbath day too, is too little for the
world, Now if any man love the world, says Saint John in express terms, the
love of the Father is not in him, 1. Ioh. 2.15. 1. Joh. 2.15.
and as the ground where gold grows, is barren of all other things; so an
heart set upon the world, Simile.
is ever barren and devoid of heavenly graces, for ye cannot serve God and
Mammon, says our Savior, Mat. 6 24. Mat. 6 24.


As for our buying of the Field, I mean the Truth and Word of God, 2 Men will
not buy the Word.
it grieves my soul to think how the Book of God is generally neglected, his
tenth part for the maintenance of his Ministers defrauded, gelt, and curtayled,
and all the labor the most men take for buying Truth, is but to sit and give
the Minister the hearing, no preparation made before, and, after, no
meditation, no conference, no repetition of the things they have heard, 3 At
least not the Treasure.
no turning the Sermons into Prayer or into Practice. Men place the utmost of
their Religion in this, they have read the Word, they have heard the Sermon,
but never show me the Meat, but show me the Man. Never tell me thus many
Chapters I have read, thus many Sermons I have heard: But tell me, what art
thou? what knowledge have thou gotten, what faith, what hope, what love, what
patience, what temperance, what humility, what thankfulness, what obedience?
what good have thou gotten by the Word? How justly may we take up the complaint
of Solomon, Pro. 17.16. Pro. 17.16.
Why is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, but he wants an
heart? Men have money, time, wit, strength, means of all sorts to buy the
Field, and to gain the Treasure, but the fool wants an heart; either they get
not the Word, or get no knowledge out of the Word, or turn not their knowledge
into gracious practice, Scire cupiunt tantum ut sciant.
They desire to know only that they may know; as if a man should get together
Nummum ad numerandum, Money only to number and tell it over, Vas vitreum
lingimus sed pultem non attingimus.
and not to buy necessaries withal; and if it be thus with them, certainly
they may have got the Field, the shell, the husk, and empty Casket, but they
have not gotten yet one peny-worth of the Treasure. And by these means it
comes to pass, that while the Devil and the world have multitudes of Chapmen
flocking and thronging about them to buy their Pedling-stuffe and painted
Bables, Simile.
The Lord may stand in the high places of the City, making Proclamation, Hoe,
come and buy of me, Isa. 55.1. Isa. 55.1.
and offering his rich and inualuable Treasures, and few or none will come to
the price. Something they will bid; and something they are content to give: But
hoc aliquid nihil est, this something is as good as nothing: for when he tells
them, They must sell all that mean to have the Treasure, they go away
sorrowful, Joh. 6.^0.
saying in themselves, Durus est hic sermo, this is an hard saying and who can
bear it, this is an hard purchase and who can buy it? as if poor souls that
heaven and happiness should be bought at too dear a rate, if they should give
their sins and vanities in exchange for it.

Non Priamus tanti, totaque Troia fuit. All the lusts of Hell are not worth so
much, Mat. 16.26.
and it will be a poor advantage to win the whole world, and to lose Gods
Kingdom and their own souls. Of Exhortation to withdraw our love from sin
and the world and set it on better things.


Let the second use be for Exhortation. Let us all beloved in the Lord be
persuaded to call off and withdraw our love and affections from our sinful
lusts, and from this present evil world, and to settle, and fasten them upon
the Treasures of the Word; namely upon Christ, upon grace, and upon glory. Set
them, O set them upon Religion and the kingdom of heaven. Had we but truly
found and tasted heavenly things, we would easily contemn earthly things as
base and vile, Qui invenit coelestia, contemnit saecularia. And impossible it
is not to love these riches, Simile.
till we know better. Can children not be in love with rattles, drums,
hoby-horses, toys and trifles? 1. Cor. 13.11. (...).
but after when they know better things, of themselves they put away these
childish follies. O that we were wise, and would once put away our childishnes
from us. Abraham left all to follow God, Heb. 11.8.
though he knew not whether he went, nor what he should have when he came
there. Peter and Andrew left all to follow Christ, Mat. 4.20.
even Father and Ship, and nets and all; Matthew the Publican being called by
our Savior, rose up, left all, Mat. 9.9.
and followed him. Mat. 2.11.
The wise men of the East having found the babe Jesus, opened their Treasures,
and present to him gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Luke 19.8.
Zacheus found the man Jesus, and presently half his goods he gives to the
poor, and makes restitution of wrongs fourefold. The Primitive Saints found
the Lord Jesus, Act. 4.34.
and they sold all their possessions, and laid down the price at the Apostles
feet. And as S, Paul tells us, Heb. 11.34. Heb. 11.34.
They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves, that
they had in heaven a better and an enduring substance. The reason of all is,
they had found the Treasure, and they held nothing too good or too dear to
purchase it withal. O that we were wise unto salvation, and would follow the
examples of these heavenly Merchants, Omnes ita comparati sumus, says
Musculus, Musculus. Pecuniam in loco negligere in lucro est.
ut libenter quod minus est impendamus ut acquiramus quod majus est. Even
nature it self does teach us to part readily with a little to bring in a
greater gain. Who will not part with a penny to gain a pound? who will not
cast away a little seed that he may reap a fruitful harvest? Heb. 2.3. Not
caring for.
why should we then for vain and transitory things neglect and lose so great
salvation, (...), as the Apostle speaks. Heb. 2.3?

Let us in time bethink our selves, and with blessed Mary. Luke 10 42. Luke
10.42.
Let us choose (...), that good part which shall never be taken from us. If we
lay up Treasures for our selves with that rich fool, Luke 12. and be not rich
to God, we shall show our selves fools, Luke 12.20. (...) am^ns. Beza.
as he was, says our Savior, v. 21. and speed as he did, to whom it was said,
Thou fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee, and then
whose shall all these things be?

Take to heart S. John's motive 1 Ioh, 2 17. The world passes and the lusts
thereof, but he that does the will of God abides for ever. Motive. 1. Joh.
2.17. (...). Eccl. 12.5.
All will forsake thee, and thou must forsake all. Thy lusts will forsake thee,
Concupiscence, says Solomon, will flee away, thy lust to meat and drink, thy
lust to mirth and music, and all Court-like delights will flee from thee, as
they did from aged Barzillai. 2. Sam. 19.35.
The world also will forsake thee, it runs on orbs and wheels, and is ever
passing and sliding away. The old world is gone, the old year is gone, the old
week is gone, this day is in part gone, and carries with it the thread of thy
life. How many of our dear friends, and Gods dear chidren are passed away and
left us behind, Only the Word of God continues for ever. 1. Pet. 1. ult. 1.
Pet. 1. vlt.
and he that does the will and Word of God endures for ever, 1. Ioh. 2.17. The
Word of God will continue with thee to quicken and comfort thy soul, grace and
good conscience gotten by it will stand by thee, and thy good works done
according to it, will follow thee after death. Rev. 14.13.
True Religion will bring thee true credit, true prosperity, true and solid
comfort in life and death. And when carnal and worldly men that have laid up
their Treasures on earth, and have gone a whoring after the world and worldly
lusts, shall lose heaven and the world too, thou that have made Gods Word thy
Paradise, and God thy portion, whom to please and to enjoy thou have esteemed
thy greatest Joy and Treasure, thou shall be sure to be well provided for; for
thou have already a Treasure of grace and comfort, and shall have shortly a
Treasure of Glory, even Fulness of Joy at Gods right hand, and Pleasures for
evermore. To conclude, Psa. 16 ult.
all those that can truly say to Christ as Peter did, Mat. 19.27.
Behold Lord we have forsaken all and followed thee, What shall we have
therefore? He will undoubtedly answer them, as there he did him: Verily I say
unto you, Ver. 28.
that ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, shall sit on Thrones, and
ye that have forsaken houses or lands, or friends for my Names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold in this life, Ver 29.
and in the end inherit life everlasting. Now unto life everlasting he bring us
that laid down life and all for us, and he give us grace to deny our selves,
and to lay down life and all for him; To whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost be ever rendered, as is ever due, All honor, glory, praise and thanks
from this time forth for evermore. Amen. Amen.

The end of the second Sermon.
Soli Deo gloria.
I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tried in the fire that thou may be rich.
Rev. 3.18.

