THE LIFE OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN, SAINT CATHARINE OF SIENA.

Drawn out of all them that had written it from the beginning. And written in
Italian by the reverend Father, Doctor Caterinus Senensis.

And now translated into English out of the same Doctor, by John Fen Priest
and Confessar to the English Nuns at Louaine.

printer's or publisher's device I H S



With permission of Superiors.

Anno 1609.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND CONSTANT LADY, THE LADY D. I. ALL HAPPINESS PERSEVERANCE,
AND INCREASE IN VERTV.
MADAM,
It is now long since that my heart has had, not only a very inward compassion
of your miseries, but also a vearie earnest desire to present unto you some
godly Treatise, which might both be consolatorie unto you amidst your
discomforts, and a pattern for your conformity unto the life of Christ. Know
you therefore, that amongst all the virtues which can shine in a perfect and
constant Christian, the forsaking of worldly riches, and the patient supporting
of tribulations, are two most noble and incomparable virtues; Which doctrine was
set forth by our Savior him self, when he willed the young man in the
gospel; first, to forsake all that he had; and next, to take up his cross and
to follow him.

Unto this contempt of worldly riches (especially when there is question of the
honor of God, or zeal of virtue) many examples, not only sacred but profane,
do plentifully exhort us. Bias one of the seven Sages of Greece, seeing his
cuntrie all in fire and flames, and every man gathering of moueables and riches
to carry with him, being admonished by one to do the like, said. Truly so I
do, for all mine I carry with me (meaning his virtues). Crates the
Philosopher, having cast all his money into the bottom of the sea, said. Malo
te perdere, quam vt tu me perdas. I had rather cast away thee, then that thou
should cast away me. Aristippus coming to Diogenes, and finding him washing his
roots, said unto him; Thou bening a wise man, and a Philosopher, if thou
would credit me, thou should not need to vvash roots, but should
remain in the court of a noble Prince with me. To whom Diogenes answered; and
if thou, quoth he, wilt credit me, and use mean poverty, thou ought not
with flattery to lie to Princes.

To apply these examples unto our selves; That of Bias does teach, that virtue
is the only jewel which a wise man should seek to preserve before al worldly
riches. That of Crates: that riches are to be cast from us, and to be
renounced, when they can not be kept without the hinderance of virtue, or
offense of God. That of Diogenes: that the virtue of poverty with peace of
conscience, is far to be perferred before a princes favor, when for the same
we must flatter or dissemble against our conscience. And thus you see in these
heathen Philosophers which knew no God, what riches they contemned: what
treasures they despised: what honors they refused: and what poverty they
embraced, only for the zeal of moral virtue.

But alas so passing great is the corrupted and abused judgment of many in
these our days, that no man is deemed happy, but he that is in honor: no man
wise, but he that is wealthy: no man wretched but he that is in wantes: nor no
kind of punishment like to worldly poverty. How many are there who expose
their souls to everlasting peril, thorough the inordinate love of their
worldly riches? And how few are there, who like unto the mariners, when they
see any storms or tempests arise at sea, do cast out of their ship their
riches and merchandise to save their lives? This caused holy S. Bernard to
cry out and say. O Vtinam congregata perirent, and non congregator eorum. O
would to God the things gathered might only perish, and not their gatherer.
This caused holy David to cry out and say. Cadent a latere tuo mill, and
december millia a dextris tuis. There shall fall a thousand on thy left side, and
ten thousand on thy right side. By the right hand spiritually, is signified
riches and prosperity, and by the left poverty and adversity. In both these
men are mightily assaulted: many fall, and many are quite overcome: but
without comparison far greater slaughter is made in the time of prosperity,
wealth, and pleasure, then in the time of adversity poverty and misery. And
this caused S. Gregory to say, that the servants of God in his world, are
more a fraid of prosperity, then they are of adversity.

For this respect our merciful Lord, out of his tender love to his elect, and
fore-knowing to what hurt and danger their riches may turn them, if they
should bear an inordinate love unto them, by sundry means, does take them
from them. Imitatinge herein the cunning hunter; who having espied out the tree
against the which the Elephant uses to lean when he would sleep, does saw
asunder the tree: whereunto he thinking to repose, falls down, and so is
taken. Even so does God; from some, by cutting a sunder the lives of their
friends: from others, by taking from them their temporal goods, unto which
they leaned more then to him: and unto others, by touching them with sundry
kinds of tribulations. Which yet he does, not of any hate, but of a special
love which he bears unto them. In figure whereof, Isaac said unto Esau, genesis
27. Come near me that I may touch thee, and that I may prove if thou be my
son. And S. Gregory, askinge the question, what was wanting to Job that he
should be afflicted, seeing he was adorned with all virtue; This, says he, that
he might know to give thanks in adversity. For as the Apostle S. Paul says;
Virtue is perfited in infirmity. To which purpose, when a certain person
besought a holy man, that by his prayers he would deliver him of his sickness;
the holy man having heard that he was better and deuouter in his sickness then
in his health, ansvvered; I beseech our Lord to keep thee in that state, in
which thou art best. For well he knevve that our Lord has a vvonderfull
care over such as he suffers to be afflicted. Unto whom he is, as the
phisitien is to the patient, who fights not against the man, but against his
disease. Unto whom he speedely runs as to a hurt member of his body, and
with a most special care and providence does look unto him, and power into
his soul most plentiful store of heavenly grace and divine consolation.

Now Madam, for as much as you have voluntarily deprived your self of the
riches and pleasures of this world, for the honor of God, how may you not
joyfully rejoice with our Savior Christ and say. Nunc venit princeps mundi
huius and in me non habet quicquam. Now the prince of this world comes, and
in me he has nothing. And having likewise so patiently supported so great
tribulations, how may we not al with vvonder say. Venite and videte opera
Domini, quae posuit prodigia super terram. Come and see the works of our
Lord, what wonders he has put upon the earth. For as Sampson being demanded
wherein his great force and strenght consisted, confessed it to lie hid in
most vveake hairs: so truly we may rightly confess and say the like, that
God has hidden in a most vveake sex, most vvorthie valor, victory and
invincible courage. You may well be confident in the goodness of him, who never
permiteth any to be tempted above their ability. For our Lord deals with the
just, as he which casts, a precious glass up on high, and suffers it to
fall until it come near the ground, and then catches it and saves it that
it be not broken: meaning thereby not to break the glass, but to show his
art, that he knows how to save it, even when to others it seems to be
utterly lost.

Wherefore, good Madam, nether let your long afflictions seem tedious unto
you, nor account that lost which you have left for Christ. If we cast water
about the root of a fruitful tree, we do not think that water lost, because
we expect great abundance of fruit: even so, that which we forgo for the
love of Christ, is not lost, for we shall gather of that tree, the fruit of
eternal life. Rather rejoice herein, that by this your patience and sufferance
you preserve your soul in the grace and favor of almighty God; Which such as
this world would be if the sun were taken from it, such is a soul when it is
deprived of the light of grace. Again rejoice for that you are made herein a
true imitator and follower of Christ: who as S. Augustine says, did him self
contemn all earthly goods, to show that they ought to be contemned; and
likewise suffered in him self all earthly evils, which he commands us to
suffer; that nether in the one should be thought felicity, nether in the other
should be feared infelicitie. Again rejoice for that there is laid up for you
a copious revvard in the kingdom of heaven. For if to him that had employed
his five talents and made them ten, so great a recompense was assured, what a
vvonderfull recompense shall you receive for more then ten hundred pounds a
year which you have forsaken for the love of Christ? How shall not our
Savior say unto you. Well done good and faithful servant, because thou have
been faithful in little I will set thee over much, enter into thy Masters joy.
Again rejoice for that you have so vvisely defeated the devil, and and
escaped and avoided his crafty snares, whose sutteltie and meaning was, by
disposessing you of yours, to have posessed him self of you. For the Devil
when he depriueth us of our worldly substance, does it not for the love
thereof, for that such things, are not so precious to him; it is our soul
that he would gain, all the rest he nothing regards. For so he took from
Job, his substance, his children, and the health of his body, but chiefly
intended to destroy his soul.

Now therefore, for as much as it is perseverance which brings every virtue to
his perfection, you must ever be furnished with perfect Fortitude, the only
virtue of all others insuperable; for all the world can not overcome one man in
whom is true Fortitude. And as Seneca says. It is more easy to overcome one
whole nation, then one such man. For what can all the enemies and persecutors
in the world do, when they have done the utmost of their malice, but that
which every little ague, or any other little disease can do unto you as well as
they? Yea if al men and devils should bend their forces against one man alone,
what greater hurt or evil can they work him, then to deliver him out of this
vale of misery, and to send him the sooner into the cuntrie of heaven and
company and society of the blessed Saints? Wherefore, if besides all the
troubles you have all ready sustained for the love of Christ, you should
further be threatened with a thousand evils, arm your self to surmount them
all with this only answer, recounted by Cassian in his Collations. Who
tells, that an Infidel outraging upon a day an holy Hermit asked him.
Quaenam miracula, and prodigia, tuus Christus in mundo edidit? What miracles
and wonders has thy Christ done in the world. To whom the good Hermit made
answer saying. Vt his ac maioribus iniurijs non mouear, nec offendar minis.
That I be not moved with these and with greater injuries, nor am feared with
threatninges. If yet further you should be threatened with a thousand deaths,
answer as Seneca ansvvered the like objections which he made to him self,
saying. Thou shall dye. One this condition, quoth he, to go from hence, I came
hither. Thou shall dye. It is the law of all nations, to restore again what
one has borrowed. Thou shall dye. It were foolishnes to fear what can not
be eschued. Thou shall dye. I am not the first nor shall not be the last. All
have gone before me, and all shall follow after me.

Finally, let not I beseech you, the example of such as flinch, or go back in
the time of affliction, be any offense or trouble to you; True it is, that it
is a great scandal unto the vveake, and a great discomfort and grief to the
servants of Christ. But Madam, remember that of such it is said, that they
departed because they loved more the glory of the world then the glory of
Christ. They be of those, who were present and follovved Christ when he
entered into Jerusalem in glory and triumph, but forsook and left him at the
time of his passion. Men that would have a Jesus of silk and velvet.
Svvallovves, who are present at the beging of summer, but depart in vvinter.
But you (vvoorthie Lady) have begun a glorious combat for the love of
Christ, you have honorably entered the same, you have patiently pursued, you
have victoriously sustained, Prospere proceed and regna, persevere that you may
be crowned. Show your self to be that happy mother of the Machabes, who by
her virtuous and constant example, exhorted her children to endure all
torments, yea death it self, rather then to violate the law of their God.
Which constancy and blessed perseverance, vvoorthie Madam, I chiefly vvishe
unto your self, and next to your self, unto your Son and heir, and to
those good gentlevvomen your daughters, which have remained with you in your
tribulations. And for the rest of all yours, which are separated from you,
from the very bottom of my heart I humbly pray for their conversion.

Good Madam, so judge of the heart vvher with this work is consecrated and
dedicated unto you, as if it had been in his power, the self same heart would
as gladly have presented you a wedge of gould; With the which as you might
have been more enriched: so are you by this more honored, by how much the
praise of virtue, is to be preferred before all the treasure and wealth of the
world. The continance and increase vvherof, I ever vvish both to you and yours.

Your Ladyships servant ever during his life. JOHN HEIGHAM*

THE LIFE OF THE MOST PVRE AND ANGELIKE VIRGIN, S. CATHARINE OF SIENA, IN whom
and by whom almighty God wrought many strange and wonderful things.
THE FIRST PART.
Of the birth and infancy of this holy virgin* and of certain wonderful
tokens of holiness, that showed in her even in that age.

CHAP. I.
THere was in Siena, which is an ancient city of Tuscan in Italy, a certain
man called James benincasa, a dyer by occupation, no rich man of substance,
but having conveniently well to live. He lived, as he was brought up, in the
fear of God: and toward the world he was a plain and upright dealing man,
well-beloved of all, that had any conversation with him, by reason of his sweet
and gentle demeanor: which virtue among many other, was noted in him to be
singular. This James took to, wife a woman called Lapa, who was likewise a
virtuous woman, very careful and diligent about her family, and withal of
very modest, chaste, and womanly behavior. And therefore almighty God blessed
her with many children, of the which she bare for the most part every year
one, and some years two. Last of all it pleased God so to dispose, that she
brought forth two daughters at one birth. The one was called Ione, which,
after she was baptized, lived not many days. The other was this Catharine, of
whom we mind here to speak: whom the mother brought up with great diligence,
and loved more tenderly then she did the rest of her children, because the rest
coming on so fast one upon an other, that she might not endure to nourse them
her self, but put them out to others, this only she noursed at home with the
milk of her own breasts: which was one great cause of special love. But the
thing, that did most principally move the mother to cast a singular affection
toward this daughter, was a certain unwonted and marvelous grace, which
showed in the deliteful presence, deeds, gestures, and words of this child,
even in the time of her tender in fancy. For when she was but only weaned from
the mothers milk, and could a little go about the house, the parents and
neighbors thought they could never have their fill of seeing and hearing her:
her countenance was so sweet and amiable, her talk so witty and to so good
purpose. And as she grew in years, so did she also increase in grace and
wisdom: in so much, that when she was five years old, having then learned
the Aue Marie, she used continually to say the same with ripe judgment and
fervent devotion. And going up and down a pair of stayers that were in the
house, her manner was to say one Aue Marie upon every step, kneeling upon her
knees with great reverence. The which singular devotion toward our blessed
Lady, how acceptable it was to almighty God, it may right well appear by the
most excellent graces and privileges, that ensued thereupon even in her tender
age: which were undoubtedly most certain tokens of a very noble and high
calling, of God: as hereafter shall be declared more at large.

Of a very strange vision showed unto her: and of certain wonderful effects
of the love of God toward her, and of her love toward God.

Chap. 2.
When she was six years old, her mother seeing her to be of a very towardly
wit, sent her on a day with her brother Steven, who was somewhat elder then
she, to a sisters house of theirs called Bonaue^tura a married woman, either to
see how she did (as the manner of kinsfolks is) or else in some other arrand.
When she had done, what she was willed by her mother to do, she returned
homewardes again: and passing by a street, which is called in their tongue
Valle piatta, she cast up her head a little, and looked toward the Church of
S. Dominicke, which stood there right over against her, and behold, she saw
in the aier a goodly chamber royally decked, and in it our Lord and savior
Jesus Christ, sitting in a seat imperial, clad with a solemn pontifical robe,
wearing on his head a mitre, such as the bisshops of Rome are wont to wear:
and with him she saw the Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, and S John the
Evangelist. When this blessed infant beheld all this, at the first she was
astonished. But afterward being come to her self, and well advised, she cast
up her eyes, both of body and soul, to her Savior: who likewise cast the eyes
of his divine majesty upon her, with a lovely and smyling cheer. And
stretching out his right hand toward her and over her, made the sign of the
Cross (as the manner of bisshops and prelates is to do) and gave her his
blessing. The which forthwith wrought so effectually and mightily in her, that
she was ravished and transfourmed spiritually into that most glorious and
beawtiful Lord; whom she beheld with such an inward and spiritual liking, that
she forgot, not only her going and way, but also her own self. In so much
that she stood still there, without moving any part of her body: and so would
she have stood, not only then, but many other times also, without regard or
fear of either men or beasts, (which are wont to be dreadful to little
children) if she had not ben towched, or taken away by some other. But at the
lenght her brother Steven, who was gone on his way, imaginyng that she had
followed, turnyng back and seeing her a great way behind, standing still in
the way, and looking up into the eleme^t, cried unto her alowd and called her
by her nam; But she gave him no word to answer: for she was in deed so wholly
occupied in all her senses both in wardly and outwardly, that she gave no heed
to his crying: whereupon he went nearer and nearer, and evermore as he went, he
cried unto her. But all was to no purpose, until he came at length to the
very place, where she stood, and took her by the hand, saying. What do
thou here: why come thou not away? At the which words and pulling of her
hand, she cast down her eyes a little, like one that had been awaked out of a
dead sleep, and said. Oh, said she, if thou had seen that goodly sight,
that I saw, thou would never have done so to me. And when she had said
those words, she cast up her eyes again, thinking to have seen it, as she
did before. But when she saw that it was vanished away, she revenged the
injury done unto her by her brother, as children are wont to do, with weping.
And it grieved her so much the more, because she persuaded her self, that by
the casting down of her eyes, she had deserved to leese the blisful fruition
of that glorious sight. Thus ended this wonderful vision, leaving her with such
a thirst and languishing love after that heavenly beawtie, which she had
seen, that from this time forward her whole care and study was, how to
recover the same again. Now when our Lord had after this manner watered the
root of his little pla^t with the dew of his sweet blessing, she began
forthwith to yeald, not only buddes and blossoms of great matters in
expectation, but also ripe fruits of diverse and sundry excellent and perfect
virtues: in so much that in all her behavior she showed her self to all
those, that God vowchsafed to converse with her, not like an infant, as her
years required; nor yet like a young woman, (which not withstanding in that
age had been a very strange matter) but like a grave and sad matrone. This
heavenly fire of Gods holy love had wrought such an alteration in her heart,
such a light in her understanding, such a fervor in her will, such a plyantnes
in all her powers, both of body and soul, to follow the instincte of his
holy Spirit, that to them, that saw her behavior, and took good heed to
her words and deeds, it seemed that she was wholly transformed into
JESUS CHRIST her sweet spowse and Savior. In so much that on a day going to
confession (as her manner was) she declared of her self to her gostlie father,
that she had learned the lives and austeritie of diverse ancient fathers in
Egypt, and other Saints, and specially of the holy patriarch S. Dominicke,
not by the teaching of men, nor by reading in books, but by revelation from
God: and that she had such a desire to frame her life after the examples and
rules of those holy men, that she could think upon none other thing, but only
how to bring the same to pass. Whereupon she entered into a new course of life,
which was so strange and unwonted (especially in that tender age) that all men
had great wonder of it. First of all she gave over all manner of play and
sport, wherein young children are wont to take delight. Then she withdrewe her
self from all company, that she might have the freer and more familiar
access to God, in holy meditations and prayers. She bound her self to a
wonderful kind of silence, she punished her body with much abstinence, and
other hard discipline. The which that she might do with the more commodity
and secrecy, she sought out a privy place in the house, where she might
scourge her self with a cord, which she had provided for that purpose. And as
she was a towardlie scholar in the school of Christ, yealding her self very
ployantly to be lead from virtue to virtue, whether soever it pleased the
spirit of God to lead her: so was she also a diligent and discrete
schole-mistres, and used means to allure and train other little children also
of her age, in the same patthes of virtue and austere life. In so much, that
when the neighbors children resorted unto her (as they did oftentimes) being
sterred to grace by the sweet words, and holy example of this gracious
infant, they would gather them selves together in a certain secret place of
the house, which she had chosen out for the nonce, and there would they scourge
them selves, as they saw her to do, saying in the mean time each of them, a
certain number of Pater nosters and Aue Mary's, according as she prescribed
them to say. By these and other the like exercises of piety and devotion, she
fownd such favor in the sight of her heavenly spowse, that very many time,
when she set her self to go up and down those staiers in her fathers house,
saying her Aue Mary's after such sort as we declared before, it was seen by
diverse and sundry persons, that she was carried sensibly in the air by the
almighty power of God and ministry of Angels; without towching any step
of the same with her feet. And this happened unto her, namely at those times,
when she retired her self from all company, and specially of men. And there
is no doubt, but that it happened in that place, to give her and others to
understand, how acceptable that devotion toward the most glorious mother of
God, which she exercised in that place, was to almighty God.

Of a bold entreprise, which this blessed infant made, to live a solitary
life, after the manner of auneie^t Fathers in Egypt; And how she understood,
that it was not the will of God, that she should enter into that state of life
as yet.

Chap. 3.
THis young virgin had learned by revelation, that the trade of life, which the
ancient Heremites lived in Egypt, was very acceptable unto God: and therefore
she had a passing great desire, to seek out some solitaire place in the
wilderness, where she might likewise live after their rules and examples. But
she could not devise, how to bring her desired purpose to pass. And because it
was not the will of God, that she should take that trade of life in such manner
as she desired, he left her in this point to her own natural wit, and would
give her none other direction, but only what her own childish wit could
devise. Whereupon to accomplish the great desire that she had to serve God in
the wilderness, on a day tymely in the morning, she made her provision (like a
child) of one loaf of bread, and with the same took her way toward her
sisters house, which was married, and dwelt near unto the gate of S. Ansanus.
Howbeit she entered not into the house, as she was wont to do, but passed by,
and went out at the gate: (and so did she never before that time.) And so
passing forth, until she came at the lenght, where she saw the howses
standing one here and an other there, and not together, as she was wont to see
them in the city, she began to be glad and hoped well, that she was near to
the wilderness. Yet she held on her way a little further, and came at the last
to a place, where she fownd a little cave under a bancke, which pleased her very
well. And forth with she entered into the same with passing great joy and
gladness; for she persuaded her self verily, that she had now fownd out that
wilderness, that she so much desired. And when she was entered, she stood not
long to consider of the opportunity of the place, or how she might acco^modate
her self in that new oratorie, but by and by without any further aduisement
or consideration, she fell down on her knees, and set her self to prayer with
great humility and fervor of spirit The which lowly and devout mind was so
acceptable in the sight of our Lord, that although it was not his holy will
and pleasure, that she should follow that order of life, yet to give her to
understand that no holy desire or purpose shall ever pass unrewarded, he gave
her this toke^. As she was praying with a very vehement bent of mind, she was
taken up by little and little from the earth, where she kneeled: and her body
was lifted up as high as the height of the cave would suffer her to rise. And
so she continued from morning till noone. But when she perceived, that she was
thus lifted up from the earth, she began to fear and to suspecte, that it
might be some deceit of the ghostly enemy, whose drifte might be, by this
mean to put her in fear, and so to hinder her designement of going into the
wilderness. And therefore she set her self to pray more fervently, and to abase
her self more and more before God. Whereupon about that very hour, that our
Savior after his passion was taken down from the Cross, it pleased his
divine majesty, that she likewise should descend by little, and little in like
manner as she had ascended. And he made her to understand by his secret
inspiration, that the time was not yet come, in the which she should forsake
her fathers house, and put her body to such penance and affliction. Wherefore
she was in mind to return home again. But when she came forth and saw her
self all alone, and beheld the gate of the city, which seemed to be so far
off, that she douted her weak and feeble body would never be able to endure
so long a journey, fearing also lest her father and mother should think that
she had been lost, she set her self again to prayer, and committed the matter
wholly to God: who failed not to supply the weakness of his little hand maid,
and sent a little clowd, which took her up from the grownd, and carrying her in
the air, set her in a very short time in the gate of the city: from whence
she went with all speed home to her Father and mother: who suspected nothing at
all of any such matter, but thought she had been with her sister Bonauentura.

How she vowed her virginity unto almighty God.

Chap. 4.
SVch was the virtue and operation of this before mentioned revelation, that it
drew al wordlie love and affection out of the heart of this young maid, and
wrought in the same a certain holy love to the Son of God only, and to his
most glorious mother the virgin Marie. And this love was so great, that she
accounted all the delites and pleasures of this wordle as very dirt and dong,
in comparison of her sweet spowse Jesus Christ. Moreover, being now seven
years old, she had learned only by the inward instruction of the holy Ghost
in her heart, that is was a goodly state of life, and withal very acceptable
unto God, to live in all purity and cleannes both of body and soul. She had
learned also, that our blessed Lady the most pure and unspotted mother of God,
was the first that dedicated her self by vow to serve God in that most clean
and perfect state of virginity. And therefore she thought it most expedient,
for the obteinyng of that grace, to make her humble suite to her, who had
before al others obtained the same at Gods hand for her self, and undoubtedly
for all those, that should afterward require it at her hand, with the like
humility and earnest desire. Being therefore of the age of seven years, she
set her self very gravely and sadly to take aduisement, what order of life
was best for her to take: and for the better resolution in that point, she
prayed to our blessed Lady, queen of Angels and virgins, that it would please
her to make intercession to her dear Son, that he would vowchsafe to teach
her by the instincte of his spirit, what way she might best take, that were
most to his glory and to her sowles health. Our blessed Lady, mother of pity
and comfort by whose gracious mocion this holy desire was first planted in her
heart, heard the discrete demand of this wise young virgin, and answered her
just request, First with a daily increase of greater desire and longing after
the thing requested, which was to know, how she might order her life, to be
most acceptable unto God, and then also with a resolution from God, certifying,
her by secret inspiration in her heart, that his will and pleasure was, that she
should serve him with all purity both of body and soul, in the state of
virginity. The, which when she understood, she suffered not that heavenly fire
enkendled in her heart, to be quenched nor to slake, but being wholly inflamed
with the love of that most excellent and goodly manner of life, she chose out a
secret place in the house, far from the conversation of all persons, where
she might with the more freedom of spirit, offer up her prayers and vows to
almighty God: and there composing her self, both in body and mind with all
humility, she made her prayer after this manner. O most blessed Lady, O most
glorious and sacred virgin, mother of God, which before all other women did
by vow, consecrate thy virginity unto God, and becamest thereby so gracious in
his sight, that he would have his only Son to be borne of thee: I most humbly
beseech thee, trusting not in any merits of mine own, but only in thine
unspeakable pity, that thou will vowchsafe to obtain me such grace and favor
with thy only begote^ Son, that from this day foreward I may take him for the
lawful and deerly belowed spowse of my soul. And I here give my faith and
promise both to him, and to thee, that I shall never take other spowse, but
shall by the assistance of his holy grace, do what in me lies, to keep my
self a true, and undefiled virgin to him alone. Thus prayed this young handmaid
of Christ with great lowlines and feruencie of of spirit; And her prayer was
heard, her vow accepted, and she received to be the undefiled spowse of the
unspotted lamb of God Jesus Christ. The which thing when she understood (as
she did by and by, by the inward inspiration of the holy Ghost) being
replenished with a certain holy fear, she employed her whole care and
study, how she might best keep her self chaste, and true to her dear spowse.
And though as yet she felt no motion to uncleanness in her flesh, yet to provide
like a wise woman, for the time to come, she began even in those tender years,
to tame her body with fasting, watching, and abstinence from all deliteful
things, and namely from eating of flesh. In so much, that when any flesh was
laid unto her at the table, either she gave it to her brother Steven that sat
by her, or else she conveyed it privily away, that no man might see it. She
prayed very often and much, and subdued her body with much hard and sharp
discipline, sometimes by her self alone, and sometimes with other young
children, which resorted unto her at times, and were as it were trained under
her in spiritual exercises. And so with these and other the like works, she
preserved and increased the graces of God, that were planted in her, by her
dear spowse Jesus Christ.

Of a woderfull zeal, that was in her to win sowles to God: and how for that
cause she cast a great love to S. Dominicke, and to his order.

Chap. 5.
AFter that this young virgin had thus espowsed her self to the Son of God,
she was wholly enflamed with the holy fire of his heavenly love in such sort,
that she had a passing great desire and zeal not only to be united her self
to him with a pure and sincere love, but also to win other sowles also. By
reason of the which zeal she cast a special affection to those Saints, that
she understood had taken pains specially about the bringyng of sowles under
the sweet yoke and obedience of Christ. And understanding by revelation from
God, that S. Dominicke had institued the order of the friars Preachers to that
end, she had the brethren of that order in such reverence, that when she saw
any of them passing by her fathers house, she would go after them with great
humility and devotion, and kiss the very steps, where they had set their
feet. She had also a marvelous great desire to be professed her self in that
rule, that she with the rest of the brethren might do, what in her lay, to win some sowles unto God. But when she saw, that she might not do so,
because she was a woman, she thought to take an other way, which was, to go
into some far countries and there to change her apparel, and so to be
received into some cloister for a man. Thus she thought of her self, but yet
not altogether without some president. For she had understood before of S.
Euphrosina (by whose name she was commonly called, while she was a little one,
peradventure by Gods providence to for-signifie this holy designeme^t) that
she had after such a manner changed her attire, and lived a very religious and
straight kind of life in a monastery among men. But though this desire and
purpose continued long in her mind, yet at the lenght by her humble and
continual prayer, she obtained at Gods hand to understand, that he would not
have her to take that way: whereupon she gave it over. Now this young virgin
waxed fast in the growth and stature of her body, but much faster in the
increase of virtue, in meekenes, in devotion, in grave and womanly behavior,
demeanyng her self in all her words and deeds so discretly, and with such an
unwonted gravity in that age, that her parents, acquaintance, and neighbors
had her in great admiration. Amongst a number of things, that passed very
notably of that sort, this one act (me thinks) is not to be passed over with
silence. It befell on a day, that her mother, having a special devotion to S.
Anthony, would have a Mass to be said in the honor of the said Saint.
Whereupon she called her daughter unto her, and taking her certain candels and
money in her hand, said these words unto her. Go daughter (said she) to the
church, and pray our parish Priest, that he will sing or cause to be song, a
Mass in the honor of S. Antonie; And offer up this money and candels upon the
altar. She took the money and candels of her mother willingly (as she was
evermore very glad and ready, to do whatsoever she was commanded by her
parents, especially if it tended to the honor of God) and went without any
tariance to the church, and did as she was willed to do. And furthermore for
her own private devotion, she continued out the whole Mass, and all the rest
of the divine service. Now her mother thought she would have returned home
again, so soon as she had made her oblation unto the Priest. And therefore
when she was come home, to make her ashamed of her long tarying, she spoke unto
her, as the manner of mothers is to speak unto little children. Cursed be those
wicked tongues (said she) that said, my daughter should come no more. She is
come at the lenght, though it be long first. The child hearing those words,
held her self still for a while, and gave no word again. But after a good
space, when she had, as it were, well advised her self, she took her mother
aside, and with great sadness of countenance said meekely unto her. Good mother,
when ye see, that I do transgress any commandment of yours, beat me with a
rod, as you shall think best, that I may be the more wary an other time, for
it stands well with right and reason, that ye so do. But one thing I pray
you: for my faults curse no man or woman in the wordle, good or bad, for it is
unseemly for you to do it, and to me, it is a great grief of mind to hear
it. The mother was so astoined at the discrete answer and grave counsel of her
young daughter, that for a good time she could not devise how to say any more
unto her. How beit because she would not have her to understand so much, she
turned to her again and said. Why, werte thou then so long away? Dear
mother (said she) I tarried to hear that Mass, and the rest of the divine
service: and that done, I came straight home, without tarying in any place.
Then was the mother more edified by those words, then she was before, and went
to her husband, and told him all that had passed between her and her daughter.
The which when he heard, he weighed the matter like a wise man with him self,
and took it to be a very certain token, of some great grace and singular
holiness, that was like to ensue in his daughter: who increasing day by day,
in the love and fear of God, lead her life in these and other the like works
of virtue and godliness, until she came to the age of twelve years.

How she relented somewhat in her spiritual exercises, being thereunto induced
by the importunity of her mother and sisters, who would needs have her to use
some diligence in trymyng and setting out of her self. And of the penance,
which she did for that offense.

Chap. 6.
WHen this maid was now come to the age of twelve years and upward, her father
and mother took great care, how they might bestow her honestly in marriage;
for the better perfourmance whereof, that there might not lack any grace or
comelines to set her forth withal, that either was in her by nature, or might
be had by diligence: her mother, after the manner of women in that country (in
deed rather much used, then greatly commended) was earnest with her, that she
should bestow more time and diligence, in washing and scowring her skin, in
kembing and couloring her hair, in plucking up such hairs as grew in her
face or neck disorderedly, and in other the like vain and superfluous
attendances, about the trymming and decking of her body, to please the eyes of
men. But the young spowse of Christ, whose heart was wholly prevented with the
love of the fairest and beawtifullest among the sons of men, who had also
both the louelines of her spowse, and her own faith and truth, so lately
plight to him, evermore present before her eyes, could in no wise be induced,
to withdraw any time from the inward decking of her soul, to make it appear
seemly in the sight of God, and to bestow the same about the outward
adornynge of her body, to make it gracious and liking to the eyes of men. And
therefore she showed her self to be utterly unwilling, to follow her mothers
counsel in that point. When her mother saw, that her words and persuasion
could take no place, she was very angry with her, and sent for her other
daughter called Bonauentura, which was married, and willed her to deal with her
sister, and to use all possible means to cause her to condescend to her
request. Who did as she was willed by her mother, and in deed left no thing
vn-assaied, whereby she thought she might win her purpose. And so in the end,
what by the importunity of the mother, and what by the example and fair
speech of Bonauentura (unto whom Catherine had always borne a special love
and affection even from her child hoold) the young virgin was, as it were,
enforced to yeald somewhat to the folly, commonly received among women, and so
to spend some time more then she was willing, about the attiere of her body.
But afterward, when she had retired her self from company, and considered
of the matter by her self alone, she took marvelous great sorrow for it, and
was Confessed also for it, with such sobbing and sighing, that any man would
have supposed, that she had committed some very grievous offense. She used
often times to make a general Confession of her whole life: and evermore when
she came to this point, she could make no end of weeping and lamenting. The
which thing the Confessor perceiving, though he knew, that it was a token of
a timorous and well disposed mind, sometimes to fear sin, where none is, yet
because it seemed strange to him, that she should have a conscience of it, as
of a mortal sin, whereas he by his learning, was fully resolved, that in
truth it was not so; he asked her, whether she had in all that time any
deliberate will and purpose, to do any thing contrary to her vow. Whereunto
she answered and said, that it never, came in her heart. Then he asked her
further more, whether she did it to that end, that she might be the better
liked of men. To the which demand, she made answer likewise and said, that
there was no one thing that grieved her more, then when she was driven, by any
necessary occasion, either to see, or to be seen of men, whom otherwise she
was wont to flee, like as men flee serpents; For the which cause she would
never stand at the door or window, to see, or to be seen of men passing by
the house. The Confessor proceeded in examinyng the matter, and demanded
whether her attiere were over gaie, light, or otherwise excessive, above that,
that was commonly used of other women of her degree. Whereunto she answered and
said, that it was not. Why then (said he) do ye take your offense to be so
grievous in the sight of God? Sire (said she, sobbing and sighing from the
botome of her heart) because I think, I did at that time prefer the love of
my sister, before the love of God: and whiles I was afraid to offend a silie
transitory creature, I offended the divine majesty of the everlasting
Creator, and sweet spowse of my soul Jesus Christ. And with that she fell a
weeping and wailing very ruthfully, and did great penance upon her self. The
which the Confessor seeing, pitying her state, and thinking it expedient to
comfort her in that case, said unto her. Albeit there was some manner of
excess, yet considering that it was but little, and done for no wicked or euel
intent, but only for a vain pleasance for that time, I take it, it was not
against the commandment of God. When she heard her Confessor say so, she
lift up her eyes to heaven, and cried with a loud voice. Oh my Lord God, what a
ghostly Father is this, that excuses my sins? And so with an earnest
displeasure against her self, she turned to her Confessor again, and said;
Father, think you, that this most wretched and vile creature, which have
received so many graces and gifts of my Creator, only of his more goodness,
without any merit on my part, should withdraw any time from the service of
such a loving and bowntiful Lord, and bestow the same about the setting out of
this rotten and stinking flesh, which might also be a cause, or inducement, to
deadly sin? When the Confessor hard those words, and saw that they
proceeded from a heart wonderfully inflamed with the fire of Gods love, being
not able to answer her, he gave over to speak of that matter any more.
Nevertheless he proceeded to examine the whole state of her life. And when he had
done in that behalf, so much as apperteined to a learned and discrete ghostly
Father to do, he gave afterward a very sufficient testimony before God and
his holy Church, that, when he had heard her Confessions, both general and
special, all the time of his life, he could never epsy any spot of mortal
sin in her conscience, unless this be taken for a mortal sin, which no
learned divine (I think) would ever judge. He testified furthermore both by
word of mowth and in writing, that he found her always so clean from venial
sins, that he could scantly perceive by her Confession (which she made both
very often and very exactely) that she did commit any offense at all: in so
much that it was well known, not only to her ghostly Father that examined her
conscience, but also to as many, in effect as had any conversation or
doings with her, that she did never, or seeldome offend so much as in word.
And so will any man judge, that shall with good diligence, and attention, read
over the whole story of her life. For he shall see, that the order of her life
was such, her silence so wonderful, her sleep so short, her eating and
drinking so spare, her prayers so continual, her meditations and contemplations
so heavenly, her exhortations to others so earnest and so often used, her whole
conversation so meek and sweet, that where such graces did abound, it was not
possible, that sin should take any place, and where so much time was spent
in holy exercises, there could not be much time spare, to be bestowed in
synful works.

How she recovered her wonted liberty in serving God, and was reconciled
again to her spowse. How the persecutions, that she sustained at home, did not
only not hurt her, but also profit her very much.

Chap. 7.
WHen this young maid had been thus induced, by the importunity of her mother,
and sister, to condescend to their ungodly request, so far forth, as is
before declared, she perceived in her self, that she was much slacker and
colder in her prayers and meditations, then she was wont to be before. Which
happened unto her undoubtedly, by the permission of God: Whose provident
goodness disposes all things for his chosen servants so sweetly, that he
turns even their synful deffectes, to their further good and benefit. And
therefore he would not suffer his dear spouse to continue long in that state,
but that there might be nothing to hinder her fervor and devotion, he laid his
hand soon after upon Bonauentura her sister, by whose means she was induced
to that inconvenience, and took her out of this life, with great anguish and
travail in childbearing: not withstanding that she was otherwise a lusty
young woman, and like to bear many children. This Bonauentura was ever of good
life, and conversation: and yet, because she had attempted to draw her sister
from the service of God (to whom only she had wholly devoted her self) and to
allure her to the vanities of the world, it pleased God to show this dreadful
example upon her, for the terror of all such, as should at any time
afterward be means to hinder holy vows and purposes. And yet would he not
have her to be utterly lost: but (as it was revealed afterward to this holy
virgin, and she declared the same secretly to her ghostly Father) she was in
Purgatory, and there abode many grievous pains and torments, for a long
season, and longer should have done, if this blessed virgin, had not hopen her
with her devout prayers. Now when her sister Bonauentura was thus passed out of
the wordle, this devout maid, being by her departure, delivered from that
importunate clamor, which was before very troublesome unto her, began to see
more clearly, both the deformity of her sin, and the vanity of the wordle.
Whereupon, with an humble knowledge of her self, and sure affiance in the
mercy of God, she cast her self down at the feet of our Lord with Marie
Magdalen, and there lying prostrate with much lamentation and tears, besought
him of pardon for her offense, and would never give over her weeping and
wailing, but continued still her most humble suit, that she also might at the
lenght hear those comfortable words, spoken by our Lord to her heart; Thy
sins are forgeuen thee: And from that day foreward she began to bear a
special love and devotion to the said Marie Magdalen, and to conform her self
to her in the works of penance. It can not be expressed with words, what
inward grief of mind she took, so often as that offense came to her mind.
She sighed and sobbed, she wept and wrang her hands, she took no comfort in
any thing but only in the endless mercy of God, of the which she made her
self well assewred, that it did infinitely pass all the sins, that any man
does, or can commit, and that it was always freely offered to as many, as
would require it, with a contrite and humble heart: whereupon she sequestered her
self from all creatures, which (she saw) were void of comfort, and turned her
self to God, in whom only she fownd her self to receive perfect and sownd
comfort. With him she sought by all means, to make her peace and atonement,
and so that made, to set her whole love and felicity in him. But the ghostly
enemy of mankind, envying the blisful state of this goodly peace, did his
endeavor to disturb the same, by putting into the minds of her parents and
kinsfolk, how expedient it was, to bestow her honestly in marriage, especially
now, considering that her other sister was departed this life. And so by these
and other the like suggestions, the crafty serpent persuaded them to be
earnest and diligent, both in soliciting her to embrace that state of life,
and in providing her of a convenient husband. But when the wise virgin saw by
the light of Gods holy spirit, that all that, was but the sutteltie of the
deuel, meaning thereby to withdraw her from her holy purpose, she contrary
wise set her self more earnestly, then she was wont, to continual prayers,
heavenly meditations, and other works of austeritie and penance. She eschewed
the sight, and conversation of men, and gave all her frindes to understand
plainly, that she would have no earthly creature for her husband, but only
the everlasting Son of God, upon whom she had fixed her love. The which
resolution when her father and mother understood, they thought good to take an
other way; which was, to send for one of the Dominican Friars, whose
authority, they thought, she would reverence, and to entreat him to talk with
her, and to see if he could by any means alter her mind. The Friar came, and
promised to do what in him lay: and so did in deed. He set out unto her in
many words, what austeritie of life belonged to that profession, that she
minded to enter into, what a hard matter it was to hold out in the same, what
snares the deuel would lay to entrappe her, how the wordle, would use many
means to circumuent and flatter her, how frail and weak the flesh was, what a
great danger and shame it would be, if when she had once put her hand to the
plough, she should look back again. Unto the which points, the faithful
spowse of Christ, answered with such wisdom and constancy, that the
religious man, which came to turn her, was turned him self: and so, being
sorry that he had waded so far with her in that course, changed his style,
and said these words Daughter, seeing it is so, that ye are fully resolved to
serve God in the holy state of virginity, and that ye are thereunto called
(as I am thoroughly persuaded by your words) even by God him self: I have no
more to say in the matter: it is the best part, that ye have chosen: our Lord
give you grace to follow it. And now, if ye think good furthermore to follow
my counsel, I would advise you to cut off your hair; For in so doing, it is
like, ye shall both cut of all hope of marriage in your parents, and withal
redeem a great deal of time and labor, which otherwise must needs be spent
about the trymmyng of the same. When the holy virgin heard those words, she
took them as spoken by God him self, and forthwith she ran, and took a
pair of sheares, and cut of her hair hard by the skin; For she had before,
conceived a certain displeasure against her hair, because she persuaded her
self, that by the trymmyng of the same, she had committed a grievous offense
against God. And when she had so done, she covered her head with a coyfe, and
so went about her business, contrary to the manner of all other maide^s. The
which when her mother espied, she asked her what that coife meant. Whereunto she
made no direct answeere, because she was afraid to tell the truth, and to make
a lie she had a great conscience. Whereupon her mother stepped hastily unto her,
and taking of the kerchefe from her head, saw that her fair hair was cut of
hard by the head. The which sight and loss, so pinched her by the heart, that
for very inward grief she cried out. Alas daughter, said she, what have thou
done? But the maid covered her head again, and went aside. At this cry of the
mother came the good man of the house, and his other children, having great
fear and wonder, what the matter should be. But when they understood the
cause, they were very much offended with her: in so much that they reproached
her, both in words and deeds. Thou vile wretch (said they) trowest thou
thus, by cutting of thine hair, to escape our hands? It will grew again in
spite of thy teeth. Though thou burst for cursed heart, thou must marry. And
make thy self well assured of this, thou shall never have good day, until
thou conform thy will to our will. And with that they took order, that she
should have no more any secret chamber in the house to resort unto, but should
be continually occupied about the common service of the house, that she might
have, neither time nor place, to retire her self to prayer and meditation. And
to give her to understand, how little account they made of her, they put away
the kitchen maid, and appointed her to do, all the works of drudgerie about
the house. And while she was so occupied, they ceased not to revile her,
whether soever she went in the house, and to load her ears with most
opprobrious and despiteful words, weenyng thereby to bring to pass, that she
should either yeald to them, or be weerie of her life. Last of all, to enforce
this battle upon the seely maid with as great strength and policy as was
possible, they fownd out a comely young man, of a good kindred, and well-beloved
of all that were in the house, whom they tendered unto her. But her heart was so
thoroughly possessed with the love of Christ her chosen spowse, that she might
not abide to hear of any other. And whereas they had debarred her of that
commodity, which she was wont to have, of a secret place to withdraw her
self unto, for prayer and meditation: our merciful Lord, who will not suffer
his faithful servants to be tempted above that they are able, but even with
the tentation gives an issue, taught her by the inward instincte of his holy
spirit, how she should buyld a secret chamber, or oratorie in her own heart,
where she might dwell delitefully with her sweet spowse so long as she listed,
and never be plucked out, whatsoever befell. And whereas before, she was
enforced sometimes by occasions to go out of her chamber, and so to be
distracted with out ward affairs, now contrariwise she shut up her self so
closely in this closet, and took such passing delight in the presence of her
love and joy, Jesus Christ, whose delight it is to dwell in pure and clean
hearts, that howsoever they cried and called about her, whatsoever beating and
bounsing they made outwardly, reproching her in words or deeds, she passed
with all such things so quietly, as if they had never ben spoken or done to
her. And thus had she a very sensible, and experimental understanding of that
goodly lesson, which our Savior teaches us in the ghospel, where he says:
The kingdom of God is within you. For unto a soul thus disposed, where Christ
reigns by faith and holy love, all creatures are made vassal, and do serve
each thing in his kind and course orderly, even as obedient subjects do their
Prince, in a well governed kingdom. Now when this towardlie disciple of
Christ, had thus learned this high lesson, by the teaching of the holy Ghost,
as she had showed her self to be an humble scholar in the school of God, so
had she also a charitable desire to become a discrete schoole-mistres to
others, and namely to Doctor Raimundus her ghostly Father, whom at times,
when he was occasioned to go abroad, by reason of his charge and affairs, she
would warn, that he should buyld a secret cell, or closet, in his soul, out
of the which he should never depart. The which words, at the first, seemed to
him to be very obscure and darcke: but afterward, when he had considered of
them advisedly, he saw, that they were to very good purpose and profit. He
saw, what a goodly thing it was, for a man to buyld a temple in his heart for
almighty God, and to dwell in the same with quietness of conscience, and peace
of God, that passes all understanding. And he saw, how little the deuel had
gained at this holy virgins hand, by moving her parents, to debar her of
that little commodity of a secret chamber, which she had in their house. The
loss whereof was an occasion to her, to buyld an heavenly chamber in her heart,
where she might enjoy the sweet presence of her lovely spowse, so often, and
so long as she listed, without any trouble or molestation. And as for the
abbasing of her, to the vile services of the house, how little that turned to
the advantage of the enemy, it may appear by that, that she her self
declared afterward to her ghostly Father. When she saw, that her father and
mother had appointed her to do all the works of drudgerie in the kitchen, and
other places of the house, she never repined at it, but turned all that baseness
to her great commodity and merit, by this holy imagination. She had this
conceit with her self, that her father, represented in the house, our Savior
Christ; her mother our blessed Lady; her brethren, sisters, and others of the
family, the Apostles and disciples of Christ. The kitchen she imagined to be
the innermost tabernacle of the temple called Sancta sanctorum, where the most
principal burnt sacrifices, were dight and offered up to God. And with this
godly imagination, she went up and down the house like a diligent Martha, and
in her father, mother, and brethren served Christ, with his blessed mother and
Saints, so cheerfully and with such a glad heart, that the whole house had
great wonder of it. And thus she turned all that drudgerie, whereunto she was
put by the malice of the ghostly enemy, to the honor of God, to the inward
comfort of her own soul, and to the great contentation of her parents, and
edifying of as many as saw it.

Of her continuance in her fervent and devout exercises: and how her father
saw a Dove over her head. Of a singular affection, that she bare to the habit
of S. Dominicke: and how it was declared unto her by a clear vision, that she
was heard. How she prevailed against all those in the house, that went about to
hinder her holy designementes, and vows.

Chap. 8.
But yet, because she cold not be without some chamber, where she might take
her rest in the night season, and a private chamber she might not have, because
her father and mother had taken order to the contrary: she chose to be in her
brother Steuens chamber, where she might in the day time, withdraw her self
from company, whiles he was out of the way, and in the night, set her self
to prayer, without fear of interruption, when he was laid to sleep. So that
night and day, she sought none other thing, but how she might occupy her
self in such virtuous exercises, as were most liking to her heavenly spowse,
unto whom she commended her self and prayed without ceasing, that it would
please him to be the keeper of her virginity, saying evermore with the
glorious virgin and martyr Cecilia: O Lord, let my heart and body be kept
undefiled. And our Lord, who never fails to succor his faithful servants in
their distress, heard the cry his unjustly afflicted spowse, and gave her
such strenght and comfort from above, that she bare and overcame with great
facility, all that heavy burden of vexations and troubles, that her parents
and kinsfolks had laid upon her. And the greater enforcement they used, to
remove her from her holy purpose, the more firm and immovable she showed her
self to be in continuyng the same. In so much that at the lenght, when her
parents saw her firmenes and constancy, they confessed, and said in plain
words. She has overcome us. And her father, who was more innocent then the
rest, considering secretly with him self, of the doings of his daughter,
perceived every day more and more that she followed in the whole state of her
life, not any lightness of youth, or stubbernes of heart toward her parents,
but only the motion and guidance of Gods holy spirit. For the better
confirmation whereof, it pleased God so to dispose, that on a day, when she was
in her brothers chamber at prayer, leaving the door open (for her father and
mother had given her charge, that she should be no where, with the door shut
upon her) her father in the mean time entering into the chamber by chance, and
seeking some thing there, of his sons, that he had need to occupy at that
time, fownd her in a corner kneeling devoutly upon her knees; and casting up
his eyes, saw a little white dove, sitting over her head; which dove, so soon
as he was entered, to his seemyng, flewe out at the chamber window; whereat
being somewhat amazed, he asked her, what dove that was. Sir, said she, I never
saw dove, nor other byrd in the chamber, that I wot of. The which when he
heard, he was very much astonished, but kept the matter secretly to him self.
About this time, the desire, which this holy virgin had had of long time, to
put on the habit of S. Dominicke, began to increase in her heart, daily more and
more: for the accomplishment whereof, she ceased not by day and by night, to
offer up her humble prayers and supplications to almighty God. Who liked well
of her request, and granted the same: therefore for her better assurance and
confort, sent her this strange and evident vision. Being on a time a sleep, it
seemed that she saw, diverse and sundry of the Fathers and fownders, of the
rules of religion: and among them, she saw S. Dominicke, whom she knew well
enough, by a white lilie that he held in his hand; which lilie seemed to her,
to be all in a bright fire, as the bush was that Moses saw, which burned and
consumed not. Those Fathers willed her, to choose some one of their rules, in
the which, she might lead her life, and serve God, with the greater merit. She
cast her eyes upon S. Dominicke, and turned her self whole to him: who
likewise came toward her, bringing in his hand the habit of the sisters,
commonly called, the sisters Penitentes of S. Dominicke: and said thus unto
her. Daughter, said he, be of good comfort, and dread no peril; for it is
certain, that thou shall receive this apparel and wear it. The which words,
were so comfortable unto her, that she wept for joy, and gave most humble
thanks to almighty God, and to the worthy patriarcke S. Dominicke. And so
with the force of tears gushing out of her eyes, she awaked, and came to her
self again. By this vision she received such comfort and strength, both in
body and soul, and withal such a trust and affiance in God; that the self
same day, she called her father, and mother, and brethren together, and spoke
unto them with a great grace, and comely boldness, after this manner. It is now
a long time, sense ye first began to treat with me, that I should marry with
some mortal man; The which talk how much I ever abhored, I never declared
plainly, but concealed it in part, for reverence that I bare unto you. But now
I may no longer hold my peace: and therefore I mind to open my heart and purpose
unto you in plain words. It is so, that I have made a full resolution and
promise to my Lord and Savior, and to his most glorious Mother the blessed
virgin Marie, that I will serve them all the days of my life, in the clean
and holy state of virginity; And I give you to understand, that this is no
new thing, or lately come upon me, but a thing that I did long since, even in
mine infancy, being not with standing thereunto moved, not by any childish
lightness, but by long and sad aduisement; and that, not without very evident
tokens, and most assured revelations from almighty God. And I have vowed
withal, that I will never incline mine heart, to accept any other husband, but
only him. And therefore now, being come by his gracious goodness, to the years
of discretion, and more perfect knowledge, I thought it my bownden duty, to
advertise you in express terms, that thus much I have, by the will of God
faithfully promised, and thus much I will by the grace of God, truly observe,
This determinate purpose, is so deeply imprinted in my soul, that it shall be
more easy to make a hard flint soft, then to take this godly resolution out
of mine heart. Wherefore I most humbly beseech you, that ye will leese no more
time, in treating with me about marriage; For in this matter, I may in no wise,
condescend to your request, because I have plight my faith and truth, to Jesus
Christ alone, whose love I do, and must prefer before all earthly
creatures, Now, if it shall please you to keep me in your house, with this
condition, as your common servant, I will serve you willingly, and obediently,
to the uttermost of my power. If ye think by putting me out of your house, to
enforce me to yeald unto your demand for lack of necessary provision, assure
your selves, no fear of lack can alter my mind in this case. For I have
chosen him for my husband, that gives food to al living creatures, who will
not suffer them to be destitute of things necessary, that repose themselves
with a sure affiance in his provident goodness. With these words, pronounced
with such a comely grace and modesty, they were all so astoined, and withal
so overcome with tenderness of heart and weeping, that for a good space they were
not able to give her one word for answer. At the lenght, her father, who was a
man that feared God, and had a more Christian consideration of things, then
the rest had, calling to mind the Dove, which he had seen not long before over
her head, with diverse and sundry other the like very evident tokens of some
strange grace, and favor of God toward her, after a good season, when he had
won so much of him self, that he was able to speak, made her this answer.
Dear Daughter, said he God forbid, that we should will, or desire any,
thing, contrary to the will of God, from whom (we doubt not) this holy
determination of yours proceeds. Your long patience and constancy, declare
unto us very evidently, that this your designement comes, not of any
childish lightness, but of a fervent love toward God. Do therefore a Gods name
freely, what you have vowed: follow the way, that the holy Ghost shows unto
you. From this day foreward we shall no more hinder you, but shall confourme
our wills to the will of God. Only this, pray heartily for us to your spowse,
whom ye have chosen in your tender age, that we may after his life be fownd
worthy of the bliss, that he has promised us. Then turnyng to his wife, and
other children, he said likewise to them. From this day foreward, see that
none of you be so hardy, as to molest or hinder my Daughters devotion. Let her
serve her spowse with all diligence and freedom: for in truth this alliance,
that she has made, is both more honorable, and also more for the advancement
of our family, then that was, that we sought to make; We have no cause to
complain of her doings? The exchange, that she has made, is this; She has
refused to match with a mortal man, and has chosen to be married, to the
immortal God and man, Jesus Christ, the redeemer of the wordle. When the father
had spoken these words, not without many tears, both in him self, and in
others that were there present, and namely in the mother, who bare a very
tender and natural love to this daughter, the joyous virgin, whose heart, was as
it were ravished with unspeakable gladness, yealded most humble thanks; First
to almighty God, by whose gracious assistance she had overcome this battle;
then to her father and mother, for their most comfortable grant made unto her:
and from that hour foreward, she had none other care in her heart, but how she
might best direct her life wholye to the honor of her dear spowse.

Of her great Abstinence.

Chap. 9.
AFter that her parents had made her this grant of freedom to serve God,
without any hinderance or molestation: she began forthwith to dispose her
life after a marvelous goodly order. And first of all she besought them, that
she might have some little chamber to her self (which was granted without any
difficulty) in the which, what rigorous discipline, and austerite, she
exercised upon her body, with what diligence and carefulnes, she sought to
have the deliteful presence of her spowse, no tongue is able to express. There
began she to renew the exercises of the ancient Fathers in Egypt: which were
the more marvelous in her, because they were done without any example, or
instruction of man, by a frail woman, in her tender age, not in a wood, cave,
or solitary place, but in a city, not in a covent of Nonnes, but in her
fathers house. At the very entry therefore into this straight manner of life,
first and foremost she resolved utterly to abstain from all flesh: the which
kind of abstinence she continued so precisely, that at the length by long use
and custom, all flesh became loathsome unto her: in so much that it was
evidently seen, that the only smell of it, was noisome to her body. Whereby
she became very lean, thynne, and feeble. Which thing her ghostly Father
perceiving on a time, and knowing that the cause thereof was, that she received
no meat or drink, that was of good substance and nourishment, gave her
counsel, that she should put in her water, which she drank, a little sugar to
comfort and quicken the spirits. Whereat she was somewhat moved, and turnyng
suddenly to him, said these words. That little life, that is left in me, me
thinks, ye go about to quench it utterly. With that he began to examine her
concerning the order of her diet, and fownd by examination, that the words
which she spoke, were very true, for in deed she had so accustomed her self
to bitter meats, and unsavory drinks, that all sweet things were become
hurtful to her body, for so much as her natural disposition was altered by
custom. Her ordinary drink, from the beginning, was a little portion of wine
(as the manner of that country is) myngled with so much water, that it lost
both taste and savor, and a great part of the color also. But when she was
fiften years old, she gave over all wine, and drancke water alone. She weaned
her self likewise by little and little, from all manner of sodden meats, and
sustained her body with bread only, and a few raw herbs. After this, when
she was of the age of twenty years, or there about, she gave over the eating
of bread also, and held her self to raw herbs only. Last of all, she came to
such a high state of life (not by any force of nature, but by the
supernatural power of God) that for a long time together, she sustained her
life without eating and drinking at all, and yet endured withal, willingly and
cheerfully, both very paineful sickenesses, and also very hard labors of the
body. Moreover and all this, it was certainly known, that her stomach had
quite lost the office and power of digestion: and yet, neither was that
moisture, which the physicians call Radical, consummed, nor the strenght of her
frail body any jot decayed. Which thing can not be ascribed to any
exercise or custom of abstinence, but only to that fulness of spirit, which
abounded so much in the soul, that it redownded into the body also.

Of the great austeritie, which she used about her bed and apparel. Of the
shirt of hair, and chain of iron, which she ware about her middle.

Chap. 10.
SHe made her self a bed of boordes only, without any other thing, between
them and her body: upon the which sometimes she sat, or stood upright in
meditation, and sometimes she kneeled or lay down prostrate in prayer. And
when she would lie down to sleep, she never put of her clothes. The clothes,
that she ware, both next her body and without, were all woollen. Sometime she
would wear a rough shirt of hair upon her skin. But because she was much
given to cleanlines, and she took it, that the hair was an occasion of some
uncleanness: she laid it aside, and took for it a chain of yro^, which she
gyrded so hard to her sides, that it made a deep dent into the flesh, as
though it had been burnt with a hoate iron: as some of her spiritual companions,
and daughters, reported afterward, whose help she was e^forced to use at
times, by reason of great infirmities and diseases, unto the which her body
was very much subject. The which thing her ghostly Father understanding at
the lenght by them, not long before her death, being moved with pity,
commanded her by virtue of obedience, that she should leave it off. Which
though she was very loath to do, because she persuaded her self, that the
roughnes thereof had a great comformitie with the life of Christ, yet because
she knew on the other side, that obedience was more acceptable in the sight of
God, then any austeritie of life, she did humbly as she was commanded

Of her wonderful watching: and of the grief, that her mother took for the
same.

Chap. 11.
HEr watching was very strange and wonderful; for at the length she had by a
little and little so overcome sleep, that in two days and two nights she would
allow no more, but one half hour to sleep: the which half hour also she
would never take, but when very feeblenes of body constreined her. Her bed (as
it is said before) was bare bordes: her bolster, or pillowe, a hard piece of
wood. The which thing her mother perceiving, being moved with motherlie
affection, and pity toward her own flesh, entreated her earnestly, that she
would give over her own hard bed for a time, and be contented to lie with her
upon her bed, and there to take her sleep if she could, if she could not, at
the least to rest her self a little. She showed her self in all points
obedient to her mother, and went with her into her chamber, and when her mother
was laid in one side of the bed, she went and laid her self down in the other
side: Where she continued watching in prayer and meditation, until at the
lenght perceiving her mother to be fast a sleep, she rose up softely without
making any noise, and got her self to her wonted exercises. But the
suspicious mother, whose heart was evermore waking, espied forthwith the wilines
of her daughter, and took it very grievously. Whereupon the good daughter,
who had always a great care to do nothing, that might grieve her mother,
devised a new slight, by the which she thought, she might both satisfy her
mothers mind, and exercise in some degree her accustomed discipline. She took
two pieces of timber, and put them privily into the bed, under the sheet, on
that side where she should lie, and laid her self down upon the same. But it
was not so secretly done, but that the mother, who had a great jealousy of all
her doings, within a short time fownd it out. The which when she espied, and
saw withal, that how diligent and careful soever she was to qualify the
rigor of her daughters life, she would on the other side be as politic and
inuentiue, to find means to continue the same; as one overcome she gave over,
and said unto her after this manner. Daughter, I see well, it booteth not to
strive with you any longer, I do but leese my labor; Wherefore a Gods name
go your way, and take your rest in your own chamber, at what time, and after
what manner, ye shall think best. And so after this time she entermedled no
more in her doings, but suffered her freely to follow the instincte and guida^ce
of the holy Ghost in all things. When the blessed virgin had thus by her
godly wilines, overcome this battaille, that was raised against her by the
malice of the ghostly enemy, to hinder her heavenly designeme^tes, she
returned to her former spiritual exercises again, with a passing great
increase of fervor and devotion. She took such a delight in meditating and
reasonyng, upon things apperteinyng to godliness, that doctor Raimundus her
ghostly Father (who was a very grave, wise and learned man) affirmed this to
be a thing, which he took to be most certainly true, that if she might have
come into the company of men of understanding, that would have reasoned with
her of God, a hundred nights, she would have continued with them in such
communication without eating, drinking or sleeping. Yea he affirmed
furthermore, that, when she had any such occasion to speak or hear others
speak of God, she was sensibly nourished, recreated and conforted withal: as
contrary wise, when she might not be so occupied, it was evidently seen, that
she drooped, and became lean, dry, and feeble. He confessed also to the
honor of God and of his holy spowse (though withal to his own shame and
confusion) when that blessed virgin would at times speak of the goodness of
God, and of his mercies toward her, he (by reason of the lenght of time,
which she spent evermore willingly about that matter, and also, because* he was
far from that fervor of love that was in her) being overcome with the
heaviness of his body, fell into a slomber, and she in the mean time, being
mightiely carried up into God by the vehemence of her spirit, continued her
discourse still, taking no heed to him: until at the lenght after a long time,
casting her eye aside, and seeing that he was a sleep, she would cry to him
alowd and say: Alas Father, why leese you the profit of your soul for a
little sleep? Do I speak to a wall, or to you?

How she beat her self for a long time, thrice in the day, with a chain of
iron.

Chap. 12.
THis holy virgin, having a great desire to follow the steps of S.
Dominicke, used for a long space to beat her self, three times every day
with a chain of iron. The first time, for her self: the second, for the
living: and the third, for the dead. The which discipline she was enforced at
the lenght to geue-ouer, by reason of the weakness of her body. Being
demanded on a time of her ghostly Father, how, and after what manner she did
that penance, she answered with great bashfulnes, that for every time she
took an hour and a half, and beat her self so, that the blood tricled down
from her shoulders to her feet. And while she was in this exercise, laid on so
sore upon her body, that her mother being one time near unto the chamber, and
hearing the noise of the strokes, was in wardly moved with motherlie pity, and
so entered in suddenly upon her. But when she saw the manner of it, when she
beheld presently with her eyes, the roughe yro^ chain, where with she beat her
self, the body of daughter miserably rent and torn, the bloody streams,
that ran down to the grownd on all sides, being overcome with natural
compassion, she cried out like a woman besides her self, and said. Alas
Daughter, what do thou, what meanest thou? Will thou kill thy self? Who
has counseled my daughter to exercise such cruelty upon her tender body?
with that she scright out, as loud as ever she could, and tare her hair and
clothes, and sared like a madd woman. In so much that the neighbors rownd
about, hearing the lamentable criyng of the old woman, and dowbting of some
strange and heavy mischance, came runnyng into the house to comfort the
afflicted mother. When they were there, and saw what had happened, it is hard
to say, whether of them two they pitied more, either the mother, whose bowels
(they saw) were so inwardly moved, with compassion on her dear child, or the
daughter, who had exercised such rigorous justice, and bloody revenge, upon
her own body, for the sins of others.

How she desired earnestly to receive the habit of S. Dominicke: and how her
mother, to turn her mind, lead her away to the batthes. What penance she did
even in the batthes.

Chap. 13.
WHen this blessed maid was thus at liberty to occupy her self in the before
mentioned exercises of godliness and penance: the more the ghostly enemy
busied him self to hinder her good purposes, the more earnest she waxed in
following the same. And now, calling to mind the religious habit, promised unto
her long before by the blessed Father S. Dominicke, she never ceased to pray
to God with inward groanyng and tears both by day and by night, that he
would vowchsafe to fulfill his promise with speed. For she saw, that she
should never be free from the molestatio^ of her parents, until such time as
she had received it: and therefore she humbly besought the^ also, that they
would be contented to dismiss her, and to be means to the sisters that lived
in penance, under the rule of S. Dominicke, commonly called there, the sisters
of the Mantel, that she might be admitted into their company. But her mother,
who had no liking of her suit, but sought rather somewhat to qualify the
rigor of her exercises already begone, determined to go to a hot bath, and
to take her daughter with her, hoping thereby to bring to pass, what by
cherishing of her body with such sensual delites, and what by distracting her
mind from her wonted meditations, that she should in time by little and little,
relent the extremity of her rough discipline. Undoubtedly this was not done
without the instigatio^ of the deuel, whose bent was, to withdraw that devout
soul, from following the calling of her spowse. But there is no counsel against
God, who taught his true servant to turn all the treacherous wiles of the
enemy, to her further commodity and profit. When she came to the bath, she
fownd out a new manner of bathing, such as had not lightly ben hard of, before
that time. she entreated her mother, that she might be in the bath alone, when
all other had bathed the^ selves. The which thing when her mother had granted
with a very good will, (being in deed a plain meanying woman, nand nothing
suspecting the wilines of her daughter in that matter) she went and set her
self under the spowt, where the water came scalding hoate into the bath: and
there suffered patiently greater pains, of the heat of the water, then she was
wont to do at home, when she beat her self with the iron chain. Now when her
mother had espied that also, and saw that whatsoever she could devise, for
the solace or comfort of her daughters body, was by her wilines turned to the
contrary, she determined to return to her house again: where not
withstanding she ceased not to show in words, that she had a great misliking,
of her extreme seueretie and penance. Unto the which words the good daughter
gave but a deaf ear, having evermore greater regard to the holy spirit of
God, speaking inwardly in her heart, then to the outward sownd of words, that
tended to the hinderance of her godly designementes. Afterward, when her
ghostly Father, (who had heard tell of her bathing by the report of her
mother) demanded of her how it was possible, that she should be able to
suffer the heat of that scalding water so long time, without the extreme damage
and peril of her body, she made answer and said very simply, that being in
the bath, she called to mind the pains of hell, and purgatory, and so made
her prayer to almighty God, whom she had so grievously offended, that he would
vowchsafe of his endless mercy, to change the torments, that she had deserved
by her sins, into those pains, that she would willingly put her self unto
there for is love. Unto the which prayer it pleased God to make answer, by
giving her such a passing great joy and gladness in her heart, that all the
pain, that she suffered, was pleasant and deliteful unto her: and the almighty
power of God, so dispensed with her body, that it had in deed a very great
and sensible feeling of pain, but no hurt or blemish at all. When she had thus
satisfied the demand of her ghostly Father, she went home, and fell again to
the exercises of her accustomed penance.

How she received the habit of S. Dominicke: and how she was the first virgin
that received the same.

Chap. 14.
NOw to come to our matter again, when this blessed virgin was returned from
the batthes, she ceased not to solicit her mother, that she would move the
aforenamed sisters of the Mantel, that she might receive the habit, that she
had so long and earnestly desired. The mother being overcome with the
importunity of her daughter, went to the sisters, and entreated them, that she
might be received into their company. Whereunto they made answer, that it was
not their manner, to receive young maidens into their habit, but only widows,
and women of sad years, such as were thought able and likely to have
experience to govern them selves: because they had no common place and
conversation as commonly couentes of religious persons have, but lived echone a
part from other in private celles. When the mother came home with this answer
to her daughter, she was nothing daunted withal, but besought her mother, after
a very humble manner, that she would take the pains to renew her suit again,
and use more earnest means to persuade with them, then she had done before.
Which thing she was well content to Do, and went again: but in fine could
obtain no better answer, then she had at the first. The which unpleasant
answer also, the good daughter took in very good part, remitting her self
humbly to the will of God in all things, and making her self well assured,
that the holy Father S. Dominicke would in time (when it should please God)
fulfill his promise. In the mean time, it chanced this blessed virgin to be
visited with a very painful sickness. Her body was so disfigured with the
measels, that she could scantly be known: and withal she was so sore vexed
with a hot burning ague, that her mother, who loved her among all her chidren
most tenderly, had very great pity and fear of her. The which occasion, the
wise virgin thought, was not to be slipped: but taking the opportunity of the
present state and time, began to move her mother once again after this manner.
Good mother, as ye tender my life and health, so I beseech you, to use
diligent and earnest means to procure me the habit, that I have so long
desired; for otherwise I am well assured, that our Lord, and S. Dominicke, who
have called me to their service, will so dispose of me, that you shall not have
me long, neither in that habit, nor in any other. These words she repeated
so often, and with such vehemency, that her mother at the lenght, being very
sore afraid, lest her daughter showld have died in deed, went again to the
religious sisters, and entreated them so earnestly, that they were overcome
with her importunity, and so made her an answer after this manner. If your
daughter (said they) be not ouer-faire, we are content to receive her. If she
be, the malice (ye know) of the wordle is such, that you shall hassard the good
name, both of your daughter, and of all us. And therefore we may in no wise
receive her. Whereunto the mother answered and said. Come your selves and judge,
whether she be fair or no. Whereupon they sent two discreet matrons, chosen
out emonge them selves, to go and consider both of the state of her body, and
also how she was affected in mind. Which coming to the house, fownd the maid
lying sick on her bed, and by sickness so altered, that they might not well
discern the diposition of her body. Howbeit by her words, they saw very
evidently, that she had a marvelous fervent desire in her heart to serve God,
whereat they were both very much astoined, and also very glad, to see so young
a maid, to pass a number of ancient women, in virtue and godliness. And so
taking their leave there, they went home to the rest of their company, and
declared unto them, what they had heard and seen. Upon the which report, they
communicated the matter to the brethren of the Order, and that done resolved
with a full consent to receive her into the habit, sending word to the mother,
that so soon as her daughter was recovered, she should bring her without any
longer delaie. The which tidinges was so joyful to the young virgin, that she
wept for very joy, and thanked God, and S. Dominicke, that it pleased them,
at the lenght, to perform their promise. And then she began to alter the
tenor of her prayer; for whereas before she was evermore glad of bodily
sickenesses and diseases, now contrariwise she besought our Lord, in most
humble and earnest manner, that he would vowchsafe to deliver her out of hand
from that infirmity of body, that stayed her there, from the accomplishing of
her vow and purpose, referring her self, notwithstanding in all things, to
the holy will, and disposition of almighty God. Who gave ear to the inward
groanyng of his faithful spowse, and granted her petition in such sort, that
she received forth with both health of body, and also the habit that she so
much longed after. And because she was the first virgin, that was received into
that habit, she was also accounted afterward, the head and sowndresse of all
the virgins, that by her example were admitted into the same Order.

Of the holy Vows, designementes, and exercises, which the blessed virgin
used, after the receiving of the habit: and what effectual exhortations, she
made to excite her self to the service of God.

Chap. 15.
When she had received the habit, though it were not the manner in that Order,
to make a public and solemn profession, yet she made a full and prefecte
resolution, from the botome of her heart to serve God in extreme poverty, and
straight obedience: the which she observed so precisely, that at the very
time, when she was to pass out of this life, she said boldly, that she could
not remember, that she had ever transgressed, or failed, in any thing, that
was commanded her by her superiors, were it never so little. Her poverty also
was so perfect, that in all her life, she did not only her self, not possess
or desire any things that were superfluous, but besought almighty God also
most heartily, for her father and mother brethren and sisters, that it would
please hin to diminish their state and substance, to the end that a number of
occasions and inducementes unto sin, which are commonly annexed with the
abundance of earthly things, might be taken away from them, and they by
lack and necessity, brought to remember God, and to flee unto him, for
succor and help, in their distress. And it was evidently seen, that her
prayer was heard; for it fell so out by the provident goodness of God, that they
came in deed to great penury and lack, by strange chances, without any
fault on their part. Now, being thus newly entered, into the discipline of the
sissters penitentes, she took such a passing delight, in the observation of the
rule, and had such a desire, and earnest longyng, to atteine to the perfection
of spiritual life, that she would speak to her self at times, after this
manner. Lo Catherine, thou art now entered into a state of religion; from hence
foreward, thou must take an other trade of life, and not live, as thou have
done hitherto. Let the wordle pass now, and begin to think of religion,
do thou not consider the color of the habit, which thou have taken, and
what it means? Thine ynner garment is white: to geaue thee to understand,
that thou must be inwardly white, and pure of life, without any mixture of
any uncleanness. Thine outward garment is black; whereby thou art put in mind
to mortify thy flesh, with new watching, fasting, and prayer, and with other
the like works of austeritie. Thou must now fight manfully, and subdue thy
rebellious flesh: Thou must die to the wordle, and live only to thy spowse
Look thou therefore, what is required of thee to do, and not what most men
do. Thou have taken the straight way, that leads to life, wherefore it
behooves thee to streighten thy self, and to walk warily in this way. Thy
spowse teaches thee, that this is the way that few take, which is a warnyng
to thee, that thou must have an eye, not to the multitude, but to the fewest,
and best; For the way of the greater number of men is wide, and leads to
damnation. These and other the like speeches, she would use at times, to stir
up her self, to the better observation of her godly vows, and designementes.
And among other things, she determined to keep a very strange, and rigorous
manner of silence; In so much that for the space of three years, she never
spoke with any creature, but only with her ghostly Father, and with him she
spoke only in confession, and not otherwise. Out of her cell, she never went,
unless it were to the Church to hear Mass, or some other divine service. And
because she began then to eat none other meat, but only bread, and raw
herbs, she needed not to go out for any other provision. She determined
never to go to take any repast, or bodily sustenance, without much weeping
before: as though that had been a convenient antepast, to procure an appetite.
After this manner she fownd the means to find out a wilderness in the middle of
the city, and to make her self a solitary place, were there was great resort
and concourse of people. She continued in prayer, and meditation, in the night
season, until the Friars Preachers, rang the second peale to Matins. And then
she went to take a little rest; saying these words to our Lord. Lord, hitherto
have thy servants my brethren taken their rest, and I have kept the watch for
them, before thee our guardian, and protector, beseeching thee to keep them
from the assaults of the enemy, and all euel; Now are they risen to praise
thee: wherefore I humbly pray thee, to keep them, and to give me leave to rest
a while; And so she laid her self down, upon the bare boordes, and put under
her head, a hard block, in steed of a bolster or pillowe.

Of diverse and sundry visions and revelations showed unto her; With a
doctrine how to discern between true and false visions.

Chap. 16.
THis holy virgin, declared in secret confession, to her ghostly Father, that
at what time she began to retire her self from all conversation, and to live
alone in her cell, it pleased her spowse Jesus Christ, to visit her in visible
manner, and to give her instructions, in matters concerning her salvation.
Father, said she, take this for a most certain truth, that I was never taught
the rule of spiritual life, by any man or woman, but only by Jesus Christ, the
spowse of my soul: who has informed me always, either by secret inspiration,
or else appeering openly unto me, and speaking to me, as I now speak to you.
She declared moreover to her ghostly Father, that at the begyning, her visio^s
were for the most part, only wrought in her imagination; but afterward they
were sensible: in so much that she saw with her bodily eyes, and heard with
her bodily ears, the sownd of the voice, that spoke unto her. She reported
furthermore, that at the beginning, she began to doubt and fear, lest it might
be some deceit, or illusion of the ghostly enemy, who transfigureth him
self into an Angel of light. Which fear our Lord misliked not, but rather
commended it highly unto her, and said, that so long as a man or woman, lives
in this life, he should always stand in fear, according as it written.
Blessed is the man, that is ever fearful. And he asked her, whether she were
willing, to learn of him certain, notes and tokens, by the which she might be
able, to discern between the true visions of God, and the false illusions of
the enemy. Whereunto she made answer, with great submission, and lowlines of
spirit, and besought him humbly, that he would vowchasafe to teach her. Then
he said these words. Daughter, It were an easy matter for me, to inform thy
soul inwardly, with the secret instincte of my spirit, in such sort, that thou
should at all times discern perfectly and without error, between true
visions, and counterfeicte illusions. But because my will is, that it should
profit others, as well as thee: therefore I will teach thee a general rule and
lesson, which is this. My vision begins evermore with fear and dread, but
in process of time, it sets a soul in great joy, quietness, and security.
It begins with some kind of bitterness, but in continuance it waxes more
deliteful and sweet. The visions of the enemy, are contrary; For in the
beginning, they show a kind of security and gladness, but in process they
turn to fear, and bitterness, which increase afterward, and wax greater and
greater. And it stands with good reason: for so much as my ways, and the
ways of the enemy, have this special difference. My ways are the keeping of
the commandments, in perfection of a virtuous and godly life, which leads
unto me. These seem at the beginning, to be full of difficulty and
unpleasant: but in time, they become easy enough, and pleasant. But the ways
of the enemy, are the transgressing of my commandments, in the liberty of
the flesh, and licentiousnes of life, which show at the beginning, to be
deliteful, and pleasant: but in continuance of time, they prove in very deed,
dangerous, painful, and unpleasant. Take this also, for a most certain and
infallible rule, to discern between true, and false visions; Because I am
truth, it can not otherwise be, but that evermore by my visions, the soul of
man must needs receive a greater knowledge of truth: by the which knowledge he
comes to understand, both his own baseness, and the worthiness of God: and so
consequently, to do due honor and reverence to God, and to make little account
of him self; which is the proper condition of humility. The contrary
happens in the visions of the enemy; For he being the father of lying, and
king over all the children of pride, can give none other thing, but only what he
has: and therefore in his visions there must needs ensue in a soul,
ignorance, and error: by reason whereof it conceiueth a false reputation of it
self, which is the proper condition of pride. By this may thou know,
whether thy visions be of me, or of the enemy, of truth, or of falsehood. If
they come of truth, they will make thy soul humble: if they come of falsehood,
they will make thy soul proud. Thus was she instructed of the teacher of all
truth, Jesus Christ: and she kept his doctrine and instructions, very
faithfully in mind, and uttered them afterward to her ghostly Father, and
others, for their instruction, as it shall be declared hereafter. And after this
time it pleased God to send her so many visions, and revelations, that who so
would consider of them advisedly, he should see, that it were hard to find,
any two men in the wordle, more familiary acquenited, then our Lord and she
were. In so much that whether she prayed, or read, or meditated, or walked, or
waked, or slept, she was at all times, and in all places, visited, and
comforted of our Lord. And which is more, while her tongue was outwardly
speaking unto men, her heart was inwardly bent upon God, and spoke, spiritually
with him. Howbeit that could not endure any long time: for so much as her soul
was within a little space, so drawn up and united to God, that it could not
choose, but forsake utterly, the senses and powers of the body.

Of a very goodly and profitable doctrine, of our Savior, worthy to be
planted in the hearts of as many, as are desirous to come to spiritual
perfection.

Chap. 17.
Amongst a number of goodly and high lessons, that she learned of our
Savior, this was one. On a time, while she was praying, our Savior appeered
to her, and said. Daughter, know thou what thou art, and what I am? If thou
have a perfect knowledge of these two points, thou art blessed. For by the
mean thereof, thou shall easily escape all the snares of the enemy, and shall
not at any time, give consent to any sin, that is against my
commandments: but contariwise, thou shall be able to atteine to all grace,
all truth, all charity without any great difficulty or hardness. This is a
brief doctrine, by the which a man may, without reading many books, without
discussing many subtle, and perplexed points of philosophy, be made blessed,
and unite him self with God. Full well did my servant Augustine understand
this, when he said. O Lord, when I know thee, and when I know my self, then
have I obtained the fruit of all my prayer. Very few atteine, to the perfect
understanding of this matter: and therefore give thou good heed to my words,
that thou may be made able to conceive it. Thou art she, that art not. Is
not this true? Art not thou she, that was made of nothing? In so much as every
creature is made of nothing: and so having no manner of being of it self, it
begins to have a being, by my almighty power, to wit, what soever is, it
is by me, and not by it self. And therefore of it self, it tends evermore to
nothing again, that is, to have no being. And if I should withdraw my hand,
that conserueth it, but for the space of one moment, it would forthwith turn
to be, as it was of it self, that is, nothing. Now because sin is a defecte,
and so consequently nothing: therefore man (unless the hand of God did always
preserve him) would of him self, tend unto sin, and so to al manner of
defect. This is the doctrine, which I taught my disciples, when I said;
Without me ye can do nothing. And by the mowthe of mine Apostle; He that
takes himself to be somewhat, when he is nothing, deceives him self. And in
an other place; We are not sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as
of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Be thou therefore well assured,
that whatsoever you are, that are you by my creation, and by my co^seruatio^,
by the which it may be said after a sort, that I do as it were, create you
again and again, from time to time, and give you a new being every moment.
And know thou also for an undoubted truth; that as of your selves you are
nothing, so of your selves you do evermore tend to nothing. Now if a man were
thoroughly persuaded in this truth, to wit, if a man were fully resolved, that
in truth he were nothing, how could he be proud? How could he glory in him
self, or in any work of his own, if he knew, that there were nothing
properly his own, but only defectes and sin? How could he vaunt, and set him
self before others, if he did consider with good aduisement, that he were
equal with all others, to wit, nothing, as al others be? How could he bear
envy to any other, or disdain the state of any man, or woman in the wordle,
if he saw clearly, that all goodness were of God, and all evil of him self?
And (if he took these growndes to be true) how could he put his hope and
affiance, in any man or other earthly thing? How could he be brought to say,
or to think, that this thing is mine, if he were resolved, that it is God that
has made, it and not him self, who (as of him self) is nothing? And none can
give that to an other, that he has not him self. He that has not his being
of him self, but has received the same of an other by way, as it were, of
petition and beggyng, can not impart it unto any other. And therefore the
creature that knows this, accounts him self vile and base, and full of
defectes, and maymes, on all sides. The which conceit causes, that he can not
love any thing in him self, because he sees, that there is but one thing
properly, and truly, to be accounted his own, which is sin. But because, man
standing in these terms, should fall away, and live in a wretched kind of
despair (for so much as naturally he is inclined to have a being) therefore, the
other part of this doctrine is very requisite to be understood, which is, that
I am he, that am: as it was said to Moses, in the vision of the bush, that
burned and was not consumed. In truth that thing is that is of it self. And
that thing only is of it self, whose being depends not of any other, nor
has any superior cause, which thing is only God. All other creatures, have
their being of God, in so much as they are created, and conserved by him. God
only, is unchangeable, incorruptible, and cause of his own everlasting being.
That creature therefore, that sees this, and has a natural desire of being;
when he sees, that he can not have any being, and much less any good, and
blessed being, in him self, or in any other creature; he turns him self to
God, with an humble, and devout mind, and setting him self to contemplate and
behold his Creator and Conseruer, the geuer, mainteiner, and increaser of all
being, and blessedness, the everlasting founteine and spring of all goodness,
which only is able to slake, the thyrst of all his natural lusts and
longynges, he begins to sigh toward him, and knowing him to be a most
liberal and bowntifull geuer, he is inflamed with the love of him, and so much
the more, because he sees, that of all the gifts, and benefits, that he
receives at his hand, there returns no commodity to the geuer again,
for so much as he is in him self, and of him self, the most high, perfect, and
sufficient goodness. And thus increasing in knowledge, he comes to understand,
that as it is he that gives and extolleth, so it is he also, that takes away
and abaseth, when his pleasure is. Whereupon he conceiueth, a certain holy
fear, which is the guardian of the soul: by reason whereof he will not suffer
any thing to pass from his heart, that may offend, so sweet, and bowntifull a
geuer. And withal he setleth him self, so fast upon his provident goodness,
that whatsoever trouble, or adversity, befall him, he is nothing moved withal,
but knows for certain, that almighty God, permits it to come upon him,
for his salvation, either for his further instruction, or to make him to look
better to him self, or to increase his merit, or else as a just punishment for
some offense committed. Moreover, this consideration brings him to
understand, that there is no labor, no travail, no affliction in this wordle
so grievous, that may in any degree, seem worthy of that glorious reward,
that he looks for at the most bountiful hand of God. And therefore he
looks no more to him self, but only to the merciful goodness of God: in whom
reposing him self, with a very sure affiance, and sweet love, he receives,
even in this present life, a pledge and earnest penny, of the life to come.
This was the first lesson, that the blessed virgin, learned of her spowse and
master: the which she took of him very willingly, like a towardly scholar,
and laid it up very charily, in the chest of her heart. This was the sure
foundation, that the great workman laid in the soul of his dear spowse, upon
the which he minded to make a perfect buylding of spiritual life.

An other goodly doctrine, by the which a soul is made pure and meet to
ennioye the familiarity of almighty God even in this life: with a miracle
wrought by our Lord on the sea for confirmation of the same.

Chap. 18.
IT pleased almighty God, to teach this his scholar, an other very notable
lesson, not unlike to that before mentioned. On a time he appeered unto her, and
said these words. Daughter, think on me, and I shall think on thee. The
which words she took to be spoken in like sense (as she declared afterward
to her ghostly Father) as if our Lord had said in plain words unto her.
Daughter, have no thought or care of thy self, neither bodily, nor ghostly;
for I, that know what is behoueful for thee, better then thou do thy self,
will think upon thee, and provide with all care and diligence, for thy
necessities. Only set thou thy self to think on me, for in that stands thy
perfection and final bliss. This is a great lesson, and undoubtedly very
profitable to him, that would exercise it faithfully. For the will of God
toward us (as the Apostle says) is our sanctification, which consists in
uniting our selves to him by love: which love cannot be wrought in our wills,
unless our heart be wholly discharged, of the cares of all earth lie things.
For So Much as God is a thing of such excellency, that he deserves, to
dispossess our heart of all other things, that him self may enter, and take
possession of it as the only rightful Lord, and owner of the same. But because
he sees, that we stand in need of many things, for the preservation of our
body, which if we have not provided from time to time, it must needs decaie:
therefore he added furthermore, and said: and I will think on thee. Which
words import so much, as those that he spoke to his disciples, when he willed
them, to be careless for all earthly things, aperteinyng to the maintenance of
the body, and to set their whole hope and affiance, in his provident goodness.
For if it be so, that he provides so dwely, for the necessary sustentation of
birds in the aier, of beasts, and worms in the earth, and of all other
living things; if he have such a fatherly care to clad the very trees,
plants, flowers, and other insensible creatures: how much greater care is it
like, that he will have of man (for whose sake all these creatures were made)
as being the most excellent creature, made unto the image of God, and specially
chose^, to have the joyful fruition of him self? She reasoned furthermore
with Church men, and specially with Priests, and religious persons after this
manner. Seeing it is so, said she, that we have made a full resignatio^ of our
selves unto God, first in Baptism, and afterward when we entered into holy
Orders, or took upon us the state of a religious life: surely there is no
cause why we should be houefull for our selves in any thing, for so much as God,
to whom we have resigned our selves, both can, and will provide, whatsoever he
knows to be behoueful for us. Wherefore our whole, and only care, ought to
be, how to please and serve him. And that we must do, not only in respect of
the reward, that we look for at his hand, but specially and principally, in
consideration of the worthiness, of that blessed band of love and union, which
is between us and him. In so much that the blessed state of life everlasting,
is to be desired of us, not so much for it self, as because it unites us
perfectly, and inseparably, to our beginning and original being, which is
almighty God. It can not be expressed in words, what a great affiance, this
holy maid conceived, of those words of our Savior (And I will think on
thee); in the which words, she took such a passing joy and delight, that she
could never have her fill, of thinking and speaking of them. In so much, that
she made a treatise, called a Dialogue, wherein she expressed, the wonderful
fruits of the same; as they may well perceive, that read it, or rather to say
better, that can perse into the matter, and have a taste in it. She was wont
also to say to Doctor Raimundus, her ghostly Father, and to other that were
familiar with her: when she saw them dismayed and pensive, for any strange
accident that chansed unto them. Leave all (said she) to God: what have you to
do of your selves? For you to take care for these things, is to take from
God, his care and providence: as though he either would not, or could not,
provide for you in all cases. Know you not, that he has a greater care of
you, then you have of your selves? And that he is both able, and willing to
award you from all euels? It chanced on a time, that Doctor Raimundus, and
many other both men and women, were in a ship on the sea, among whom was this
holy maid also: and when the night came on, they were in great peril (as the
pilote said) to be carried, for lack of a good wind, into strange ylandes, and
far countries. The which thing Doctor Raimundus, understanding, came to her,
and spoke after a lamentable manner. Mother, said he, (for so they used to call
her) see you not, in what danger we stand? To whom she made answer readily,
and said. What have you to do of your selves? With that Doctor Raimundus held
his peace, and took a better comfort. And anon after, there blewe a contrary
wind, which enforced the pilote (as he said) to return back again, which
thing her ghostly Father went and declared unto her also. Whereunto she said:
Let him turn the ship a Gods name, and follow the wind that God sends. And
so he did: and she in the mean time, bowed down her head, and made her prayer
to God. And they kept not on that course, so far as a man would shoot an
arrowe, but that there came a gracious wind, that brought them to the haven
that they desired, to their great wonder, and gladness, singyng all with a
joyful voice. Te Deum laudamus.

Certain goodly sayings, which she was wont to use, to excite her self, and
others, to the perfection of Charity.

Chap. 19.
OFten times, when she conferred with her ghostly Father, and talked
concerning the worthiness, and state of a soul, that loved God with a perfect
charity, she was wont to utter this sentence. A soul (said she) that loves
God perfectly, never sees, loves, or remembers, any other creature, neither
it self, nor any other thing. The which saying, she declared more plainly
after this manner. Such a soul, said she, sees that of it self it is nothing,
and that all her being, and welfare, depends of God only: in whom she finds
by experience, that al her felicity stands, and in none other creature: and
therefore she wholly forsakes, both her self, and all other things, and does
as it were, plonge her self in the love of him, and directs all her works,
and thoughts, together with all the powers of her soul in him, according to
the rule and direction, that she finds in him. And without him, she lists
not to be, for so much as in him she finds, all that the heart may delight in,
all beauty, all sweetness, all quietness, and all peace. And so by this mean,
there increases daily, a certain union, and streighte band of love, between
her and God; which in time, comes to be so wonderfully wrought, that she is
altogether, as it were, transfourmed into him. Whereupon it comes to pass,
that she can love, delight, think, and remember, none other thing, but only
him. All other creatures she loves, knows, and considerereth in him: even as
a man does, that diueth and swymmeth under the water, who sees and feels
nothing, that is not either water, or contained in the water. And if he see
any thing, that is out of the water, he sees it, not properly as it is in it
self, but as the likeness of the same shows in the water, and not otherwise.
This is a very perfect and sure rule, by the which a man may make a just
estimate, both of him self, and of all creatures, grownded upon a most
certain, and infallible truth, which is almighty God. Upon this she brought
in an other Doctrine also, which she took such pleasure in, that she ceased
not to repeat it again and again, as a thing very worthy to be noted. A
soul, said she, that is thus plonged in the love of God, look how much she
loves God, so much she hates her self, that is, her own sensuality, which
is the root, and beginning of all sin, and from whence she sees to arise,
the cause of her separation from God, which is her whole felicity, and final
perfection. The which thing when a soul preceiueth, she conceiueth a great
misliking, which brings forth a certain holy hatred, against her own
lusts, and withal an earnest desire, to kill the root of the same, which
root is self love. But because she sees, that the root is so deep, that it
can not be utterly grubbed up, but that there will remain some piece of it,
which will from time to time molest her: therefore does she likewise, increase
daily in this holy hatred, whereof is engendered, a certain frutful despising,
and setting at naught of her self; which by the force and virtue of the love
of God, the ouercomer of all deiection and confusion, rises up with a greater
hope and desire, and auanceth it self toward God: for whose love she is
desirous to abide all pains, and roughnes of discipline, hoping thereby to
subdue al inordinate appitites, and pronenes, to sin in her self, which are
the lettes and stays, that keep her from her desired joy, and union with
God. And in this humble submission of her self, she receives an inward light
of grace, by the which she comes to see, and to acknowledge, the merciful
goodness of God, who is evermore ready to pardon, and will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he turn and live. Which consideration, increases her
love toward him passingly: and by love she purchases daily greater grace,
strenght, and fulness of peace in her self, and so goes foreward, in
perfection of charity, until at the le^ght it pleases God, to pluck her as
a melowe apple, from this tree of bitterness, and to transpose her wholly into
him self, who is the everlasting tree of sweetness and life. And thus is this
holy hatred, the true keeper, and guardian of the soul, the forteresse and
sure castle, of a quiet and assured hope in God. This is that, which the holy
Apostle meant, when he said: When I am weak, then am I strong. For our Lord
had declared unto him, that strenght is wrought in weakness. And therefore he
says also: I will gladly rejoice in mine infirmities, that the power of
Christ may dwell in me. Now this infirmity was nothing else, but only that
hatred of him self, that we here speak of: Which was caused in him, by the
knowledge of that root of inordinate lusts, and of his weakness, and
insufficiency to all good works, which he saw was in him self The which
thing when he perceived, he waxed weak and feeble, that is, he despaired in
him self, and acknowledging his own feeblenes, yealded him self humbly, into
the mighty hands of God, in whom only it lay, to cure his infirmity. Who
like a loving Father, forthwith accepted that lowly resignation of him self,
and laying his almighty hand upon him, made him strong in God, that was
content to confess, how weak and in sufficient he was in him self. When this
holy virgin spoke these, and other words to like purpose, she burst out, as
it were of a certain inward joy and iubilee, that she felt in her spirit,
and said; O wonderful goodness of God, how strangely do thou dispose of of
things! Out of vice, thou drawest virtue, out of weakness, strength, out of
offense, great grace, and favor. O dear children, said she, have this holy
hatred in your selves; for out of it arises true meekenes, and humility of
heart: by reason whereof, you shall account all your works, and other things
as smoke and vanities, and shall glory only in God. This holy hatred, shall
make you to have a great moderation, and stay in prosperity, and withal a
goodly quietness, and patience in adversity. It shall cawse you to be modest,
and comely in your conversation with men; gracious and acceptable, in all your
works of piety before God. Many times also she would add furthermore, and
say contrariwise. Woe be to that soul, in the which this holy hatred lodges
not: for it can not be chosen, but that in such a soul there must needs
reign self love, which is the root, fowndation, and syncke of all inordinate
lusts. And therefore, when she saw any sin, or vice, in any person, being
moved with a certain compassion, she used often times to say. This is the
fruit of self love, the mother of pride, and of all other euels. Do therefore
(said she to her ghostly Father, and others) your uttermost endeavor, to
grubbe it up out of your heart, and to plant in the same that holy hatred; for
that is the kings high way, very certainly known, and well trodden: in the
which all our defectes, are perfectly corrected without any error, and by it
we clyme up to the mount of all virtues, in the highest perfection. Thus much
saw the glorious Father S. Augustine, when he described two cities, the own
fownded upon the love of our selves, which tends to the dishonor of God, and
the other grownded upon the love of God, which tends to the abbasing of our
selves.

Of the strange battles, which she had against the deuel: and how she armed
her self with a strong faith, and other heavenly virtues, and so gate a most
glorious victory over her enemy.

Chap. 20.
AFter that she had learned these lessons (which were many more, then are here
specified) it pleased the wisdom of God, (who sees, that his servants, do
commonly take more good of their battles against the enemy, then they do in
the time of peace) to suffer his humble handmaid, to enter a great combat with
proud Satan. And because his will was, that she should overcome in that
battle, he would, that besides the furniture, which he had given her before,
she should now put on a special armor of Fortitude, to serve her against all
the assaults of the enemy. The which though he were willing, to give her of
his own more bowntifulnes, yet because he deliteth to be sought unto, and
gives his graces more willingly, when they are earnestly sought and instantly
craved at is hand: therefore certain days, before this battle should
begin, he put in the heart of his spowse, that she should humble her self
before him in prayer, and crave the virtue of Fortitude. The which prayer our
Lord answered effectually, and gave her both the virtue that she desired, and
withal a very sweet lesson concerning the same, saying. Daughter, if thou will
have the virtue of Fortitude, thou must endeavor to follow me. True it is, that
I was able of mine own power, to overcome all the forces of the enemy, by
diverse and sundry ways. But for your behoose and example, I chose rather to
vanquish him, by dying upon the Cross: that you, that be only men, might
learn, if you minded to encounter with the enemy, to take the Cross, as I
did, and so by virtue of the same, to overcome al his wyles and strength. And
be you well assured, that this Cross shall be a refresshing unto you in your
tentations, if you have mind of the pains, that I suffered on it for your sake.
If you suffer for my love with me, you shall be rewarded with me. And the more
like you be to me in this life, in persecutions and pains, the more like shall
you be to me in the life to come, in joy and rest. Embrace therefore, my dear
daughter, embrace the Cross; receive all bitter things and adversities, with
a willing and cheereful heart. And dread no power, neither of man, nor of the
deuel. For in whatsoever time or manner, they shall make any enforcement
against thee, by this mean thou shall easily withstand, and put back, all
their violent attemptes. When this good disciple of Christ, had heard this
lesson, she forgot it not, but laid it up with a dilligent regard in her
memory; And evermore afterward, she had passing great joy and delight, in
bearing tribulation and adversity. In so much that there was nothing in the
earth, that she took such inward comfort in, as she did in Crosses, troubles,
and hard discipline. For she believed assuredly, that by troubles and
vexations, she approached near unto her spowse, and was made like unto him: the
which the longer they were, and more extreme, the greater weight of glory she
knew, that they wrought in her for the time to come. Now, when our Lord saw,
that his spowse was thus sufficiently furnished and armed, against all
assaults, it seemed a fit time, to open the way to the enemy, and to permit
him to come against her, with all his strength and malice. Satan saw, how much
she profited in spiritual life: how lustely and stowtely she clymmed up to the
mount of all perfection. He considered, that she was of the weaker kind, to
wit, a woman, and withal of years very young and tender: all the which turned
him to greater grief and confusion. He weighed also the great opinion, and
^ame of virtue, which men had conceived of her: by reason whereof, he saw,
that in time he was in danger, to leese many sowles, whereupon when he was
permitted by God, he began to assiege this strong fortress, diverse and
sundry ways. The first assaults, were very strange tentations of the flesh,
in the which, sommetymes he fourmed in her fantasy (both waking and sleeping)
illusions and dreams, which were wanton and dishonest; and sometimes he made
certain corporal visions to appear unto her, forming bodies in the air, the
which he caused to utter many words and gestures, which were very filthy
and unseemly to be spoken. When the blessed virgin, heard and saw those
things, she ran forthwith with great fear and horror (according to the
doctrine that she had learned) to her iron chain, with the which, she beat her
body so much, that the blood ran out in streams. And unto that rough
discipline, she added further more so much watching, that in a manner she
yealded no rest at all to her body. But the more she increased her austeritie
of discipline, the more did the enemy, busy him self, in renewing and
multiplying his assaults, cawsing such visions to appear unto her, both more
manifestly, and also in greater number; and sometimes they showed them selves,
to have as it were, a certain pity, and compassion, on the great penance,
that she put her self unto, and said unto her. Alas poor wretch, what meanest
thou thus to torment thy body in vain? Weenest thou, that thou shall be able
to endure this hard discipline to the end? What gain shall it be to thee, if
thou murder thy self? How much better were it for thee, to leave off this
folly, before thou be utterly spent. Thou art yet a young woman, and the time of
pleasure is not passed. Nature is not so decayed, but that thou may well
recover, both thy strength and beauty, and so show among other women, and take
a husband, and leave some increase to the world. May thou not as well
please God, in the holy state of matrimony, as in this barren and unfruitful
state, that thou have now taken? Have not thou heard tell of Sara, Rebecca,
Lia, Rachel, with many others, that lived very perfectly, and honorably, in
the state of matrimony? Who has brought thee, to enter into this singular
trade of life, so hard and straight, that thou shall never be able to hold out
in it? All the while, that the enemies, were speaking these and other the like
words unto her, she continued in prayer, and kept her heart pure from all
uncleanness: and gave them not one word to answer, saving only, when they went
about to bring her in despair of continuance, in that holy order of life,
then would she say. I trust in my Lord Jesus Christ, and not in my self. And
they could never get other word of her. And therefore afterward, when she
talked with her ghostly Father, and others, that conuersed with her, she was
wont to give them this lesson for a general rule, that when they had to deal
with the enemy, tempting them to any manner of synn, they should never stand
to reason, or dispute with him: for so much as he trusts very much, in his
malicious and sophistical suttelties, and if he may a little incline the will
of man, he will soon induce his understanding to error. But the surest way in
this case is, to deal as a true wife is wont to do, when she is moved by an
adulterer to dishonestie: unto whom she makes none answer, whatsoever he
say, neither will she so much as look in his face, but forthwith turns
away from him, and so keeps her self faithful and true, to her husband.
And so did this chaste virgin to her spowse Christ: and by this mean she gate a
great victory over her enemy, boring his ears, with the nail of a strong
and faithful prayer. Howbeit, though he saw his first assault thus easily
frustrate and put by, yet did he not cease, but moved an other battle against
her, which was much more fierce and cruel then the foremer.

How the enemy, accompained, with a great multitude of unclean spirits,
renewed his battarie against this strong Fortress, and used greater
enforcement, then before.

Chap. 21.
WHen the unclean spirits saw, that this attempt took no place; but was by
the grace of God easily overcome: they took diverse and sundry shapes of men
and women, and setting them selves in such fourmes, before the eyes of the
chaste virgin, they exercised most filthy acts of the flesh, and spoke very
foul words, and used all possible means to sterre up her mind and body to
uncleanness. The which what a great grief it caused to her unspotted, and
maidenlie heart, those only are able to consider, that know, what a goodly
treasure, a pure and chaste conversation is in the sight of God, and so
consequently, what a great loss it is to be in danger to be spoiled of the
same. It was also a great torment, and increase of heaviness, to her mind, to
consider, that her dear spowse and Lord, who was wont before to visit and
comfort her oftentimes, seemed now, as though he had utterly forsaken her, and
would no more relieve and succor her in her distress, although for her part
she did what in her lay, knocking at the gate of his mercy with continual
prayer, tears, and hard discipline upon her body. And when she saw, that he
made no answer, she began to devise a certain new manner of slight, to
encounter with the enemy (how be it not without the secret instincte of God:)
which was this. She conceived a marvelous great misliking of her self, and
against her own sins, and so turnyng her indignation, as it were against her
self, she uttered such words. Ah most vile wretch, look thou to receive
comfort? Think thou, that thy sins have deserved it at Gods hand? O most
unkind caitife, is it not enough for thee, that thou art pardoned of the pains
of hell? O unthankful creature, do not thou take it to be gain enough, that
the endless mercy of God, that changed those everlasting torments, into these
temporal afflictions? Were it not a very gaineful exchange for thee, though
they should endure all the time of thy life? Will thou then be dismayed, and
relent thy wonted mortification, and discipline, knowing, that by theses
means, thou shall escape endless pains, and within a short time, receive
endless joy and comfort at the hand of thy dear spowse Jesus Christ? By this
may thou try, whether thou have chosen to serve God for these temporal
visitations and comfortes, or else in hope of that everlasting bless, and
joyful fruition of him self, in the life to come. A wake therefore, take a
good heart, fight manfully, and expecte with patience, the good will and
pleasure of God. Now is the time for thee, to increase to thy self, labor and
pain, and to his holy name honor and glory. It can not be expressed in
words, how much she was strengthened in soul by this mean, and contrariwise
how much the proud enemy, was by the same confownded, and weakened. She
confessed afterward to her ghostly Father, that there was such a rabble of
those foul feendes at that time in her chamber, moving her diverse and sundry
ways to uncleanness, that she was enforced for a time, to flee from her chamber
to the Church, and there to keep more then she was wont to do. How be it even
in the Church also, she was molested, thought not so much as before in her
chamber. Whether when she returned afterward, she was again so beset with
such a compaine of unclean spirits, representing there before her so many
acts of filthiness, and that with so great importunity and strange manners,
that it was a very miracle, how she was able to sustain the same. But she
forth with falling down to the earth, and there lying groueling on her face in
prayer, besought God of his mercy, with such mighty sighs, and groans, that
in contemplatio^ of her pitiful cry, he somewhat assuaged the fury of those
foul feendes. And so continuyng in such afflictions, and troubles, a great
number of days, at the lenght, when at a time coming from the Church, and
lying after such a manner in her chamber, she made her earnest prayer unto God,
craving his merciful aid and assistance, there appeered a certain
comfortable beam of the holy Ghost, which brought unto her remembrance the
goodly lesson, that our Lord had thaught her before, when she prayed unto him,
for the gift of Fortitude. And so understanding that all, that was there done,
was only the tentation of the enemy, she received great joy in her heart, and
determined from that day foreward, to suffer meekely, and gladly, all manner of
tentations and afflictions, for the love of her spowse Jesus Christ. Then one
of those wicked sprites, (who was peradventure of greater boldness, and malice,
then the rest) spoke unto her after this manner. Wretched woman, what meanest
thou? Think thou evermore to lead such a state of life, as this is? Make thy
self well assured of this: We shall never give thee one hour of respite, but
shall pain, and vex thee continually, until thou yeald, and consent, unto
our will. Unto whom she made answer out of hand, with a great courage and
affiance in God, and said; I have chosen pain for my refreshing: and therefore
it shall not be yrckesome to me, but rather pleasant and delitefull, to suffer
these, and all other afflictions, for the love of my Lord and Savior, so long
and so much, as shall please his divine majesty. With that word, all that
detestable company of unclean sprites, vanished quite away, with a very
dreadful, and horrible noise. And behold forth with, there appeered a
marvelous goodly light from heaven, which shone all over her chamber, and in
that light our Savior Christ, in such form, and manner, as he was, when he
hong upon the Cross, and there shed his most precious blood, for the
redemption of the world. Who called her unto him, and and said these words.
Mine own daughter Catherine, see thou not, what I have suffered for thy sake?
Think it not much therefore, to suffer for me. After that, he approached nearer
unto her in an other form to comfort her, and spoke unto her, many sweet and
loving words, and she likewise to him. O Lord (said she, using the words of
S. Antonie) where were thou, when my heart was so vexed, with soul and loathsome
tentations. Daughter, said he, I was in thine heart. Then said she again. O
Lord, saving always thy truth, and my dutiful reverence to thy divine
Majesty, how is it possible, that thou should dwell in an heart, replenished
with so many filthy, and shameful thoughts? Whereunto our Savior said. Tell
me daughter; Those unclean thoughts, did they cause in thy heart grief or
delight? No, said she, they caused very great grief, and sorrow. Who then,
said our Lord, was he, that caused that grief and misliking in thine heart? Who
was it, but only I, that lay secretly within, in the middle of thy soul?
Assure thy self of this. If I had not ben there present, those foul
thoughts, that stood rownd about thine heart, seeking means to enter (but
evermore with the repu^^e) had without all doubt prevailed, and made their
entry into thy soul, with full consent of thy will and synful delight. But my
presence was it, that caused that misliking in thine heart, and moved thee, to
make resistance against those foul tentations: the which thy heart refused so
much as it could; and because it could not do so much, as it would, it
conceived a greater displeasure, both against them, and also against it self.
It was my gracious presence, that wrought all these goodly effects in thine
heart: wherein I took great delight, to see my love, my holy fear, and the
zeal of my faith, planted in thy soul, my dear daughter and spowse. And so,
when I saw my time (which was, when thou had through my grace and
assistance thoroughly vanquished the pride and insolency of thine enemy) I
sent out certain external beams of my light, that put these darcke feendes to
flight. For by course of nature, darckenes may not abide, where light is last
of all, by my light, I gave thee to understand, that those pains were thy
great merit, gain, and increase of the virtue of Fortitude. And because thou
offredst thy self willingly to suffer for my love, taking such pains with a
cheerful heart, and esteemyng them as a recreation, according to my doctrine:
therefore my will and pleasure was, that they should endure no longer. And so I
showed my self: where upon they vanished quite away. My daughter, I delight
not in the pains of my servants, but in their good will, and readiness, to
suffer patiently, and gladly for my sake. And because such patience, and
willingness, is showed in pains and adversity, therefore do I suffer them, to
endure the same. Take this similitude of my body. At what time my body hong
upon the Cross in extreme pains and tourmentes, and afterward when it lay
dead upon the ground, no man could ever have thought, that all that
notwithstanding, there had been in it hiden that true life, that gives life and
moving, to every living thing. And yet so it was by reason of the inseparable
union, that was, and is, between my Godhead and humane nature: though not so
understood of men, no, not of mine own Apostles and disciples, that had
conuersed with me a long time. Now, as at that time, when my body lay there
dead, void of sense, and without all outward show of any inward power, there
was not withstanding in it, a divine power able to quiken and give life to
other creatures, no less then afterward, when it was raised from death, and
endewed with the glorious gifts of immortal life: even so (though after a
different manner) do I dwell in the sowles of my faithful servants, at one time
covertly, and without showing my self, for their exercise and further merit,
and at an other time openly and without covert, for their comfort and joy. In
this the time of thy battle, I was in thine heart, armyng and fortifying thee
with my grace, against the force of the enemy, but covertly, for to exercise
thy patience and increase of merit. But now, that thou have through my grace,
fought out thy battle manfully, and vanquished the enemy, I give thee to
understand, that I am and will be in thine heart more openly, yea and withal, more
often for thy comfort. And with these words, that blessed vision ended: at
what time the holy virgin was left, replenished with such abundance of joy,
and sweetness, that no pen is able to describe it. And specially she took
passing great comfort in that, that our Lord called her, Mine own daughter
Catherine. And therefore she entreated her ghostly Father, that when he spoke
unto her, he would use the self same words, and say, My daughter Catherine:
to the end that, by the often repetition of those words, she might often times
renew the inward sweetness, that she felt in her heart, of those joyous words
of her Dear Lord and spowse.

How our Lord, with diverse other Saints, visited her oftentimes very
familiarly; And how he taught her to read by miracle.

Chap. 22.
FRom that time foreward, it pleased our Lord, to use a very unwonted
familiarity with her, and to visit her both very often, and very lovingly,
even as one friend, is wont to visit an other: coming to her sometimes him
self alone, sometimes bringing with him his most blessed mother, the virgin
Marie, some times the holy patriarch S. Dominicke, sometimes also with his
mother S. Marie Magdalene, S. John the Evangelist, the Apostle S. Paul, and
other Saints, whom he brought with him, sometimes all together, and sometimes
again, some one or else some few of them, according as his pleasure was. For
the most part, he came alone, and conferred with her, even as one familiar is
wont to do with an other. In so much, that many times they walked up and
down in her chamber together, and said the psalms, or divine service
together, as though they had been two clerks, or religious persons. Which may
seem a very strange thing, and so much the more, if it be considered withal,
that she never learned to read, by the teaching of any man, or woman; for (as
she declared to her ghostly Father) she had a great desire to learn her
mattins: and therefore on a time, she besought one of her sisters, to geat her
an A. B. C. and to teach her the lettres. But when she had travailed about the
same, a certain of weeks, and saw that she did but leese her time: she
thought good to give over that course, and to set her self again, to her
customable exercises, of prayer and meditation. And one time lying prostrate on
the grownd, she made her prayer after this manner. Lord, if it be not thy holy
will and pleasure, that I shall atteine the knowledge of reading, I am very
well content, for thy love, to continue in my ignorance, and to spend my time,
in such simple meditations, as it shall please thee to grant me; But if thou
would vowchsafe, to show me so much favor, as that I might be able to
read, and sing the divine service, I would be right glad, also to serve thee in
such manner. It is a wonderful thing to report, that she had no sooner ended
her prayer, but that she was forthwith able to read as readily, as one that
had been trained long time in the study of learning. Whereat her ghostly
Father, was meruelously astoined: for so much as it was well known to all, that
conuersed with her, that before that time, she could not only not read, or
spell, but also very hardly know one letter from an other. After this time
she gate her books of Church service, and began to say her Mattins, and other
Canonical hours: in the which she noted disigently the verses of the psalms,
but especially that verse, that is used commonly in the beginning of every
hour, to wite, Deus in adiutorium meum intend: Domine ad adiuuandum me
festina: and kept the same in her mind, with a special regard to her lives end.

How she increased so much in heavenly contemplations, that she was often
times ravished in the same: and how she was espowsed to our Savior Christ with
a Ring.

Chap. 23.
AFter this time, increasing daily in heavenly contemplations, she was at the
lenght enforced, almost to give over all vocal prayer: because she was no
soener set to pray, but that forthwith, she was so much elevated in the
height of her spirit, and so ravished from her bodily senses, that she might
scantly endure, to end one Pater noster. Whereupon having an earnest desire in
her heart, to have yet a further increase of perfection, in spiritual life, and
to clymme up, to the highest point of charity, she made her petition unto
almighty God, in most humble manner, that it would please him to give her such
a light of faith, that being guided by the same, she might from that time
foreward, walk surely and without alteration, in the paths of his holy
commandments, and make resistance, against all the attemptes of of the
enemy. The which request, our Lord took in good part and answered very
comfortably, and sweetly, saying these words. I will make thee my spowse in
faith. And evermore, as she increased in desire, and multiplied her prayer, so
heard she the same sentence repeated and confirmed by our Lord, saying unto
her: I will make thee my spowse in faith. At the last it happened, a little
before the beginning of lent, in the shrouing days (at what time men are wont
of a corrupt custom to gather together after a synful manner, and to give them
selves overmuch to belly cheer) that this wise virgin, sequestered her self
from all company, and closing her self up all alone in her cell, she besought
our Lord, with great austeritie of life, with long fasting, continual watching,
and fervent prayer, that he would vowchsafe to perform his promise, in giving
her that perfection of faith, that she so much desired. While she was thus
praying, with great fervor of mind, and instance, behold our Lord appeered
unto her, after a very comfortable manner, and said these words. Because thou
have forsaken all the vanities of the world, and set thy love upon me, and
because thou have for my sake, rather chosen to afflicte thy body with
fasting, then to eat flesh with others, especially at this time, when all
other that dwell rownd about thee, yea and those also that dwell in the same
house with thee, do bancket, and make great feasts: therefore I am determined
this day, to keep a solemn feast with thee, and with great joy, and pomp,
to espowse thy soul to me in faith. As our Lord was speaking these words,
there appeered in the same place, the most glorious virgin Marie mother of God,
the beloved disciple S. John the Euangeliste, the great trompet of the holy
Ghost S. Paul the Apostle, and the most worthy patriarch and fownder of her
order, S. Dominicke: and after these, came the kingly prophet, and poet
David, with a musical psalter in his hand, on the which he played a heavenly
song of inestimable sweetness, in the ears of the new spowse. Then our blessed
Lady came to her, and took her by the hand: and withal, stretched out her
fingers, toward her Son, with a very comely grace and besought him that
he would vowchsafe, to espowse her to him self in faith. Whereunto he assented
forthwith, with a very sweet, and lovely countenance, and taking out a
ring, that was set about with four precious pearls, and had in the other
part, a marvelous rich diamant, put the same on the finger of her right hand.
saying thus. Behold. I here espowse thee to me thy Maker and Savior, in faith:
Which shall continue in thee, from this time forward evermore, without any
change or alteration, until the time come that thou shall consummate the same
with me, in a most perfect, and blesful conjunction, in the joys of heaven.
Wherefore from hence forth, bear thy self stowtly, and be not dismayed, for
thou art now armed with the armor of faith, by the virtue whereof thou shall
withstand, and overcome, all the assaults of the enemy. And with that, this
vision vanished away, and left her replenished, with such joy, and sweetness,
that no tongue is able to express it.

Certain proofs, of the holiness of this blessed virgin, declaring the
aforementioned straight frindship, and familiarity, between our Lord and
her, to be a thing undoubted.

Chap. 24.
IT may be, that many of the things mentioned before in this book, may
seem to to some men very strange, and almost incredible. And no merueile: for
why, so they seemed even at that time to many men, not only of such as had
little acqueintance with her, but of those also, that lived familiarly with her:
who as they were much induced to think reverently of her, by seeing her
virtuous, and holy conversation: so contrariwise they were put in great doubt,
and perplexity, by reason of the things, that she did. Among others, that
cast such doubts, was doctor Raimundus her ghostly Father, a great learned,
and wise man; who at the beginning of his familiarity with her could not
resolve, whether those wonderful things, that he heard, and saw in her, were
true, or counterfeicte, and whether they proceeded of God, or of the deuel.
While he stood thus in doubt, and had a great desire to be resolved in the
matter, because it stood him upon (being her ghostly Father) neither to
deceive, nor to be deceived, but to judge aright of spirits: it came to his
mind, that if he could by her means, and intercession, obtain for him self,
a true Contrition of all his sins (such as he never had before) together with
a perfect sorrow for the same, and earnest desire to make a full Satisfaction
in the sight of God, and that he might perceive sensibly, that all that came to
him by her means: he would take that, for a most certain, and infallible
token, that whatsoever she had done, was the work of God, and not of Satan,
transfiguring him self into an Angel of light. And this trial liked him very
well, because being learned in the study of divinity, he knew, that the
deuel could not possibly be the author of true Contrition to any man, and
that it is not in the power of any creature, but only of God, to move the heart
of man, to what him lists. And so with this intent he went unto her, and
without declaring any thing particularly, he desired her, that she would do
him a pleasure. What pleasure, said she? forsoouth, said he, that you would be
a mean to your spowse for me, that he of his great mercy, would pardon me all
my sins. Whereunto she made answer, with a cheereful countenance (as casting
no doubt at all of the effect) that she would do it. Then said he again.
Daughter, I thank you for this. But yet thus much I must tell you more; That
unless you procure me, some good assurance of the same, you do me no pleasure
at all. What assurance would you require, said she? I would require, said he,
that I might have a full Pardon, and a Bull drawn upon the same, after the
manner of the court of Rome. With that she smiled sweetly, and asked him, what
manner of Bull he would have. The Bull, said he, that I desire, is, that I may
feel in my self, a certain deep, and perfect Contrition of my sins,
beyond the common course. At that word she gave him such a comfortable look,
that it seemed to him, that she had entered into all the secrets of his heart.
Well, said she, such a Bull shall you have also. And so they parted: for the
day was almost spent. The next morning doctor Raimundus was taken after his
customable manner with certain infirmities, which were notwithstanding very
grievous, and as then so paineful unto him, that he was enforced to keep his
bed. There was at that time about him, brother Nicolas of Pisa* a very
religious man, and one that he loved dearly. The place, where he lay, was a
Monastery of Nuns, of S. Dominickes order, not far from the lodging of
this holy maid: who saw right well in spirit, in what case doctor Raimundus
was, and said to her companion. Come, let us go to visit our father doctor
Raimundus: for he is sick: what will you do, said she? ye are in worse case
then he. But she forthwith set her self in the way with her companion, and
making more have, then she was wont to do at other times, came upon him
suddenly ^^ lying in his bed, and said; Father, how is it with you? Which was
to him so unlooked for, that he had no time to talk with his brother, and to
take order for things, as he would have done if he had known of her coming.
And scantly could he answer her and say, that he was sorry, that she should
take such pains in coming to him, being her self in far weaker state, then
he was, but that she was entered, without any further circumstances, into an
high discourse (as her manner was) of heavenly matters, of God, and of his
benefits bestowed upon his creatures; and contrariwise, of our ungratefulness
toward him, and pronenesse to offend such a good, and bowntiful Lord. Which
words were spoken, with such grace, that he felt, that his heart was strangely
drawn, by the virtue of the same, and that it received great comfort. And so
for manners sake, he caused him self to be taken out of the bed, were he lay,
and to be set on an other lower cowch, nearer to her. Who went on with her
discourse: and he never thought of his petition, made unto her over night,
concerning the Bull: but was carried away, with the efficacy and strength of
her words; which pearsed his heart, like sharp darts. Whereupon, his mind
being thus forcibly driven, and entering at the length into a certain deep,
and inward consideration of his sins, (such as he never had in his life
before) there was represented unto him, i^ a most clear vision, the judgment
seat of Christ; before whom, being arrained and accused, and acknowledging him
self gyltie, he heard a sentence of everlasting damnation pronounced against
him self, which, he confessed, he had deserved by the order of Gods justice.
This sentence he heard openly read, and he saw withal, a preparation made for
his execution in such order and manner, as is wont to be, when malefactors, or
thieves, are condemned to the gallows. At the length, when this dreadful, and
horrible vision, had continued a good space, our Savior appeered again unto
him, not like a terrible Judge, but like a pitiful Father: and whereas he was
naked he clad him with his own garments, lead him into his house, gave him to
eat and drink plentifully, made very much of him, accepted him into his
family, as one of his howsehold servants, and changed the sentence of
everlasting death, into a firm promise of everlasting life. The which when he
saw, and considered inwardly with him self, first the deformity of his
sins, and danger that he was in, and then the merciful goodness of our
Savior, that received him again so lovingly: he burst out into groanyng,
sobbing, sighing, and weeping so abundantly, that in all his life time, there
never happened the like unto him. The holy maid, that was by, all this while,
and saw, how the medicine wrought, began then to hold her peace, and to let
him alone for a good time, that he might have his fill of weeping and
Co^trition. And when she saw her time, she spoke to him again, and said.
Father; I pray you, give over this manner of reading, and consider well of the
tenor of the Bull. The Bull, said he? And with that turnyng him self toward
her, he said. Ah daughter, may this be the Bull, that I required of you yester
euenyng? This is it, good Father, said she. Wherefore be ye myndful of the
benefits of God. That said, she took her leave forthwith, and went her way.
Doctor Raimundus her ghostly Father, declared yet, an other very evident
sign, of her great holiness, and familiarity, with almighty God; which was
this. Being on a time very sick, and feeble, she laid her down (as her manner
was) upon her boordes. Where having diverse and sundry revelations, she caused
her ghostie Father to be sent for, that she might impart the same to him. So
soon as he was come, she began, after her accustomable manner, to speak of God,
and to recite unto him many things, and namely those things, that our Lord
had vowchsafed to show unto her at shrofte whereof we spoke a little before.
When he heard the things, that she reported, and considered of the greatness of
the same, in comparison of that he had read of other Saints: he said thus in
his mind. Is it possible, that all this should be true, that she says? And
with that looking steadfastly upon her, he saw her face suddenly transfourmed
into the face of a man: who likewise set his eyes steadfastly upon him, and gave
him a marvelous dreadful look. The face, that he saw, was somewhat long: he
showed like a man of middle age: his beard was of the color of ripe wheat,
that is, between red and yallowe: his countenance was very comely, reverend,
and full of majesty. And for a little time he saw that face only, and could
see none other thing: which put him in such a fear, and terror, that casting
up his hands above his shoulders, he cried with a loud voice, and said. Oh
Lord, who is this, that looks thus upon me? It is he (said she) that is. And
with that she came again to her own form. These and other the like things
did doctor Raimundus her ghostly Father, report of his own experience: all
which he affirmed to be most certainly true, with a very great, and earnest
protestation.

THE SECOND PART.
How the spowse of Christ, was made by little and little, to show her self to
the wordle.

Chap. 1.
AFter that our Savior Christ, had thus espowsed this holy virgin to him
self, and beawtified her with many graces, and gifts: his will and pleasur
was, that she should from that time foreward, by little, and little, show her
self to the world; that the grain, that had now lain hidden in the grownd a
convenient time, and was sufficiently mortified, might bud, flower, and bring
forth the fruit of many excellent virtues, to the comfort of men. Wherefore
on a time, when he had showed her many mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and
had taught her also to say the Psalms, and Canonical hours with him self
(as is declared before) he bad her, that she should go down to eat with
others, and then return to him again. When she heard that, she sobbed and
wept, and fell down at his feet after a very pitiful manner, and said unto
him. O most sweet Jesus, why will thou put me away from thee? If I have
offended thy divine Majesty, behold here my body at thy feet, lay what
penance it shall please thee upon it, and I will help with all my heart. Only
this I beseech thee, let me not be so sharply punished, as to be sundred from
thy blessed presence. What have I to do with their meats? I have meat to
eat, that they know not of. Oh my good Lord, wherefore do thou will me, to
go to eat with them? Does man live of bread only, and not rather, and better,
of every word, that comes out of thy mouth? Art not thou he, my dear Lord,
that have cawsed me to eschew the conversation of men? that I might the better
converse with thee? And now that I have fownd thee, without any desert on my
part, only of thy mere liberality and goodness, shall I be so unhappy, as to
forsake such a goodly treasure, for to return to the conversation of men, and
so to dymme the purity and cleerenes of my faith? Suffer not that, O my dear
spowse and Lord, for thine infinity goodness. When she had thus powered out her
heart before our Lord, pitifully sobbing and weeping, and lying prostrate at his
feet, he, like a merciful Lord, gave her very sweet words again, and said.
My dear daughter, leave the care of thy self to me. It is meet, that thou
do fulfill all righteousness. Which thou can not do, unless thou be
fruteful and profitable, not only to thy self, but also to others. Think not,
my good daughter, that it is my meaning to separate thee from me, but rather to
unite thy heart more firmly unto me. Know thou not, that all the law and
prophets stand of two points, to wit, of the love of God, and of the love of
thy neighbor? Wherefore to make thee perfect, my will is, that thou exercise
thy self in the love of thy neighbor, with great compassion and mercy, that
thou may fly up to heaven, not with one wing, but with two. Call to mind
the zeal that thou had of winning sowles, which, I planted in thy heart,
even in thine infancy: at what time thou had a desire to change thine
habit, and to clad thy self like a man, that thou might be received into
the order of the Friars Preachers. Remember, that this habit, which thou
wearest, is the habit of thy father S. Dominicke, and was given unto thee by
my dear mother, namely for a special love and affection, that thou barest unto
him, for the great travail, that he sustained in wynning of sowles. Behold, I
do now dispose, and ordain thee, to that end, that thou did through my
secret inspiration so much desire in thy yowth. I dispose thee to that
function, that my Father disposed me unto in the earth; I ordain thee to that
ministry, that I ordained my beloved Apostles and disciples unto before I
departed from them on the earth. And all this I do for thy further merit and
greater crown. At these words the humble virgin took great comfort, and
bowing down her head with all submission, said. O Lord thy will be done in all
things, and not mine, for thou art light, and I am darckenes, thou art he that
is: and I am she, that is not; But yet I beseech thee, my Lord God, let me be
so bold, as to ask, how I a wretched and vile woman, should be able to do
any good in thy Church. How shall I being a simple woman, be able to instruct
wise and learned men? How shall it be seemly for me, to live and converse
among men? Unto that our Savior answered and said. Who is he, that created
man, and made a distinction between man and woman? was it not I? If I the^ be
the creator of man and woman, what law may restrain me, that I shall not
do with my creatures, what I shall think good? Can my power be limited, that
I shall not dispose of man and woman, of learned and unlearned, of noble and
base according to my will? Touching thy question therefore, which is, how a
woman, that is the weaker vessel, should be an able and sufficient mean to
edify men, with doctrine and example: because I know, that this thy demand
proceeds, not of any lack of faith in my almighty power, but only of an
humble consideration, of thine own weakness and frailty: I will impart unto
thee my secret in this behalf. Daughter, it is so, that now a days there
abounds such pride in the world (and specially in those that hold them
selves for learned and wise) that my justice can no longer bear it; But
because my mercy is above all my works: as I have determined to do justice
upon this heinous sin, so have I also provided a sovereign medicine against
the same, to as many as will accept it. The proper medicine and punishment of
pride, is to be confownded and brought to shame. And therefore my deliberation
is, that these men, that are wise in their own conceit, shall be made ashamed,
and controlled in their own judgment, when they shall see those creatures,
that they account vile and abiecte (as frail and weak women) to understand
the hidden mysteries of God, not by humane study, but only by grace infused,
and to show the same to the world, both by word and example of life, and for
confirmation of such doctrine, to work many strange signs, wonders, and
miracles above the course of nature. I will do now, as I did, when I was
conversant in the world: at what time I sent simple men, idiots, and fisshers
(but replenished with heavenly knowledge, and strength of my spirit) to
control the wisdom of the world: so will I send thee at this time, and
other ignorant persons, both men and women to confownd the pride of those,
that are wise in their own eyes. The which confusion if they receive, and
humble them selves before me, confessing that all wisdom and power is mine:
if they will reverently embrace my doctrine, spread, throughout the world by
such weak and frail vessels, I will have mercy upon them, and give them a
further increase of grace: and their confusion, shall be to them a medicine unto
everlasting salvation. But if they refuse to receive this medicine, and will
needs follow on in their old course, despising my holy word, and persecuting
my belowed servants, and frindes: I shall bring them to such confusion, that
the whole world shall despise them, and set them al at naught. And if after
such temporal confusion in this world they show them selves stiff necked,
and unrecoverable: I will adiuge them moreover to everlasting confusion in the
world to come: Where, with great bitterness of heart, and penance without fruit,
they shall see them selves so much depressed, and holden down underneath them
selves, as they had a desire in this life, to be magnified and exalted above
them selves. Wherefore, daughter, set thy self in a readiness, to be sent out
into the world: for I will be with thee at all times, and in all places; I will
visit thee, and direct thee in all things, that I shall send thee to do.
When she heard that, she bowed down her head with great reverence, and went
down (as our Lord had willed her) to eat with the rest of the howsehold: with
whom she continued for that time bodily, but her heart was fixed in God. And
whatsoever she saw or heard, of wordlie affairs, was tedious and yrckesome
unto her: and therefore so soon as she might conveniently, she withdrewe her
self out of all company, and returned again to her Cell, that she might
there with the greater quetnes, enjoy the desired presence of him, in whom she
had reposed her whole love and felicity. From that time foreward, there grew
in her, a passing great desire of receiving the blessed Sacrament, of the body
and blood of Christ: whereby she believed faithfully, that she should receive a
further increase of grace, and be united to God: not only with the union of
spirit, but also (after a sort) with a blessed conjunction of bodies, while
she received his most blessed body into her body.

Of her virtuous and lowclie conversation among men, and how she would debase
her self, to do the vilest services in the house. Of many strange
visitations, excesses, and trawnses, which she had in the presence of many.

Chap. 2.
BEing thus appointed by the express commandment of God, to spend some part
of her life in the compaine of men, that her conversation might be the more
fruteful to them, in all her doings she showed, a marvelous profownd, and
sincere humility, and withal a very earnest, and hearty zeal, to the honor
of God, and to the edifying of al such, as happened to co^uerse with her. For
show of a great humility, she set her self with a very willing and
cheereful mind, to do all the vilest and fowlest services in the house, as to
swepe the house, to scowre vessels, to wassh disshes, and to do other more
base and loathsome services then these, such as do properly apperteine to
abiecte servants and drudges. And it pleased God also, that the servant of the
house should be often sick: by reason whereof, her charge and travail was
doubled; For it lay upon her, both to serve the whole howsehold, and withal to
have a very special and diligent regard, to the servant that was sick. All
the which notwithstanding, she would find a time, to give her self to her
wonted exercises, of prayer and penance, and to continue (as it were with
certain enterteinementes) her love and familiarity, with her spowse; who, to
answer her love, visited her also by evident miracle, diverse and sundry
times in the presence of all that lived in house with her. While she was
occupied about the services of the house, it happened very often, that she was
in a trawnce: at what time her body was lifted up into the air, and hong
there without any thing to stay it up, eue^ as a piece of iron, is wo^t to
hang at the adamant stone. And as we see, that fire does naturally tend upward:
even so was it made in a sort almost natural to her, (by reason of the
heavenly fire, with the which her heart was wholly inflamed) to be carried up
toward Christ her spowse, in whom only her spirit fownd rest. In the time,
while she was in such trawnces, (which happened very often unto her) it was
evidently seen, by as many as chanced then to be present, that her soul did
withdraw it self from the bodily senses, and that it did so forsake the
body, that her hands and feet were drawn together: in so much that if they
happened to latch at any thing, they held it so fast, that ye might sooner
break them, the^ sunder them from the thing, of the which they took hold. Her
eyes were closed up: her neck was stiff like an horn: and it was no small
danger, once to towche her in that time, (though it were done never so
gently.) Her mother on a time standing by, assaied to set her neck straight
(for it seemed to her, that it stood a little awrie.) But, as God would have it,
one of the sisters, that was then present, and understood the danger of the
same, cried out unto her, and bad her in any case, that she should not do it.
And anon after, when she came to her self again, she felt her neck so sore,
as if it had been beaten with a staff. And she said furthermore to doctor
Raimundus her ghostly Father, that if her mother had put a little more strength
unto it, she had without all doubt broken her neck.

How being in a trawnse, she fell into the fire, and continued there a good
while without any harm.

Chap. 3.
IT happened on a day, that this holy maid was turnyng the spit, at a hot
fire of coals, to roast a piece of meat for the howsehold. At what time, being
her self roasted within, with a far hoater fire of the spirit of God, then
was that fire, that roasted the meat on the spit, she was ravished in soul,
and taken away from her bodily senses: by reason whereof the spit stood still.
The which thing her brothers wife, called Lysa perceiving and knowing right
well the conditions of the holy maid, took the spit out of her hand, and let
her alone. When the meat was ready, the howsehold set them selves at the
table, and taking a convenient time for their repast, saw all that while that
she continued still in her trawnce. After supper, Lisa determined with her
self, that she would tarry by her, to see the end. At the length, when bed
time was come, she went speedily, and brought her husband and children to bed,
and coming again to see what would become of her, espied before she came at
her, that she was fallen into the fire of hot burning coals. Which sudden
sight made her so afraid, that she scright out as loud as she could, and said;
Alas, Alas, Catherine is all burnt. And with that she ran to her, and caught
her out of the fire. Which done, behold, vewing her diligently on all sides, to
quench the fire if any had been, she saw, that the fire had done her no harm,
neither to her body, nor to her clothes: in so much that, there was not so
much as any savor of burning (as there is wont to be when cloth is burnt) not
yet (which is most of all) any ashes remaining upon any part of her
garments. And yet was it a great fire, and she a long time in it. But the fire
of Gods holy love, that burned inwardly in her heart, was of such force and
virtue, that it would not suffer that outward fire to prevail over her.

Of diverse and sundry miracles, like unto this before written. And how it
pleased our Savior Christ, to give the enemy power over her body.

Chap. 4.
WHile she was praying on a day at Siena in S. Dominickes Church, her spirit
being ravished (as it happened often times) in her contemplation, she leaned
her head to a pillar, upon the which pillar there was a wax candle set up in
the honor of some Saint, that was there. While she was thus in a trawnce, it
chanced that candle to fall down upon her head: where it continued burning,
until such time as it was all wasted, and did her no manner of harm or
displeasure, neither to her head, neither, to the veiles or wimples, that she
ware on her head. The like happened unto her in many other places, where she
chanced to be, to the great horror and trouble, of diverse and sundry devout
persons, that happened to be present: And namely, when she went about some
charitable work, of edifying and bringing sowles to God, then was the malice
of the ghostly enemy, most busy to hinder her good purposes. As it was seen
one time, when she was so occupied, that the malicious feend took her (by the
permission of God) and cast her violently into the middle of a fire. The which
thing certain good folks, that were then about her, seeing, and having great
pity and fear of her case, cried out, and made toward her as fast as they
could, to take her out of the fire. But she, before they came, rose up of her
self, without any hurt or blemish in the world: and looking up upon them
with a smyling countenance, said unto them. Be not afraid: for it is the work
of Malatasca. By the which word she meant the deuel: for so she used to call
him. On an other time, while she was lying upon her cowch, the feend took her,
and cast her headlong into an erthen pan of coals, that stood thereby, in
such sort, that the first thing, that light on the pan, was her head. And he
did it with such fury and rage, that the pan was broken in pieces, but she
not the worse of one hear of her head. And so she set her self up again, and
smyling to an honest woman, that was then present (called Gabriel) she said
unto her merrily. Lo, will ye see, what work Malatasca makes here? These and
other the like things, that happened to this holy maid in very many places,
may seem peradventure strange and almost incredible to some man, that looks
only to the things here presently declared: and he may think it
unreasonable, that almighty God should suffer the body of one, that he loves
so tenderly, to be yealded up for a time, into the rough and violent hands of
the feend; But if he will call to mind. what has happened in fore times to
many holy men and women, and specially to our Savior Christ him self (who
suffered his own body, to be carried by the deuel into an high mountain, and
to a pinnacle of the temple) he shall not marvel, to see the malicious enemy,
to have now the like power over the Disciples, as he had then over the master.

What a charitable affection, and great care, she had of the poor; And of a
pleasant matter, that fell out about the same.

Chap. 5.
THis holy maid, finding by experience, that the more bowntiful and charitable
she showed her self toward her even Christians, the more gracious and
acceptable she was in the sight of Christ hirspowse, conceived a marvelous
great and earnest desire in her heart, of succouring the poor and needy. And
that she did very liberally, even with temporal things. But having no mean
to do it (because she was religious, and had vowed voluntaire poverty) she
besought her father with great humility and instance, that he would give her
leave, to give some part of the goods, that God had bestowed upon him, in alms
to the poor according to her conscience. The which demand he granted very
willingly, because he was very well assured, that her meaning in that, and all
other things, was very perfect and sincere. Whereupon he gave straight
commandment also to as many as were in his house, that none should be so
hardy as to control her, but to let her to give out freely, though she gave
all that was in his house. As soon as she had obtained this grant, she began
to deal out her fathers goods to the poor largely: not to every one that
would ask, without discretion, but only to such, as she knew were in great
need and distress, though they asked not. Among other, she understood of two
families, that stood in great need, and yet were ashamed to beg of whom she
took great pity; and therefore rising one day very tymely in the morning,
she loded her self with corn, wine, oil, and other things necessary, and
carried the same toward the howses, of those poor folks. Whether when she
came, as God would have it, she fownd the doors, open: and so set down her
provision within the doors, and pulling to the door after her slancke away
privily, and gate her home again as fast as she could. At an other time, this
holy maid was swollen in all parts of her body, from the top of her head to
the sole of her foot, in such sort, that she could neither sit nor stand, nor
yet lie in her bed, without great pain. At what time, hearing of a poor
widow that lived in great distress, and lack of necessary sustinance, for
her self, and for her children, being moved with inward compassion of their
wretched state, she made her humble petition to our Lord the next night, that
he would vowchsafe to lend her so much strength of body for a little time, as
that she might be able to go and succor that poor woman. Anon after, feeling
her self meruelously well comforted, she rose up early in the morning, and
filled her sack with corn; she took two great flascats also, one of wine,
and an other of oil: and withal, whatsoever she fownd in the house meet to be
eaten. And when she had laid this provision together, thinking it impossible to
carry it all at once to the widoes house, which was far from thence (and the
things weighed no less then an hundred powndes) she cast up her heart to her
spowse, and besought him of his gracious assistance. That done, she began to
try with a stowte heart, what she was able to do. Some part she laid upon her
shoulders, some she trussed under her gyrdle, some she carried in her right
hand, and some in her left. And when she had loded her self with all this
burden, she felt no more of it, then if it had been a wad or wispe of straw:
but so soon as the common bell of the city had rong (before the which time it
was not lawful for any person to walk in the streets) she took her way
toward the poor widows house, and went so light on the grownd (not
withstanding all that heavy weight of provision, and great feeblenes of body
withal) as if she had carried nothing, but had been carried her self, as in
truth she was. But, when she was almost come to the house, the burden, that
seemed before very light, became so heavy and paineful to her, that she
thought, she could not bear it one foot further. The which strange alteration
when she felt in her self, she conceived forthwith, that it was the will of
God, that it should so be. And therefore she turned her self to him with a
great affiance in his mercy, and made her humble petition to him, that he
would vowchasafe to ease her again, and make her able to go thorough with her
burden. And with that, finding her self to have received sufficient strength
to bear it out, she held on her way, till she came to the widows door,
which by the provision of God she found half open. And so putting it from her
softely with her hand, she laid in her provision with as little noise, as was
possible. Howbeit it was not done so privily, but that the widow awaked
withal. The which she perceiving, made away as fast as she could. But there
came upon her (even at that instant) such a feeblenes, and withal such a
heauisomenes of body, that she was not able to crawle away, though her life
had lain on it. Wherefore turnyng her self to our Lord, with a heavy heart
(because she feared, lest her being there alone at that time of the day, might
be scandalous to weak minds) and yet on the other side with a cheereful and
smyling countenance (because she saw, it was the will and pleasure of her
spowse so to dalie with her) between game and earnest (as it were) she spoke
unto him after this manner. O my dear Lord, why have thou thus deceived me?
Shall it do well, (think thou) that all the world laugh me to scorn? Is
it thy pleasure, that all the neighbors here see, my folly, and hold me for a
very fool and sott? See, o Lord, the day comes on fast, which will discover
me to the world, and so shall I be taken for a fantastical woman, or
peradventure for worse. O my good Lord, and sweet love of my heart, have thou
now forgoten thine old mercies, showed from time to time to me thine unworthy
handmaid? Give me, I beseech thee, so much strength, that I may be able to
return home to my chamber: and then lay upon me so much weakness, as pleases
thee. With that she enforced her self the best she could, to creep with hand
and foot upon the grownd: and while she was so creeping, she spoke to her
body after this manner: live thou, die thou, away thou must. Whether thou be
able or not able, here is no being. And therefore on a Gods name. And so, what
with going, and what with crawling, she won a little grownd. But before she
could, get out of sight, the poor widow came down, and seeing her in the
street, and no more but her, knew by her habit, who it was, that had done her
that charitable pleasure. The^ our Lord heard the groanyng of his dear spowse,
and pitying her poor case, gave her so much strength, that she gate home,
before it was broad day. Where she received great comfort of mind in
consideration of Gods mercy and loving kindness toward her: and withal her
old diseases and feeblenes of body, for her further increase of grace and
merit.

An other very notable example of her great Charity toward the poor.

Chap. 6.
WHile this holy maid was on a time in S. Dominickes Church, there came by her
a poor man, and besought her for Gods love, that she would give him somewhat.
To whom, because she had nothing there to give (for it was not her manner to
bear neither gold nor silver about her) she spoke very gently, and prayed
him, that he would have so much patience, as to tarry there, till she might
go home and come again. The poor man made answer, that he could not tarry
so long: but if she had any thing there to give, she should give it: for
otherwise he must needs go his way. She was loath, that he should go from
her without somewhat: and therefore bethought her self carefully, what thing
she might have about her, to serve that poor man's need. Anon it came to her
mind, that she had a little cross of silver, that hong by her beads: which she
brake of with all speed, and gave it gladly to the poor man. Who likewise,
when he had received this alms at her hand, went his way, and was seen no
more to beg that day, as though his coming had been for that Cross only. The
night following, while this devout virgin was occupied in prayer (after her
accustomed manner) our Savior Christ appeered unto her, having that same Cross
in his hand, set with diverse and sundry precious stones, and said unto her.
Daughther, know thou this Cross? Yea, Lord, said she, I know it right
well: but it was not so richly decked, when I had it. Then said our Lord to her
again. Yesterdaie thou gave me this Cross, with a chereful heart and great
charity: which great love and charity is signified by these precious stones.
And therefore I promise thee, that at the day of judgment I will show the
same, in the presence of all men and Angels, to the great increase of thine
everlasting joy and glory; For I will not hide, nor suffer to be hiden, such
deeds of charity, as are done by thee. With that this apparition ceased, and
left her replenished with unspeakable joy and gladness. And from that time
foreward there increased in her a passing great desire of relieuing the poor.

An other very wonderful example of her passing great Charity, like to this
before written.

Chap. 7.
AFter that our Lord had thus by his joyous presence and large promises,
allured the heart of his spowse to do yet greater works of charity: on a
day, when the divine service was done at the Friars, and she remained behind
alone with one of her sisters to pray; as she was coming down from a chapel,
that was there ordained for the sisters of penance, our Lord appeered to her in
the likeness of a poor pilgrim, at the age (as it seemed to her) of two or
three and thirty years, half naked: and besought her, that she would give
him clothes for the love of God. Tarry here a little while, said she, till I
go to yonder chapel and come again: and then, God willing, I will help thee
of clothes. With that she went up again to the chapel, and did of her kyrtel:
under the which she ware a sliueles peticote, which she put off, and came down
again, and gave it to the poor man with a glad cheer. When the poor man had
received that cote, he besought her furthermore, that seeing she had served his
turn of a woollen garment to wear outwardly, she would also be so good, as to
give him some shirt of lynen to wear next his body. With a very good will,
said she, come home with me, and I will seek one out for thee. And so she went
on before, and the poor man came after. When she was come home, she went to the
chestes and presses; where the lynen clothes of her Father and brothers were
laid up, and took out a shirt and certain other lynnen clothes, and gave the
same gladly to the poor man. When the poor pilgryme had received all those
things at her hand, he went not his way, but prayed her yet more, that she
would give him slewes to his peticote to cover his arms withal. With a good
will, said she: for otherwise, I grant, this cote were to no great purpose.
And with that, she went and sought all about for slewes, and at the last sownd
a new cote of a maid servant, that was in the house, hanging on a perch, which
had never ben worn, and took of the sleeves from the same, and gave them
cheerfully to the poor pilgrymme. Who received those sleeves also thankefully
at her hand, as he had done all the rest, and said unto her. Maistres, ye have
now clothed me thoroughly: he, for whose love ye have done it, thank you for
it. But yet one demand more I have to make unto you. I have a companion lying
in an hospital hereby, who stands in great need of clothes. If it shall
please you to send him any, I will carry them unto him in your behalf with a
very good will. This new request troubled her somewhat, and cawsed her to
have a certain conflicte within her self. On the one side she was much moved
with compassion of that poor man, and had a passing great desire to supply
his necessity. On the other side she considered the murmuring and grudging of
as many as were in the house: who waxed so weerie of her liberal dealing out
of things, that, to keep them from her hands, they began every one to keep
their apparel and other goods, under lock and keye. Again, she thought, she
had done enough to take away the sleeves of the servants new cote, that was
never worn, and that she could not with discretion take any more from her,
being her self also needy and poor. Then began she to reason with her own
self, and to discuss in her mind, whether she might conveniently depart with
her own garment, or no. She was much inclined to do it, because she knew,
that it was a great work of charity, and saw also in reason, that she was
better able to bear that lack of clothes, then the poor man was. But
contrariwise she considered, that if she should spoil her self of her clothes
and go naked, she should in so doing, trangresse the rules of common honesty:
which might cause great offense in the minds of as many as should happen to
see her. All the which things thus considered and discreetly weighed, she
resolved in her self, that in this case it was far better for her, and
withal more pleasing to God, to abstain from giving her alms, then by giving
the same to give just occasion of offense to her neighbor. And upon this
resolution she spoke to the poor man, after a very gentle and sweet manner,
and said. Truly, good man, if I might do it with honesty, I would spoil my
self even of this cote, that I wear, with all my heart, and bestow it upon
thy companion. But because I have no more garments to put on, but only this,
and therefore to give it away to an other, and to lack my self, were not
only an indiscreet part, but also against all honesty and woman-hood: I mustes
needs pray thee to hold me excused, for in truth there lacks no good will
in me, but only ability. With that the poor man smyled upon her, and said.
Maistres, I see right well, that if ye had ought to give, you would gladly
give it. I thank you for your good will* God reward you and keep you. And so
he took his leave of her, and went his way in such sort, that she gathered by
certain signs, that this poor pilgryme should be he, that was wont to apeere
unto her. But such was her lowlines and base estimation of her self, that she
thought her self unworthy to receive any such comfort and honor at Gods
hand: and therefore with an humble mind, she returned to her wo^ted services in
the house, where not withstanding she kept her heart evermore fixed upon her
dear spowse Jesus Christ. who the next night following appeered unto her
again, as she was praying, in the likeness of that poor man, holding in his
hand that cote, that she had given him, all decked and set with goodly perles
and precious stones, that shone all over the chamber, and said unto her. Dear
daughter, know thou this cote? yea Lord, said she, I know it very well:
but it was not so richly decked, when it was with me. Then said our Lord to her
again. Yester day thou gave me this coat very freely and charitably, to
cover the nakedness of my body, and to keep it from cold and shame. This day,
for recompense of thy great charity toward me, I give thee a cote, that
shall be invisible to other men, but to thee alone both visible and also
sensible, by the virtue whereof thou shall be defended both in body and soul
from all hurtful cold: and with this garment shall thou be clad, until the
time come, that in the presence of all Angels and Saints I shall put on upon
thee, that most blisful and glorious garment of immortality in my kingdom.
When he had said these words, forthwith he took out a cloth of a sanguine
color, with his own holy hands, out of the wound of his side, shynyng all
about and yealding a marvelous beawtiful light, in proportion and quantity
answerable to the measure of her body: and putting the same upon her with his
own hands, said. This garment I give thee, for all the time, that thou shall
live here upon the earth in token and pleadge of that immortal garment, that
thou shall receive at my hands in heaven. And with these words that vision
ceased, and left her endewed with such a strange grace and quality, not only
in soul, but also in body, that from that very instant, that our Lord spoke
unto her, she never felt alteration in her body, but continued evermore in one
temper, whether it were winter or somer, hot or cold, wind or rain. And
whatsoever wether came, she never ware more or fewer clothes, then one only
single peticote underneath, and one only single kirtel above, and that rather
for decency, then for necessity.

Of two evident miracles, which our Lord wrought, to declare, how accceptable
her works of Charity were to him.

Chap. 8.
THere was in the city of Sienna a certain poor man, that had dispossessed
him self of all his worldly goods for Gods sake, and was in great distress
for lack of necessary sustenance. The which thing when this holy maid
understood being moved withal compassion she took a lynnen bag, the she had,
and filled the same with eggs, and carried it privily underneath her cote
toward the house of the said poor man, to relieve him withal. When she came
near the place, were he dwelt seeing a Church there by, she entered into it
first (as her manner was) to do her devotion. Where lifting up her heart to God
in prayer and comtemplation, she was forthwith so ravished in spirit, that
her bodily senses failing, she fell down with all the weight of her body on
that side, where the bag of eggs was. There was also in the bag a thymble,
(such as taylours do so we withal) which she had forgoten to take out, when she
put in the eggs. This thymble was broken in three pieces, and the eggs
remained as whole and as sownd as they were put in, notwithstanding that she
had lain upon them with the burden of her whole body, and that for the space
of certain hours. It pleased almighty God to work an other very strange
miracle also to the like effect: a thing well known and testified by as many
as were in the house; which were to the number of twenty persons. It
happened, that the howsehold had drunk out a vessel of wine so low, that the
remnant, that was left, seemed not good enough to give to the poor (for her
manner was, always to give out the best in alms for Gods sake.) Where upon she
went to the next vessel, and drew out of that largely for the poor, a number
of days together, and was never espied by any of the howsehold. At the
length, when the other vessel was quite drawn out, the Butler also went to the
vessel, that she had broched, and drew of it for the whole house. The
howsehold drancke (as they were wont to do) sufficiently: and she gave out (as
her manner was) plentifully. And yet the wine never decreased, nether in
quantity nor quality, but kept evermore at one stay, both for fulness and for
freshnes. All the house had great wonder, how the vessel should continue so
long, and withal so good. For they all knew, that such a vessel was wont to
serve the house, but only xv. or at the uttermost xx. days. And this had
continued a full month, and yet to all their seemyng, was neither the less in
measure, nor worse in taste: but rather they all confessed, that in their whole
life time, they had never tasted a better wine. But that holy maid made no
wonder of it: for she understood, that it was the work of God, whose property
it is, to bless and multiply the substance of those, that are ready to give
to the poor for his love. One month was fully expired, and an other was well
entered: and yet the wine continued still as good and as fresh, as it was the
first day that it was broached. At the length, when the time was come, that
the grapes were ripe and ready to the press to make new wine, he that had
the chief charge about the making of the same, took order, that this vessel,
which had continued so long with old wine, should be emptied, that it might be
filled with new wine. Whereupon one of the servants, which thought of all
likelihood, that there had been little or nothing left in the vessel, went about
to draw it out into bottels. After the which manner when he had drawn a good
deal, he saw still, that it ran with full tap. At the last they resolved to
gawge the vessel, and so to see, what was in it. The which they did: and
behold, they fownd the vessel so dry, as if it had stood without licour, for
the space of many months before. Whereat the whole household was meruelously
astoined: in so much that they had no greater wonder before to see the clear
color, freshnes, and long continuance of the wine, then they had now, to see
so sudden an alteration and failing of the same.

Of a passing great charity and diligence, which she used in attending upon a
sick woman: and of her invincible patience in bearing the waiwardnes of the
same woman.

Chap. 9.
AS this holy maid had a passing great desire to relieve the poor in their
distress and extremity: so had she also a marvelous tender care and
compassion over them, that were sick and diseased. Concerning the which virtue
she left many wonderful examples to the wordle; among others this was one.
There was in the city of Sienna a poor widow called ^ecca, who for lack of
necessary attendance and sustentation in her own house, (being very weak
and feeble) was constreined to crave the ordinary charity of an hospital,
that was there by. Where she was charitably received: but the hospital was so
poor, that they were not able to make her allowance of such things and
services, as her disease required: and so, her malady increasing daily more
and more, at the length she became disfigured with a very foul leprie all
over her body. Which made her so loathsome, to all that were in the hospital,
that they eschewed her, and there was none fownd, that would serve her any
longer. Whereupon they determined to send her to a spittle-house, that was
ordained for such Lazarous folks, about a mile from the city. But before she
was removed, it pleased God, that this holy maid should have understanding of
their determination: Who, being inwardly moved with pity, went forthwith to
the hospital, where she lay, and served her both with her body and with her
goods, morning and euenyng providing for her, whatsoever she thought necessary
or requisite for a woman in that case, and dressing the same for her with her
own hands. And all this she did with as diligent a care and great reverence,
as if she had been her own mother. Which charitable and humble service, the
sick woman took in very good part at the first, and thought her self much
beholding unto her for it. But afterward, when she saw, that the holy maid
continued her diligent attendance with such regard and love, as no servant
would have done the like: like a proud and unthankful woman, she took all
that she did, to be more then duetiful, and looked for it. In so much that, if
any thing were done otherwise, then her pleasure was to have it done, she
would chide with her, and revile her, and speak such words of villainy and
reproach unto her, as no honest woman would have spoken the like to her
bondwoman or slave, that she had bought with her money. If it happened (as it
did sometimes) that she tarried at Church about her devotions, longer then her
accustomed manner was: the waiward sick woman would receive her at her return,
with very sharp and despiteful terms, saying. Ah lady queen, ye are
welcome. Where has lady queen ben so long? It seems, that the queen can
never have her fill of these Friars. These and other the like words would the
old woman power out against her with great stomach and choler. But the holy
maid gave her not one euel word to answer, but went about her business
diligently: and, when she saw her time, she would speak to her after a gentle
and lowly manner, saying. Good mother, for Gods love, have patience; And if
any thing be amiss, it shall be amended by and by. And with that she bestirred
her self about that she had to do for her, with all possible diligence, and
made a fire, and dressed her meat, and served her of all necessaries, after
such humble sort, and with such sweet words, that the impatient woman, that
was so carried away with her passions, that she seemed rather a raging bedlame,
then a reasonable creature, had great wonder of her patience. This brawling
continued a long time, and the more the disease increased upon the old woman,
the more wayward and tedious she waxed: and yet was this holy maid never
weerie of her loathsome service, but held out still, and did all, that was to be
done about her, with great love and reverence. At the length her mother Lapa,
who had a great misliking of that kind of service, cried out upon her, and
said. Daughter, it can not be, but that, if thou continue in this manner of
service, thou must needs in time become a leaper: which (thou know) I may
not abide to see. And therefore, I charge thee in any case to give it over.
Whereunto she made answer very discreetely, and said. Good mother, have you
no fear or doubt of that, for the service that I do about this sick woman, is
done by the commandment of God. And think ye not, that he will lay so
foul a plague upon me for that, that him self has willed me to do. And so
with such words she quieted the mind of her mother. But our Lord, whose
pleasure it is to try his faithful servants to the uttermost, permitted, in
deed the enemy of mankind to have such power over her body, that he infected
her hands with the leprie: in such sort, that every one, that looked upon
her, judged by and by, that it came to her by the towching of the contagious
body of that old woman. Which thing caused many of them, that spoke euel of
her before, to speak worse now. Some said this, and some said that: every man
might speak his fantasy freely: for it seemed, that they were not altogether
without some good grownd. And (which was most of all) every body shuned her
company, as a woman infected with a contagious disease. All which disgrace
moved her nothing at all, but that she continued her wonted charity and
service toward the sick woman, and took no care, what became of her own
body, so long as she might emploie it to the service of God. That woman's
sickness continued many days: but the holy maid thought them very few, by
reason of the great love, that she had to our Lord, whom (she thought) she
served in that sick woman. At the length, when our Lord had thus sufficiently
tried, the love and constancy of his faithful spowse, he determined that this
her paineful and loathsome service should have an end, by the passing of that
sick woman out of this wretched life. At the which passage the holy maid
stood by her, and comforted her with her service, with good prayers, with
godly words and exhortations, and never gave her over until the last breath.
And when the body was dead, she took off the clothes, and washed it and
shrouded it in the winding sheet, and so laid it on the beer, ready to be
carried to the place of burial. Where, when the Dirige and other divine service
was done, according to the order of the Church, she took it off again, and
laid it in the grave, and covered it with earth with her own hands. That
done, behold, by evident miracle and work of almighty God, her hands, which
were before fowly disfigured with the leprie, were now at that very instant
become, not only sownd and whole, but also much fairer and cleerer, then any
other part of her body, to the sight of as many as beheld her.

An other very strange example of her charity and patience toward a sick
woman of her own Order: and how she rendered great good, for great euel.

Chap. 10.
THe charity of this holy maid, showed upon that unthankful leperous woman,
was surely very great: and so was her charity and patience, showed toward a
sister of her own Order, no less great and worthy to be remembered. There was
among the sisters of S. Dominickes Order, commonly called the sisters of
penance, one sister, namel Palmerina, who, by reason of certain works of
charity, that she did outwardly, showed to the world to be a merciful woman
to others, but in deed was unmerciful both to her self and others: as it may
appear by that, that shall be here recited. This Palmerina, bare such a deep
malice and hatred in her heart against the holy maid, that it was a great pain
to her, not only to see or speak to her, but also to hear her named, or spoken
of by others. In so much that, whenever mention was made of her, she could
not hold her self, but that she must needs break out into reprochful words,
into backbiting and slawndering, yea and sometimes to plain curssing and
banning. When this holy maid understood that, she bare her self contrariwise
very lowly and lovingly toward her, and did (what in her lay) to win her
love with gentle behavior and sweet words. But the more humble she showed her
self and ready to please, the more did the proud woman despise her and set her
at naught. The which when she saw, taking the disease of that woman's mind to
be incurable by ought that man could do, and therefore resolving to leese no
more time about her, she turned her self to God (who only is the phisitio^ in
such desperate cases) and besought him most instantly, that he would take
mercy on her sister, and molifie her heart. This prayer was made with such
fervor and veheme^cie of spirit, that it perced the heavens and sownded into
the ears of almighty God: who, to cure that froward woman finally of her
synful disease of mind, smote her mercifully with a certain grievous infirmity
of body. When the holy maid heard tell, that Palmerina was so da^gerously
sick, she was a heavy woman for her. For she saw, that, if she should depart
the world in that state, her soul was lost everlastingly. Which consideration
wrought so in her, that she determined to leave nothing undone, that might
possibly be done, for the recovery of that soul. And so she went to her, and
with very sweet and lovely words, offered both her self and all that she
had, to be at her devotion and service. But the churlish woman was so
maliciously bent against her, that she not only refused all this courtesy, but
also reviled her, using most unseemly and reprochful language against her,
and in the end bad her go out of her chamber, with great threats and
thundering words. All which vilanie the holy maid bare with great meekenes and
patience: and continuyng her wonted charity and compassion toward that
furious woman, turned her self to God again in prayer. In this mean time
that wretched woman's sickness, by the divine providence and disposition of God,
increased so vehemently upon her, that, (without making any reconciliation
with God or the wordle) she drew on very fast to death, both of body and
soul. The which thing when the holy maid understood, her heart being
thoroughly perced with the darts of compassion, she shut her self up in her
Cell, and there casting her self down prostrate upon the grownd, with much
sobbing, weeping, and lamentation, she made her prayer unto God after this
manner. O Lord my God and Maker, may it be, that I wretched creature should be
borne into the world to this end, that sowles, which thou have created to
thine own image and likeness, should by any occasion of me be condemned to
everlasting pains? Can thou (my good Lord and dear spowse) suffer, that I,
which ought to be to my sister an instrument of everlasting salvation, should
now become an occasion of her everlasting woe and calamity? Turn away that
dreadful judgment, O Lord, I beseech thee for thy mercies sake. It had been
better for me, that I had never ben borne, then that the sowles, which thou
have redeemed with the price of thy most precious blood, should through me be
brought again into that miserable captivity of our ancient enemy the Deuel.
O Lord, are these the promises, which thou made unto me, when thou did
say, that I should be an instrument and mean, to win many sowles to thee?
Are these the fruits of life, which I thine unworthy handmaid should bring
forth to the behoof of others? There is no doubt, O Lord, but that my sin
is the cawse of all this, out of the which I can not look to receive any
better fruit, then this is. But yet, O Lord, I am right well assured, that the
botomles sea of thy mercies, can not be drayned or in any part diminished: and
therefore I set my self here before thee with a great affiance, and humbly
beseech thee, that thou will vowchsafe to cast down the eyes of thy clemency
upon this wretched creature, thy servant, my sister This I most instantly crave
of thee, o most sweet comforter of all afflicted hearts, not trusting in any
work or merit of mine own, but only in thy wonted mercy and goodness. These
and other the like words did the holy virgin use in her prayer (as she
declared afterward to her ghostly Father) which she powered out before God,
rather with fervor of desire and inward affection, then with outward noise and
sownd of voice. And our Lord, to move her to further compassion, and to make
her yet more earnest in prayer, gave her to understand and see, the evident and
imminent peril that her wretched sister was in: and she heard it pronownced in
plain terms, that the justice of God could not bear, but that such an
obstinate malice and hardness of heart, must needs be punished. The which
horible sentence, given upon her sister Palmerina (whose sowles health she
tendered exceedingly) struck her to the very heart so mightily, that she fell
down to the grownd again, and there lying prostrate, groned unto almighty
God after a most lamentable sort, saying. O Lord God almighty, Father of
mercies, and only helper in all extremities; I am right well contented, yea I
most humbly crave it at thy hand, that thou will vowchsafe to lay all the
pain dwe to this wretched woman's sins upon my back: punish me for them, for
I am the cause of them, and not she: Wherefore I most instantly beseech thee,
beat me, but spare her. And with that she raised up her heart to God with a
greater affiance, and said furthermore. O merciful Lord, I will never rise out
of this place, until thou show mercy to my sister. Wherefore I here groan
and cry unto thee, O lord, even from the very botome of mine heart, beseeching
thee by thine unspeakable goodness, by thine infinite mercy, and by the price
of thy most precious blood, shed for the redemption of mankind, that thou will
not suffer my sisters soul to depart out of her body, until the time that
thou have granted her the grace of due penance and contrition for all her
sins. Thus did the holy maid make intercession to almighty God, for the
recovery of her sisters soul: and her prayer was (as the event showed) of
marvelous great force and virtue. For the sick woman lay in extremes three
days and three nights, drawing on continually in such sort that as many as
were present, looked every hour, when she should pass out of this wordle:
(for they all saw, that she was stayed in that paineful state of life, not by
any strength of nature, but by some secret and extraordinary power.) All the
which time the devout virgin continued in most earnest and fervent prayers for
her, and never gave over, until she had with her tears and humility (as it
were) wrested the sword of Gods justice out of his almighty hand, and obtained
for that wretched woman so much mercy and grace, that she might first see the
deformity of her sins* then understand the dreadful decree of Gods justice
against her for the same, and last of all be heartily sorry and repentant for
her life past, with a sure hope of forgiveness by the mercy of God through the
merits of the most precious blood and death of our Savior Christ. This
blessed alteration was revealed by God to the holy maid also: who upon the
understanding of the same, went forthwith to her sick sisters chamber to
comfort her. Whether when she was come, the sick woman which was now very
weak in body, but well strengthened in spirit, made signs of great
reverence and joy: and partly with words (as well as she could) partly with
tokens and gestures of body and countenance, she lamented her uncharitable
demeanor toward her and besought her of mercy and pardon. That done she made
her confession with great humility and contrition and so receiving the
Sacraments and rightes of holy Church, she yealded up her soul to God. At
what time it pleased almighty God to show to the holy virgin what a blesful
and beautiful state that saved soul was in: which (as she declared afterward
to her ghostly father) was so great, that no tongue of man is able to express
it. And yet was not this that beawtie that she should receive afterward in
the bless of heaven, but only that godly state, that the soul had in her
first creation, and received again at the time of her Baptism. The^ said our
Lord to the holy maid. How say thou, my dear daughter, is not this a fair
and goodly soul, which through thy pains and diligence is now recovered out
of the hands of the enemy? What man or woman would refuse to take pains for
the wynning of such a beawtiful creature? If I, which am the most high and
sovereign beawtie, and of whom proceeds all manner of beawtie, was
notwithstanding so overcome with the love and beawtie of man's soul, that I
refused not to come down from heaven, to clad my self with the simple weed
of man's body, in the same to sustain labors, and reproaches for the space of
many days and years, and in the end to shed mine own blood for his
redemption, (and yet had I no need of man's soul, but was most sufficiently and
most perfectly blessed in my self:) how much more ought you to labor one for
an other, and do, what in you lies, for the recovery of such a noble and
excellent creature? For this cause have I showed thee the beawtie of this
soul, that hereafter thou might both thy self be the more earnest about
the wynnyng of sowles, and also procure others to do the like. With that she
thanked our Lord in most humble manner, and besought him furthermore, that he
would vowchsafe to give her a new grace; which was, that she might from that
time foreward, be able to see the state and conditions of all such sowles, as
should by occasions, have any conversation or dealing about spiritual matters
with her: that by the sight of the same, she might be the more provoked to
procure their salvation. Unto the which demand our Lord made answer after
this manner. Daughter, because thou have forsaken all carnal conversation for my
sake, and have by all means labored to unite thy self to me in spirit,
which am the most excellent and sovereign spirit: therefore I here make thee
a full grant, that from this very instant, thy soul shall be endewed with such
a gracious light, that thou shall see and behold, both the beawtie, and also
the deformity of every soul that is presented before thee. And as hitherto
thou have seen the proportion and quality of bodies, with thy bodilies eyes:
even so from this time foreward, thou shall see the conditions of sowles, with
the spiritual eye of thy soul, not only of such as shall be present before thee,
but also of all other, for whose sowles health thou shall make intercession to
me, though thou never see them with thy bodily eyes.

How she served an old widdowe, that had a festered sore runnyng upon her: by
whom she was also infamed. And of diverse strange accidents, that ensued upon
the same.

Chap. 11.
THere was among the sisters of penance one sister called Andrea: who had upon
her breast a very loathsome sore, commonly called a Canker. This sore had
fretted and eaten so much flesh rownd about, and the corruption of the same
yealded such an horrible savor, that none might come near for stench. By
reason whereof there was none fownd, that would attend upon her in her
sickness. The which thing when the holy maid understood, she went out of hand
to visit her; and, seeing her utterly forsaken and destitute of all succor
and comfort, she made her self well assured, that the providence of God had
reserved that sister for her keeping. And so accepting the charge of her, as at
Gods hand, she began to speak comfortable words unto her, and to make her a
free offer of her own person, to attend and serve her to the uttermost of her
power: (which made the widow a glad woman.) The holy maid therefore set her
self to the service of that poor woman: she took care for her, that she
might have, whatsoever was necessary or requisite for a woman in that case;
when time was, she opened her sore, and cleansed it of all the foul matter; she
was shed it and wypt it, and covered it again with plasters and clean
clothes: and in all this, she never showed so much as one little token of
lothsomenes, but did every thing with such diligence and cheerefulnes, that
the sick sister was astoined to see so great love and charity in a maid of
those years. But the malicious feend, who has great envy at all works of
charity, bent him self to do all that in him lay, to disannull, if it were
possible, if not, at the least to hinder this godly and merciful enterprise,
so much as might be. And first of all, upon a day, as the holy maid was about
to open the sore to dress it there came out such an horribile stench, that she
could hardly bear it, but that she must needs vomit. The which thing when
she perceived, she entered into a passing great choler and displeasure against
her own skeymish body ane stomach, and said to her self. Ah vile and
wretched flesh, do thou loath thy sister, whom our Lord has bought so
dearly, even with the price of his own most precious blood? The day may
come when thou also may fall into the like sickness, or peradventure worse.
As I am a Christian woman thou shall abide for it. And with that, she bowed
down, and held her mowth and nose over the sore so long, until at the length
it seemed, that she had comforted her stomach, and quite overcome the
skeymishnes, that she felt before. All the which time he sick sister cried out
unto her, and said. Good daughter, stand up: good daughter, give over, cast not
thy self away: endanger not thy body with this infectuous savor. But she
would never give over, until she had overcome both the tew lines of her own
stomach, and also the tentation of the ghostly enemy. When the subtle serpent
saw, that this his assault was thus repelled: being utterly in despair of
any better success against that holy virgin, (which stood evermore like a
strong fortress well furnished and defenced) he devised to lay his battery
to the weak woman, (whom he knew to be of less experience, and therefore
less circumspecte in such matters (and so to make his entry upon them both
together. He began to sow in the heart of the sick woman diverse and sundry
surmises against her, by crafty means bringing her in great gelowsie and
disliking of all that she did: by reason whereof in process of time she waxed
marvelous weerie of her, and might not well abide to see her. Which
weerisomenes increasing in her daily more and more engendered a certain malice,
and malice, in time bred a plain hatred. Now this malice and hatred had in
continuance by little and little so corrupted her judgment, that she not only
suspected of her the worst that any euel mind could ymagin, but also bleleeued
firmly, that all such ymaginations were most certain and undoubted truths in
so much that, whenever the holy maid was any where out of her sight, she
believed assuredly, that she was about some foul act of fleshly pleasure.
The which thing though the innocent virgin understood very well, yet did she
show her self no less loving, meke, and serviceable about her, then she was
wont to be before. But the more meekenes and diligence the good servant of
Christ used toward that froward old woman, the more testie and choleric
waxed she against her by the instigation of the deuel: in so much that at the
length she came to that, that she would no longer keep her conceived
suspicions under the covert of private gelowsie but without all modesty and
shame gave them out in plain and broad terms, to as many, as would give ear
to her slawnderous talk. This foul brute being once thus raised, it went on
from one to another, until in the end it came to the ears of the sisters: who,
to understand the very original of the rumor, went to the chamber, where the
sick sister lay, and examined her of the matter. She auowched stowtely to
them, so much as she had reported to others before, and accused the maid
constantly of actual incontine^cie and uncleanness. Whereat they were very much
astoined at the first; but yet, wheighing the age, behavior, and consta^cie of
the accuser, they gave credit to her words, and thereupon, calling the maid
before them they gave her very rough and sharp language, rebuking her with
marvelous vile and reprochful words, and asking her, how she was carried away
and brought to commit such a synful and unclean act. Whereunto she made
answer with great humility and patience, saying no more words, but only
these. Truly, good mothers and sisters, by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ I
am a maid. And, whatsoever they said to her, she gave them none other word to
answer, but only this. Truly I am a maid. Truly I am a maid: never vtterring
so much as one word, that might seem to touch her accuser. Upon whom she
attended and served with as great love and diligence, as if there had never
passed any such matter between them. And yet was she sorry at the very heart,
for the slander and infamy, that was raised upon her. Wherefore, when she had
done, what was to be done about the sick woman, she retired her self for
comfort (as her manner was in all aduersites) into her chamber: and there,
casting her self down prostrate upon the ground, she opened the grief of her
heart to almighty God, more with gronyng of heart, then with sound of voice,
after this manner. O almighty God, my dear Lord and spowse, thou know very
well, what a tender thing the good name of virgins is, (especially of them that
have vowed their virginity to thee) and how much subject they are to the
violent strokes of slawnderous tongues. And that was the cause, why thy
provident wisdom disposed, that thy most glorious mother should be committed
to the charge of Joseph, who was called, and was in deed her husband, not for
any act of matrimony, but to keep her name of virginity from slander. Thou
know, O Lord, that all this slawnder, that is raised upon me, is wrought by
the father of lying: who has done this, to withdraw and hinder me from this
charitable work, that thou have appointed me to do, and I have willingly
taken upon me for thy love. Wherefor I most humbly beseech thee, O my dear
Lord, most mighty protector of all innocents, that thou will not suffer this
wicked serpent, whom thou have trodden under foot in the time of thy sacred
passion, to have the mastrie over me. When the holy maid had thus made a long
prayer to our Lord, with much inward gronyng and plenty of tears: behold, our
Lord appeered to her, holding two crowns in his hands, one in his right hand
of gold, all decked with rich perles and precious stones, an other in his left
hand of very sharp thorns: and said these words unto her. Dear daughter,
it is so, that thou must needs be crowned with these two crowns at sundry
times. Choose therefore, whether thou have lieffer to be crowned with the sharp
crown of thorn in this life, and that other to be reserved for thee in the
life to come: or elswhether thou like better to have this goodly golden crown
in this life, and that other sharp crown in the life to come. To this demand
the humble and discrete virgin made answer after this manner. Lord, said she,
thou know very well, that I have resigned my will wholly to thee, and have
made a full resolution to do all things according to thy direction: and
therefore I dare not choose any thing, unless I may know, that the same
shall stand with thy most blessed will and pleasure. Nevertheless, because thou
have willed me to make answer concerning this choice, that thou have here made
unto me, I say thus: that I do choose in this life evermore to be conformed
and made like to thee, my Lord and Savior, and cherefully to bear Crosses and
thorns for thy love, as thou have done for mine. With that she reached out her
hands Justly, and took the crown of thorns of our Lords hands, and put
the same upon her own head with such a strength and violence, that the thorns
perced her head rownd about, in so much that for a long space after she felt a
sensible pain in her head by the pricking of those thorns, as she declared
afterward to her ghostly Father. Then our Lord said to her. Daughter, all
things are in my power. And as I have suffered this slawnder to be raised
against thee by the deuel and his members: so is it in my power to cease the
same, when I will. Continue thou therefore in that holy service that thou have
begone, and give no place to the enemy, that would let thee from all good
works. I will give thee a perfect victory over thine enemy, and will bring
to pass, that, whatsoever he has imagined against thee, it shall all be
turned upon his own head, to thy great joy, and his great pain. Thus was she
well comforted again, and so continued still at the service of that sick
woman. In this mean time the slanderous rumor was bruted, and, came to her
mothers ears. Who for her self made no doubt at all of her daughters
innoce^cie (for she knew many things, that the world knew not) and yet she
could not but take it very heauelie, when she heard tell that such a slawnder
was raised upon her. The grief whereof so overcame her mind, that she flang to
her daughter with great heat and vehemency of spirit, and began with her
after this manner. How often times have I told thee, that thou should no more
serve yonder stinging old croyne? See now, what reward she gives thee for all
thy good service, she has brought up a foul slander upon thee among all thy
sisters: which God knows, whether thou shall ever be able to rid thy self
of, so long as thou live. If ever thou serve her again after this day, or
if ever thou come, where she is: never take me for thy mother. For I tell thee
plain, I will never know thee for my daughter. These and other the like
words did the mother utter in great heat and choler, whereat the daughter at
the first was somewhat astoined. But after a little time, when she had gathered
her self together, she went to her mother, and kneeling down before her with
great reverence, she spoke these words. Sweet mother, think you, that our
Lord would be pleased with us if we should leave the works of mercy undone,
because our neigbour shows him self unthankful toward us? When our
Savior Christ hong on the Cross, and heard there the reprochful talk of that
ungrateful people rownd about, did he in regard of their cruel words geueouer
the charitable work of their redemption? Good mother, you know very well,
that if I should leave this old sick woman, she were forthwith in great
danger to perish for lack of keeping: because she should not find any, that
would come near her, and do such service, as is requisite to be done about a
woman in this case. And so should I be the occasion of her death. She is now a
little deceived by the ghostly enemy: but she may hereafter by the grace of
God come to acknowledge her fault and be sorry for the same. With such words
she qualified her mothers mind and gate her blessing: and so returned again to
the service of the sick woman. About whom she did all things with great
diligence and love, never showing neither in words nor in countina^ce so much
as any token of disconte^tantio^ or displeasure. In so much that the sick
sister seeing her demeanor, was very much astoined and withal ashamed of that
she had done, and so began to have great sorrow at heart and repentance for the
slander, that she had raised upon her. Then also it pleased our Lord to show
his mercy toward his faithful spowse, and to restore her again to her good
fame and estimatimatio^ after this manner. On a day the holy maid went to the
sick sisters chamber to serve her, as she was wont to do. At what time, as
she was coming toward her bed, where she lay, to do some thing that was to
be done about her; behold the sick woman saw a marvelous goodly light
coming down from heaven, which filled all her chamber, and was so beautiful
and comfortable, that it made her utterly to forget all the pains of her
disease. What that sight might mean, she could not conceive. But, looking
about her here and there, she beheld the maidens face gloriously transformed:
the majesty whereof was so strange, that she seemed to her rather an Angel of
heaven, then any earthly creature. And this beautiful light, environed the
holy virgins body rownd about. The which brightness the more the old woman
beheld, the more did she condemn the malice of her own heart and tongue, in
that she had conceived and uttered so foul matter, as she had done, against
such an excellent and pure creature, as the holy maid then showed to be. This
vision continued a good time: and at the length, when it ceased, left the sick
woman both in sorrow, and also in comfort. In sorrow, because on the one side
she saw, what a heinous sin she had committed in dissamyng that innocent
virgin. In comfort, because on the other side she saw the mercy of God freely
and franckely offered unto her. The which thing so mollified her heart, that with
much sobbing and weeping she confessed her fault to the holy maid, and
besought her of pardon. When the good virgin saw the humble manner of her
repentance and submission, she likewise very amiably took the old woman in
her arms, and kissed her, and spoke very sweet and comfortable words unto
her, saying. Good mother, I have no displeasure in the world against you, but
only against our enemy the Deuel, by whose malice and suttiltie, I know, all
this is wrought: but, rather I have to thank you with all my heart, for you
have put me in mind to have a more careful and vigilant regard to my self, and
so doing you have turned the malicious drifte of the feend to my further good
and commodity. With such sweet speeches she comforted the sick sister, and
then she set her self to do all such services, as were wont to be done about
her. And when she had done all, she took her leave very gently (as her manner
was) and so retired her self to her chamber, to give God thanks so the
prosperous success, that she had had in this matter, and to enter into her
accustomed exercise of prayer and meditation. In this mean time the old woman,
who had a great care to restore the innocent virgin to her good name again,
when any of those came to her, before whom she had made that slanderous
report, took occasion to unburden her conscience, and confessed openly with
great lamentation and tears, that whatsoever dishonestie she had any time
reported by that holy maid, she had been induced to report it by the craft of
the deuel, and not by any thing that ever she saw or knew in her. And
therefore she cried them all mercy, and besought them for charity to forgive
her. She affirmed furthermore, that she was able to make good proof, that the
holy maid was not only free from all suspicion of any uncleanness of body,
but also endued with many high and singular graces of God, and that she was in
deed a very pure virgin and a Saint. Thus much, said she; I speak not upon
heresaie or opinion, but upon very certain knoweledge. Then certain of the
elder and sadder women talked with her secretly, and required to understand,
what certain tokens and knowledge of holiness she had in the maid. Whereupon
she declared unto them so much as has been here receited before. And said
furthermore, very constantly and with great fervor of spirit, that in all
her life time she never knew, what true sweetness of soul and spiritual
comfort meant, until that time, when she saw the holy maid so transfourmed
and environed round about with that heavenly and unspeakable light: the
beawtie and brightness whereof was so great, that no tongue was able to express
it. This testimony of the sick woman was spread allouer the city: by reason
whereof the fame of the blessed virgin, and the opinion of her rare virtue and
holiness was so much increased, as the malice of the deuel had thought to have
obscured the same by this false treachery. But in all this, as she was nothing
dejected by the raising of that slanderous report: so was she nothing puffed
up with pride for all the honor that the wordle gave her: but acknowledging
humbly all virtues and holiness to be the gifts of God, she continued still in
her foremer state,, at the service of that sick woman. But the ghostly
enemy, whose malice cease not, though he saw, that he had had very euel
luck in all that he had ever attempted against her before yet like an earnest
gamester, he thought, he would adventure one cast more, as it were upon
desperation. On a time, as the holy maid was dressing the old woman's sore, by
the malicious working of the feend, there issued out of it such a loathsome and
horrible stench, that she was upon the point to have cast up all that was in
her body. The which when she saw perceuing that it was the practice of that
venomous serpent, she entered into an earnest displeasure against her own
flesh, and spoke to her self with great vehemency of spirit, saying. Ah
wretched and caraine flesh, do thou loath thine even Christian? I shall make
thee, not only to endure the savor of it, but also to reciue it within thee
With that she took all the wasshing of the sore, together with the corrupt
matter and filth; and going aside put it all into cup, and drancke it up
lustely. And in so doing, she overcame at one time, both the skeymishnes of her
own stomach, and malice of the Deuel. This was told afterward to her
ghostly Father in her presence, and she confessed, that it was all true; and
said furthermore, that she could not remember, that she had ever eaten or
droncken such a pleasant and delicate meat or drink, as that seemed to be,
in all her life. The next night following after this glorious victory, our
Savior Christ appeered unto her, and showed her his hands, feet and side,
and in them imprinted the five wounds, of his most bitter passion, and said
unto her. Dear daughter, many are the battles, that thou have sustained for
my love: and great are the victories that thou have achieved through my grace
and assistance. For the which I bear thee great good will and favor. But
especially that drink, that thou tookest yester day for my sake, liked me
passingly well: in the which, because thou have not only despised the delight of
the flesh, cast behind thy back the opinion of the wordle, and utterly subdued
thine own nature: I will give thee a drink that shall pass in sweetness and
pleasure all the licours, that the wordle is wont or able to give. With that he
reached out his arm, and took her about the neck, and brought her mouth
softely to the sacred wound of his side, and said unto her. Drink daughter,
drink thy fill at the very founteine of life. This drink, shall replenish
thy soul with unspeakable sweetness in such sort, that it shall abound and
ouerslowe into thy body also, which thou have so utterly despised for my love.
Then the holy maid set her mouth to, with great greedines, and drew out of
that founteine of everlasting salvation the licour of life. And so she
continued sucking a good while, not only with the mouth of her body, but also
(and that much more) with the mouth of her soul: until at the length (when
his holy will and pleasure was) she gave over, feeling her self in a
marvelous blesful state. For she had droncke her fill, and yet was nothing
glutted, but rather thirsty and desirous to drink still: Which thirst and
desire was no pain at all to her, but rather a passing great delight and
pleasure. After this time the holy maid was so replenished with heavenly
grace that she neither did, nor might eat, her bodily meat in such sort, as
she was wont to do before.

How she was endewed with many goodly privileges. How she had a passing
desire to receive the blessed Sacrament. How, being fortified by the spirit of
God, she endured much labor and travail without bodily sustinance.

Chap. 12.
AFter that the faithful disciple of Christ had thus by the grace of God
overcome diverse and sundry tentations; being now thoroughly tried like fine
gold in the furnace of tribulation, there remained nothing else, but only to
receive the crown of justice in life everlasting. But because the divine
providence of God had so disposed of her, that she should yet remain in this
life a little while, for the benefit of others: (in the which time she was not
able to receive the fruition of that endless bless that is prepared for the
time to come: and yet our Lord of his goodness would not suffer her to continue
any longer in this present life without some degree or state of blessedness) he
gave her a certain taste or pledge of that blesful state, that she was to
receive in the other life, even in this vale of misery. And he did it after
this manner. On a time, while she was praying in her chamber, our Lord appeered
unto her, and spoke after this manner. My dear daughter Catherine, I give thee
now to understand, that the rest of thine abode in this wordle shall be full of
such strange and unwonted gifts of my grace, that it shall cause diverse and
sundry effects in the hearts of men. Simple and ignorant persons shall be
greatly astoined to see the things, that shall be wrought by thee. Carnal men,
and such as have little experience in spiritual matters, shall be in danger to
fall quite from their faith. Yea and many of those also, that are good and
virtuous, seeing certain tokens of my passing great love toward thee (such
as have not lightly ben heard of) and withal the wonderful strangenes of the
things, that thou shall work, shall suppose, that all is but deceit and
illusion. For I will endue thy soul with such abundance of grace, that it
shall redound into thy body also: by reason whereof thou shall lead such a
marvelous kind of life, as the wordle has not oftentimes seen or heard tell
of. Again, I will enkendle in thine heart such a fyerie zeal, both of mine
honor and of the salvation of souls, that thou shall in a manner forget thine
own kind, and alter the wonted order of thy whole conversation. For thou shall
not from hence forth shonne the compaine of men and women, as thou have
hitherto but rather to win them to God, thou shall press in among them, and
labor to the uttermost of thy power. Of this manner of life many a one shall
take occasion of slander and offense, and thou shall be gainesaid of many:
that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. But in any case, see that
thou be nothing afraid or troubled with any of these things: For I will be
with thee always, and will deliver thee from lying lips and slanderous
tongues. Follow therefore freely the guydance of my holy spirit, and labor
diligently in this charitable work, wherein I have appointed thee. For by thee
I have determined, to deliver many souls out of the dragons mouth, and to
bring them to my everlasting rest in heaven. These and other the like words
spoke our Lord to her, and repeted the same again and again, and specially
that word, where he bad her, that she should not be afraid or dismayed. Whereunto
the holy maid made answer with great humility and perfect obedience saying.
Thou art my Lord and my God, and I thy creature and unworthy hand maid: thy
will be done in all things. Only this, O Lord, I beseech thee, remember me
according to the multitude of thy mercies, and help me. And with that the
vision ceased: and the blessed virgin conferred those comfortable words of our
Sauiout in her heart, easting earnestly with her self, what that gracious
alteration might mean. From that time foreward the grace of God increased
daily in her heart so much and the gifts of the holy Ghost replenished her
soul in such abundant manner, that she was her self astoined at it; and, by
reason of that passing great increase of spiritual joy and comfort that she
felt in her soul, her body, being not able to bear it, waxed feeble and
faint. Her heart was wholly carried up into God, and that with such a veheme^cie
and fervor of love, that she could not endure any time without thinking and
meditating upon his most noble works, and endless mercies toward her self
and all mankind. The force of the which love, so overcame the natural powers of
her body, that she languished and decayed in strength: and could find none
other remedy for that sickness, but only to run unto God with an amorous
affection, and to power out her heart before him with great abundance of tears,
and so to renew her self as it were in the forge and fire of love. At the
length, it pleased our Lord to give her to understand by the secret instincte
of his holy spirit, that the most sovereign medicine for that disease was,
often times to receive the blessed Sacrament of the altar. Where she should
have the joyful fruition of her love, not in such sort, as she should have it
afterward in the bless of heaven, but yet so, as that she should find her
self satisfied in some dergree for the time. Now, after that she had used for
a certain time to comunicate every day (as she did unless she were let
by sickness or by some other necessary occasion) she had at the length such a
passing great longing and (as it were) an impatient desire to receive the
blessed Sacrament, that if she were enforced by any such vrge^t necessity to
abstain but only one day, it seemed, that her body fainted se^sibly and
failed: for so much as, being now fully accorded with the soul, it had aba^doned
the natural powers and senses, and so received nourishment and sustentation,
not of the meats that the body is wont to be fed withal (which did her more
harm then good) but of the food of the soul, which is the grace of God:
which grace was so abo^dant in her soul, that it redounded into her body, and
by miracle tempered that wasting heat, that is wont to consume the radical
moisture. Her ghostly Father, examinyng her upon this point, asked, whether
she had ever any appetite to eat or no. Whereunto she made answer, that she
was fully satisfied with the holy Sacrament, and had none other appetite. Then
he asked her yet further, in case by occasion she absteined from receiving the
blessed Sacrament, whether she were then hungry or no. To that likewise she
answered and said, that the only presence of the Sacrament, did satisfy her,
and not only the Sacrament, but the priest also, that had touched the
Sacrament, did satifie and comfort her in such sort, that she could not so much
as think of any other meat. And in deed it was well known to as many as
lived with her from the beginning of Lent until the Ascension day, she
continued in very good liking without receiving any manner of bodily food or
sustenance in the world. And upon that day by commandment of God, she took
only a little bread and a few herbs: for her stomach might not brook any
deintie or fine meats. After that she observed a simple manner of fasting for a
time, until at the length by little and little, she came again to her old manner
of abstinence, which was to eat nothing at all. And so she passed over her
life in a continual and evident miracle, verifying that saying of the holy
Scripture, that man lives not only by bread, but by every word that comes
out of our Lords mowth. Her ghostly Father testified, that he saw her him
self (and that not once or twice, but often times) when, continuyng after this
sort without any manner of sustenance, unless it were a little water, she
became so weak, that as many as were about her looked every hour, when she
would give up the ghost. At what time, if occasion were ministered to win a
soul to God, or to do any other charitable work to the honor of God, they
all saw to their great astonishment, that she was suddenly altered in the
state of her body in such sort, that she was able to rise and go without any
token of weakness or weerines, and also to endure great labor in doing that
good work, that she took in hand for Gods sake. And those that went with her,
having their perfect health and strength, could hardly follow her here and
there, but that they must needs be more weerie, then she showed to be. Which
made them all to confess, that it was the almighty power of God, that
sustained her, and not any natural force.

How she was molested by diverse and sundry persons, dissuading her from her
straight Abstinence: and how she overcame her ghostly Father by reason.

Chap. 13.
THis straight and unwonted manner of Abstinence, was to the holy maid an
occasion of great unquietness and trouble, both by them that lived with her in
house, and also by others: who, seeing the order of her conversation, to be so
far above the common course of man's life, persuaded them selves, and
travailed much to persuade her also, that it was not the gracious gift of God,
but only a subtle deceit and tentation of the Deuel. With this error were a
great number carried away, and among others her own ghostly Father: who,
imagining all this to be nothing else, but only a crafty illusio^ of Satan
transforming him self into an Angel of light, commanded her to eat her
meat, and not to give any credit to such deceueable visio^s. Whereunto she
made answer and said, that she found by experience, that she was more healthie
in body, when she received no bodily sustenance at all, then she was, when
she did eat. The ghostly Father was nothing moved with that talk, but taking
all to be but only excuses, he commanded her precisely, that she should eat.
Then she, to show her self a true daughter of obedience, did as she was
commanded, and began to eat her meat, until by eating she became so weak
and wasted, that she was at the very point of death without any hope of
recovery, unless she returned again to her former Abstinence. Whereupon she
sent for her ghostly Father, and said unto him. Father, said she, I pray you
tell me one thing: in case I should by over much fasting kill my self, should
I not be gyltie of mine own death? yes, said he. Again, said she, I beseech
you resolve me in this. Whether do you take it to be a greater sin to die by
overmuch eating, or by overmuch Abstinence? By overmuch eating, said he. Then
sir, said she, seeing it is so, that you see by experience, that I am very
weak, and even at deaths door by reason of my eating: Why do you not
forbid me to eat, as you would forbid me to fast in the like case? To that
reason he could make none answer: and therefore seeing by very evident to
kens, that she was near the point of death, he made her this final resolution,
saying. Daughter, do as God shall put in your mind, follow the guydance of his
holy spirit, and pray for me; For, I see, the things that our Lord works
in you, are very strange, and not to be measured by the common rule.

How her strange manner of life was gaine-said and slawndered: and how such
gaine-sayinges and slawnders may easily be answered.

Chap. 14.
THis strange and unwonted manner of life, as it was to some of the better sort
an occasion of praising God in his wonderful works, so did it minister to
many ungodly and ill disposed persons, matter of slander and offense. Some
said, that she made her self better then our blessed Lady and the Apostles,
yea better then our Savior Christ him self; who (as the holy scripture
records) did eat and drink. Some other alleged the rules of spiritual
life, which do precisely forbid any Religious person to follow any singular
manner of life. Some other reasoned and said, that virtue consisted in the
mean, and that all extremity was to be suspected of vice. Some said, that she
was beguyled by the Deuel: some other said in plain terms, that she was an
hypocrite, and persuaded them selves, that she did fast openly to bleere the
eyes of the world, but that she had good morsels in corners, which the world
knew not of. Thus did every body think and report of her, (as it is wont to
happen in such cases) not as they found her better or worse, but as they found
them selves better or worse disposed. But, to make answer to these vain
surmises and false reports briefly, it is to be known, that all men,
especially Religious and spiritual persons, if they have not utterly
overthrown or done their best to over throw self-love in them selves, but do
labor still to get the vain estimation of the world, are in great danger to
be overthrown by their own ambitious mind; and so being blinded with such
malice, to envy the gifts and graces of God in others, namely if they be such
excellent and singular gifts, as may seem in any degree to make their own
qualities to shewelesse in the opinion of men. Such persons are wont commonly
to cover their own malice with the cloak of a certain zeal, which they
pretend to have to the honor of God and edifying of sowles: under the which
covert they will go about to obscure and slander the gifts of God in their
neighbors, giving the world to understand, that, whatsoever they see in them,
all is but the deceit of the Deuel, illusions, counterfeicting, hypocrisy, or
lack of discretion. But in the end such malice is wont to discover it self,
as this against the holy virgin does, especially if it be examined and tried,
by the rules of holy Scriptures and examples of other Saints, of whom we are
well assured, that they were in the like case directed by the spirit of God.
To them therefore, that say, that she preferred her self before our blessed
Lady, the Apostles, and Christ him self, in that she observed such a straight
kind of fast, as we read not the like of them: it may be answered, that our
Savior Christ did (as it is written) both eat and drink contrariwise S. John
Baptist (as our Savior him self witnesses) did neither eat nor drink: and
yet will no man prefer S. John before our Savior in regard of his singular
Abstinence. The like may be said of many of the ancient Fathers, as S.
Antoine, Ma^arius, Hilarion, Serapion, and others who likewise kept a
streighter fast, then we read of the Apostles, and yet does no man prefer
them before the Apostles. If they will add furthermore and say, that this
holy maids case is not altogether like to those ancient Fathers; for so much
as, though, they lived a marvelous straight kind of life, and fasted far
above the common course of men, yet did they eat somewhat, and fasted not
simply from all manner of bodily sustenance: to that it may be answered, that
she had (even for that point) the example of Marie Magdalen, who lived in a
rock of the sea for the space of thirty years together, and never eat nor
drancke in all that time. And yet was she never thought to be better, then our
blessed Lady, which did both eat and drink. To them, that allege the rules
of spiritual life, which do expressly forbid all singularity, it may easily
be answered: that no man ought to take such order of life upon him self,
without a very good and assured warrant from God: but, if he be commanded by
God to take any such singular manner of life upon him, he may* not refuse it
in respect of the singularity: for that were to refuse the gift and grace of
God. The like answer may be made to them also, that reason and say, that all
extremities are to be eschewed, and only the mean to be embraced. For it is a
most certain ground, that whatsoever almighty God wills, can not be taken
for an extremity: for so much as his will is to us a most true and infallible
rule: by the which rule he measures to every one, accordingly as he sees
most expedient. And many times, what we imagine to be to one man a great
extremity, that knows he to be to an other man the very just mean, wherein
consists virtue. As for those that said, that she was deceived by the Deuel,
there needs none answer to be given: for so much as the thing it self
answers them sufficiently. For admit, that she might be deceived by the
enemy (whose craft in deed is very subtle) yet would I feign learn of them,
who it was, that kept her body so long time in her natural force and strength.
If they answer and say, that it was the Deuell: then will I ask them again,
who that was, that preserved her soul in such spiritual joy and peace,
especially at that time, when she was deprived of all outward delight and
comfort. This inward comfort and peace is undoubtedly the fruit of the holy
Ghost, and may in no wise be ascribed to the Deuel. Last of all, to come to
them, that of a wicked malice slaundered the blessed virgin of hypocrisy and
vain glory, I think it not so expedient to shape them an answer, as to give
them good counsel. I would wish all such to be better advised, what they speak
against Gods servants, and what judgment they give concerning the wonderful
works of God in his Saints. For they shall receive their judgment for all
such rash and slanderous talk at the later day, before the judgment seat
of God and all this Saints.

How she showed her self marvelous severe and rigorous toward her self, and
contrariwise wonderful gentle and meek toward them that slaundered her,
which she did to win then to God.

Chap. 15.
WHen any il disposed persons spoke their pleasure of her, slaundering and
deprauing that unwonted manner of Absteinence, which they saw in her, she would
answer then not with any vehemency of words, but only simply, and with such
a moderation of speech, as she thought most meet to qualify and overcome such
hard hearts: for sooth, said she, it is true, that our Lord susteineth my life
without bodily food: and yet see I no cause, why you should be offended. For
in truth I would eat with a good will, if I could. But almighty God has for
my sins laid this strange infirmity upon me, that, if I eat, I am
forthwith in peril of death: pray therefore to God for me, that he will
vouchsafe to forgive me my sins, which are to me the very cause of this and
all other euels. By such sweet words she hoped well to have stayed those
malicious tongues. But when she saw, that she prevailed not; of very pity,
that she had of those weak minds, and to take away all occasion and color
of offense, she came to the table with others, and did enforce her self to
eat somewhat: but in so doing suffered such intolerable pains, that as many
as saw it, had great compassion on her. For her stomach had utterly lost, the
virtue of digestion: by reason whereof, the meat that she eat, either she cast
it up again, (and that was oftentimes procured by putting a fether into her
throat, or otherwise violently) or else it remained in her stomach undigested,
and there engendered windinnes, colikes, and other passions, which tormented her
very cruelly and never ceased, until she had brought it up by one mean or
other. The which thing her ghostly Father seeing, and considering that she
suffered all such pains only to stop the course of slanderous tongues, for
very inward compassion, that he had of her great torments, he spoke
comfortably unto her, and willed her on Gods name, that she should rather leave
eating, then to suffer such pains, how soever they took it, and whatsoever
slanders they raised upon her. Whereunto she made answer with a smyling
countenance, saying. Father, how think you? Is it not better for me to
discharge the debt of my sins after this manner in this present life, then to
differ the payment of the same in far greater pains to the life to come?
would you, that I should flee Gods Justice, or rather (to speak more to the
purpose) that I should not accept this goodly occasion, that is offered me
here, to satisfy Gods Justice with such temporal pains? Surely, Father, I
take it for a great grace and benefit of God, that he will vouchsafe thus to
chastise me here for my sins; and not reserve the same to be punished in the
other life. To this her ghostly Father could say nothing, and therefore he
held his peace. And so by this mean, she gave a great example of high
perfection to all men: she overcame the Deuel, which had wrought all this
trouble against her: she stopped the mouths of diverse and sundry malicious
persons: and prepared for her self a double crown in the life to come. On a
time reasonyng with her ghostly Father concerning the gifts and graces of
God, she uttered a very notable lesson, which was this. If man (said she)
knew how to use the grace of God, he should make his gain and commodity of
every thing, that happens unto him in this life. And so would I wish, that
you should do, good Father, Whenever any thing hapeneth unto you, think
with your self, and say thus. God give me his grace to win somewhat of
this, toward my souls health. And then do your endeavor to gain such and
such virtues, as that present matter shall minister occasion: and within a
little time ye shall become very rich.

How our Savior took her heart out of her body, and after a certain of days
gave her a new for it.

Chap. 16.
THe familiarity, that our Lord had with this blessed virgin, was so strange,
and the gracious privileges, that he endued her withal, so singular, that they
gave at that time, and may peradventure give now also occasion of laughter to
many wordlie persons, and to such, as are in any degree fallen from that
simplicity, that is (as the Apostles says) and ought to be in Christ. And
yet are not the wonderful works of God therefore to be concealed from the
unfaithful, but rather to be set out for the behoof of the godly and well
disposed; For as almighty God does from time to time work such great wonders
in his saints: so does he also from time to time, prepare some good hearts,
that will receive the same with a simple reverence and true Christian regard. On
a time, while this holy maid was lifting up her heart to God in prayer with
great fervor of spirit, and saying those words of the prophet David: O God,
create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit in my bowels: she made a
special petition to him, that he would vouchsafe to take away her own heart
and will, and give her an other new heart and will, that were wholly according
to his holy will. As she was so praying with great humility and instance,
behold, our Savior Christ appeered to her after a very comfortable manner, and
came to her, and opened her left side sensibly with this hand, and took out
her heart, and so going his way left her in deed without a heart. Afterward
being in talk with her ghostly Father, among other things she said to him,
that she had no heart in her body, When her Confesseur heard those words, he
laughed at her, and began after a sort to rebuke her for so saying. But she
affirmed constantly, that so it was: and for confirmation of the same declared,
how our Savior had taken it out with his own hand. All the which talk
persuaded him nothing at all. How is it possible, said he, that any man should
live without a heart? ye say truly, Father (said she) unto man it is in deed
impossible: but unto God there is nothing impossible. Within a few days after
this, it chanced her to go to a certain Chapple of the Friars preachers,
where the sisters of penance were wont to kneel. And when they were all gone
home, she continued there in prayer: wherein lifting up her heart to God with
great fervor and devotion, she was ravished in spirit* as her common manner
was. That done, she set her self in the way to go homeward. And as she went,
behold, a goodly light from heaven environed her round about: and in that
light appeered our Savior Christ, holding in his hands a red shinyng heart.
At the sudden sight whereof she was so afraid, that she fell down to the
ground all quaking and trembling. Then came our Lord unto her, and openyng her
side, put the heart, that he held in his hand into her body, and said these
words. Lo, dear daughter, as I did this other day take away thy heart, so
do I now in steed of that give thee my heart, with the which thou shall live
everlastingly. When he had so done, he closed up the wound again that was made
in her body, and went his way. Howbeit he did it in such sort, that there
remained ever afterward a certain mark or scarre, as it were, of a wound
healed: as she declared oftentimes to her ghostly Father, and many of her
sisters saw it with their eyes. From that time foreward she altered the manner
of her prayer, and said not, as she was wont to do before; Lord, I beseech
thee, keep my heart: but, Lord, I beseech thee, keep thy heart.

Of diverse and sundry visions, which she had at the sight and receiving of
the blessed Sacrament: and how she felt her self wonderfully altered after the
receite of that new heart.

Chap. 17.
AFter that she had received this new heart, she increased meruelously in high
and heavenly contemplations, especially when she was occupied in prayer about
the Altar: from whence she never parted without some very strange visions and
illuminations, namely when she received the blessed Sacrament. Many times she
saw our Savior Christ between the priests hands, in the form of a little
sucking babe: sometimes she saw him like a pretty stripling: and sometimes
also like a hot burning furnace, into the which it seemed to her that the
priest did enter, when he did communicate. Many times, when she received B.
Sacrament, she felt such passing sweet savors, that her body was almost
overcome with the sweetness of the same. And generally* whenever she did
either see or receive the holy Sacrament, she received withal such abundance
of new joys and unspeakable comfortes, that many times her heart daunced in
her body, and made such a sensible noise, that it might well be heard of them
that stood by. And it was well perceived, that the noise was not natural, such
as other men's bodies are wont to make: but it was altogether strange and above
the common course of nature. In this inward and spiritual Iubile, that she felt
in her self, she would break out sometimes and speak to her ghostly Father
after this manner. O Father, see you not, that I am not now the same woman, that
I was before? O that you could feel, that I do now feel in my heart. Surely,
surely, Father, there is no man in this world so proud, or so hard hearted,
that would not relent and become humble, if he felt, what I feel. And yet is
that, that I tell you, nothing in comparison of that, that I feel inwardly.
There is such a great fire of Gods love enkendled in my heart, that this
external and material fire, being compared with that, seems rather cold then
hot. I am so replenished with inward joy and gladness, that I can but
marvel, how my soul may abide in this wretched body. This hot burning
fire does so purify and renew my soul in innocence and cleannes that me
thinks; I am come again to the age of five years. This divine fire does so
inflame me with the love of my neighbor, that it were the greatest joy in the
wordle to me, to die for any man, that lives in the wordle. These things did
she declare to her ghostly Father to the glory of God, and to the behoof of
the world: that we might understand and see the unspeakable love of almighty
God toward man, and what wonderful effects the holy Ghost brings forth
in flexible and ployant hearts: to move us, that be dull of spirit, to the
keeping of his holy commandments, in hope of the comfortable rewards, that
we are to receive at Gods hand, not only in the life to come, but also in this
present life.

How our Lord reveled many high mysteries to the holy maid: and how Marie
Magdalen was assigned to her, to be her mother.

Chap. 18.
AFter that this holy maid was thus replenished with such great abondance of
very singular graces and gifts, it pleased almighty God to reuele unto her
diverse and sundry high mysteries, of the which this was one. On a time our
Lord appeered to her, to comfort her in her holy purpose, accompanied with our
blessed Lady and S. Marie Magdalen: and asked her this question. Daughter,
said he, what thing desire thou? Whereunto she made answer, and said. Lord,
thou know better then I, what thing is most behoueful for me. And of my
self, thou know, I have no will nor heart, but only thy will, and thy heart.
As she was speaking those words, it came to her mind, how Marie Magdalen
committed her self wholly to our Lord, when she sat and wept at his feet.
With that she felt the like swetnes in her heart, as Marie Magdalen felt, at
what time she wept at our Lords feet: whereupon she fixed her eyes upon her.
Our Lord seeing that, and withal looking to the inward bent of her mind, to
satisfy her godly desire, said these words unto her. Behold, dear daughter,
from this time foreward I give thee Marie Magdalen to be thy mother: to whom as
to a loving mother, thou may at al times flee for special comfort: for unto
her specially have I committed the government of thee. When she heard that,
she gave our Lord most humble thanks: and turnyng her self to Marie Magdalen
with great humility and reverence, she besought her, that she would vowchsafe
so to take her under her motherlie protection. And from that time foreward
Marie Magdalen acknowledged the holy maid for her daughter, and she took her
evermore for her mother. which thing may seem to be done, not without great
mystery, if we consider, what liknes there was between the mother and
daughter, in the whole state of their life and conversation.

How, hangyng in the air, she saw certain secrets and high mysteries of God,
which it is not lawful to disclose to any man.

Chap. 19.
THIS holy maid, from the time that she was thus endued with new graces,
until the xxxiij. year of her age (at what time she departed out of this
life) was so wholly occupied in divine comtemplations, that in all that time
she never needed any bodily sustenance. And in those contemplations her soul
was so mightily drawn up to heavenly things, that her body also was by the
vehemency of the spirit, taken up often times withal, and suspended in the
air. At which times she saw many wonderful things, and spoke many high
words of heavenly matters, which were heard of diverse and sundry persons.
On a time her ghostly Father, seeing her so ravished from her bodily senses,
and hearing her speak certain words softely to her self, came near to
hearken what she said. And standing by her, he heard her speak these words
distinctly in latin: Vidi arcana Dei, that is. I have seen the secrets of
God. And she repeted the same words often times Vidi arcana Dei. Her ghostly
Father afterward being very desirous to know, what she meant by those
words, and why she repeted them so often, asked her after this manner. Good
mother, said he, I pray you, tell me, why you repeated those words so often.
What is the cause, why you will not declare your secrets to me now as you were
wont to do? To that she answered and said, that she might not speak
otherwise: why so, said he? why may you not declare the things, that our
Lord reuealeth unto you, as well now, as you were wont to do? Good Father,
said she, I should have as great a conscience, if I should declare the high
mysteries, that almighty God has now reveled unto me, with my defectuous and
imperfecte tongue, as I should have, if I had blasphemed or dishonored our
Lord in words. For there is so great difference between heavenly things
apprehended in an understanding, that is illuminated by God, and the same
things uttered by the speech or tongue of man, that me thinks, they are
almost contrary the one to the other. And therefore for this time, I pray
you, hold me excused. For the things, that I have seen, are unspeakable.
After this great revelation, that our Lord made to her of unspeakable things,
it seemed to her, that her heart did leap out of her body, and that it did
enter into the side of our Savior Christ, and there was made one heart with his
heart. And at that instant she felt her soul all molton and resolved with the
force of his divine love, in such sort, that she cried out with a loud, voice
often times. Domine, vulnerasti cor meum. Domine, vulnerasti cor meum. Lord,
thou have wounded my heart. Lord, thou have wounded my heart. This thing was done
upon S. Margarets Day, in the year of our Lord. 1370.

How she put her mouth to the side of our Savior, and drancke: and of many
other wonderful things, that happened about the blessed Sacrament.

Chap. 20.
IT chanced also the same year on S. Laurence day, that this holy maid,
coming to the Church to hear Mass, set her self down near to the Altar,
as her manner was, that she might the better see the holy Sacrament. And
kneeling there devoutly in her prayers, she brake out into weeping and sobbing
so much, that her ghostly Father came to her and warned her, that she should
refrain so much as was possible, for not molesting the priest at Mass.
Whereupon, like a meek and obedient daughter, she removed her self farther
from the Altar, and made her humble prayer to our Lord, that he would
vouchsafe to illuminate her Confessors heart, that he might see and understand,
that such violent motions of the spirit, might not be witholden and kept in by
the strength of man: and her priaer was not vain. For it pleased God to make
her ghostly Father to understand perfectly by experience, that such fervor of
spirit could not be so kept in, but that the force of divine love would needs
break out. The which when he understood, he never rebuked her afterward for
any such matter. Now, kneeling after this manner far of from the Altar, she
groned in her heart, and many times also brake out into words, and said after
a languishing and ruthful manner. I would feign receive the body of my Lord and
Redeemer. I would feign receive the body of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
One time, as she was so so crying, behold, our Lord appeered unto her with the
wound of his side all open, and bringing her mowth to the same, said. Receive
of my flesh, and drink of my blood so much as thou will. With that she sucked
greedily, and took so much, that it seemed to her, that for very pure love
she was at the point of death, by reason of the passing great sweetness, that
she felt in her heart. The self same year upon S. Alexius day, this holy
maid made her prayer to God, that he would vowchsafe to grant her a fervent
and burning desire to receive his most holy body and blood. At what time she
understood by revelation, that on the morrow she should receive without all
doubt. For she had been forbiden for certain respects, that she should not
receive so often. When she had that comfortable revelation, she prayed again
to our Lord, that he would vowchsafe to cleanse her heart against the time of
receiving, that she might receive the more worthily and to her greater profit.
Behold, while she was so praying, she felt a certain reign coming down into
her soul, in manner of a great abondant flood, not of water or of any other
such licour, but of blood myngled with fire: which (as it seemed to her)
cleansed her soul so mightily, that the strength and operation of the same
redounded into the body, and cleansed it also. After this on the morrow, she
was so extremely sick; that to her seemyng she was not able to move one foot,
though the world had lain on it. All the which not withstanding she doubted
nothing of the promise made unto her by our Lord: but with a full affiance in
him, set her self in the way toward the Church. Whither when she was come,
she kneeled down in a chapel besides an Altar, and besought almighty God
with great instance, that her ghostly Father might come and say Mass there.
(For she had a special inhibition, not to receive at any other priests hand.)
And she understood by revelation, that almighty God had granted her that
petition also. Now, while she was thus attending there for the performance of
all these comfortable promises, her ghostly Father, who before found small
disposition in him self to say Mass that day, and knew not of her being
there, was suddenly touched at the heart with a very strange fervor and
devotion. Whereupon he prepared him self to Mass, and went to the same Altar,
where the holy maid was (at which Altar he was never wont to say Mass at
other times.) When he came thither and found her there, attending his coming
and desiring to communicate, he understood, that it was our Lord, that had
moved him, to say Mass that day, and to choose that Altar contrary to his
accustomed manner. He said Mass, and at the end (as the manner is) he came to
minister the blessed Sacrament to her at the Aulters end. While she was
receiving, her ghostly Father beheld her, and saw her face all red, and
shynyng, and bedewed with great abundance of tears: whereat he was meruelously
astoined. And she, by receiving the blessed Sacrament at that time, was so
replenished with the joyous presence of our Lord, and so mightily drawn inward
by the unspeakable sweetness that she felt in him, that all the day after she
might not speak so much as one word to any creature. On the next day, her
Confessor asked her what she eiled, and what the cause was, she had such a
goodly shynyng read in her face the day before, while she was receiving the
blessed Sacrament. To whom she answered and said. Father, of what color my
face was at that time, I know not. But this I know very well. When I
unworthy wretch received that blessed Sacrament at your hand, it drew me into
it after such a sort, that all other things, saving it alone, waxed loathsome
unto me, not only temporal things and delites of the world, but also all
other comfortes and pleasures, were they never so spiritual. Whereupon I made my
humble prayer to our Lord, that he would take all such comfortes and delites
from me, that I might take pleasure in none other thing, but only in him. I
besought him also, that he would vouchsafe to take away my will, and give me
his will. The which petition he granted me, and said after this manner. Behold,
dear daughter, now I give thee my will, by the virtue whereof thou shall be so
strong, that whatsoever shall happen unto thee from this time foreward, thou
shall never be altered or moved, but shall continue evermore in one state. She
declared yet furthermore to her Confessor, and said. Father, said she, will
you know, how our Lord served me the last day? for sooth he dalied with me,
even as a mother is wont to dalie with her child, whom she loves tenderly. She
will set her child some times a good way from her, when she myndeth to show
him her tette: and there will she suffer him to stand and cry after it. All
the which time she takes pleasure to laugh at the fondnes of the child. At the
lenght, when she has suffered him to cry a good while, she runs to him with
a laughing cheer, and clyppeth him in her arms, huggeth and kisseth him, and
so gives him the tette. In like manner did our Lord with me; He showed me the
blessed wound in his side, and made, as it were, a certain tender of the same
unto me: (but yet a far of.) The which I seeing, for the great desire that I
had to put my mowth unto it out of hand, wept abondantly. Our Lord suffered me
to weep, and seemed to take pleasure in it. At the length, when I had wept a
good while, he came to me with a marvelous sweet and cheereful countenance,
and took my soul in his arms, and put my mouth to his blessed wound. Where,
by reason of the greedy desire, that I had, my soul entered in all wholly, and
sucking there at will, drew out such unspeakable sweetness, and withal such a
great knowledge of his divinity and godhead, that, whosoever were able to conceive
it, would be astoined to consider, how it was possible for my heart not to
break, feeling and receiving such abundance of love into it, as it did at
that time. And he would marvel now also, to think, how it were possible for
me to sustain life, having such a continual flaming fire of charity in my
heart, as I feel.

Of certain other revelations showed unto her upon the receiving of the
blessed Sacrament. And how she obtained graces for diverse and sundry persons.

Chap. 21.
THe same year, upon the 18. day of August, when she was to receive the
blessed Sacrament, she said with great fervor and devotion these words: Lord,
I am not worthy, that thou should enter into my body. And our Lord made
her answer again: but I am worthy, that thou should enter into me. And so
receiving the blessed Sacrament, it seemed to her, that her soul entered into
him, and he into her soul, even as a fish enters into the water into the
fish. And with that she felt her self so mightily drawn up into almighty
God, that the powers of her body failing her, she had much a do to return
home to her chamber; whether when she was come, she laid her self down upon
her hard bed of boordes, and lay there for a good space like a stone without
any moving. At the length her body was taken up in the aier, and there hong
for an other space, in the presence of three persons, that bare witness of all
that happened at that time: and so coming down again, she began, as it were,
to awake out of a dead sleep; and, lying very weak and feeble upon her bed,
she spoke softely many sweet words, and uttered much good matter of high
contemplations, which caused as many as were present to weep. Among other
words, that she spoke, she prayed for many persons, and for some specially,
namely for her Confessor: who was at that time in the Church, and had no mind
of any thing, that might move him to devotion, and yet of a sudden found in
him self, such a strange and wonderful fervor of devotion, as he never felt
the like in his whole life before: whereat he had great wonder. While he was
thus casting with him self, what that strange and soddaine alteration might
mean, one of the sisters, that had heard and seen the whole process of the
matter, came in to him, and said; Father, sister Catherine has prayed for you
very much this day, at such an hour. When he heard that, he understood
forthwith, that her prayer was the cause of all that gracious alteration in
him self. Then he asked that other sister, what manner of prayer the holy maid
had made. And she told him, that she had prayed for him and for other, that
our Lord would vouchsafe to grant then everlasting life. She told him
furthermore, that when the holy maid had made this prayer, she stretched out
her hand, and besought our Lord, to grant her this petition. And so taking in
her hand again she seemed to make, as though it had been very sore, and said
with great sighing these words. O Lord, worshipped may thou be; For so was
she wont to say, so often as she felt any grief in her body. When her
Confessor heard all this, he went forthwith to her lodging, and prayed her,
that she would declare all her vision to him. She like an obedient daughter
declared unto him the whole vision in such sort, as it is described here
before. And when she came to that point, where she prayed for certain special
persons, she said to him. Father, when I prayed for you and for other, that
our Lord would vouchsafe to grant you everlasting life, it pleased his goodness
to give me an assured comfort in my heart, that in deed so it should be. With
that I besought him that he would grant me some token of the certainty
thereof: not that I doubted any thing of his promise, but because I was
desirous to have some notable memorial of the same. Then he bad me, that I
should stretch out my hand. And I did so. And he put into my hand a nail, and
closed the same so fast within my hand, that I felt a great pain in my hand,
as if there had been a nail stricken into my hand in deed with an hammer. And so
(our Lord be blessed for it) I have in my right hand, one of the marks of my
sweet spowse and Savior, to my self sensible, though to others invisible.

How she received the blessed marks of our Savior Christ in the city of Pisa.

Chap. 22.
ON a time this holy maid went to the city of Pisa, accompanied with diverse
and sundry persons: among other doctor Raimundus her ghostly Father was
one. When she came thither, she was enterteined by a certain worshipful man,
whose house stood beside S. Christians chapel: where her Confessor said
mass at her request, and ministered the holy Sacrament unto her after her
accustomed manner. When she had received, she was forthwith ravished from her
bodily senses for a good space. All the which time her Confessor with diverse
others a waited there, to see, what would become of her, and to hear some
spiritual and comfortable words of her, as they were wont to do commonly,
when she came to her self again. Suddenly as they beheld her, the body, that
lay prostrate upon the ground, was raised up, and she kneeled upon her knees,
strethching up her arms and hands, and showing in her face a marvelous
goodly and clear brightness. When she had kneeled after this manner a good
while, at the length she fell down suddenly, like one that had received a
deadly wound: and soon after that she was restored again to her bodily
senses. Then she caled for her ghostly Father, and said secretly unto him these
words; Father, I give you to understand for certain, that I bear now in my
body (by the grace and mercy of God) the blessed marks of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Her Confessor hearing that, asked her, how that might
be, and how it had been with her in all that time of her traunse. Whereunto she
made answer and said; Father, I saw our Lord fastened upon the Cross, coming
down toward me and enuironyng me rownd about with a marvelous beawtiful
light. With the which gracious sight my soul was so ravished, and had such a
passing desire to go and meet with our Lord, that my body was constreined by
the very force of the spirit to set it self up, as you might see. Then there
came down from the holes of his blessed wounds five bloody beams, which
were directed toward the same parts of my body, to wit, to my hands,
feet, and heart. With that I cried out to our Lord and said. O Lord, I beseech
thee, let no singes of these holy marks appear outwardly to the sight of
men. Suddenly, while I was speaking these words, before those beams were
fully come down to my body, they changed their color, out of a sanguine
red, into a marvelous brightness and so in the form of a goodly pure light
they lighted and rested upon the said parts of my body. When she had thus
declared her whole vision, her ghostly Father asked her, whether any of
thoses beams came down to her right side or no. She answered, no, but only to
her left side upon the heart. He asked her furthermore, whether she felt any
sensible pain in those parts, or no. With that she fetched a great sigh, and
said. Father, I suffer such a great and sensible pain, in all those five
parts of my body, and specially at my heart, that unless almighty God show
a new miracle, I can not long endure in this life. That word did her ghostly
Father take very good head unto, and he looked diligently, whether he might
epsy any tokens of sensible pain in those parts of her body. When she had
said so much as she would say at that time, they went out of that chapel
together toward their lodging: and the holy maid betook her self to her
chamber and lay down, and showed such evident tokens of extreme sickness,
that as many, as were about her, thought certainly, that she would have dyed
out of hand. Whereupon her Confessor, with certain other, that kept him
company, were called, to see that strange case. When they came and saw her in
such extremity, they were all overcome with sorrow and heaviness: for though
they had seen her oftentimes before in very weak case, yet had they never
seen her so feeble, and (to their seemyng) so near to death. Nevertheless
within a while after she came to her self again, and recovered so much
strength, that receiving a little meat, she was able to speak: and said to her
ghostly Father, as she had said before, that unless almighty God would by
some new miracle continue her life, she had but a little time to endure in this
wordle. When her Confessor heard that, he called all her spiritual children
together, both men and women, and besought them with many tears, that they
would all with one voice offer up their humble prayer to God, beseeching him,
that he would vouchsafe to lend them their mother, that lay at the point of
death, for a time, to direct and train them yet further in the paths of
spiritual life. They assented all to his request with a very good will, and
went with him to the chamber, where the holy maid lay in a traunse. And
doctor Raimundus in the behalf of them all, spoke unto her after this manner.
Good mother, we know well, that your desire is to be with your dear spowse
and Lord, our Savior Christ. But our desire and earnest suit is, that you
would take pity on us your poor children, and not leave us thus comfortles
and without direction. Your reward is safely laid up for you in heaven, and
abides your coming. But we are in danger of perishing a thousand ways in this
tempestuous sea of the wordle. We know also, good mother, that your dear
spowse loves you so tenderly, that he will deny you nothing, that you ask
him. Wherefore we beseech you all with one voice, to make your humble prayer to
him, that he will vouchsafe to lend you yet a little time of life among us, for
our further instruction in this holy order of life, wherein you have begun to
trade us. We will pray with you also: but what are we seely wretches and
sinful creatures? we are unworthy to appear before his divine majesty,
being, as we are, full of iniquity and subject to many imperfections. And
therefore we pray you, dear mother, that our suit may be offered up to
almighty God by you: who for the tender love, that you have always showed to
us, are like to solicit it more carefully, and for the singular favor, that
you have found in his sight, are like to obtain it more certainly. Many such
words spoke her Confessor and the rest to her with great heaviness of heart,
which they showed more with the tears that they shed, then with the words
that they spoke. When they had said, the holy maid made them answer after this
manner. It is now long, as you know sense I resigned my self wholly unto God,
and have no will of mine own, but do remit all to the direction of his blessed
will. True it is, that I love you very entierly, and have a great desire of
your salvation. And it is no less true, that he loves and tendreth you
infinitely more, then I do or can do, and that he thirsts after your
salvation, more then I and all men are able to conceive: whereof we have most
sufficient testimony, the shedding of his most precious blood. His will
therefore be done in this and in all other things. I will not cease to pray for
you, howbeit not otherwise, but only that his will be done: which (I know)
shall be best for you, howsoever it fall out. When she had spoken these words,
they went aside fot a time in great heaviness and perplexity, until the time,
that they might hear some more comfortable answer. The next day after, she
called her Confessor unto her, and said; Father, I believe, our Lord has
somewhat condescended to your petition: and I hope, you shall understand his
will and pleasure touching the same within a short time. And as she said, so it
proved in deed. For upon the next morrow, which was sondaie, she received the
blessed Sacrament at her Confessors hand. And as on the sondaie before she was
brought to very great weakness after the receiving of the blessed Sacrament,
so at this time she was meruelously refresshed and strengthened in body. Which
seemed strange to as many, as were there present. Then doctor Raimundus,
seeing that wonderful and comfortable alteration in her body, said these
words. I am now in great hope, that our Lord has accepted our tears, and
that he has given favorable ear to the humble prayers of us his unworthy
servants. With that, for their further assurance and comfort, he asked the
holy maid, whether the pain, that she was wont to have in her hands, feet,
and side, did continue still, as it did before. Whereunto she made answer and
said, that our Savior Christ had now so wrought in her body, that those
wounds or marks, were no more a grief and torment unto her, but rather a
passing great joy and sensible comfort: and that our Lord at their instance
and suit had granted her a longer time of affliction in this life, which she
was glad of, for the love she bare to them.

How she was ravished in spirit for the space of three days* and how
afterward she did penance as long for a word, that escaped her unawares.

Chap. 23.
Upon the feast of S. Paul's conversion, this holy maid was meruelously
ravished from her bodily senses: and her spirit was so mightily drawn up to
heauenward, that for the space of three days and three nights, she was
immovable and without all bodily feeling: in so much that many thought
verily, that she had bin fully dead. But there were some, that understood her
condition better then the rest, who were of opinion, that she should be
ravished with S. Paul into the third heaven. At the lenght, when the three
days were ended, she came to her self again. But her spirit was so
comforted with the things that had been revealed unto her in that time, that
she stood long time after, like one that had been neither fully sleeping, nor
fully awaked. In the mean time, whil she so stood, there came to her doctor
Thomas, her first Confessor, and with him an other Friar called brother
Donatus of Florence: who were going to visit a certain holy Heremite in the
wilderness. And taking this holy maid in their way, and finding her in this
case, they thought, they would prove, whether they might awake her fully, by
inuiting her to do some work of charity. And so they asked her, whether she
would go with the^ to see that holy man. Yea, said she: not knowing in deed
at that very instant, what she said. For as yet she remained in that sleepie
state, that she had been in before. But so soon as she perceived, that such a
word had passed her, she had such a remorse of conscience, because she had
said otherwise, the^ she minded to do, that, for very griese of mind and
sorrow for her offense, she awaked altogether: and as she had been before three
days and three nights in a deliteful conte^plation of heavenly things, so
did she likewise continue three days and three nights after a very
lamentable manner waling and weeping for her sin, and said to her self. O
most wicked and perverse woman, have thou thus requited the infinite goodness
and mercy of thy Lord and Savior with making a lie? Be these the truths,
that thou have learned in heaven? Be these the fruits of the doctrines, that
the holy Ghost has inspired in thy heart? Thou knew well, when thou spakest
those words, that it was not thy meaning to go with them. And yet thou
would say yea, and make a lie to those good men and virtuous priests, that
have charge of thy soul. Ah wretched creature. Ah wicked woman. These and
other the like words did she speak with an earnest displeasure against her
self, and did great penance upon her body, for the space of three days and
three nights for that lie, that she had made: (if it may truly be termed a
lie, and not rather a word, that escaped her unawares.) Howsoever it was, she
was permitted by the providence of God so to slide, and also to have a timorous
remorse for her offense, to keep down her heart, that it should not be puffed
up with pride, in regard of those heavenly revelations, that she had seen:
Which were so great (as she declared afterward to her ghostly Father) that
no tongue of man was able to express them.

Of certain other revelations: and again of the tenderness of her conscience.

Chap. 24.
AT an other time the Apostle S. Paul appeered to her, and gave her warnyng,
that she should give her self earnestly to prayer. The which warnyng she
received with very great obedience, and did in deed set her self wholly to the
exercise of prayer: and thereby deserved to have many goodly revelations. Upon
S. Dominickes eueen a little before even song time, being in the Church occupied
in prayer, many revelations were showed to her by S. Dominicke him self, and
by diverse other Saints. The which revelations were so familiar to her, that
she was able at one time both to give heed to them, and also to declare the
same to others. While she was thus occupied, it chanced, that brother
Barthelmewe her Confessors companion entered into the Church: in whom she had
as great affiance, as in her Confessor him self: for in her Confessors
absence, he was her ghostly Father. When she perceived, that he was come, she
arose and went toward him, and said that she had to confer with him
concerning certain revelations. Whereupon they sat down together in the
Church, and she began to declare to him many strange things, that our Lord
had revealed to her. Among other things she declared to him, that at that
very instant, while she was speaking to him, she saw her holy father S.
Dominicke, there present as well, as she saw the Friar that sat by her, and
that he was nearer to her, then the Friar was. In this mean time, while she
was thus declaring to him many wonderful reuelatio^s, it happened, that her
younger brother, whose name was also Barthelmewe, came by. And she (seeing by
like the shadow of his body, or else hearing the noise of his feet) cast her
eye a little a side and beheld her brother, and so thought to return to her
foremer discourse again. But considering with her self, what she had done,
she was toched at the heart with such an inward grief for that little
distraction, that for a good time she held her peace and spoke not one word,
but wept and wailed very bitterly. At the length, the Friar that was there,
seeing, that she made no end of weeping, spoke comfortable words unto her, and
prayed her, that she would go foreward in her godly talk. But she so sobbed
and wept that she was not able to give him one word to answer. After a long
spcae, when she had won so much of her self, that she was able to speak,
she began with her self after this manner. Ah wretch, that thou art: thou shall
surely abide for it. With that Friar Barthelmewe asked her, what offense that
should be, that she took so heauiely? Out upon me vile wretch, said she: saw
you not, while our Lord was showing me his great mysteries and secrets, how I
turned mine eye a side to behold a creature? Then the good man, who had great
wonder to see the tenderness of her conscience, and therefore desired to excuse
or qualify her offense, said unto her. Surrely mother, it seems very
strange to me, that you should make so great lamentation for a matter of so
light importance for that turnyng aside; for your eye endured so little time
that (I assure you) I could not epsy it. O father, said she, if you knew, how
sharply our blessed Lady rebuked me for that trespass, undoubtedly you would
weep and lament with me. When she had said those words, she held her peace,
and would speak no more of her revelations, but continued sorrowing and
weeping for her offense, until such time, as she had made her Confession; and
so with heavy cheer she went home to her chamber. She declared afterward to
her ghostly Father, that S. Paul appeered to her also, and reproved her so
roughly for that little loss of time, that she would rather suffer all the
shame of the world, then abide, such an other rebuke at the Apostles hand. And
of that rebuke she took occcasion to speak to her ghostly Father after this
manner. O Father, said she, think you, what a confusion, and shame that
shall be, that all wicked and unhappy sinners shall abide at the later day,
when they shall stand before the majesty of God, seeing that the presence of
one only Apostle, is so dreadful and intolerable. I assure you, father, the
apostles words and contenance were so terrible to me, that, if I had not had
comfort of a goodly bright lamp, that stood by, while he spoke to me, I
think verily, my heart had never ben able to abide the same, but would have
dyed for very sorrow, that it had of that extreme shame and confusion. And
thus it pleased God now and then to put her in mind of her own frailty,
especially after such great revelations, which otherwise might have moved her
heart to pride.

How it pleased God to reveal to her the worthynes and excellency of the
blessed Partriarke S. Dominicke, and of his true children.

Chap 25.
ON a time conferring with Friar. Barthelmewe of the revelations, that our Lord
had showed unto her among other things she declared, that she had seen, in
deed by a vision of imagination, how almighty God the Father brought forth
his coequal true Son (as it seemed to her) by his mouth: the which Son in
the nature of mankind, which he had taken, showed him self to her also in the
substance and form of a true man; She saw likewise, how almighty God
brought forth the glorious patriarch S. Dominicke, not out of his mouth, but
out of his breast, environed round about with a marvelous goodly light and
brightness. And she heard a voice, proceeding from the mouth of almighty God,
which said these words. Dear daughter, I have brought forth (as thou see)
these two sons, the one naturally, and the other by adoption. She was much
amazed at the strangenes of that comparision, made between the Son of God
and S. Dominicke. Whereupon the voice proceeded and declared the meaning of it
after this manner. As this my natural Son was in his humane nature, which he
took, evermore most perfectly obedient to me, even to death: so was this my
some by adoption obedient to me in all points, even from his childhood to his
dying day, and directed all his works according to my commandments, and
kept that purity both of body and soul, which he received of me in Baptism
clean and unspotted until the end of his life. And as this my natural Son
spoke openly to the wordle, and gave a most clear testimony to the truth,
that I put in his mouth: even so did this my son by adoption, preach the
truth of my gospel as well to heretics and scismatikes, as also among my
faithful people. And as this my natural Son sent out his disciples to publish
the gospel to all creatures: so does this my son by adoption now at this
present, and shall hereafter from time to time, send out his brethren and
children under the yoke of his holy obedience and discipline. And for this
cause is it granted to him and his by special privilege, that they shall have
the true understanding of my words, and shall never swerve from the same. And
as this my natural Son ordained the state of his whole life in deeds and
words, to the salvation of souls: even so did this my Son by adoption
emploie him self wholly, both in his doctrine, and in example of life, to
deliver sowles from the snares of the deuel, which are error and sin. And
that was his principal intent, when he first founded his order, to wit, to win sowles out of the bondage of error and sin, and to bring them to the
knowledge of truth, and withal to the exrcise of a godly and Christian life.
And for these cawses do I liken him to my natural Son. This was the
revelation, which she had at that time, while she was conferring with Friar
Barthelmewe in the Church: at what time she chanced to cast her eye aside, as
it is declared before.

How the holy virgin, being wholly enflamed with the love of God, desired
instantly to be loosed from this life, and to be with Christ: and how by that
mean she obtained to bear in her body, every particular pain, that our
Savior Christ suffered for us.

Chap. 26.
THis holy virgin was now replenished with such abundance of grace, that she
bestowed in a manner the whole time of her life in heavenly contemplations: by
reason whereof, being often times ravished in spirit and abstracted from her
bodily senses, she became so feeble and fainte, that she was constrained to
keep her bed. Where she lay, as it were, in a continual longyng and
languishing after her spowse: with the divine love of whom she was so much
inflamed, that she might not well reason or think of any other thing, but
only of him. And many times, by reason of the vehemency of that holy fire
burning in her heart, she brake out into these words, and repeated the same
again and again: O my most sweet and lovely Lord, Son of God. O my most
dear and amiable spowse, Son of the B. virgin Marie. With such words did
she express the inward gronyng and melting of her heart. This was her morning
and euenyng song: this her repast, when she was hungry: this her rest after
labor. In this time our Lord appeered unto her oftentimes: which also
increased the fire in her heart: in so much that on a time being overcome with
the heat of the same, she began (like one that were impatiently set to have a
thing) as it were to quarrel and expostulate with him, saying. O my most sweet
and lovely Lord, O dear spowse of my soul, wherefore do thou suffer me to be
holden here prisoner in the dongeon of this wicked world? Wherefore do thou
not loose my bands, and call me away to thy blesful tabernacles? Do thou
not see, o Lord, that there is nothing under the sun, wherein I can take
delight? Do thou not know, that I do love no creature in this world, but
only in thee, or for thee? Do thou not see, o eye of heaven which see all
things, that all things are to me unsightly and yrckesome, the beawtie of thy
divine majesty only excepted, whereon my heart is fixed? wherefore then do thou
suffer this my wretched body to be so long a let and stay, that I can not
come and have the joyful fruition of that most excellent beawtie, that I so
much desire? O my most gracious and amiable Lord, O most sweet love of my heart,
suffer me no longer to dwell in this earthie and foul prison, but take me out,
and call me to dwell with thee in thine everlasting tabernacles. To these
words proceeding from such a loving and languishing spirit, our Lord answered
sweetly after this manner. Dear daughter, when I lived in earth, I labored to
fulfill not mine own will, but the will of my Father. And though I had an
earnest desire to eat that last passover with my disciples (as they heard me
say often times) and so to be with my Father: yet did I patiently abide the
time, that my Father had ordained. Thus much I tell thee, to instruct thee by
mine own example, that, though thou have a fervent desire to be perfectly
united to me in bless, yet must thou tarry the time, that I have appointed.
Unto the which words she made answer readily, and said. O Lord, seeing it is
thy pleasure, that I shall not yet pass out of this life, thy blessed will be
done in all things, both in heaven and in earth. But yet one thing I most
humbly beseech thee, seeing it is so, that I may not be united to thee in
bless, during the time of mine abode here in this life, grant me thus much:
that I may be united to thee at the least in thy passion, and that I may have
a feeling of every particular pain and torment, thou did suffer for me on
the Cross, even to the yealding up of thy most holy spirit. Thus she prayed
with great vehemency of spirit, and our Lord gave favorable ear to her
petition; for (as she declared afterward secretly to her Confessor) our
Savior Christ never suffered any kind of pain in his body, which she did not
likewise suffer in some degree. And therefore she took a passing great delight
to reason of the Cross and passion of our Savior Christ: and she revealed
diverse and sundry strange mysteries, and made many goodly expositions upon
certain places of the gospel, such as were never by any of the holy doctors
before.

How, bearing the Cross of Christ continually in her body, she took great
delight to reason of the same: and how she revealed many strange mysteries upon
the holy scriptures concerning the Cross.

Chap. 27.
REasonyng at diverse and sundry times of the Cross of Christ, she would take
occasion to utter many goodly doctrines and sentences, which were of great
force and efficacy to stir up the minds of the hearers to the love of
Christ crucified. Among other things she affirmed constantly, that our Savior
Christ did, from the very hour of his conception to the end of his life,
bear a continual Cross in his heart. And of this doctrine she gave a very
good reason after this manner. Is it not most certain, said she, that our
Savior Christ the mediator between God and man, true God and true man, was
at the very point of his conception replenished, in the highest and most
perfect degree, with all fulness of grace, knowledge, wisdom, and charity?
In so much that it was not necessary for him to learn ought of any creature
in heaven or in earth. Then, being so replenished with charity, it folweth
necessarily, that he had in him self the love both of God and also of his
neighbor in the highest perfection. And being replenished with knowledge, it
follows likewise, that he saw most clearly two points: the one, that
almighty God was deprived of his honor, fear, and reverence, that man owed
unto him: the other, that man was deprived of everlasting bless, which was
dew to him for the said honor, fear, and reverence. And of this love and
knowledge, it must needs be, that he bare a marvelous heavy and continual
Cross in his soul, which had evermore such a great and vehement thirst, to
the honor of God, and to the salvation of man. And because he knew, that the
restitution both of the one and the other, to wite, both of the honor of God,
and also of the salvation of man, was appointed by God to be wrought by the
mean of his Cross: therefore he had evermore a marvelous great desir to come
unto it: which desire was vndoubtely a very cordial and continual Cross unto
him, and never ended, until the time came, that his body was in deed
stretched out and nailed upon the tree of the Cross. She reasoned yet further
concerning that Cross of desire, and said thus. No man living is able to make
a just estimate of the pains and torments, that our Savior suffered in his
heart, by reason of the desire, that he had, to pay the debt of mankind, to
deliver them from the sentence of death, and to bring them again into the
favor of God. They only, that love God with all their heart, with all their
soul, with all their strength, and their neighbor as them selves, may guess
in some degree, what his pain was. Such good men may, judge in part by the
love that they have the^ selves to the honor of God and salvation of man, and
by the grief, that they feel in them selves, when the thing, that they love,
is either taken away or long delaied, what his grief was. They may judge, I
say, in part, and not perfectly: for so much as the love, that man has or can
have, to the honor of God and salvation of man, be it never so great, is
nothging in comparison of that passing great love, that was in the heart of our
Savior Christ. And therefore the desire that he had to recover both the one and
the other, must needs cawse in him a greater sorrow without all comparison,
then ever was or could be in man: until he saw an effectual and perfect
restitution made, to God of his honor and reverence: to man of his former
state of grace in this present life, and of glory in the life to come. And
thus much he signified to his disciples, when he said those words: I have had
an earnest desire to eat this passover with you: and afterward likewise,
when in his prayer to God the father he said: Father, take away this cup from
me. Which is as if he had said in plain words. Father, I see here prepared
for me a very bitter cup of most sharp torments and death, which I have
droncke continually in desire even from the hour of my conception, but now do
begin to drink the same in deed, and so to make an end of drincking this
paineful potion of the Cross: which I desire thee to hasten and bring to an
end. For that being once passed and gone, I shall reap the fruit of my long
and earnest desire, to wit, I shall have fulfilled mine obedience in all
points to thee, restitution shall be made perfectly, to God of his due honor,
to man of his foremer state. And I desire not to have this cup of my passion
taken away, which thou have here made ready for me, which I take at thy
fatherly hand like an obedient son and drink it willingly: but I desire to
have that cup taken away from me and ended, which I have droncke with such an
earnest and greedy desire so many years for the love that I bear to thine
honor, and to the salvation of mankind. This was the exposition, that she made
upon this place of the gospel against the which, (because it seemed straung and
singular) her ghostly Father doctor Raimundus reasoned after this manner.
Mother, said he, you know, that the holy Fathers do commonly give an other
interpretation to this place, almost contrary to this, that you have said.
They say that our Lord desired, in deed rather not to drink that cup, then
to drink it: meaning thereby to declare to us, that he was true man, and that,
as true man, his flesh did naturally abhor death, as the flesh of every man
does. And by this he would give a doctrine, and withal an example in him
self, to all weak and frail men, that they should not be dismayed, though
they felt in them selves, that they did fear death. For So Much as the like
fear and frailty was seen in our head also, who took upon him all our
infirmities, only sin excepted. To this the holy maid made answer thus.
Father, said she, I know right well, that the holy doctors do expound this
place, as you have said: and I find no fault with their exposition. And though
this interpretation, that our Lord has taught me, seem diverse or almost
contrary (as you think) to that, yet is it very true, and may well stand
with the common exposition of the holy Fathers; Father, it is certain, that
our Savior Christ was head, not only of the weak and frail, that fear and
flee death, but also of the strong and mighty, that bear it manfully, and
yeald not to the fear and shrynking of the flesh. And therefore he would in
this act and words, give a doctrine and example to them both. He would
tremble, and fear, and desire that the bitter cup of his passion might pass
away, to give an example to the weak, that they might likewise fear and flee
death without any offense (if they had no commandment from God to the
contrary) He would also overcome that fear and quaking of the flesh by the
force of reason and zeal of Gods honor, and desire his Father to hasten that
cup of his passion and death: to give an example to the strong that they should
not yeald to the frailty, of the flesh, and shrincke at the terror of death,
but follow the direction of the spirit, and offer them selves valiantly to
torments and to death it self, when by so doing, they might either honor
God, or edify their neighbor. And I see no cause, why one place of the
scripture should not have many interpretations: for so much as the holy
scripture (as you know) has many senses and meanynges. Which the holy Ghost
has so ordained, that the holy scripture might serve diverse and sundry
persons, to diverse and sundry effects. As we see this present text being
diuersely expounded, serves men of diverse quality to very good purpose: The
weak for a refuge, if they retire and save them selves: the strong for a
warrant, if they step forewardes, and offer them selves to evident danger for
Gods sake. Then, if you ask me, how these two interpretations may stand
together, the one being contrary to the other: (for by the one our Savior
required, that the cup of his passion might be hastened, by the other, that it
might pass away) I answer, that I take it for none inconvenience, that in
that agony, he should have those two contrary effects in him self, the one
according to the flesh, whose property it is, naturally to repine at any
thing that may hurt: the other according to the spirit, which, looking to the
honor of God and salvation of mankind, desired earnestly the bitter cup of his
death, by the drinking whereof he knew right well, that both the one and the
other should be restored. When her Confessor had heard this reason and
discourse, he replied no more, but held his peace, for in deed he was astoined,
and knew not, what to answer to the wisdom and spirit of God, that spoke
in her.

An other exposition upon the same place of the gospel, with certain other,
mystical sayings. And how she passed in deed out of this life in the pains of
the Cross.

Chap. 28.
BEing on a time ravished in spirit, she learned an other exposition upon this
place of the gospel, which her Confessor douctour Thomas committed to writing:
and it was thus. Our Lord, said she, approaching near to his passion, set
before the eyes of his mind that great multitude of wicked men and women, which
he saw, through malice and obstinacy would not take the benefit of his
death. The which sight put him into such an agony, that he sweat water and
blood, and for very pity, that he had of those miserable creatures, he was,
as it were, enforced to utter those words; Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me. Which is as much, as if he had said; Father, this cup, that
is here presented before me, is surely a very bitter cup to me, seeing (as I
do to my great grief) the damnation of so many souls, which without any
cause shall make light of this great love, that I am here to show to mankind,
and leese the benefit of my blood, which is now ready to be powered out for
their sake. Wherefore, if it be possible, I beseech thee, that thou will pardon
them, and in so doing take away this bitter cup from me. This, said she, was
the prayer, that our Savior made to his eternal Father. And she added
furthermore and said, that he had without all doubt obtained the thing, that he
demanded, if he had requested the same absolutely and without condition: for
what petition could he make to his Father, that should not have been heard: who
(as the Apostle says) was heard for the very reverence, that was in him
self? But as on the one side the tender love, that he bare to mankind, won
so much of him, that he made that petition in their behalf: so on the other
side, the love of Gods justice moderated the vehemency of his love toward
mankind, and cawsed him to qualify his earnest demand, with this clause and
condition: howbeit; O Father, not my will be done, but thine. This holy maid
declared yet further to her confessor and said, that the pains, which our
Savior suffered for the redemption of mankind, were so excessiuely great, that
it had been impossible for any man in this wordle to endure the same, but that
he must needs have dyed, if it had been possible, many times. For as the love,
that he bare to mankind, was unspeakable and incomprehensible: so were the
pains, that he suffered for their love, so great that no man had been able to
esteem them, and much less to bear them. What man, said she, would have
believed, that those thorns of his crown, should have persed thorough his
scull into his brains? And yet so it was. Again, who would have thought, that
the bones of a man should have been drawn a sonder and disiointed? And yet the
prophet David says: They told all my bones, speaking of the unmerciful and
cruel tormentours, which haled and pulled him here and there so violently, that
they plucked his bones out of joint. Certain it is, that the malice of those
wicked Jews was very great, and that they used him very cruelly: and yet
could not their malicious and cruel usage have done it, but only that his will
was (to show his unspeakable love toward us) as it were utterly to forsake
him self, and to suffer his body to be destitute of all such force and
strength, as might make any resistance against pains and torments. So that
the principal cause of his passion was, the desire, which he had, of showing
his love to us evidently and effectually. It was not the violent hand of those
tormentours, that were able to hold him (whom he made to fall down at his
foot with one word of his mouth.) It was not the nails, that were able to
hold him fast to the Cross: (which were his creatures, and had no further
power upon their Creator, but only so much as he would give them:) but it was
the love, that he bare to mankind that took him: it was love, that held him
fast: it was love, that nailed him fast to the Cross, and made him there to
endure a most bitter and reprochful death. Such high words and sentences did
she utter to her confessor concerning the passion of our Savior. And she
affirmed furthermore, that, whatsoever pains our Savior had borne in any
part of his body, the same had she borne in her body also, in like manner as
our Savior did, but not in like measure (for that had been impossible for her
body to bear) And to show, in deed, that she knew by exeperience, which of
all those pains was greatest, she said, that all the other pains were passed
and gone, but one remained still in her body, which was the diuulsion (as they
term it) or sundering of the bones in the breast: which pain was of all other
pains (as she said) most grievous. Now this pain of the breast grew on so
vehemently upon her, and withal the love of our Savior, to whom she was
confourmed by suffering such pains, increased so mightily in her heart, that she
was wholly overcome with the force of the same, and her heart, like a thynne
glass filled with a very strong liqour, being not able to bear the strength
of that divine love, brast in sunder (as she declared afterward) and clefte
in the middle from the highest to the lowest part of the same. And certain it
is, that she dyed in deed in the presence of many virtuous and credible
persons, and so continued a long time. Of this matter she made mention
afterward in a letter written to her ghostly Father with her own hand: in
the which letter she declared among other things, how she was taught by S.
John the Evangelist and S. Thomas of Aquine, to write in a very short space.

How she passed in deed out of this life, and had the fruition of heavenly
joys: and how afterward her soul came again to the body.

Chap. 29.
HEr ghostly Father being desirous to learn the very certainty of this
matter at her own mouth, on a time reasonyng with her, besought her, that she
would tell him plainly, what had passed. She stood still a great while, and
could not give him one word to answer for weeping: but at the length she spoke
after this manner. O father said she, is it not a pitiful and lamentable case,
that a soul, which has been once delivered out of a darcke, prison, and has
had the fruition of a most joyous and beawtifull light, should be constreined
to forsake that goodly light, and to return again to dwell in his former
dark and stinkinge dongeon? O good Father, I am that wretched creature, upon
whom this calamity is fallen by the ordinance of God for my sins. How so
said he? Forsooth, said she, the fire of Gods love was at that time so
strong in my heart, and the desire which I had to be united to him, so
vehement, that though my heart had been of stone or of iron, it must needs have
broken in sonder. And therefore I give you thus much to understand for certain,
that my heart was in deed undone and opened from the uppermost part to the
neither, only by the violence of that mighty love: which, I believe, was of
such force, that no creature in this world had been able to abide it: in so
much that, me thinks, I feel yet certain tokens of that clefte in my heart.
And so often as it comes to my mind, what a blesful state my soul was in, in
that mean time, while it was separated from my body, I can not but weep and
lament for my return again to this vale of misery. With that her Confessor
prayed her, that she would make a declaration of the whole matter from the
beginning. Whereunto she made answer and said. Father, after that I had been fed
and comforted a long time with diverse and sundry revelations and visions,
which it pleased our Lord of his great mercy to show unto me, at length for
very pure love I fell so sick, that I was constreined to keep my bed. Where
lying, I made my humble petition to our Lord, that he would vouchsafe to
deliver me out of this wretched wordle and unite me perfectly to him self.
Which petition as then he would not hear. But yet he granted me thus much,
that I should suffer, in the time of mine abode in this life, all the pains of
his Cross and passion: by the suffering whereof I should both learn the better,
how passing great his love was toward me, and also be stirred, by the example
of his unspeakable love, in some degree to love him again. And so in deed it
came to pass, that seeing (as it were) by an evident experience in my self,
how great love our Savior bare to me, and how intolerable pains he suffered
for my sake, I was wholly overcome with the force of such inestimable kindness,
and my heart being not able to bear the strength of so much love, as it had
conceived, brake in sunder: by reason whereof my soul was also delivered out of
this mortal body, and had the fruition of his divine majesty (howbeit but for
a little time: which was my great grief.) Then said doctor Raimundus to her. I
pray you, good mother, tell me, how long was your soul out of your body? And
what things did you see in that time? With that she fetched a deep sigh, and
said; Faher, those that were about my body, and made preparation for my
burial, said, that it was about a four hours. In the which time I saw the
divine essence of almighty God: which causes me now to live with such
discontentation of mind and misliking of all things here in the world. And
had it not ben for the zeal, that I have, to the honor of God, and edifying
of mine even Christians, for whose sakes my soul was restored again to the
body, without all doubt I must needs have dyed for sorrow. And now the
greatest comfort, that I have in the world, is, that I know and am well
assured, that the more I suffer in this life, the more blessed I shall be in the
life to come. And therefore all tribulations are to me, not uncomfortable and
yrckesome, but rather comfortable (as you see) and deliteful. I saw also the
pains of the damned in hell, and of those likewise, that are in purgatory:
which were so great, that no tongue of man is able to express them. I assure
you Father, if wretched sinners might see those horrible pains and torments,
they would rather choose to suffer an hundred deaths in this world (if it
were possible) then to endure the least pain, that is there, for the space of
one day. But above others, I saw, that they were specially punished, which
had broken their faith and promise given in matrimony, not keepinge them
selves within the honest bounds and yoke of wedlock, but following the
inordinate lusts of their flesh and sensuality. Which was so ordained, not
because the breach of weddelocke is the most heinous offense, that is there
punished (for there be many greater sins) but because the offenders in this
vice for the most part had never had any remorse of conscience for this
offense, as they had for the rest of their sins: and also because they had
commonly fallen more often into this sin, then to any other: for many times
a sin, which is in it self not so great, displeases God highly, if it be
oftentimes committed, and no care had of amendment by contrition and penance.
Now, when I had seen all these things, and had conceived withal a most
certain hope, that, for mine own part, I was passed all pains, and come to a
state of all joy and gladness, our Lord said unto me. Daughter, see thou not
these unhappy sinners and transgressors of my laws, on the one side what
joys they have lost, and on the other side what pains they have found? for
this cause have I showed these things to thee, because I will have thee to
return again into the world, to declare to my people their sins and
iniquities, and withal the great peril and pain, that hangs over them, if
they will not amend. When I heard, that I should return to the world again,
I was stricken with a marvelous great fear and horror. Whereupon our Lord, to
comfort me again, spoke thus sweetly unto me. Daughter, there are a great
number of sowles in the world, which I will have to be saved through thy
means: and that is the cause, why I send thee thither again. Wherefore go
thy way with a good will, and be of good comfort. From this time foreward my
will is, that thou shall change the order of thy life. Thou shall no more keep
within thy cell, but go abroad into the world to win sowles. Thou shall
bear my name before al sorts of men, high and low, clerks and secular. I
will bring thee before the bisshops and head prelates in my Church, to confownd
their pride. Be not afraid to confer with them in high points concerning the
salvation of sowles. For I will give thee a wit to conceive, and withal a mouth
to speak in such sort, that none shall be able to withstand thee. While our Lord
spoke these words to me, of a sudden my soul was restored to the body. The
which when I perceived, for very sorrow I wept three days and three nights,
and never ceased. And yet to this day, I can not possibly abstain from
weeping, when it comes to my mind, how I was deprived of that passing great
joy and felicity, and sent back again to this darcke prison of my body.
Thus much I thought good to signify to you, father, and to others also for
this end, that when you understand, what a blesful state of life, I have forgon
for a time (God knows how long) and that I have forgon the same by the
ordinance of God, for the weal and edifyng of souls, you should not marvel
hereafter, if you see, that I bear a great love to them, who have cost me so
dear, and that, to win them to God, I do alter the state of my life, and
converse with them more familiarly, then I have done hitherto. When doctor
Raimundus had heard thus much, he gave a great charge to as many as were
present of the brethren and sisters, that they should in no wise utter any
part of her talk, so long as she lived. For being a wise man he saw, that
wordlie persons (such as had not wholly and perfectly subjected all their
understanding to the power of Christ) were like to take more harm by it,
then good. And he saw then presently by experience, that some of her own
scholars, which had before that time heard and followed her doctrine, went
backward, because they were not able to apprehend the high mysteries, that she
uttered unto them. But after her death, fearing lest he should have offended
God, if he had concealed such great works and wonders, he committed all to
writing, for the benefit of the posterity. For further confirmation whereof, I
think it not amiss, to towch briefly a very notable thing, that it pleased
our Lord to work by her, while she was so separated from her body. At what
time this holy maid drew near to her death, to the seemyng of such as were
about her, there resorted unto her diverse and sundry of her spiritual
children, to see the manner of her passage: and with them many devout persons,
both men and women. By whom her Confessor doctor Thomas was also sent for,
to be present at her departure, and to help her (as the manner is) with the
prayers and Sacraments of holy Church. Who came speedily, and three other of
his brethren with him. When they saw, that she had given up the Ghost, they
lamented all for the loss of their dear mother: but above the rest one of the
religious brethren, whose name was brother John of Siena, sorowed so much, and
wept so vehemently, that he brake a vain in his breast; by reason whereof he
coughed and avoided great gobbettes of blood. Which was an occasion of double
sorrow to as many, as were there: for both they lamented the decease of the
holy virgin, which was already gone, and also the peril of that good man, who
with such pain was not like to continue long after. Whereupon doctor Thomas
her Confessor, being inwardly moved with compassion, said to that sick Friar
with a great faith and affiance in God. Brother John, you know that this holy
maid was of very great merit and estimation in the sight of almighty God for
her virtuous conversation. Wherefore take her hand and, put it to the place of
your body, where you feel your self aggrieued. And I doubt not but that you
shall find help and comfort. He did, as he was willed: and forthwith the
disease of his breast left him and, never came again so long as he lived.
There was present at all these doings, besides these before named, one of her
spiritual daughters called Alexa, who departed out of this wordle not long
after. There were also two other of the sisters of penance, who came to make
the body ready for the burial. One of them was named Catherine, which had
been her companion long time in religion: the other was her cosen, and was
called Pisa. These spiritual persons with many other, gave testimony for the
truth of all this matter: but above all others, Friar Ihon did not only
testify it in words, as other did, but also declared the manner of it, and
affirmed it constantly in all places wheresoever he became.

How she had a marvelous devotion and longyng after the blessed Sacrament: and
how she bare many reproaches and slanders for the same.

Chap. 30.
THis holy maid had such an earneste longinge after the blessed Sacrament of
our Lords body and blood, and received the same so often, that many of them,
that resorted to that Church, and saw her very often at the Altar to receive,
supposed that she had communicated daily. Which was an occasion of great
trouble both to her and to her Confessor, by certain indiscreet and ignorant
persons, who being puffed up with an opinion of knowledge, and withal
pretending some color of piety, said, that her often receiving was not to be
liked, because it would in time cause her to have the blessed Sacrament in
less reverence and estimation. Which vain and ignorant supposition her
Confessor answered very learnedly, alleging most certain and infallible
grounds, first out of the Acts of the Apostles, where it is written by S.
Luke, that the disciples of Christ, and such as were newly turned to the faith
by them, did continue daily in breaking of bread, that is, in receiving of the
blessed Sacrament: then also out of S. Denyse S. Paul's scholar, who declares
likewise in his book entitled Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, that in the primitive
Church, the faithful people did use to communicate every day: and last of all
out of the holy ghospel, where we are taught by our Savior him self to say
in our daily prayer: Give us this day our daily bread. Which bread may in
deed signify our bodily food and sustenance, but not only, nor principally:
for the bread, that we ought principally to seek at Gods hand every day, is
the bread of our soul, or rather (to speak truly) the bread of our soul and
body: Which is the body and blood of our Savior Christ, really and
substantially ministered unto the faithful people in the Church under the form
of bread in the holy Sacrament of the altar. But contrariwise for
confirmation of their opinion, they alleged to the holy maid a saying of S.
Augustine, whose words are these. To communicate daily, is a thing, which I
neither praise nor blame. Which fond allegatiton she answered her self very
pretily, saying. If it be so, said she, that S. Augustine will not blame me,
wherefore do you blame me? As who should say. If S. Augustine, who was a great
learned man, and knew how to direct his judgment by the rules of Gods word,
durst not take upon him to determine the matter, lest he should seem to set
him self a judge over other men's consciences: how dare you to judge of my
conscience, and to blame me for often receiving: considering that the thing,
being in it self indifferent, is made either very good or very euel,
according to the disposition of the person that receives: very good and
wholesome, if it be received worthily, very euel and pernicious, if it be
received unworthily? If S. Augustine had known, that it had been euel to
receive daily, he would not have said, that he did neither like nor dislike of
it, but would have said in plain terms, that he did vterly mislike it. How
much better were it for such rash iudgers of other men's consciences to harken
to S. Ambrose, who inuiteth the^ to receive daily with these words? Take this
bread, says he every day: because you baue need every day to be purged,
restored, and comforted. And the angelique doctor S. Thomas after a long
discourse had about this matter, concludes in the end, that such persons, as
find them selves to have a greater devotion and reverence to the blessed
Sacrament by their often receiving, may safely receive it often times. And
surely this increase of devotion and reverence was evidently seen in the holy
maid: in whom it was noted by diverse and sundry persons that conuersed with
her, but especially by her ghostly Father, who sat at the stern of her
conscience, that the oftener she comunicated, the more she increased in
humility, in holy fear, in fervor of devotion, in charity, in patience,
and in all other virtues. And when she might not communicate (as it happened
sometimes by reason of certain urgent and necessary lettes) she had a
certain fainting and languishing pain, not only in her soul but also
miraculously in her body, which was more grievous to her, then if she had been
sick of a burning ague or any other bodily infirmity. Which point could never
be persuaded to diverse of the religious persons, that lived in house with
her: who did, what in them lay, to hinder her from so often receiving; whereby
they put her to marvelous intolerable pains. But her ghostly father, who
knew in deed the state of her soul, condescended easily to her earnest and
holy demand, and was evermore very ready to minister the blessed Sacrament
unto her: because (being a wise and learned man) he understood that her desire
and longyng was of God. To whom when she came to require the blessed Sacrament
she was wont to speak very sweetly after this manner. Father, I am hungry. I
pray you for gods love give me the bread of life. In respect of the which
good mind and devotion toward the blessed Sacrament, Pope Gregory the nynth
made her a grant, that she might choose for her ghostly father what priest
she would, and that she might carry with her a portable altar, whether soever
she went: to the end that she might confess and receive, where and when she
would.

How our Savior Christ ministered the blessed Sacrament unto her with his own
holy hand.

Chap. 31.
ON a time doctor Raimundus making his abode in Siena, for certain business,
that he had there to do, came one morning to visit the holy maid, and fownd
her very sore pained with diverse and sundry diseases, but specially with a
great griping in the flank commonly called Iliaca passio. All the which pain
notwithstanding, after certain conference had between them concerning the
worthiness and excellency of the blessed Sacrament, she besought him, that she
might receive that morning. Whereunto he assented with a good will, and so went
to the Church to prepare him self to say mass. But her pains increased so
vehemently upon her, that she sent one of her sisters after him, to entreat
him to tarry a little while, hoping after a time to have some such release of
her pains, that she might be able to come to the Church. Where withal he was
well contented, and abode her leisure, till it was about noone. At what time
she fownd some ease, and came in deed to the Church to communicate. But before
she had signified so much to the father, certain of the sisters, which saw
that the time was far spent, and knew also, that her manner was after she had
received, to be ravished in spirit and so to continue for the space of three,
four, or five houers, came to her and persuaded with her, that she should
abstain from receiving that day, in consideration that the time was past, and
that it would be a great trouble to the brethren, who must attend so long to
shut the Church doors, when all was done. Which counsel she yealded unto with
great meekenes. But yet she had such an impatient desire to receive, that she
turned her self to our Lord after a ruthful manner, and said. O my dear Lord
and sweet comfort of all afflicted hearts, seeing it has pleased thee so
graciously to put this desire into my heart, I most humbly beseech thee, that it
may also please thee to perform the same by thy self, which can not be
performed by men without their great trouble and disquiet. Our Lord, who never
despises the desire of a good heart, heard the inward gronyng of his hand maid,
and gave her comfort, that he would accomplish her godly request not only
mercifully, but also meruelously. Whereupon she sent one of her sisters to
doctor Raimundus, to pray him to begin mass at his pleasure: for she might
not receive at his hand that day. With that he went to mass, supposing that
she had not ben in the Church, but at home in her chamber. And after sacring,
when the time was to break the holy Host: he thought to break it (according
to the manner and ordinance of holy Chuch into three parts. But behold,
contrary to his meaning and expectation he saw four parts. Of the which,
one part skipped from above the chalice, where he held it in his hand, and laid
it self down upon the corporal, to his seeming. Where he beheld it advisedly,
and afterward when he received, sought for it diligently, and so did he
likewise, when Mass was done, both on the corporal, and on the altar, and al
about beside the altar, and upon the ground, but could never find it. Which
put him in a great maze and perplexity of conscience. Whereupon he thought good
to take the advice of his priour: (who was accounted a very discrete and
godly man) and so in the mean time covered the altar, and gave a great
charge to the Sacristane to see, that none should come near the altar, til he
came again. Now, as he was going, in the way he met with the priour of the
Carthusians (his very frinde and familiar) who came to confer with the holy
maid of certain matters, and therefore prayed him, that he would bring him to
her speech. I beseech you, said doctor Raimundus, have a little patience, while
I go and speak two words with our Father priour, and I will return with all
possible speed, and bring you to her cell. Sir, said he, I may not tarry* for
this is (as you know) a solemn fasting day with us, and I must needs eat
this day with my brethren in the refectorie. The time is far spent, (as you
see) and I have well nigh three miles home. Wherefore I must desire you for
Gods love to dispatch me, as soon as you can. For I am moved in conscience to
talk with her of certain matters, when doctor Raimundus heard that, for
very charity he left his own business undone, and went with him toward the
holy maids chamber, supposing to have fownd her there. But when he came
thither and asked for her: the sisters answered, that she was gone to Church.
To Church, said he? when went she to Church? for sooth, said they, before
Mass: and there she has continued ever sense. With that he was much astoined,
and turned back again to the Church with the priour of the Carthusians, where
he fownd her in deed in a corner kneeling upon her knees, ravished in spirit
(as her manner was to be) and some other of the sisters with her. To whom he
spoke, and prayed them, that they would use such means as they might
conveniently, to bring her to her self again so soon as were possible: For
there was there with him a frind of his, that had a great desire to speak with
her, and yet might not tarry long. Now, when she was come to her self again,
doctor Raimundus took her aside, and in few words opened his own case to
her: that he might give place to his frind, whose urgent business required a
more speedy dispatch. When she hade said, she smyled on him after a
comfortable manner, and asked him, whether he had used such diligence, as was
requisite, in seeking that piece. Whereunto he answered, that he had sought it
with as great diligence, as was possible. If you have done so, said she, why
are you so careful? With that she smyled again, and went toward the priour
of the Charterhowse, to speak with him. In the mean time doctor Raimundus
remained somewhat comforted, but not fully satisfied: until he might know in
deed, what was become of it. So soon as she had done with the priour, and
satisfied him in all such demaundes, as he made unto her: she returned again
to doctor Raimundus: who, being very desiours to understand the truth of the
matter, began with her after this sort. Mother, said he, it is you (I trow)
that has taken away this piece of the holy Host. No for sooth, father, said
she: it was not I, but an other that took it away from you, and therefore take
no more care for it: for I assure you, you shall never find it. Then doctor
Raimundus prayed her, that she would declare to him the whole process of the
matter: which she did with a good will, to the honor of God, and to satisfy
his careful mind. Father, said she, be you no more careful for that piece of
the blessed Host. For I tell it to you, as to my ghostly father, that it was
brought to me, and I received it at the reverend hands of our most blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And, that you may understand the cause also, I
think it good to make yet a further declaration of the matter unto you.
Father, it is so, that I was this morning in purpose, and had withal a very
earnest desire to receive. But my sisters gave me counsel to the contrary:
bicawse my receiving was like to be troublesome to some of the brethren: who
(as they said) grutched somewhat at it: whereupon I thought with my self to
follow not mine own will, but their advise. But my desire was so great, that,
when I saw, that I could not receive at the hands of men without their great
trouble and disquet: I turned my self to God, and besought him in most humble
wise, that he would vouchsafe to help his poor handmaid. Our gracious Lord
heard my petition: and so forthwith appeered unto me, and ministered that
fourth part, that you speak of, to me with his own hands. wherefore good
Father, be you of good comfort, for you have lost nothing: and I have fownd
that whereby I remain meruelously well refresshed and satisfied. When doctor
Raimundus heard that, he was likewise fully satisfied: and so departed toward
his covent, praising and magnifying the infinite goodness of almighty God, who
fills the hungry with good things, and gives the peace of God, which
passes all understanding, to them that serve him in holiness and righteousness,
and keep them selves with a wary and fearful regard from all such things,
as, they think, may in any degree offend his divine majesty.

How her face did shine like an angel, while she was receiving the blessed
Sacrament: and of certain other strange signs*

Chap. 32.
ON a time doctor Raimundus returnyng from Auinion to Siena, went to visit
the holy maid: and entering into her lodging* about noone tide, fownd her
praying in her oratorie. (This thing happened upon S. Marckes day the
Evangelist.) When she saw him, she rose up after a civil manner, as it were to
welcome him, and said these words. O father, if you knew, how hungry my
soul is. Doctor Raimundus understood well, what she meant, and therefore made
her answer, that the time was far spent, and that he was him self so weerie
of his journey, that he could hardly dispose him self to say Mass that day.
With that she held her peace a little while: and soon after brake out again
and said; Father, I am very hungry. Then doctor Raimundus, to satisfy her
impatient desire (which, he knew, was of God) prepared him self to Mass, in
her own chapple not far from her lodging, which she had peculiar to her
self by special license from the popes holiness: when he had received the
blessed Sacrament him self, he made ready an Host, that he had there
consecrated, to minister to her also. And turnyng him self to her, to give her
the general absolution (as the manner of holy Church is) behold, he saw her
face transfigured, like the face of an Angel, all clear, lightsome, and
casting out beams of a marvelous brightness. With the which strange sight he
was so astoined, that he said in him self to almighty God. Surely Lord this
is not Caterines face: this is undoubtedly the face of thy dearly beloved
spowse. With that he turned him self again to the altar, and looking upon
the consecrated Host, said these words in his heart. Come, O Lord, to thy
spowse. And he had no sooner spoken those words in his mind, but that the
holy Host came of it self into his hands, and did as it were offer it self
to be carried to the mouth of his deer spowse. Thus much did doctor Raimundus
testify him self, who was a very grave, wise, and learned man. There were
also diverse other credible persons, that affirmed constantly, that, when this
holy maid did at diverse and sundry times receive the blessed Sacrament, they
might hear sensibly, how the holy Host made a noise in her mouth, as though it
had been a stone cast with great strength and violence. For confirmation whereof,
brother Barthelmewe (who was likewise a doctor of divinity and very godly
man) testified, that many times, when he ministered the blessed Sacrament unto
her, the holy Host departed from his fingers after a violent manner, and so
entered into the mouth of the holy maid.

How almighty God permitted the deuel to have power over her body: and how
she overcame all with great patience.

Chap. 33.
THe malice, that the damned sprites bare to this holy virgin, was very
great, and the battles that they made continually against her to remove her
from her constancy and vow of virginity, were surely very fierce and cruel.
All the which she overcame by the grace of God, and triumphed over all their
malice and wilines, as we have in part touched before: but as our Lord would
not suffer them to have any power over her soul (which could not be without
sin) so did he permit them to vex her body and put it to great pain, for
her further increase of merit and higher crown. In so much that some times
they threw her into the fire, sometimes they cast her down headlong from her
horse: and one time, when doctor Raimundus her Confessor with diverse other
was present, they hurled her down in such sort, that both she and her horse
were over the head and ears in the myer. Whereat she smyled pleasantly, and
said to her company. Be not afraid: for this is the work of Malatasca. And
this happened most commonly unto her, when she had done some special work,
that tended to the edifying of souls. As she declares very well her self in
her hundredth and sixth epistle: where, after that she had declared, what
intolerable pains she suffered (which were in deed so vehement, that for very
pain she raught at her garments, and look how much she latched with her
hand, so much she rent away:) and how the next day being to write letters to
the Popes holiness and to three Cardinals, when she had ended her letler to the
Pope, she was able to write no more, by reason of the violent pains, that came
upon her, she writes these words. And so standing still a little while, there
began a terror of deuels, which was done in such sort, that they set me quite
besides my self, raging like mad dogs against me, as though I seely worm
had been the occasion of taking out of their hands that, which they had holden
long time in the holy Church. And this terror (together with the pain of my
body) was so great, that I had thought to have gone from my study, and to get
me to the chapel, as though my study, had been the occasion of my pains* but
suddenly I was thrown down. And being thrown down, it seemed to me, that my
soul was departed from my body: howbeit not so, as, when it was departed in
deed: for then my soul did taste the felicity of the immortal spirits, and
did receive that most sovereign blessedness with them. But now it seemed as a
thing reserved; though it seemed not to be in my body: but I saw my body, as
though it had been an other. These be the very words, that she writes in that
epistle: in the which she describes certain new battles made against her
by those damned sprites, far greater and more terrible, then ever she
sustained at any other time. And in the next epistle she declares, how she
was very sore beaten and tormented by them, because she prayed with a great
zeal for the Catholic Church, where she says moreover, that the more she
suffered in her body, the greater was her love toward the Church, and the
more she desired to see the same reformed.

How she delivered a certain young maid, that was possessed of a wicked sprite.

Chap. 34.
AS it was well known to diverse and sundry persons, that this holy maid
was meruelously vexed and put to intolerable pains by the malice of wicked
sprites: so it pleased God to show likewise to the wordle, that he had
granted her (as it were by special privilege) authority and jurisdiction over
the said sprites, to command, bynd, and cast them out at her pleasure, to the
great comfort of the true and humble servants of God, and withal to the utter
confusion of those proud sprites, that set them selves up against God and his
servants: as may appear evidently by these examples here ensewing. There was
in the city of Siena a certain notarie called master Michael, who, when he
was well stricken in years, determined with the consent of his wife, to forsake
the wordle, and to give him self to a more streigth order of life. He
determined also to dedicate two of his daughters to the service of God in a
monastery founded in the name and honor of S. John Baptist, in the same
city. Where when they had continued a certain time, one of the daughters,
whose name was Laurentia (a child of eight years old) was by the secret
judgment of God posessed with a wicked sprit; by reason whereof the whole
monastery was much disquieted. Whereupon by common consent they sent for her
father, and gave him his daughter again. After that this child was thus taken
out of the monastery, the wicked sprite uttered many wonderful things by her
mouth, and answered to many darcke and hard questions. And (which was most
strange) he spoke commonly in the latin tongue. He disclosed also many secret
vices of diverse and sundry persons, to their great reproach and slander.
Which thing turned the father and mother, and others also of their kindred and
acquentance to great heaviness: who left no mean unsought, whereby, they
thought, they might ease the child. Among other things, wherein those devout
folks hoped in time to find help and comfort, one special mean was the
relics of Saints kept in many places in the city: unto the which places
they resorted daily with all diligence and namely to S. Ambrose tomb, (who had been in his life time a Friar preacher) to whom almighty God had granted a
singular grace in casting out deuels from such as were possessed: in so much
that his cope or scapular, which were there kept, being laid upon them, that
were vexed with unclean sprites, did very commonly chase them away. Wherefore
they brought the child thither and laid her down upon the tomb, and cast the
said clothes over her. And the father and mother in the mean time set them
selves earnestly to prayer, beseeching our Lord with great instance, that it
would please him, at the contemplation of that holy Saint, to take mercy on
their child. But their prayer was not heard as then. Which thing happened unto
them, not for any sin, that they committed, but because it was otherwise
disposed by the provident wisdom of God: who (vndoubtely) put it in the
hearts of certain of their frindes, to give them counsel, that they should
repraire to the holy maid for the relief of their child. Which counsel they
followed in deed, and first sent unto her, praying her in most earnest manner,
that she would vouchsafe to do her best to help their daughter: whereunto she
made answer, that she had enough to do with the wicked sprites, that did from
time to time molest and trouble her self: and therefore prayed them, that they
would hold her excused. The parents, whose hearts were very heavy and
careful for the innocent child, would not take that excuse, but took their
daughter, and went to her to her lodging; And came to the house so suddenly,
that she could not possibly escape by the door, but that they must needs have
a sight of her. The which when she saw she fownd the means to conueie her
self out by a window, and so hid her self for that time in such sort, that
they could not find her. At the last, when they had tried all ways, and saw,
that they could by no means come to her speech (for she had given charge to as
many, as were about her, that none should move her in that matter) they
resolved to go to doct: Thomas her ghostly father, and to entreat him, that,
seeing the case was so lamentable, and she so unwilling to deal in it, he
would command her in the virtue of her obedience to keep the child with her
for a time. Doctor Thomas was much moved with their pitiful suit, and therefore
put them in comfort, that he would do for his part, what was possible to be
done. But because he knew well, that if he spoke to her him self, she would
of humility make one excuse or other in such sort, that he should not be able
to move her any further: he devised this wyle. He awaited a time late in the
euenyng, when he knew, that the holy maid was abroad: and then took the
child, that was possessed, and put her into a chamber, whether he knew, she
would come that night: leaving word with the rest of the sisters, that they
should tell her, when she came home, that he commanded her in the virtue of
her obedience, to suffer that child to remain there with her all that night
until the next morrow. And so he went his way, and left the child with
them. Anon after, when she came home and espied the child in her chamber, she
asked the sisters, who had brought that child thither. They made her answer
and said, that doctor Thomas her confessor had left the child there. And
they declared furthermore, that he had willed her in the virtue of her
obedience, to take the charge of the child till the next day. When she heard
that, she made no more a do: but set her self forthwith to prayer, and
caused the child to kneel down and pray with her. And so they continued
together all that night, encountering and fighting against the wicked sprite,
until at the length a little before day he was constreined by the force of her
faithful prayer to depart, and to leave the innocent child without doing any
harm to her body. The which thing when one of the sisters caled Alexia
perceived, she ran to doctor Thomas, and told him, that the child was
delivered. Doct: Thomas likewise being very glad of that ioiful news, went to
the father and mother; and brought them with him to the holy maids chamber.
Where, when they saw the child delivered in deed, they wept for joy, and
glorified almighty God, that had given such power to his humble spowse. But
the holy maid knew, that the wicked sprite had not quite forsaken the child:
and therefore entreated the father and mother, that she might remain there
with her a little time, which they granted with a good will. Then she began to
instruct the child, and exhorted her to give her self to continual prayer. And
withal she gave her a great charge, that she should in no wise depart out of
the house, until her father and mother came thither again to fetch her home.
Which points the child observed very well. Now it chanced in this mean
time, that the holy maid had occasion to go home to her own house about some
necessary business: (for all this was done, not in her own house, but in the
house of one of the sisters called Alexia: of whom mention is made before) and
there to continue all that day: for the which time she left the child with a
servant, and gave her a great charge withal. When she had passed over the
whole day in her own house about such necessary businesses, as she had there
to do, and night was come: she willed Alexia to give her her ma^tel: for she
would return with her to her house. To that Alexia made answer and said, that
it was very late, and that it would be euel thought of, if women (esp
religious persons) should be seen abroad at that time of the night. O Alexia,
said she; we must needs go, for that hellish wolf is about to take my little
lamb away from me again. And with that they went both together, and found
the child in deed very strangely altered, her face all red, and her wits
utterly distracted. When the holy maid saw that, she brak out with great
indignation, into these words. Ah thou foul feend of hell, how durst thou
thus to enter again upon this poor innocent? I trust in the great goodness of
my dear Lord and Savior, that thou shall now be cast out in such sort, that
thou shall never dare to enter again. And with that she took the child with
her into her chamber, where she continued for a certain time in prayer. Which
done, she brought out the child again fully delivered of that wicked sprite:
and willed that other sister, that was there with her, to take the child and
lay her down upon the bed, that she might rest a while. And the next morrow
she sent for the father and mother: to whom she spoke after this manner. Take
your child home with you on Gods name, for from this day foreward she shall
never be troubled more with that wicked sprite. They took their child with
glad hearts, and lead her to the monastery from whence she came: where she
lived a very blessed life under that holy rule and discipline, and was never
molested more to her dying day. Which thing was so joyous to master Michael
her father, that he could never tell it afterward, but that he wept for joy.
And he honored the holy maid in his heart, as if she had been an Angel of God.
Doctor Raimundus, being certified of this great miracle by the faithful report
of doctor Thomas, Alexia, and of the father and mother of the child, went him
self to the holy maid, and desired her, that she would inform him
particularly of the matter. But specially he was desirous to know the cause,
why the thing was not wrought by the virtue of some holy relics (which the
father and mother sought so diligently unto) or else exorcismes, as it is wont
to be. Whereunto she made answer, that it was a very rough and stubborn
sprite, so obstinatly bent, that at the first time she was feign to continue in
battle against him from the euenyng til the fourth houer of the night, before
she could expel him; And at the length, when he saw, that he must needs
depart; (being indeed thereunto constreined by the force of her fervent prayer,
and by virtue of the charge that she gave him in Gods be half) he said these
words to her. If I must needs depart out of this child, I will enter into
thee Whereunto she made answer and said; If it be Gods pleasure (without whose
license I am well assured, thou may do nothing) our Lord forbid, that I
should be against his holy will in any thing. The which words, proceeding of
a very humble and and resigned spirit, so struck the proud feend, that he
lost all the strenght, that he had before against the innocent child. Howbeit
in passing out, he rested a while in the chides throat: which was perceived by
a great swelling, that he made in that place. Which thing the holy maid
seeing, she made the sign of the Cross over the childs throat: by virtue
whereof the wicked sprite was utterly dispossessed in such sort, that he might
never return, to disquiet the child again.

How she delivered a woman that was possessed of a wicked sprite.

Chap. 35.
ON a time, while this holy maid was at a certain castle or town called
Rocka within the territory of Siena, with a worshipful lady, whose name was
Madam Bianchina, it happened, that a woman of the same castle was suddenly
taken and miserably tormented with a wicked sprite. The which piteful sight
when Madame Bianchina saw, she was so moved with compassion, that she thought
to become an earnest suter to the holy maid for her delivery. But, because
she understood, that such suits were commonly very unpleasant to the holy
maid (who of a great humility showed her self evermore very loath to meddle
in any such matter) she asked counsel of certain of the religious sisters,
that were there with the holy maid: whose advise was, that the woman should be
brought to her presence suddenly and unawares to her: that the sight of the
piteful creature might move her to compassion. The which advise seemed very
good, and according to the same the woman was in deed on a day brought in
before the holy maid, in a place, where she happened to be, making a loue-daie
between two, that were fallen out. When she saw the wretched woman, and saw
withal, that she could by no means avoid: she turned to the lady Bianchina,
and said. Ah madame, God forgive you. Wot you, what you have done? know you
not, that I have trouble enough by these wicked sprites, that do from time to
time molest mine own person? wherefore then do you increase my trouble, in
presenting others before me, that are vexed with these foul feendes? With that
she turned to the woman, that was possessed, and said to the wicked sprite.
Thou malicious enemy of mankind, I charge thee, lay down thy head here in
this man's lap, and abide there, till I come again. She had no sooner spoken
those words, but that the woman, that was vexed, laid down her head in a
certain Anchorites lap, that was there by, who was called Sanctus, and never
removed till she came again. In this mean time, while the holy maid was gone
out, to make up a full peace between two men of war, that were at variance
(whose dwelling was not far from that place:) the sprite cried out mightily
by the mouth of that miserable woman, leanyng her head in the Anchorites lap,
and said. Why do ye hold me here? I pray you, let me go for, I am very
hard houlden. They that stood thereby, made answer, and said to him again.
And why do thou not go thy way? who holds thee? Is not the door open?
Oh, said he, that cursed woman has bound me here. She holds me, that I may
not depart. What woman, said they? That, that cursed woman, said he: and would
not, or peradventure could not name her: but after a raging manner cried out,
that cursed creature, that cursed woman, mine enemy. Then the Anchorite asked
him, whether he took her for his great enemy, or no. Yea, said he, the
greatest, that I have this day in the wordle. Then those that were there
present, being much disquieted with his outrageous crying, said to him. Hold
thy peace, Caterine comes: (meaning thereby to put him in fear, and so to
cause him to cease his crying.) No, no, said he, she comes not yet. She is in
such a place (where she was in deed) They asked him, what she did there: what
does she, said he? She is now doing of a thing (as she is at all times) wherein
I take small pleasure. And with that he cried out again very sore, and said.
Ah, why am I thus holden here? And it was evidently seen, that he never moved
from that place, where the holy maid charged him to abide, till her coming
again. At the last he said, Now is that, that cursed woman coming. They
demanded of him where she was. She is now, said he, in such a place. And now
she is gone from thence, and goes toward such a place. And so declared from
time to time, how she passed from place to place until at the length, when she
was come to the gate of the house, where they were, he said. Now she is come.
When she was entered into the house and began to make toward the chamber,
wherein they abode her return: he cried out with a loud voice, and said. Ah,
why hold ye me here by force? The holy maid made answer, and said; Arise
wretch, and get thee hence, and leave this creature of God: and from this houer
foreward see that thou be never so hardy, as once to molest her again. And
with that it was seen, that the wiked feend forsook all the other parts of
that woman's body, and gathered him self into her throat: where he made such
an horible swelling, that it moved as many as were present, to great
compassion. Then the holy maid made the sign of the Cross over the place
that was swolen, and forthwith he went his way and left the woman safe and
sound, in the presence of a great many, that were there, and saw this evident
miracle with their eyes. But because the poor woman had been sore travailed by
the feend, the holy maid willed the^ to bring her home to her house, that she
might rest a while and take some sustena^ce And so they did. Now when she was
fully come to her self again, and knew the place and persons, that were
about her: she had great marvel, and asked some of her acqueintance, what she
did there, and how she came thither. They made her answer, and declared unto
her, in what case she had been, and what had been done by the holy maid about
her delivery. When she heard that, she was astoined: and said, that in truth
she could remember no such thing. Only this she confessed, that her body was
very sore shaken and bruised, as if it had been beaten with a cluble. Then she
turned her self after a very humble manner toward the holy maid, and with
most hearty thanks acknowledged the great benefit, that she had there
received at Gods hand through her means. Of this evident miracle were
witnesses, the lady Bianchina, that holy Anchorite, in whose lap it was
done, and other more, to the number of thirty persons. Many other miracles
she wrought of like sort in casting out of deuels, in the presence of diverse
and sundry credible persons, the which honor and triumph over the enemy, it
pleased out Lord to give her in the sight of the wordle, because she had at all
times so valiantly resisted and overthrown him in her own person, when
soever he moved her by any means, either to pride of mind or uncleanness of
body.

THE THIRD PART.
How the holy maid was endued with the spirit of prophecy, and foretold,
what calamities should happen to the Church, and likewise, how it should be
restored again.

Chap. 1.
AMONG many goodly gifts and graces, with the which this holy Virgin was
endued, one was the spirit of prophecy: which was in her so strange and
singular, that she not only foresawe the things, that were to come, so
perfectely, as if they had been present, but also persed into the very secrets
of men's hearts, and told them, what they thought. Which thing caused the wordle
to have her in such admiration, that, when she spoke to them of matters
concerning their souls health, they heard her words with greater attention
and reverence. About the year of our Lord. 1375. at what time Gregory the
eleventh was Pope, many cities and territories in Italy rebelled against the
Sea Apostolic, withdrawing them selves and their yearly reuenwes from the
Church of Rome. Which revolt all good men took very heavily, and namely
Doctoure Raimundus; whose grief was so great, that he went of purpose to Pisa
(where the holy maid chanced to be at that time) to power out his heart before
her. As he was declaring to her the lamentable state of things abroad with
sorrowful words and many tears: she showed likewise in countenance, that she
had great compassion of a number of souls, that were like to perish through
that synful rebellion. But, when he had said, she made him answer after this
manner. Father, said she, begin not to weep so soon: for all this is but
honye and milk in comparison of that, that shall come hereafter. What, said
he? Think you, that I shall ever have greater cause to sorrow, then I have at
this present, seeing (as I now see) the people so wickedly bent, that they are
not afraid to set them selves against our holy mother the Church, and to make
light of her curse and excommunication? What remains now, but only that they
do utterly deny the faith of Christ? To that the holy maid made answer and
said. Father, all that ye see hitherto, is done by the common lay people: but
you shall see hereafter an other manner of rebellion, then this is, contrived
and practiced by the clergy. When Doctor Raimundus heard that, he was
meruelously astonished for a time. At the length he asked her, whether she
thought it a thing possible, that the clergy should rebel against the Church.
Yea, said she, it is possible: and you shall see it. For, when our holy Father
the Pope shall go about to reform their manners, then shall they set them
selves up against him, and make a schism in the Church. Whereof shall arise
great slander and offense to all good men. And therefore I give you warning
before, that you arm your self with patience: for you shall see all this.
Doctor Raimundus at that time mistook the holy maids words, supposing,
that she had meant, that all these things should have come to pass then
presently in Pope Gregory's days. And therefore, when he saw, that Pope
Gregory was dead, he thought no more of her words: because he imagined, that
the term of her prophecy had been expired. But afterward in the time of Pope
Vrbanus the sixte, when he saw and felt also that wicked rebellion, that was
raised against him by the proud prelates of the Church: he called to mind,
what the holy maid had said unto him before: and thought every hour a day,
until he might have some opportunity to confer with her concerning the state
of those present troubles. Which by the disposition of almighty God came to
pass, even as he desired; for in that fury of rebellion and schism the holy
maid was sent for to Rome, by commandment of the Popes holiness: where Doctor
Raimundus repaired unto her, and put her in mind of such communication, as had
passed between them long time before in Pisa. I remember well, said she, that
such words I spoke to you at that time: which now you see verified. And now I
will give you to understand thus much more. Like as I said to you then, that
the rebellion of that time was but milk and honey in comparison of this, that
you see now: even so I tell you now, that these present troubles are but a
childs game, in comparison of those horrible calamities, that are to come. And
with that she began to recite diverse and sundry plagues, which, she foresawe,
should fall upon many parts of the wordle, and namely upon the Kingdom of
Sicilia and countries there about. The which prophecy was in deed fulfilled
soon after in the time of Queen Ione and of her successor* with such
unwonted scourges, calamities, and almost utter subversion, not only of the
Kingdom of Sicilia, but also of all other Kingdoms, Territories, and Cities,
lying near unto it, that Doctor Raimundus and as many as lived and saw
afterward the horrible state of that bloody time, confessed, that the like
had not ben often seen in those parts of the wordle before. When Doctor
Raimundus had heard thus much concerning the scourges and afflictions, that
were toward the Church (of the which, some he saw then presently verified,
and therefore doubted nothing of the rest) he asked the holy maid, whether
after all these storms there were not like to come a calm among the people of
God. Whereunto she made answer after this manner. Father, said she, almighty
God has determined thus to purge his Church by calamities and tribulations.
The which when he has once done, he will raise up a new spirit in his chosen
servants, and send such godly Pastors and Curates over his flock, that my
heart reioyseth within my body to think upon that goodlye reformation, that
shall ensue in all states of men. And as the Church of Christ seems now
poor, deformed, and naked; so shall it then be seen in a very glorious and
beautiful state, clad with the seemly ornaments of virtue and godliness. The
good shall joy to see the Church of God in such a flourishing peace: and the
euel shall be allured, by the sweet savor of their virtuous conversation, to
follow them in the patthes of Gods holy commandementes. Therefore, father,
thank our Lord, who of his gracious goodness voutchsafeth, after rain and
te^pestes to send fair wether. Thus much spoke the holy maid touching the
state of the Church to Doctor Raimundus; whom she left in a great perplexity
between sorrow and joy: very sorrowful, in consideration of the great
scourges, that he saw, were to come upon the people of God: and contrariwise
very joyful, in regard of that great good, which, he was likewise assured,
should ensue of the same.

How the holy maid saw the secret thoughts of men's hearts: and how she used
that gift to the benefit of diverse and sundry persons.

Chap. 2.
AS this holy maid, being directed by the infallible light of Gods holy
Spirit, entered into the innermost closet of his Divine providence, and there
saw, what order was taken for things to come in the world: so likewise she
was able by the direction of the same light, to enter into the most secret
corners of men's hearts, and there to take a vewe of their hidden thoughts and
designementes. Whereof Doctor Raimundus gave a faithful testimony in him
self, saying and constantly affirming, that on a time, while he was in
company with the holy maid, his mind was occupied about certain thoughts,
that were unpleasant to God. Which thing she perceiving, gave him warning, that
he should withdraw his mind from such thoughts, and occupy him self about
some other matters. He (as a man) began to excuse him self with a lie, and
said, that he had no such thing in his mind. O good Father (said she after a
very humble manner) wherefore say you so? Will you deny me that, which I see
more clearly, then you see it your self? And with that she took occasion
both to tell him precisely, what he thought at that time, and withal to give
him a good lesson, how he should avoid the like thoughts an other time.
Doctor Raimundus confessed afterward to the glory of God, (though in deed
it founded in some degree to his own reproach in the wordle) that the like
happened between them at diverse and sundry times. There was also in the
city of Siena a worshipful knight called Sir Nicolas Sauacines, a man of great
valor in his days and well-beloved of all men. When this Sir Nicolas had spent
a great part of his life abroad in the wars of foraine contreis, at the
length in his age he returned home to his own country and house: where he
lived rechlesly in pastimes and pleasures, deceiving him self (as the manner of
such men is) with this false ground, that he should have time enough to do
penance before his end. His wife and frindes, being virtuous folks them
selves, and therefore sorry to see him in such case, persuaded with him
earnestly, that he would go to Confession, and do penance for his foremer
life. But whatsoever they said to him in that behalf, he gave but a deaffe
ear to their words. Then it came into their mind (undoubtedly by the secret
instincte of almighty God, who desires not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he be turned and live) that they should move him to go to the holy
maid, whose name was at that time very famous over all the city for many
virtues, and namely for a singular grace, that she had, in dealing with those
men, that were hard hearted and obstinately set to continue in their synful
state of life. And so with this mind they went to him, and exhorted him very
effectually, that he would now in his later days look more careully to his
souls health, and in regard of that hey gave him counsel, that he should
resort at his convenient leisure to the holy maid, and talk with her: and
they doubted not, but that her good talk and prayers should do him much good.
When the knight heard them name the holy maid: tush, said he, think you, that
I have nothing else to do, but to go and talk with her? What good is she able
to do me? Then his wife (who was a good virtuous woman and well acqueinted
with the holy maid) went to her, and with great lamentation opened to her,
what had been done by her self and by her frindes for the conversion of her
husband: whose heart notwithstanding was so hardened, that they could do him
no good. And therefore she besought the holy maid to pray to God for her
husband: that his heart might be mollified and made apt to receive the grace of
God. The holy maid promised the lady, that she would have her husband in
remembrance: and so she had. Soon after, the holy maid appeered to the knight
in his sleep, and gave him warning, that, if he minded to escape everlasting
damnation, he should give ear to his wives counsel touching his souls health.
So soon as he was awaked, he told his wife, what had happened in his sleep:
and he told her furthermore, that he would go and talk with the holy maid,
to know, whether it were she, that had so appeered to him, or no. His wife was
very glad of that, and went to the holy maid before, to thank her for her
charity, and to entreat her, that she would appoint a time and place, where
her husband might come and speak with her. Which she did with a good will: and
he came, and was by her good exhortations so thoroughly turned in heart, that he
promised to go out of hand to Doctor Thomas her ghostly Father, and to him
to confess his sins. And so he did. Now, when he had done, he came to her
again in the Church, where she was, and told her, that he had confessed his
sins, and taken penance for the same. Sir, said she, you have done very
well: and shall by the grace of God do better hereafter. But I pray you, tell
me. Have you confessed all your sins? Yea, said he, all that came to my mind.
Anon after she asked him again, whether he had made a full and perfect
confession of all his sins. And ever he made answer, that he had done it. At
the length, she willed him to examine his conscience with good diligence, and
to think advisedly, whether he had not left out some sin, that was
committed many years before. And still he said, that to his remembrance he
had left no one sin unconfessed. With that she took him a side, and put him
in mind of a very grievous sin, which he had committed many years before
in Apulia: which sin was also so secretly done, that she could never have
come to the knowledge of it, unless it had been reveled unto her by God. When
the knight heard that, he was meruelously astonished: and acknowledging him self
in deed gyltie, he went without any longer delaie to her ghostly father, and
made his confession of that sin particularly. And from that day forewarde he
bare such a reverence and love to the holy maid, that he could never speak
enough of her virtue and holiness. In so much that he would say of her, as the
woman of Samaria said of our Savior Christ. Come and see a holy virgin, that
has told me all that I have done. Is not she (think you) a great prophetisse?
This knight, after that he was thus turned by the holy maid, lived evermore in
awe of her, even as a child does of his master, and was wholly directed by her
in all things until his dying day (which was within one year after.) And so
he lived a godly life, and died in the state of grace.

How the holy maid delivered Doctor Thomas her Confessor, and an other Friar
that iourneyed with him, from being murdered in the way.

Chap. 3.
ON a time Doctor Thomas the holy maids Confessor, and an other Friar
called brother George Naddi Doctor in Divinity likewise went on horse back
together toward Mount Politan to visit Doctor Raimundus, who was at that
time there, Father Confessor over a Monastery of Nuns. These two religious
persons, being on the way, chanced to be espied by a number of thieves, that
were drincking in a tavern, where they should pass. Of the which there arose
from the table to the number of ten or twelve, which prevented these Friars, in
a place, whether, they knew, they must needs come, and there setting upon
them very fiercely, made them to alight from their horses. And when they had
spoiled them almost of all their clothes, and of whatsoever they had about them
besides; they lead them toward a darcke thicket, that was there by, mynding
there to have murdered them, and so to have bestowed their bodies in that
unhaunted place, that their fact should never be espied. When Doctor Thomas
perceived (partly by their suspicious manner, and partly by some words, that
they cast out) what their meaning was: being in a great agony, he cast up his
heart to God and to the holy maid, and said these words secretly to him self
with great devotion. O dear Catherine, Gods devout servant and spowse, help
us now in this our great distress. He had scantly spoken those words in his
heart, but that one of the thieves, that was before in mind to have killed them,
being quite altered from that cruel purpose, spoke after this manner to his
fellows. Sirs, what mean we, to she we such cruelty to these good men, that
neued did us harm? Surely it is a great sin. Let them go a Gods name. We
may trust them well enough: they will never discrie us. At these words, the
rest being likewise touched as it were, with a certain remorse of conscience,
restored unto them again their horses, clothes, and all other things (only a
little money excepted) and sent them away without any further hurt. Now, the
thing that is most to be noted in this story, is this. At that very time,
when Doctor Thomas spoke those words in his heart, the holy maid, being then
in Siena, said to one of the sisters these words. Doctor Thomas calls me.
And sure I am, that he is in great distress, where soever he is. And therefore
let us pray to God for him. And with that she set her self to prayer: by
virtue whereof she overcame and altered the minds of those wicked thieves,
that would have murdered him: as the effect declared afterward.

How she prophesied long time before of the conversion of a gentleman called
Francis of Malauolt.

Chap. 4.
THere was in the city of Siena a gentleman called Francis of Malauolt,
worshipfully borne, but youthfully given. And though he had a wife, yet could
he not keep at home, but would be oftentimes abroad. Which thing grieved all
his frindes, and especially one man, that kept him company most commonly: who
being a virtuous man, for very entier love, that he bare unto him, and also
for compassion, that he had in his heart, to see his frind to live in such a
damnable state, exhorted him, that he would go one day with him, and hear
the holy maid. The young gentleman was well content to go with him, and to
hear her speak. And resorting unto her at diverse and sundry times, he was
then presently much stirred to compunction by her godly exhortations, and
determined with him self to leave his synful life: but within a few days
after he fell to it again. The which thing the holy maid perceived well, and
had great pity on his weakness, and therefore prayed to God earnestly for him:
and on a day, when the young man came after his accustomed manner to hear her
exhortation, she spoke these words to him with great fervor, and veheme^cy of
spirit. Son said she, thou come often to me: but afterward thou farest
like a wild byrd, and fliest away from me to thy old hauntes. But one thing I
tell thee? I shall once (by Gods grace) lay such a yoke on thy neck, that
thou shall not fly from me any more, as thou do now. The young gentleman
took good heed to her words, (and so did many more, that were present:) but
yet he saw them not verified, so long as she lived. And for a time also, after
that she was passed out of this wordle, he gave him self again to his wonted
licentiousnes and vicious manner of life. And so much the more freely, because
he had none then to restreine him, as he was wont to have of her before. But as
the holy maid was an earnest intercessour for that young man, while she dwelt
here on the earth: so was she also a much more diligent sollicitour in his
cause before God, when she was in heaven: as the end declared. Not long after
the decease of this holy maid, it chanced, that the young man's wife, and that
dear frind, that loved him so intierly, and in whom he reposed a very
special trust, died also. The departure and lack of which two he took so
deeply (because he seemed, as a man abandoned and left alone in the wordle)
that he willingly forsook all the vain joys and pleasures of the wordle, and
put his head into the holy yoke of religion: in the which discipline he lived
and died not without a very great opinion of virtue and holiness. And
whenever he happened in his life time to talk to others of his dissolute
life in the world, and of his conversion and entering into religion, he would
confess, that, whatsoever grace he had, he had to thank God, from whom all
goodness proceeds, and the holy maid, by whose effectual prayer, he
acknowledged, he was won from the wordle, to God.

How the holy maid made an exhortation to the Carthusian Monckes, in the which
by the spirit of prophecy she touched the most secret defectes of diverse and
sundry of them very particularly.

Chap. 5.
THere was besides the city of Pisa in an Island a covent of Carthusians, the
Priour whereof was called Don Bartilmewe of Rauenna. This Priour, being a good
religious man, and desirous to train up his covent in all perfection of
spiritual life, hearing of the virtue and holiness of this holy maid, and what
a singular grace she had in moving men's hearts with her godly exhortations,
besought Doctor Raimundus, that he would be a mean to her, and entreat her to
come one day to his house, to give some spiritual lesson to his brethren. The
holy maid was content, at the request of Doctor Raimundus, to go with him
and certain other religious persons to the place. When she was come, the
Priour ordained for her and for her sisters, that came with her, a convenient
lodging without the monastery: the men he took into his cloister with him
self. The next morning he came with his whole covent to the holy maids
lodging, and besought her very earnestly, that she would voutchsafe to say
some thing, whereby both he and his brethren might be edified. She of humility
refused a great while, and said, that it was more meet for her being a woman
to be instructed by them, then to take upon her to instruct them. But at the
length, being overcome with their importunity, she spoke, as it pleased God to
put in her heart. And specially she took occasion to touch a number of sleites
and illusions, which the ghostly enemy is wont to use, to deceive and
entrappe those spiritual persons, that give them selves to solitary life.
And, when she had briefly and plainly declared the tentations, she did with
the life briefnes and plainenes teach them, against every particular te^tation
a particular remedy. And these things she uttered so orderly and with such
apt terms, that they were all astonished to hear her. When she had made an
end, the Priour turned him self to Doctor Raimundus, and said these words.
Thus many years have I heard the confessions of these my brethren: as the
manner of our religion requires, whereby you may presume, that I do know the
state of every man. And I say to you, that, if this holy maid had heard
their confessions, as I have done, she could not have spoken more to the
purpose, and more to the profit and edifying of every one of them, then she
has done. Whereby we may clearly see, that she is undoubtedly a great
prophetess, and that the holy spirit of God speaks in her.

What a singular grace the holy maid had, not only in seeing the state of
their souls, that were present with her, but also in discerning the qualities
and conditions of them, that were far from her and in strange countries: with
certain other points of like sort, worthy to be noted.

Chap. 6.
Many devout persons, resorting unto the holy maid at times for spiritual
comfort, did use to kneel down before her, and to do greater reverence to
her, then was usually done to other religious persons. The which thing because
she did not refuse, some that were present, took offense and murmured,
ymagining with them selves, that she had been vainglorious, and that she had
taken pleasure in such courtesies. Doctor Raimundus, to take away this
occasion of offense, went to the holy maid, and told her, what was conceived
of her. To whom she made answer in this sort; Father, said she, our Lord
knows, that I am so thoroughly occupied in vewing the secret qualities of the
souls of them, that resort to me, that I take little heed to the outward
gestures of their bodies. And as she saw the secret disposition of souls, so
did she likewise take either passing great delight in them, if they were
virtuously disposed, or very great grief and bothsomenes toward them, if
she saw them given to vice and uncleanness. On a time, while the holy maid was
talking with Pope Gregory concerning the state of the Church (where Doctor
Raimundus was used for an interpretour between them: because the Pope
understood not the Italian tongue, and she spoke no latin) among other things
she lamented her very much of the court of Rome, and said, that where of
reason there ought to be a most pleasant paradyse of virtue and holiness, there
she found a most loathsome syncke of all stinking vice and uncleanness. The
Pope, being somewhat moved with those words, asked of Doctor Raimundus, how
long it was, sense she was first acqueinted with the court of Rome. And
understanding, that it was but a few days, he asked her, how she came to have
such knowledge of the manners of the court in so few days. With that she
raised her self up with a certain comely boldness (whereas before she held
down her head) and said these words to the Pope. To the honor of almighty
God I dare well say thus much, that I had a more perfect sent of the horrible
stench of the sins, that are committed in the court of Rome, when I lived at
home in mine own country, where I was borne, then they have them selves, that
do commit such sins every day. When the Pope heard these words, he held
his peace, and wondered much at the strangenes of her answer. But Doctor
Raimundus above all other was meruelously astonished, seeing her to speak in the
presence of so great a Prelate, as that Pope was, with such an unwonted boldness
and authority. It happened often times (as Doctor Raimundus and diverse other
credible persons reported) that when she came with them into places, where
neither she nor they had ever ben before, there resorted unto her many men and
women, that seemed by their apparel, words, and outward behavior, very
honest and godly folks: but were in deed given to some unclean vice. Which
thing she perceived by and by, and therefore would in no wise be brought to
speak with them of heavenly matters (as they required) nor so much as to
turn her face toward them. And if she saw, that they tarried over long, she
would break out into words also, and say to them, that, if they minded to
talk of God or of godly matters, they should first rid them selves out of
the deuels snares and amend their lives. And with that she would find some
occasion to withdraw her self from their company. Now her Confessor and
other, that were about her at such times, enquiring further of the behavior
and conversation of such persons, as she refused thus to speak withal, found
in deed, that they were noted of some grievous crime, and that they continued
in the same without repentance. An other time there came a woman to speak with
the holy maid, whose behavior was so woman lie and talk so honest, that, so
many as were there present, took her to be a very virtuous woman. The which
notwithstanding, the holy maid turned her face away from her (as it seemed)
of purpose: because she would neither see the woman, nor be seen of her.
Whereof Doctor Raimundus had great wonder, and therefore took occasion
afterward to ask her secretly, what the cause was, why she had so done. To
whom she made answer after this manner. O Father, said she, if you had felt
such a stench of sin, as I felt, while that woman spoke to me, I am well
assured, you would have cast up all, that had been in your stomach. Upon this
Doctor Raimundus used means to come to the knowledge of that woman's
conversation, and understood, that she was a priests concubine.

How the holy maid prayed continually for the state of the Church: and how by
prayer she obtained of God the ceasing of two rebellions in Rome.

Chap. 7.
AT what time Pope Vrbanus the sixth was enforced to flee out of Rome, by reason
of a rebellion, that was raised against him in the city by the french faction:
the holy maid, which as then was left behind in Rome, and saw the miserable
state of the Church, wept day and night, and with continual sighs and sobbes
made her prayer to our Lord, beseeching him most instantly that he would
voutchsafe to cease the fury of those wicked rebels, and give peace to his
afflicted Church. And it was well seen, that her prayer was heard. For soon
after it pleased God so to dispose, that in one day both those factious
schismatikes that had taken arms against the Sea Apostolic, were vanquished
and taken, and the castle of S. Angelo, which had holden out long time before,
rendered it self into the Popes hands. When our holy father the Pope
understood of this great victory, he returned to the city again: where he
asked the holy maid her advise, what she thought best to be done in that case.
And her advise was, that he should go bare footed to S. Peeters Church, and
all the people with him, to thank God with all submission and sowlines of
heart, for that joyous calm after so long storms. And thus the Church of
Christ began (as it were) to revive again: and the holy maid took passing
great comfort to see it. But that joy endured not long. For within a little
time, after these troubles were pacified, the deuel, whose malice is evermore
vigilant against the Church of God, raised up a new tempest. And what he could
not bring to pass by the fury of strangers, that did he attempt again by
sowing discord between the citizens of Rome and the Popes holiness. When the
holy maid perceived that, and saw the imminent peril, that was like thereby
to ensue to the Church of God, she turned her self to our Lord in prayer, and
besought him, that he would hold his holy hand over the people, and not suffer
them to commit such a wicked and heinous sin. And as she was thus praying,
she saw the city full of damned sprites, stirring and exciting the people to
kill the Pope; And those sprites cried horribly to her, and said. Thou cursed
wretch, thou art evermore busy to let our designementes. But be thou well
assured, we shall put thee to a foul death. She gave them no word to answer,
but continued her prayer with greater fervor and devotion, beseeching our Lord
with all instancie, that he would voutchsafe to keep her from all mischief,
and also that it would please him to preserve the Pope, his lieuetenant and
vicar general in earth, from all the violent attemptes of those wicked
conspiratours, for the honor of his own holy name, and for the redress of
his dear Spouse the Church, which as then was in very lamentable state. She
prayed likewise for those impious rebels, and besought our Lord most earnestly,
that he would voutchsafe of his infinite mercy to mollify their hearts, and
not suffer them to commit such a horrible sin, as to murder their own Father
and Pastor. When she had prayed often after this manner, it pleased God one
time to give her this answer. Daughter, said he, suffer the people to
accomplish their malice, in committing this damnable sin, that they are
about: that I may exercise my justice, and punish them according to their
deserts. For their wickedness is so odious and horrible in my sight, that it
may no longer be endured. When the holy maid heard those dreadful words, she
set her self to prayer again, with far greater devotion and vehemency of
spirit then before, and said. O most merciful Lord, thou see, how thy dear
of Spouse the Church, whom thou have redeemed with the price of thy most
precious blood, is this day miserably vexed and afflicted almost through out
the wordle. Thou know on the one side how few there are, that show them
selves ready to assist and comfort her; and thou art not ignorant on the other
side, how many there are and how cruelly bent, that seek by all possible
means to annoye and discomfort her. And in this behalf it can not be hidden
from thine eyes, which see all things, how many treacheries and treasons
there are now in contriuing, to make our holy father thy vicar out of the
way. The which most detestable conspiracy, if it take place, must needs
turn not only this city of Rome, but also the whole body of Christendom to
great discomfort and slander. Therefore, o blessed Lord, I most humbly beseech
thee, that thou will for this time temper the rigor of thy justice, and spare
thy people, whom thou have bought so dear. After this manner did the holy maid
continue many days and many nights together in fervent prayer: in the which
time our Lord did ever more allege justice, and she craved mercy. And all
the time, that she was thus occupied in prayer, the wicked sprites did so vex
and torment her with their horrible scriching and crying, that her body waxed
marvelous feeble. In so much that, if our Lord had not by his almighty power
sustained her, it had not ben possible for her to have endured, but her heart
must needs have burst in sunder. In the end she concluded her prayer with
these words. O Lord, said she seeing it is so, that thy mercy may not be
granted without thy Justice. I beseech thee, despise not my prayers, but
whatsoever pain is to be laid upon this people, lay it upon my body, and I
will bear it with all my heart, for the love, that I bear to the honor of thy
holy name, and to the salvation of their souls. After the time, that she had
spoken these words, our Lord made no more mention of his justice, but held his
peace, and gave her the victory, as the effect declared evidently; For from
that very hour foreward it was seen, that the people did by little, and little
cease off their conspiracies and practices against the Popes holiness, and in
the end submitted them selves wholly to his authority. But as their malice
relented by little and little, and in time ceased: so did her pain and smart
likewise increase answerably, by the permission of God: by whose suffrance the
wicked sprites vexed and tormented her body so cruelly, that it seemed
incredible, but only to such as were present with her, and saw, how it was, in
part rent and torn, as it had been with iron hooks, in part swollen and full
of black and blewe wailes, as though it had been beaten with clubbes, and all
over so pitifully araied, that it seemed rather a thing to wonder at, then a
natural body. All the which notwithstanding she gave not over her accustomed
manner of prayer, but continued in the same, both longer time together, then she
was wont to do before, and also with greater fervor of spirit and devotion,
then she was wont to have at other times. And evermore, as she increased in
prayer and charitable affection toward the Church of God, so did those wicked
feendes increase their cruelty toward her, beating and bounsing her day and
night, and withal filling her ears with their most horrible cries, saying. O
thou cursed wretch, thou have ever ben against us. But be thou well assured:
the times is now come, that we will be even with thee. Thou have oftentimes
disappointed us of our purposes. And therefore now we will never give thee
over, until we have made a full riddance of thee, in such sort, that thou
shall never be able to hinder us any more. Thus much the holy maid wrote her
self in a letter to Doctor Raimundus her ghostly Father. And so she
continued in such vexation and torments from the sunday of Septuagesima,
until the last saving one of April: on the which day it pleased our Lord to
call her out of this life.

How the holy maid obtained by prayer, that she might satisfy the justice of
God, for the pains dwe to her father in Purgatory.

Chap. 8.
WHen James this holy maids father saw, that his daughter was wholly given
to the service of God (as it has been declared in the first part of this book)
he cast a very special love and affection to her, and entreated her in his
house with great respect and reverence, and had this opinion of her, that she
was able to obtain at Gods hand for him, what she would. And she likewise bare
a very singular love and reverence to her father, and commended his health to
God in her daily prayers in most earnest manner. It chanced, that her father
fell into a very grievous sickness, and kept his bed. The which when she
understood, she turned her self to God in prayer after her accustomed manner,
and besought him, that her father might recover again. But answer was given
her from God, that the end of his days in this life was come, and that it was
not expedient for him to live any longer. With that she went forthwith to her
father, to visit him, and to examine him, how he was disposed in his soul:
and found him ready and willing to pass out of this wordle, whenever it
should please God to call him: whereof she was very glad, and thanked our Lord
with all her heart. Then she prayed furthermore, that, seeing our Lord had
voutchsafed to call her father out of this life in the state of salvation, it
might also stand with his holy will and pleasure, to make him this grant,
that he might pass out of hand to the joys of heaven, and not be stayed any
time in the pains of Purgatory. Whereunto our Lord made her answer, that the
order of justice must needs be observed: which would not bear, that any
soul should have the fruition of those unspeakable joys, unless it were
most perfectly purged before. And though her father had lead a convenient good
life in his vocation, and had done many good works also, which were very
acceptable in the sight of God (of the which one principal work was, the
mainteinyng of her in religion) yet there remained some rust of earthly
conversation, which of right must be tried out with the fire of purgatory.
When she heard that, she made her prayer to our Lord after this manner. O most
merciful Lord, how may I abide, that the soul of my dear father, whom thou
have appointed to be the mean to bring me into this wordle, by whom I have been so carefully provided for in my tender age, at whose hand I have received
so many comfortes and reliefes, by whose handie labor and charges, I have been
maintained thus maine years in thy service, should now be tormented with the
pains of Purgatory? I beseech thee, O father of mercies and God of all
comfort, for all the loving kindness, that ever thou have showed to mankind,
that thou will not suffer my fathers soul to depart out of his body, until
it be by one mean or other so perfectly tried and purified, that it need no
further purgation. A wonderful thing to consider. After the time, that the
holy maid had said those words, it was evidently seen, that her fathers
body decayed more and more (as it did before) to wards death, all his powers
failing sensibly in such sort, that all men saw, by the course of nature it
could not continue any time. And yet, for so long time, as she continued in
prayer, wrestling (as it were) with almighty God, and laboring to incline him
in some degree (if it were possible) from justice to mercy: they might
perceive, that his soul was holden in his body by some spiritual power, and
could in no wise depart. At the length, when she saw, that the justice of God
must needs be satisfied: she said thus. O most merciful Lord, if it ca^ not
otherwise be, but that thy justice must be answered. I beseech thee, turn thy
justice upon me: and whatsoever pains thou have appointed for my father, lay
the same upon my body, and I will willingly bear them. To that our Lord
consented, and said unto her. Daughter, for the love, that thou bear to me,
I am content to grant thee thy petition, and to transpose the pains due to
thy father, and to lay the same upon thee: which thou shall bear in thy
body, so long as thou live. With that she thanked God most humbly, and said.
O Lord, thy judgments are all just: be it done to me, as thou have
determined. And so she made have toward her father, who lay in extremes. And
she comforted him meruelously with that glad tidinges: and went not from him,
until he had given up the ghost. So soon as her father was departed, she felt
her self forthwith pained with a grievous disease in her side called Iliaca
passio, which never went from her, so long as she lived. The which pain she
bare not only patie^tly, but also cheerfully, co^ceiui^g such an inward joy of
that B. state that she knew her father was in, that she little esteemed the
outward pain of her own body. In so much that, at the time of her fathers
departure, when all other that were present, made great lamentation, she smiled
sweetly, and showing great gladness in her countenance, said these words.
Dear father, would God I were, as you are; Our Lord be blessed.

How the holy maid by prayer brought her mother to life again, and so
delivered her from the pains of hell.

Chap. 9.
AS the holy maid showed her self to be a very loving and duetiful child
toward her father: so did she likewise afterward show the like love and
charity toward her mother: as her duty required. Her mother Lapa was very
sick, and her sickness grew on her every day more and more, in such sort,
that there were seen in her great tokens of death, and small hope of life. All
the which notwithstanding she was so drowned in the wordle, that she might in
no wise hear of death, and be brought to confourme her will to the will of
God. When her daughter saw that, being moved with pity, she turned her self
to God, after her accustomed manner, in prayer, and besought him with great
instance, that he would voutchsafe to prolong her mothers life. Our Lord made
answer, that, if she could be brought to dispose her self to die at that
time, it would be best for her: for so much as, if she lived longer, there were
such storms of troubles and adversity toward her, as she should not be able
to bear. The holy maid hearing that, went to her mother, and comforted her,
and used many sweet persuasions with her, to induce her to be content (seeing
it was the will of God) to pass out of this wretched state to a more happy
and blessed life. But the mother, giving but a deaffe ear to this kind of
talk, charged her daughter earnestly, that she should rather pray to God for
the continuance of her life: for as yet she could in no wise be brought to
depart out of the wordle. Then the holy maid in great anguish and perplexity
of mind, became a mediatrix between almighty God and her mother: humbly
beseeching him, on the one side, that he would not suffer her mother to depart,
until she were resolved to die willingly for his love, and earnestly exhorting
her on the other side, that she should yeald her heart fully and wholly to the
will of God. But she was so fixed on the wordle, that she might not abide to
hear of death. Whereupon our Lord speak to the holy maid after this sort.
Daughter, said he, tell thy mother, that if she will not consent to die now, a
time shall come, when she shall be so afflicted, that she shall desire to die,
and shall not be heard. Which saying of our Lord took effect within a little
time after: and she was in deed so miserably tormented in mind with the loss
of her temporal goods (unto the which she bare a marvelous inordinate love)
that she brake out impatiently into certain words, as it were, of desperation
and despite against God, saying. Is it possible, that God has so enclosed my
soul in this crooked body, that it can find no way out? Have I sent so many
of my sons and daughters, kinsfolks and frindes, housband and all out of the
wordle before me with great grief, and now am constreined to remain here
alone after them all, to see my self overwhelmed with heaviness and misery?
And so with this bitterness of heart and murmuring against God, she passed out of
this life, without any further contrition or repentance for her sins. Her
daughter took this manner of her departure marvelous heavily, and could receive
no comfort: but, setting her self to prayer (which she had evermore tried to
be a present remedy against all euels) she sighed, sobbed, and wept very
lamentably, and powered out the grief of her heart before God with these words.
O my dear Lord and God, are these the promises, that thou have made me, that
there should no one of my house and family perish in the hands of the enemy?
Behold o Lord, my mother is now passed out of this life without repentance for
her sins, without confession, without the rightes of holy Church. O sweet
Lord, O Father of all comfort, I most humbly beseech thee in the bowels of thy
tender mercy, that thou will not reiecte the petition of thy lowly handmaid
at this time. See, o Lord, I lie here prostrate before thy divine Majesty, and
will not rise out of this place, until my mother be restored to life again,
and I ascertained of her salvation: that thy promises may be verified, and my
soul comforted. While the holy maid was thus praying, there were a number of
women in the chamber, some of the household, and some of the neighbors, that
came thither at that time (as the manner is) to mourn and to do such things,
as were to be done about the dead corpse. Among these women some there were
also, that gave diligent ear to the holy maid, and heard distinctly, what
words she spoke in her prayer. But they all saw this (and were witnesses of
the same) that, soon after the holy maid had ended her prayer, the soul
returned to the body again, and the woman lived afterward a convenient time
to repent her of her former offenses, and so died in the state of grace. This
story did the holy maid her self declare afterward to Doctor Raimundus
her ghostly father.

How the holy maid obtained of God by prayer the conversion of two thieves,
that were lead to execution.

Chap. 10.
ON a day, while the holy maid was in the house of one of her sisters called
Alexia, it cha^ced, that two famous thieves condemned to death were carried in a
cart thorough the street toward the place of execution. Their sentence was,
that by the way, as they were carried, they should be pinched now in one part
of their body, and now in an other with hot yrons or pincers, and so in the
end put to death. Which pain was so intolerable, that they (which were before
in a desperate state, and might by no persuasions be brought to repent them of
their manifold and heinous offenses committed against God and the wordle)
blasphemed God and all his Saints. In so much that it seemed, that the
temporal torments, that they were now in, were but a beginning and way to
these everlasting torments and fire, that they went unto. But our merciful
Lord, whose provident goodness disposes all things sweetly, had otherwise
determined of them. When they were come near to this house, Alexia hearing a
great concourse, and noise of people in the street, went to the window, to
see, what it might be. And seeing the horrible manner of the execution, she
ran in again, and said to the holy maid. O mother; if ever you will see, a
pitiful sight, come now. With that the holy maid went to the window and
looked out: and so soon as she had seen the manner of the execution, she
returned forthwith to her prayers again. For (as she declared afterward
secretly to Doctor Raimundus) she saw a great multitude of wicked spirits
about those fellons, which did burn their souls more cruelly within, then the
tormentours did their bodies without. Which lamentable sight moved her to
double compassion. She had great pity to see their bodies: but much more to
se^ their souls, wherefore turning her self to our Lord with great fervor of
spirit, she made her prayer to him after this manner. Ah dear Lord, wherefore
do thou suffer these thy creatures, made to thine own image and likeness, and
redeemed with the price of thy most precious blood, to be thus lead away in
triumph by the cruel enemy? I know, o Lord, and confess, that these men are
justly punished according to the measure of their offenses. So was the thief
also, that hong by thee on the Cross: whom notwithstanding thou tookest to
mercy, saying that he should be with thee that very day in Paradyse. Thou
did not refuse Peeter, but gave him a frindlie and comfortable look,
though he, like an unkind man, had thrice refused and denied thee. Thou drewest
Marie Magdalen to thee with the lines of love, when she had estranged her self
from thee by her manifold sins. Thou tookest Mathewe the Publicane from a
synful trade of life in the wordle, to be an Apostle and Evangelist. Thou
did not repel the woman of Cananee, nor Zacheus the Prince of Publicans,
but did most sweetly accept the one and inuit the other. Wherefore I most
humbly beseech thee, for all thy mercies, hitherto showed unto man, and for all
those also, that thine infinite goodness has determined to show hereafter,
that thou will voutchsafe to look down upon these wretched creatures, and
mollify their hearts with the fire of thy holy spirit, that they may be
delivered from the second death. Our Lord heard the prayer of his Spowse, and
granted her such a grace, that she went in spirit with those two thieves
toward the place of execution, weeping and lamenting for their sins, and
moving them to repentance for the same. Which thing the wicked sprites
perceived well enough: and therefore they cried out upon her, and said.
Catherine, leave to trouble us. If thou will not, we will surely enter into
thee and vex thee. To whom the holy maid made this answer. As God will, so
will I. And therefore I will not cease to do, what lies in me, for the
relief of these poor wretches; because I know, it is the will of God, that I
should so do. And so continuing in prayer, she procured them a very singular
favor and grace: as the effect declared. For, when these thieves were come to
the gate of the city, our Savior Christ appeered to them, showing to them his
precious wounds all streami^g down with blood, and inuiting them to become
repe^tant for their former life. Which if they did, he put them in a sure
comfort, that all was quite forgeuen. At this strange sight their hearts were
suddenly so altered (to the great wonder of as many as were there present)
that they changed their style, and turned their blasphemy into tha^kesgeuing
and praising God for his great mercies. And, showing themselves to be heartily
sorry and contrite for their sins, desired earnestly, that they might have a
Priest to hear their Co^fessio^s. That done, they went forward cheerfully
toward the place of execution: where they showed likewise great tokens of joy
and comfort, for that they had to pass by a reproachful death to a glorious
life. All the people saw this strange alteration, and were much astonished at
it, because as the^ they understood not the cause thereof: which afterward
came to light by this mean. The Priest, that heard these fello^s Co^fessio^s,
went soon after to visit Doct. Rai: the holy maids Confessor, and in talk
declared unto him, how wonderfully God had wrought, with the^. Doct. Rai:
forthwith began to suspect, as it was indeed, and therefore asked Alexia, what
the holy maid was doi^g at that time, when the thieves were lead thorough
their street toward the place of execution. She made him answer, and declared
the whole process of the matter, so much as she had seen and heard in her
own house. Whereby Doctor Raimundus saw a very great likelihood, that the
thing had been wrought (as he deemed before) by the prayer and intercession of
the holy maid. Howbeit for the more assurance he took an occasion afterward
to ask the holy maid her self. And she (to the honor of God, and for the
satisfaction of her ghostly father) declared unto him particularly, how every
thing had passed. Within a few days, after this was done, certain of the
sisters, that chanced to be present, while the holy maid was praying, heard
her say these words in her prayer with a full voice. O Lord Jesus, I most
heartily thank thee, that thou have delivered them out of the second prison. Of
the which words being demanded afterward, what she meant by them, she made
answer, that the souls of those thieves were as then delivered out of
Purgatory, and restored to Paradyse. Such was her charity toward them,
that, as she had by prayer delivered them from the everlasting torments of
hell, so she never ceased to pray for them, until she saw, that they were
also passed the temporal pains of Purgatory, and received into everlasting
bliss.

How by the prayer of the holy maid an obstinate sinner was turned to God.

Chap. 11.
THere was a man dwelling in the city of Siena called Andrewe Mardine, well
endued with wordlie substance, but bare of heavenly riches, void of the love
and fear of God, a baretter, blasphemer, and wicked liver. This man about the
fortieth year of his age, was suddenly taken with a very grievous sickness,
which held him so vehemently, that he was feign to keep his bed, where he lay
and waxed every day weaker and weaker until at the length he was given, over
by the Phisicions and despaired of all men. His curate hearing that, came to
visit him, and (as his Pastoral charge required) exhorted him with many
words, that he should now in the end of his life, dispose him self to
Confession and penance for his souls health. But he was so obstinately bent,
that he little esteemed the Priest, and less his counsel. Which thing his wife
perceiving (which was a good woman, and had a great desire to saw her
husbands soul) ran to diverse and sundry religious persons, both men and
women, and besought them, that they would come and do their diligence to turn
his heart. They came at her instance, and used many perswasible means to bring
him to a better mind, setting before his eyes now the horrible threats of hell
fire, and now the sweet peomises of the joys of heaven: but all in vain.
After them came the curate again, with great heaviness and care to do, what in
him lay, toward the recovery of this soul, that was thus in danger to
perish. He exhorted him (as he had done before) and thereunto added many
goodly persuasions, to induce him to be repentant for his foremer life, and to
call to God for mercy. But the wretched man's heart was so hardened, that he
might not endure to hear him speak, but scorned both him and his wholesome
exhortations. In so much that at the lenght he fell into plain desperation and
sin against the holy Ghost: and in that damnable state drew on a pace
toward his end. This matter chanced to come to the knowledge of doctor
Thomas, who, having great compassion of the wretched man's case, went forthwith
toward the holy Maids lodging, hoping by her mediation to find some grace
in the sight of God. But when he came thither, he found the holy maid ravished
from her bodily senses. And so long as she was so, he durst not do any thing
to her body, whereby to bring her again: and tarry there any longer he might
not, because it wae very late in the euenyng. Wherefore he gave a very
straight charge to one of the sisters, that was there with her at that time,
that, when the holy maid came to her self again, she should desire her in
his name, and also charge her in the virtue of her obedience, that she should
extend her charity toward that miserable man, that lay on passing, and
pray to God heartily for his recovery. When the holy maid understood the
lamentable state of the sick man, and withal the charge, that was geauen her
from her ghostly father, she tarried not, but forthwith set her self to
prayer, and besought our Lord with great instance and fervor of spirit, that
he would not suffer that soul to perish, whom he had redeemed with the price
of his most precious blood. To that our Lord made answer and said, that the
iniquity of that wicked man was so heinous in his sight, that the cry thereof
perced the heavens and called for justice; for he had not only in words most
horribly blasphemed the holy name of God and of his Saints, but also with
great despite and malice thrown a table into the fire, in the which was
painted the death and passion of our Savior Christ, together with the images
of our blessed Lady and other Saints. By the which fact he had deserved
everlasting damnation. When the holy maid heard that, she fell down prostrate
before our Lord, and said. O Lord, if thou will look narrowly to our
iniquities, who shall be able to stand? Wherefore came thou down from heaven
into the wordle? Wherefore tookest thou flesh of the most pure and unspotted
virgin Marie? Wherefore did thou suffer a most bitter and reproachful
death? Have thou done all these things, o Lord, to this end, that thou
might call men to a straight and rigorous account for their sins, and not
rather, that thou might utterly cancel their debtes and take them to mercy?
Why do thou, o merciful Lord, tell me of the sins of one lost man, seeing
thou have borne upon thine own shoulders, the sins of the whole wordle, that
none should be lost? Do I lie here prostrate at thy feet to demand justice,
and not rather to crave mercy? Do I present my self here before thy divine
Majesty, to plead the innocence of this wretched creature, and not rather to
confess, that he is gyltie of everlasting death and damnation, and that the
only refuge is, to appeal to thine endless mercy? Remember, o dear Lord,
what thou saidest to me, when thou did first will me to go abroad, and to
procure the salvation of many souls. Thou know right well, that I have
none other joy or comfort in this life, but only to see the conversion of
sinners unto thee. And for this cause only I am content to lack the joyful
fruition of thy blessed presence. Wherefore, if thou take this joy from me,
what other thing shall I find in this vale of misery, wherein to take pleasure
or comfort? O most merciful Father and God of all comfort, reiecte not the
humble petition of thine handmaid, put me not away from thee at this time; but
graciously grant me, that this my brothers hard heart may be mollified, and
made to yeald to the working of thy holy spirit. Thus did the holy maid
continue in prayer and disputation with our Lord, from the beginning of the
night till the next morning. All the which time she neither slept nor took
any manner of rest: but wept and wailed continually, for great compassion, that
she had, to see that soul perish: our Lord evermore alleging his justice, and
she craving his mercy. At the length our Lord, being as it were overcome with
her importunity and crying, gave her this comfortable answer. Dear daughter,
I will stand no longer with thee in this matter. Thy tears and lamentable
crying have prevailed, and wrested the sword of my justice out of mine hand.
This synful man shall for thy sake find such favor and grace, as thou
requirest for him. And with that our Lord withdrewe him self from the holy
maid, and appeered the same hour to the sick man, and spoke to him after this
manner. Dear child, why will thou not be repentant for the sins, that thou
have committed against me? In any case be sorry for thine offenses, and
confess the same: and I am ready to pardon thee. That word so persed the heart
of that obstinate man, that he relented forth with, and cried with a loud
voice to them, that were there present, and besought them for Gods love, that
they would help him to a ghostly father with all possible speed. For (said
he) my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has showed him self mercifully to me,
and willed me to be confessed of all my sins. When they heard that, they were
very much astoined (but withal meruelously comforted) to see that soddaine
and blessed alteration in him. And they made great have to bring him a ghostly
father: to whom he made a perfect Confession of all his sins with great
contrition, and so passed out of this wordle in the state of grace.

How the holy maid by prayer procured the conversion of a fierce young
gentleman in Siena, called James Tolomes.

Cap. 12.
THere was in the city of Siena a gentleman of a worshipful parentage, called
Francis Tolomes, who took to wife on Rabes a gentlewoman likewise of a good
house, and by her had many sons and daughters. His eldest son was called
James, a proud and hawtie young man, and of nature very fierce and cruel: in so
much that being yet but a child of age, he killed two men with his own hands:
which cawsed all men both to dread him, and to shun his company. And as he
grew in years, so did he also increase in malice and wickedness, and ran
without rain or bridle even as his outrageous mind carried him into all kinds
of mischief. He had two sisters, the one called Francis, the other Ginoccia:
which were also dissolute and light of behavior, and specially Ginoccia, which
was wholly given to vaintie and superfluous decking of her self. And yet had
she evermore a care to keep the virginity of her body: which she did, rather
for fear of shame in the wordle, then for any fear or love of God. Which
thing was no small grief to their mother Rabes: who being a woman, that feared
God, and tendered much the souls health of her daughters, went on a day to the
holy maid, and declaring the state of her daughters, besought her for Gods
love, that she would be so good, as to come with her, and give them some
godly exhortation. The holy maid, which had evermore a passing great desire
to win souls to God, went with the gentlewoman with a very good will, and
did as she was required. And her words so wrought in the hearts of those two
young maidens, that they gave over all the vanities of the wordle, and took the
habit of S. Dominicke, Ginoccia forth with, and Francis soon after. In the
which rule and discipline they lived a very straight and rigorous life:
especially Ginoccia which of the two lived in greater austeritie and penance.
When their brother James, who was at that time abroad, heard tell of this
strange alteration of his two sisters, he raged like a mad man, and cursed all
them, that had moved his sisters to take that habit. And he threatened very
boldly, that he would tear those garments from their backs, and bring them
home again. And no man durst adventure to stay him in that rage, but only a
young brother of his, that was in company with him at that time, who spoke to
him after this manner. Brother James, said he, you are not acqueinted with this
sister Catherine. But if you go to Siena, you shall see; she shall turn you
also, and make you to go Confession. To Confetsion, said he? I defy thee and
them all. Assure thy self, I will cut the throtes of all those Priests and
friars, before they shall bring me to confession. Well brother, said the child
(and he repeated his words oftentimes, speaking with great affiance, as though
he had foreseen the event of this matter in the spirit of prophecy) you
shall find my words true, and shall see, that the holy maid shall bring you
to grace. Those words set him in such a fury, that he cursed and banned, and
fared like a man distracted. And in this fury he entered into the city, and
went forth with to his fathers house: where he took on like a madd man,
threatnyng and swearing, that he would do many horrible mischiefs, unless
they brought to pass, that his sisters, and specially Ginoccia might put off
that habit, and come home again. But his mother Rabes, who was well
acqueinted with his furious nature, and therefore feared, lest he would of a
sudden do some mischievous act (as his manner was) came to him, and with fair
words stayed his rage, that he did no harm that night. And the next morning
she sent for Doctor Thomas, beseeching him for Gods sake, that he would take
the pains to come, and give her son James some godly exhortation. Doctor
Thomas came, and with him friar Bartilmewe. And they spoke many good words to
the impatient young man: but, for ought, that they could perceive, all in vain.
All this time was the holy maid in prayer, and labored earnestly to win
that young man's soul to God: for she understood (not by the relation of any
man, but only by revelation from God) in what a damnable state he stood: and
she saw in spirit, what pains those good men took to recover him. And it
was evidently seen afterward by the proof, that our Lord blessed and
furthered their charitable travail in that behalf for the holy maids sake,
and in contemplation of her devout prayers. For when these men had spent a good
time about him, and saw, that they could do him no good: at the length, while
Doctor Bartilmewe was speaking to him, behold, of a sudden, and contrary to
all expectation, the young man (being undoubtedly touched by the finger of God)
resented and said of him self, that he was very well content and glad, that
his sisters should serve God in that holy rule and discipline. And he required
furthermore with great humility, that he might be Confessed and absolved of
his own sins, that he might serve God with them also. The which he did in
deed very perfectly, to the great wonder and comfort of as many as were there
present: which a little before had seen him as fiercc as a lion, and now as
myld as a lamb. His mother Rabes was a joyful woman, to see this strange and
blessed alteration in her son, and so were all the rest of her family with
her. Now, when Doctor Thomas and Doctor Bartilmewe his companion had rendered
thanks to almighty God for this great mercy showed upon that young man, they
went out of hand with joyful hearts toward the holy maids lodging, and
thought the time long, until they might impart these glad tidinges of his
conversion to her. But when they came thither, they understood, that the holy
maid was above in an upper chamber in prayer, and ravished (as her manner was)
in spirit, and one other of the sisters with her. By reason whereof they were
constreined to tarry a while. At the length, when the holy maid was come to
her self again, that other sister came down to enterteine Doctor Thomas her
Confessor: who saluted her with a cheereful countenance, and began forthwith
to declare the cause of his coming to her. Sister, said he, we are come to
bring you very good news. Master James Tolmes is by the grace of God become
a new man, and this morning has made a general Confession of all his sins
to Doctor Bartilmewe. Father, said that sister, we have great cause both to
rejoice, and also to thank our Lord for these joyful tydinges. Howbeit they
are no news to us: for sister Catherine, before I came down to you, told me
so much, as you tell me now. And with that they went up into the upper chamber
to the holy maid: who immediately upon their entry, spoke to them after this
manner. Fathers, said she, we are much bound to thank our Lord and Savior,
that never dispiseth the humble prayer of his servants. And as he puts
holy desires into their hearts, so does he also accomplish the same to their
benefit, and comfort. The wicked feend had thought to have gotten a little
lamb, of the which he had conceived some hope. But he has (through the
unspeakable goodness of God) lost a great preie, of the which he had full
posession. He laid for Ginoccia: but he has lost James. And so it falls out
oftentimes with this ravenous and insatiable wolf, that, while he opens his
jaws wider to geat more, he both lets fall some better morsel, that he had
in his mouth before, and yet misseth of that other thing, that he so griedily
snatcheth after. Our Lord be blessed and thanked for ever more: whose provident
wisdom disposes all things sweetly, and turns the wilye malice of this
subtle serpent, to the benefit and comfort of his chosen servants. After this
Ginoccia continued without any molestation in that holy state of life, that
she had vowed: wherein, when she had suffered many sickenesses with a very
patient and cheereful mind, she passed out of this wordle to God, with a
marvelous inward sweetness and comfort, as it was evidently seen by the manner
of her departure. Soon after, her sister Francis likewise took the habit and
rule of the sisters of penance, and therein continued with great commendation
and opinion of holiness, so long as she lived (which was in deed no long time.)
And it was noted of her also, at the time of her passing out of this life, that
she smyled sweetly, and showed great tokens of spiritual joy, even when she
was at the very point of death. And this James their brother, after that he
was thus reclaimed by the devout prayer of the holy maid and diligence of good
men, became a new man, and lived in the state of matrimony a very quiet and
orderly life, to the great comfort of his frindes, and example of virtue to as
many, as chanced to converse with him.

How the holy maid obtained by prayer, the conversion of a gentleman called
Nannes.

Chap. 13.
THere was in the city of Siena a worshipful gentleman called Nannes de
Vannis: which bare a great swaie among the people, by reason that, as he was a
very fierce and warlike man, so he was also of a marvelous subtle and crafty
wit to deal in wordlie affairs. This Nannes with the rest of his family,
allies, and frindes, maintained a faction and perpetual quarrel against
certain other families in the city: who dreading his power and policy,
sought by means and with great submission, to make their peace with him. He
made them answer, that it was all one to him, whether they had peace or no
peace, and that for his own part, he was very ready and willing to come to
accord, if they could win certain other to it, to whom it apperteined as
well as to him self. And thus he gave them very fair words, and put them in
hope of peace: but in the mean time he dealt secretly with those other
persons, willing them to stand stiffely to it, and in no wise to condescend to
any conditions of peace. This matter came to the ears of the holy maid:
which, seeing herein a goodly occasion ministered unto her of working a very
charitable work, sought by many means to speak with him. But evermore, when
he understood, that she was coming toward him, he fled from her, even as the
serpent is wont to flee from the enchantour, that comes to charm him. At the
length, by the importunity of a certain holy Heremite of S. Augustines
order, called brother William, an English man, they won so much of him, that
he was content to hear the holy maid speak, but yet with this protestation,
that, whatsoever she said concerning the accord, he was fixed, and would not be
removed. And with this resolution he went to the holy maids house, at a time,
when she was abroad by a very urgent occasion of procuring the health of
souls. But Doctor Raimundus by the providence of God was there at that time:
who understanding, that Nannes was coming, was very glad of it (for he knew,
that the holy maid had a great desire to speak with him.) Wherefore he went
out to meet with him, and to give him enterteinement until her return. When
they were come into the house, Doctor Raimundus lead him the way into the
holy maids chapple or oratorie: where he caused him to sit down, and
ministered such talk unto him, as he thought most convenient to protracte the
time. But, after that they had sat there a little while, and saw that she came
not: Nannes, thought the time long, and therefore began to break with Doctor
Raimundus after this manner. Father, said he, I promised brother William, that
I would come hither and speak with the holy maid. But now, seeing she is
abroad about some other business, and I have at this present certain affairs,
that must needs be dispatched out of hand: I pray you, excuse me unto her,
and tell her, that I would gladly have spoken with her, if she had been at home.
Doctor Raimundus was very sorry, that the holy maid came not away. Howbeit
to win yet a little more time, he took occasion to enter in talk with him
concerning the peace, and asked him, how the matter stood between such and
such persons. Whereunto he made answer after this manner. Father; said he, to
you that are a priest and religious, and to this blessed maid, of whom I hear
report of great virtue and holiness, I will make no lie, but tell you plainly
and syncerely, how the case stands between these men. True it is, that I am
he, that lets this accord and agreement: though in deed it seem otherwise,
because the matter is openly contrived by others. I alone do privily maintain
and uphold one side: and if I alone would give my consent to the peace, the
matter were ended. But, to tell you my meaning in few words, my peace shall be
made and firmed with the blood of mine adversaries. This is my resolution, and
from this I will not be removed. Wherefore I pray you, set your hearts at
rest, and trouble me no more. And with that he rose up, and took his leave to
depart. But Doctor Raimundus was very loath to let him go: and therefore,
though he saw, that he was unwilling to tarry there, and for that cause loath
also to hear any more words of that, or any other matter, yet did he (to
gain more time) ask him diverse and sundry questions, and by that means
held him there so long, that the holy maid was come home and entered into the
house, before he could get out of the oratorie. When Nannes saw the holy
maid, he was sorry, that he had tarried so long. But she was right glad to see
him there, and bad him welcome after a very charitable and loving manner, and
caused him to sit down again. And when he was set, she asked him the cause
of his coming. He made her answer, and declared so much in effect, as he had
declared before to Doctor Raimundus, adding his protestation withal, that
concerning that matter of the peace, he would abide no talk: for he was
resolutely bent to the contrary. The holy maid hearing that, began to exhort
him to brotherly love and concord, and showed him withal, what a dangerous and
damnable state they were in, that lived out of charity. But he gave but a
deaffe ear to her words. Which thing she perceived well enough: and therefore
she sat still, and spoke no more to him, but, casting up her eyes and heart to
God, she besought him of grace and mercy for that hard hearted man. When
Doctor Raimundus, which had evermore a diligent eye to the holy maid, had
espied that, he spoke some words to Nannes to occupy him the while: nothing
doubting, but that she should work some better effect in him by that silent
prayer, then both he and she had done before with many words. And so it
proved in deed: for within a little time after, he spoke to them both after
this manner. It shall not be said of me, that I am so hard and intractable, that
I will have mine own mind in all things, and relent in nothing. I will
condescend to your mind in some one thing, and then I will take my leave of
you. I have four quarrels in the city: of the which I am content to put one
into your hands. Do in it, what you shall think good, make you my peace: and
I will abide your order. With that he rose up, and would have gone his way.
But in the rising, being inwardly touched, he said these words to him self. O
Lord, what comfort is this, that I feel at this instant in my soul, upon the
only namyng of this word (peace?) And soon after he said again. O Lord, O
God, what virtue or strength is this, that holds and draws me after this
sort? I have no power to go hence: I can deny you nothing, that you require
me. O Lord, o Lord, what thing may this be, that thus enforces me? And with
that he burst out into weeping, and said. I am quite overthrown: I am not able
to make any longer resistance. Then suddenly he cast him self down at the
holy maids feet, and with marvelous great submission and abundance of
tears said these words. O blessed maid, I am ready to do, whatsoever you
command me, not only in this matter of peace, but also in all other things,
whatsoever they be. Hitherto, I know well, the deuel has lead me up and down
fast tied in his chain, but now I am resolved to follow you, whether soever it
shall please you to lead me; And therefore I pray you for charities sake, be
you my guide, and teach me, how I may deliver my soul out of his bands. At
those words, the holy maid turned to him, and said. Brother, our Lord be
thanked, that you are now, through his great mercy, come to understand, in how
dangerous a state you stood. I spoke to you concerning your souls health: and
you made light of my words. I spoke to our Lord touching the same matter, and
he was content to hear me. My advise therefore is, that you do penance for
your sins in time, for fear of some sudden calamity, that may fall upon
you, which, finding you unprovided, may otherwise bear you down and quite
ouerwhelme you. This gentleman was so inwardly stricken with these words of the
holy maid, that he went forthwith to Doctor Raimundus, and made a general
Confession of all his sins with great sorrow and contrition. And so, when he
had made his peace with almighty God, by the advice of Doctor Raimundus and
virtue of the holy Sacrament of penance: he was content likewise to submit
himself to the order of the holy maid, and according to her direction and
arbitrament to make a firm peace with all his adversaries. Within a few
days, after this Man's was thus converted, it chanced, that he was taken by
the governor of the city, and cast into a straight prison, for certain
outrages, that he had committed before. And it was commonly talked among the
people, that he should be put to death. The which when Doctor Raimundus
understood, he came to the holy maid with a heavy cheer, and said. Lo,
mother, so long as Man's served the deuel, so long did all things go
prosperously with him. But now, sense the time, that he began to serve God, we
see, the wordle is wholly bent against him. This sudden alteration puts me
in great doubt and fear of the man, lest, being as yet but a young and tender
branch, he should be broken of by the violence of this storm, and so fall into
despair. Wherefore I beseech you heartily, good mother, commmend his state to
God in your prayers. And as you have by your mediation delivered him from
everlasting death, so do your endeavor also to deliver him from this temporal
and imminent danger. To that the holy maid made answer; Father, said she,
why take you this matter so heavily? Me thinks, you should rather be glad of
it. for by this you may conceive a very sure hope, that our Lord has
pardoned him all his sins, and changed those everlasting pains, that were
due to him for the same, into these temporal afflictions. When he was of the
wordle, the wordle made much of him: as one that was his own. But now, sense
he began to spoorne at the wordle, no marvel, if the wordle do likewise kick
at him again. As for the fear, that you have, lest he, being ouerlaied with
these calamities, should fall into despair: be of good comfort, and assure
your self, that the merciful goodness of our Lord, that has delivered him out
of the deep dongeon of hell, will not suffer him to perish in prison. And as
she said, so it proved in deed. For within a few days after he was delivered
out of prison. His life was in deed spared, but for that, they set a great fine
of money on his head. Whereof the holy maid was nothing sorry, but rather
glad: for, said she, our Lord has mercifully taken away from him tha poison,
with the which he had before, and might agine, have poisoned him self. So
soon as this Man's was thus delivered, he like a grateful gentleman,
ascribing the benefit both of his foremer recovery out of sin; and also of
this his delivery out of prison, to the merits and prayer of the holy maid,
made a deed of gift to her of a goodly palace, that he had, four miles from
the city. Of the which, by license of Pope Grogorie the eleventh, she made a
monastery for her spiritual daughters the sisters of penance, and dedicated
it to our blessed Lady, and in the honor of her, named the place. Our Lord of
Angels? And he, after this happy conversion, was wholly directed by doctor
Raimundus, and lead a very blessed life.

What a wonderful grace the holy maid had in making exhortations, and
converting souls to God.

Chap. 14.
Among a number of strange gifts, that were in this holy maid, one was, a
marvelous singular grace, that she had in drawing the hearts of men unto God,
not only with the words, that she spoke unto them, but also with her only
presence. And in this she so much passed all, that we read or hear reported of
other great Saints, that it might seem incredible, but that it pleased
almighty God to make it known to the wordle, by diverse and sundry effects,
wrought in such sort, that they could not be covered. Many times, as she was
passing from place to place, the people came out from all sides by hundreds and
thousands to see her: of the which great nombers were won to God by her
godly exhortations, and went forthwith to be confessed of their sins with
great sorrow and contrition. Of the which thing when Pope Gregory the
eleventh was informed, by the report of credible persons, to further her
charitable travail in winnyng of sowles to God, he made her a special grant
by his bull or letter patent, that she might have always three learned
confessors about her: unto whom he gave authority to absolve from all kinds
of sin, in as ample manner, as any bishop has within his diocese. And those
three confessors were so thoroughly occupied, by reason of the great
multitudes, that were turned to God by her means, that Doctur Raimundus (who
was one of the three, and evermore assistant to her) reported both of him self
and of the other two also, that many times they sat in confession from
morning to night, without any bodily recreation or refection: yea and
sometimes, when night came, had scantly so much leisure, as to receive a little
sustenance. The which when the holy maid perceived, she gave charge to the
rest that were about her, that they should have a care of the confesssours, and
provide them of things necessary. Which was in deed very requisite for they
were so intentive to their spiritual harvest, and took such a passing inward
delight, to see the wonderful increase, that almighty God had sent in all
places, where they travailed with the holy maid, that they live minded either
meat or drink, or any thing else belongyng to the body. And when all bodily
recreations failed, it was no small recreation and comfort to them, to see the
holy maid her self, what a spiritual Iubilee she kept, and how her heart did
as it were leap and dance for joy, when she saw such nombers of souls to
leave the broad ways of their accustomed sinful life, and now by her
direction to walk in the narrow paths of Gods holy commandments. And as
the words of the holy maid, had a wonderful virtue and strenght in drawing
the hearts of such as were present and might hear her speak: so had she also
a singular gift of persuasion in her writings to them that were absent, and
might not hear her words: as it may appear by her letters written with a
marvelous heavenly grace and eloquence, to Popes and Cardinals, to Kings and
Princes, to Bishops and Prelates, to Lords and Rulers, to communities and
commonweals, to Magisitates and private citisens, to religious persons both
men and women, and also to diverse and sundry secular persons. And such was
her zeal and charitable affection toward all kinds of men, that, whether
they were present or absent, she omitted not to do good, where soever occasion
was ministered.

How the holy maid made many goodly sermons or collations in the presence of
Pope Gregory, and afterward likewise in the presence of Pope Vrbanus, and
his Cardinals.

Cap. 15.
AFter that this chosen vessel of God was appointed to show her self to the
wordle (as is before declared) to bear the name of Christ before kings and
rulers, and all other states of men and women: she made diverse and sundry
sermons in the presence of Pope Gregory the eleventh, with such a wonderful
grace, eloquence, and authority, that the Pope him self, and all, that were
about him, were astoined to hear her. And afterward, being required by Pope
Vrbanus his successor to do the like in open consistory, she made such a
wonderful and dreadful oration, concerning the particular providence of God
over his Church, and over the head pastor of the same; (whom she declared to
be the said Pope Vrbanus the sixth, affirming constantly before them all, that
she understood so much by a most certain revelation from God:) and she rebuked
both the pope and all his Cardinals with such a constant boldness, for their
base minds and lack of manly courage in Gods cause; that they were all
enforced to confess, that it was not she that spoke, but the spirit and
wisdom of God in her. Whereupon Pope Vrbanus, turning him self to the rest,
said these words. Behold, brethren, how contemptible we are become in the
sight of God, for being thus fearful in his cause. Our Lord has sent here a
seely woman, to control and reproach us of cowardice. I call her a seely
woman, not for any defecte, that I note in her, but only to express the
frailty of her sex or kind, which (as you know) is naturally more subject
to fear, then we are. It would be thought in this case, that she (as a woman)
should be timorous, and we manly and stout. But we see now, that we are
faint hearted and dejected, and she contrariwise very full of manly courage
and comfort. It is surely a great shame and reproach to us all, that we have
need to be comforted at this time by a woman. Howbeit, seeing it is the will of
God to send us such a comforter, let us accept it: especially considering that
her words are most true: which are, that the vicare of Christ ought not to
fear, though the whole wordle should set them selves in arms against him: for
so much as almighty God, who has taken the charge and protection of him, is
stronger then the wordle. When the pope had said these words, he turned him
self to the holy maid, and gave her a very grave testimony of virtue and
holiness. And when he had so done, he opened the treasure of the Church, and
gave many spiritual graces, both to her, and to them, that were there with
her Many other collations did she make, in places, where occasion was
ministered to edify souls, to the great profit and comfort of them, that heard
her: as it may appear in part by some things, that are already declared in
this book before, and more by this present matter and some other things, that
shall be declared hereafter.

How the holy maid was sent to Pope Gregory from the Florentines about a
treaty of peace: and how she was sent back again with the conditions of
peace in her own hand.

Chap. 16.
ABout the year of our Lord 1375. the city of Florence, which had in
foretymes showed it self evermore loiall and obedient to the Sea Apostolic,
being moved, partly by the instigation of certain evil disposed citizens,
that were in authority, and partly also (as it was thought) by the lewd
demeanor of some insolent persons, that bare office in the Church, began to
withdraw their obedience, and to join them selves with the enemies of the
Church. By reason whereof there ensued a general revolt in Italy, almost of
all the territories, that belonged to the Sea Apostolic: which were at that
time (as it is reported) to the number of three score cities, and ten thousand
walled towns. Pope Gregory the eleventh seeing that, proceeded against the
Florentines by way of excommunication: whereof it came to pass, that their
merchantes and trauailers, wheresoever they went, were taken, robbed, and
spoiled in all places, and debarred of all traffic with other nations. The
which smart and loss of temporal goods so pinched them, that they were
enforced to seek all possible means, how they might be reconciled to the
Popes holiness again. And because they understood, that the holy maid was in
great credit and favor with the Pope, by reason of her virtue and holiness:
the lords and principal rulers of the city thought good, that Doctor
Raimundus her Confessor should be sent before, as it were to make her way.
And that done, they sent for the holy maid also. And when she was come almost
to the city of Florence: they went out against her, to receive her with all
honor: and besought her for Gods love, that she would take the pains to go
to Auinion (where the Pope was then resident) and to entreat him to condescend
to certain reasonable conditions or peace. The holy maid had such a passing
desire to make peace, that she cast no doubt neither of the travail and
tediousnes of the long journey, nor yet of the effect of her pains with the
Popes holiness, but took it upon her with a very good will. When she came to
Auinion, she spoke to the Pope so effectually, and used such perswasible means
to induce him to condescend to the peace, that he without any further
deliberation or sticking at the matter, made her this resolute answer.
Daughter, said he, that you may see, how much I tender peace and concord, I
put the whole matter in your hand: Do in it, as you shall think good. Only
this, have a regard to the honor of the Church. And with that he revoked his
process and sentence of excommunication against the city of Florence: by
reason whereof, they had some respite for a time, from such vexations and
troubles, as they suffered before in all places, where they had traffic with
other nations. The which when certain crafty persons, that bare the swaie at
that time among the people, perceived, they thought to use the opportunity of
that release, to the furtherance of their malicious intent, which was to hinder
the peace. And though they spoke openly of pacification, yet did they work
covertly by all possible means, to deprave and discredit, whatsoever was
spoken or done for the confirmation of the same. In so much that, when the
holy maid sent the conditions of peace to them, requiring them to set their
hands to them, and to make a public instrument upon the same (as the manner
is, when any composition of peace is made) they denied utterly to do it. The
which thing Pope Gregory foresawe very well, and in deed said these words to
the holy maid, before she sent unto them. Believe me, Catherine, (said he)
these Florentines have beguyled thee. And either they will send thee none
answer at all, or, if they do, they will not do it to such effect, as thou
requirest. And in truth as he said, so it was; For afterward, when the
Ambassadors came from Florence to the Pope, and it was thought, that they
should have conferred with the holy maid, they refused it plainly, and said,
that they had no such commission. The holy maid seeing that, was in deed very
sorry to see there dishonest and crafty dealing. Howbeit she ceased, not to
assuage the displeasure of the Popes holiness justly conceived against them: and
she used marvelous means to persuade him, that he should rather show him
self a pitiful father toward them, then a rigorous judge. While the matter
stood in these terms, the Pope, being resolved to return again to the
city of Rome (which was also wrought by the wonderful persuasion of the holy
maid) thought good to differ this treaty of peace with the Florentines,
until he came thither, where it might be done with better opportunity. And so
the Pope returnyng to Rome, the holy maid with Doctor Raimundus and the rest
of her company went home to Siena: where she busied her self (after her
accustomed manner) about the wynning of souls to God.

How the holy maid was sent back from Pope Gregory to the Florentines, with
the condiditions of peace freely put in her own hand.

Cap. 17.
AT what time these things were in doing, it chanced, that Doctor Raimundus
was very familiarly acqueinted with a worshipful gentleman of Florence called
Master Nicolas Soderines, who was well thought of among all good men for
virtue and godliness. Doctor Raimundus reasonyng with him on a time, and
complainyng of the unjust dealyng of the Florentines in that treaty of peace,
the gentleman made answer, that in truth it was the fault of some few; which
being in office and authority among the people, were able to lead the
multitude, where they listed. And if those few could by any means be
displaced, he doubted not, but that any just demand would be heard among the
people. When Doctor Raimundus had heard that, he conferred with the holy
maid, and by her advise drew out certain treaties of peace, which were
thought both very honorable, and also very profitable for both parties, if
they might be received, and exhibited the same to the Popes holiness* as sent
from her. And declared withal, what he had heard of the before named gentleman,
concerning the hinderance of the said peace. Within a few days after, the
Pope called for Doctor Raimundus again, and spoke unto him. I have (said he)
received letters, in the which it is signified unto me, that, if the holy maid
will go to Florence, the peace is like to be concluded. To that Doctor
Raimundus made answer, that not only the holy maid, but he also, and all the
rest of her spiritual sons and daughters, would be found ready at all times
to offer them selves to Martyrdom, whenever any like occasion was
ministered, to show them selves dutiful and obedient children to our holy
mother the Church. No, said the Pope, I thinck it not good, that you should go
at this time. It may be dangerous for you. But she, being a woman, and also
holden in great reverence among them for her virtue and holiness, may (I
think) go without any danger. And so it was concluded: and the Pope wrote
his letters to the city of Florence, in the which he gave her a marvelous
testimony of holiness: and with the same sent her as an oratrice from the Sea
Apostolic. When she came to Florence, she was received of the godlier sort
with all honor and reverence: and by the means of the before mentioned Master
Nicolas Soderines, came to confer privately with many of those citizens,
that lived in the fear of God: who were easily induced by her to accept the
peace, that was offered unto them by the Popes holiness. After this she went and
conferred likewise with that company or party of the city, that were called
Guelphi; and to them set out with many vehement words, what a proud,
insolent, and ungrateful part it was, to hinder that holy peace, calling those
few, that were the doers thereof, enemies and vndoers of all common weal, and
therefore unmeet to bear office among the people. She declared furthermore,
what a profit was like to ensue to their city, by that peace, if it might be
received, not only in their temporal goods, but also (and much more) for the
furtherance and edifying of souls. Then she showed the heynousnes of their
faicte to be such, in the sight both of God and man, that, if the rigor of
laws and justice should be exte^ded upon them, they had deserved to be
extremely punished in body and soul. Last of all she gave them to understand,
what a fatherly love the Popes holiness bare to them, and how inclinable he was
to show mercy, if they would submit them selves and seek it at his hands.
And these points she set out unto them with such a comely grace and with
words of such efficacy, that all those Magistrates, (with many other honest
citizens) being brought by her talk into an utter misliking of their present
troublesome state, and also into a great love and longyng after that blessed
peace, which, they saw evidently by her words, must needs turn them to
very great commodity and comfort, went forth with to the lords and
nobility of the city, and persuaded with the^, that in any case they should
seek to be reconciled to the Popes holiness. And because certain persons there
present had openly impugned this peace, and specially one captain or
principal man of the party called Guelphi, (which were in number eight) had
spoken against it in plain words, they deprived the^ of their offices. Whereof
there ensued a great turmoyle in the city, by reason that the persons so
deprived, for envy and malice, and to be reue^ged of those, that had caused
it, sought by the favor of the people to cause many other to be deprived
also: and in the end caused so many to be deprived, that for lack of
discreet Magistrates, there grew much disorder in the common weal. And
though the holy maid did show openly at all times and in all places, that she
had no liking of these broiles, but rather great heaviness and sorrow to see,
that, whereas her meaning was to set the^ at unity and concord abroad, her
charitable travail was, through the malice of certain euel disposed persons,
made an occasion of civil discord and tumult at home: yet there lacked not a
number of wicked and devilish men, which bare the common people in hand, that
the holy maid and such as she dealt withal, were the cause of raising those
troubles in the city. Whereupon first of all they bent them selves against
those men, that had been doers in any degree about the before mentioned
deprivation. And of them, some were driven out of the city; some were slain:
and some were constreined to flee for fear. Then they began to make outcries
against the holy maid her self. Some said: Come, let us go to that naughty
woman's house. Some others said. Let us kill the queanc, and cut her in pieces.
With these and other the like words, those good folks, that kept her, were
put in such fear, least some great mischief might come either to them selves
or to their houses for her sake, that they entreated her to depart. Whereat she
showed her self to be no more moved (neither in words, nor yet in
countenance) then if there had been no such thing. But smyling sweetly to her
self (as her manner was) and speaking comfortably to the rest, she went her
way into an orchyard not far from thence. Where, when she had made an
exhortation to those devout persons, that were about her, she set her self to
prayer. While the holy maid was thus praying in the orchyard after the example
of our Savior Christ, there came rushing in upon her a fierce company of
cruel men, with clubbes, spears, and swoordes ready drawn, showting and
crying horribly: Where is that naughty woman? where is that cursed wretch?
where is she? With the noise of this outrageous and beastly cry, the holy
maid, being, as it were, violently broken of the sweet sleep of her
meditation, start up suddenly, and ran to meet with them, with as lovely
and cheerful a countenance, as if she had been a young spouse, and had gone to
receive her love, whom she had long looked for. And seeing among them one man,
that came on faster then his company, having a very cruel and murdering
look, shaking his sword after a dreadful manner, and crying louder then the
rest: where is the naughty woman; which is she; which is Caterine: she offered
her self to him, and kneeling down before him, said. I am Caterine. Do your
will with me: but let these alone. At those words, the cruel hearted man, that
came with a full purpose to strike her, was so stricken himself, that he had
neither strength to hold up his hand against her, nor boldness to look her once
in the face. She kneeled boldly before him without any weapon: and he stood
trembling before her with his sword in his hand. There lacked no will nor
boldness in her to receive the stroke: but there lacked both strength and
courage in him to give it. As it may appear by a letter, that she wrote
afterward to doctur Raimundus: in the which she makes a very pitiful
lamentation; that she could not at that time effectually offer up her blood to
the vspoted lamb of God, that had offered up his most precious blood so freely
upon the Cross for her love. Now, though this wicked attempt of these furious
men was thus stayed by the mighty hand of God: Yet did there remain such a
fear stricken into the hearts of all good folks, both of the city, and of her
company and retinue, that no man having the boldness to receive her into his
house, they all gave her counsel to depart. But she, upon a great affiance,
that she had in the merciful goodness of God, and also as a prophetess well
assured of the final success and effect of the matter, said in plain
words, that she would never depart the city, until the peace were fully and
perfectly concluded. Which thing came to pass within a few days after, (even
as she haid said) when Pope Gregory was dead, and Pope Vrbanus chosen in his
place. At what time the first mouers and principal workers of this tumult in
the city of Florence were severely punished, and specially those, that did
any thing against the holy maid. And a firm peace was made and established
between the Popes holiness and their city, to the honor of God, and great
comfort not only of both parties, but of all Christendom besides.

How the holy maid showed her self to be excellently well learned, both by
her writings and works set out to the wordle, and also by her conferences and
disputations had with certain great learned men.

Chap. 18.
IF any man doubt, whether the holy maid were learned, let him read her
works, namely her book of Epistles, or the Dialogue, that she wrote
concerning the providence of God, and there is no doubt, but that he shall be
fully satisfied and persuaded, that no creature could ever have conceived such
points of high and heavenly learning without a very special grace and light
given from God. And as she showed her self to be divinely learned by a number
of books and treatises, that she endited and set out to the wordle: so did she
also meruelously satisfy yea and pass the expectation of all learned men,
that came of purpose to appose her, and to try in deed, whether the opinion of
such excellent knowledge generally conceived of her, had his true grownd in
her, or rather in others: (as they suspected.) Concerning this point, a blessed
and holy man called Steven, sometimes her gostlie child and trained under her
discipline, and afterward a monk of the Charterhouse, writes one very
notable example and worthy to be remembered. The which can not better be set
out, then with his own words, which are these. When Pope Gregory, being in
Auinion, gave much audience and reverence to the holy maid, there came three
great prelates unto him, and said. Holy father, how think you. This Caterine
of Siena is she of such great holiness, as she is reported to be? The Pope made
answer. and said. Truly, we believe, she is a holy virgin. If it please your
holiness (said they) we will go to see her. And we believe (said he) you shall be
well edified. And so they came to our house forthwith, after nine of the
clock in summer. When they knocked, I went to open the door unto them. And
one of them said to me: tell Caterine, that we would speak with her. When she
understood of their being there, she came down with doctor John her
confessor and certain other religious persons in to one of the lower rooms:
where, in a convenient place, they caused her to sit down in the middle. And
so they entered talk with her after a very insolent manner, provoking her to
choler with their biting words. And among other things they said. We come
from the Popes holiness, and are desirous to understand of you, whether you be
sent from the Florentines, or no: as the common brute is. Have not they one
sufficient man, to send about a matter of so great importance, unto so great a
prince? And if you be not sent by them, we marvel much, how you, being a
seely woman dare presume to treat of so weighty a matter, as this is with
our holy father the Pope, etc. But the holy maid stood fast, like an
immovable pillar, and gave them very humble and pitthie answers: in so much
that they merueiled much at it. And when she had satisfied them at the full
concerning this matter: they put out unto her very many, and withal very
great questions: especially touching her abstraction and singular manner of
life. And because the Apostle says, that the angel of Satan transfourmeth
him self into an angel of light, they asked her, how she knew, whether she
were deceived or no. And so they spoke many words and proposed many
questions, and in effect protracted the time, until it was night. Sometimes
Doctor John would answer for her. And though he were a Doctor of divinity;
yet were they such great learned men, that in few words they shut him up, and
said unto him. You may be ashamed to speak after this manner in our presence.
Let her answer for her self: for she satisfies us much better, then you do.
Now, among these three, one was an Archbishop, sometimes a friar of S. Francis
order, which bare him self like a proud Pharisee in countenance (as it
appeered) and made sometimes, as though he would not take the answers of the
holy maid. But the other two at the length set themselves against him; and
said. What would you have more of this maid? Without doubt she has declared
these matters more plainly and more copiously, then ever we found them declared
by any of the doctors. And she showed many more very certain and true
tokens unto them: and so there arose a great jar among them selves. But in
the end they departed all alike satisfied and comforted: and made this report
of her to our holy father the Pope, that they never found a soul neither so
humble nor so illuminated. Howbeit, when the Pope understood, how they had
ruffled with her to move her to choler, he was very angry with them: and made
his excuse to her very effectually, declaring, that it was done without his
will or consent. And he said furthermore, that, if those prelates came any
more to speak with her, they should shut the doors against them. The next
day doctor Francis the Popes physician said these words unto me. Know you
those prelates, that came yester day to our house? I made him answer, that I
knew them not. Then said he to me. I assure you, that, if the knowledge of
those three were put in one balance, and the knowledge of all the rest, that
are in the court of Come, were put in the other, the knowledge of these three
would weigh much more, then all theirs. And therefore I will tell you, that, if
they had not found this maid Caterine to have a very good ground, she had made
as ill a voyage at this time, as ever she made in her life. And then he
commended her with very great and effectual words: which I omit in this
place for breuities sake. These are the very words of that blessed and holy
man father Steven: who was (as it is said) long time conversant with her, as
her spiritual son and scholar: and afterward became a monk and so
consequently (for his virtue and holiness) a Priour over a covent of Carthusians
near unto Pauia. Where, being earnestly required, he wrote a short abbridgment
of the holy maids life. In the which is contained (brefely and in effect)
the whole substance of this book. For corroboration whereof, he caused the said
abbridgement to be firmed with the great seal of his covent, and to be
subsigned with the hands of two public notaries, in the presence of a great
number of witnesses. And made this solemn protestation withal in as earnest
and vehement terms, as he could devise: that for confirmation of the truth of
that whole story and every point contained in the same, to the honor of God
and edifying of souls, he would be found ready at all times to take a
corporal oathe, in whatsoever form it could be most exactely devised, and to
put his hand, not only to that present writing, but also into the fire, if it
were required. And of this he called almighty God to witness, who kewe the
secrets of his heart.

Abriefe repetition or sum, of many points of heavenly doctrine, revealed
unto the holy maid immediately from God.

Chap. 19.
THe holy maid was (as we have declared heretofore) oftentimes ravished in
spirit, and utterly abstracted from her bodily senses. At which times it
pleased almighty God to utter by secret inspiration unto the soul of his
dear spouse, diverse and sundry points of mystical doctrine. Which she
(being so ravished and abstracted) uttered in the presence of many godly and
great learned men: which wrote, as she spoke, and compiled a book conteinyng
six treatises. The conclusion whereof I thought good to lay down in this
place, word for word, as it is written: because it compriseth in few words,
an abbridgement or brief sum of all such matters, as are set out at large in
the whole book before. The words of almighty God to his spouse are these.
Now most dear and well-beloved daughter, I have satisfied thy desire from the
beginning of my talk, unto the last, that I had, concerning obedience: for, if
thou be well remembered, thou requiredst of me with a careful desire (as thou
know, I caused thee to desire) that I should make the fire of charity to
increase in thee. Thou requiredst, I say, fouer petitions: of the which one
was for thy self. The which I satisfied by illuminating thee with the light of
my truth, showing thee, that through the light of faith, with the knowledge of
thee and me, by such means, as I declared unto thee, thou came to the
knowledge of truth. Thy second petition was, that I should show mercy to the
wordle. Thy third petition was, for the body mystical of my holy Church,
beseeching me, that I should take away from it darckenes and persecutions,
which it suffers at this present. And thou requiredst, that I should punish
the iniquities of the evil upon thee. Whereupon I declared unto thee, that no
pain, that has an end, or is given in time, that has an end, is able of it
self alone, to satisfy for a sin done and committed against me, which am an
endless goodness. But it may well satisfy, if it be joined with contrition of
heart and desire of soul. The manner also, how this satisfaction may be made, I
have declared unto thee. Then I made thee answer, that I will show mercy to
the world, showing thee, that it is proper to me to be merciful. Whereupon
for mercies sake, and for the inestimable love, that I bare to man, I sent my
only begotten Son and word. The which thing that I might declare more
plainly to thee, I likened him to a bridge, that reaches from heaven to
earth, by reason of the union, that is made in him, between the nature of God
and man. And, to give thee yet a further light of my truth, I showed thee, how
the way to clymme up this bridge, is by three steps, to wit, by the three
powers of the soul. And of this true bridge showed unto thee, I made a figure
in my body, resembling those three steps. (as thou know very well) the
first in my feet, the second in my side, and the third in my mouth. In the
which I put the three states of the soul, to wit, the state imperfecte, the
state perfect* and the state most perfect: in the which the soul atteineth
fully to the excellency of inward love. And in each of these I showed thee
plainly, what thing that is, that takes away imperfection: and what is the
defecte or let of perfection: and by what way one may come to it. I spoke to
thee also concerning the secret deceites of the deuels, and concerning
spiritual self love. Furthermore I spoke to thee in these three states, of
the reproves, that my clemency makes. The first reproof I put to be made in
this life, before they depart out of their body. The second at their death;
which touches them, that die in mortal sin. Of whom I told thee, that they
went under the bridge by the way of the deuell: and I showed unto thee of
their myseries. The third reproof (I showed) should be at the general
judgment: where I showed thee somewhat concerning the pains of the damned,
and glory of the blessed, when every one shall receive the dowries of his
body. In like manner I promised thee, and do promise, that with much
sufferance of my mynisters I will refourme my spouse the Church: inuiting you
to such sufferance, complainyng my self with thee of their iniquity, and
showing thee withal, what an excellent place I have put them in, and what
reverence I do require, that secular persons should do unto them. And I
declared unto thee, that my will was, that their reverence should in no wise be
diminished for any defectes or excesses, that are in them; and how much it
displeases me, when the contrary is done. I spoke also to thee of the virtue
of those, that live like Angels: Where I touched withal, the excellency and
worthnes of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Again, while I was speaking
to thee of the three states of the soul, thou were desirous to be infourmed
concerning the states of tears, and to know, from whence tears proceed.
Whereupon I declared the matter orderly unto thee, showing, that the states of
tears have an accordance with the states of the soul, and that all tears do
proceed out of the fountain of the heart. And of this I assigned the cause,
proceeding orderly. Moreover I declared, that there were five kinds of tears:
of the which the fifte engenders death. Then I made answer to thy fouerth
request: which was, that I should provide for a certain particular case, that
had happened: for the which I provided (as thou know very well.) And upon
this I declared unto thee, of my providence both in general and in special,
from the beginning of the creation, until the end of the wordle. Where I
showed, how I made and do make all things, with a most high and divine
providence, giving or permitting all things, to wit, comfortes and
tribulations, spiritual and temporal, for your good: that you may be
sanctified in me, and my truth fulfilled in you. For my truth was and is this,
that I have created you to have life everlasting: Which truth is opened to you
with the blood of the Word. which is my only begotten Son. Last of all I
satisfied thy desire, and discharged my promise made to thee, by declaring unto
thee and speaking of the perfection of obedience, and of the imperfection of
disobedience: and from whence it comes, and what thing that is, that takes
obedience from you. And I put it for a general keye: and so it is. And I spoke
to thee of the particular: and of the perfect and imperfecte persons, living
both in religion and out of religion. Of each of these points I informed thee
plainly and distinctly. I spoke to thee likewise of the peace, that obedience
gives; and of the war, that disobedience causes: adding and showing
withal, how by the disobedience of Adam death came into the wordle. Now I the
everlasting Father, the most high and eternal verity, do conclude openly,
that you do obtain everlasting life by the obedience of the Word, to wit, of
my only begotten Son. And as all men have taken death and damnation of the
first man Adam, so have all men, that will bear the keye of obedience, taken
life everlasting of the new man Jesus Christ my most dearly beloved Son. Of
whom I have made you a bridge (after the time, that the way of heaven was
broken down) that you may pass without harm by this sweet and straight
way (which is a clear and lightsome truth) with the keye of wholesome
obedience. And so passing without harm thorough the darckenes of this present
life, at the last with the keye of my Word you find heaven open unto you. Now I
inuit thee (with the rest of my frindes and servants) to weep. for by
weeping and by continual and humble prayer I mind to show mercy to the
wordle. Run therefore by this way of truth, that thou be not rebuked
afterward for going slowly, for there shall be more required of thee now, then
before: because I have showed my self unto thee in my truth. And take good
heed, that thou never go out of the cell of the knowledge of thy self: but in
this cell keep and spend the treasure, that I have given thee: which treasure
is a doctrine of truth, founded upon the firm and lively rock Jesus Christ my
only begotten Son. And this truth is clad with a most goodly and shynyng
light, which dispatcheth darkness. Wherefore clad thy self with truth, my
sweet and most dearly beloved daughter.

A prayer or answer made by a faithful and devout soul to the words of
almighty God here before recited.

Chap. 20.
THen that devout soul, after that she had seen with the eye of her
understanding, and known by the light of faith, the truth and excellency of
the virtue of obedience: after that she had felt it with a right sense, and
tasted it in her affection with an unspeakable desire: beholding her self in
the divine majesty, she gave thanks to almighty God, saying. Thanks be to
thee, O eternal Father, because thou have not despised me thy creature:
neither have thou turned thy face from me, nor made light of my desires. Thou,
being the light, did not look to my darckenes. Thou, being life, did
not look to my death. Thou, being the phisician, did not refuse my
grievous infirmity. Thou, being the everlasting pureness, did not despise
me, that am full of dirt and infinite miseries. Thou, being endless, did not
reiecte me, that must have an end. Thou being the most high wisdom, did
regard me, that am a fool: for these and many other euels and infinite
defectes, that are in me, thou have not contemned me: thy bountifulnes, thy
wisdom, thy clemency, thine endless and inestimable goodness has not despised
me. But in thy light thou have given me light: in thy wisdom I am come to
know truth: in thy clemency I have found the love of thee, and charity
toward my neighbor. And who has enforced thee to this? Not any virtue of
mine, but only thy fatherly love. This love therefore enforces thee to
illuminate the eye of my understanding with the light of faith, that I may
know and understand thy truth, that is opened unto me, Grant me, O Lord, that
my memory may be found of sufficient capacity, to receive and keep thy
benefits. Let my will burn with the fire of thy most sweet love: let that
fire make my body to power out blood given for the love of blood, and so cause
me to open the gate of heaven with the keye of wholesome obedience. This same
request do I also make in most hearty manner for every reasonable creature,
both in general and in special: and for the mystical body of our holy
mother the Church. I confess, and deny not, that thou have loved me, before I
was: and that thou love man so much, that thou art in a sort likened to one,
that were ensotted and made a fool with overmuch love. O eternal Godhead, O
everlasting Trinity, which through the union of the divine nature have made
the price of the blood of thy only begotten Son to be of so great value. O
eternal Trinity, thou art a certain deep sea, in the which the more I
seek, the more I find: and the more I find, the more I seek thee. Thou do
after a sort satiate or fill the soul insatiably: for in thy botomles deapth
thou do so satiate the soul, that it remains evermore hungry, and longyng
after thee, O everlasting Trinity, and desirous to see thee, with the light,
that is in thy light. Even as the heart longs after the spring of runnyng
water: so does my soul long to be out of this darcke body, and to see thee in
truth, as thou art. Oh, how long shall thy face continue hidden from mine eyes?
O everlasting Trinity, o fire and botomles deapth of charity, dissolve out of
hand the cloud of this my body. For the knowledge, that thou have given me of
thee in thy truth, does very much enforce me, and cause me to have a passing
desire to lay down this heavy ^ompe of my body, and to yeald up my life for
the honor and glory of thy name: because I have tasted and seen (with the
light of understanding in thy light) thy botomles deapht, o everlasting
Trinity, and the beauty of thy creature. Whereupon beholding my self in thee,
I saw, that I was thine image: by reason that thou (O eternal Father) have
given me of thy power, and of thy wisdom, and of thine understanding: which
wisdom is properly ascribed to thy only begotten Son. And the holy Ghost,
which proceeds from thee the Father and from thy Son, has given me a will,
by the which I am made apt to love. For thou (O eternal Trinity) art the
Creator, and I the creature. And therefore I know by the light, that thou
have given me, in the new creation, that thou have wrought in me by the blood
of thy only begotten Son, that thou art enamored with the beauty of thy
creature. O botomles deapth, O everlasting Trinity, O Godhead, O deep Sea:
what greater thing could thou give me, then thine own self? Thou art the
fire, which do ever burn, and never waste. Thou art the fire, which do
consume with thy heat all self love in a soul. Thou art the fire, which
take away all coldness, and do illuminate minds with thy light: with the
which light thou have made me to know thy truth. Thou art that light above all
light, which geuest a supernatural light to the eye of our understanding in
such perfection and abundance, that even the light of faith is made more
clear by it. In the which faith I see, that my soul has life: and in this
light it receives thee that art the light; For in the light of faith I get
wisdom, in the wisdom of the word thy Son. In this light of faith I am
made strong, and constant, and able to hold out. In this light of faith I
conceive a hope, that thou will not suffer me to faint in the way. This light
teaches me the way, by the which I must walk: and without this light I
should walk in darckenes. And therefore I made my petition to thee, O eternal
Father, that thou would illuminate me with the light of this most holy
faith. Truly this light is a sea, which does feed the soul in thee the quiet
and calm sea, until it be wholly in thee. O calm sea, everlasting Trinity.
The water of this sea is not troubled, and therefore it causes no fear, but
gives the knowledge of truth. This is a most clear water, which shows
things hidden. And therefore where this most goodly shyning light of thy
faith abounds, there is the soul as it were clarified and made bright by the
thing that it believes. This is a second glass, which thou (o everlasting
Trinity) do make me to know. The which, being holden with the hand of love
before the eyes of my soul, represe^teth to me my self in thee, showing, that
I am thy creature. And it does likewise represent thee in me, by reason of the
conjunction, which thou have made, of thy deity with our humane nature. In the
light of this glass there is represe^ted unto me, and I know thee, the most
high and excellent goodness, the goodness that is above all goodness, the happy
goodness, the inco^prehensible goodness, the inestimable goodness: the beauty,
that is above all beauty, the wisdom, that excels all wisdom: for thou
art wisdom it self. Thou being the food of Angels, with the fire of charity
have given thy self to men. Thou art the garment, that covers my nakedness.
Thou feedest the hu^grie with thy sweetness: for thou art all sweet, without
any manner of bitterness. Wherefore o everlasting Trinity, in the light, that
thou have given me, and I have received, by the means of this light of thy
most holy faith (thine own self shewi^g the same unto me by diverse and
sundry wonderful declarations) I am come to know the way of great
perfection, to the end that from this time foreward I should serve thee with
light and not with darckenes, and be a glass of a good and holy life, and so
raise my self up from this miserable life, in the which I have hitherto served
thee evermore in darckenes: for I knew not thy truth, and therefore I loved it
not. But wherefore did I not know thee? Forsooth, because I saw thee not. And
wherefore did I not see thee with the light of this most holy and glorious
faith? Because the mist of self love had dymmed the eye of mine understanding.
But thou (O eternal truth) have with thy light dissolved my darckenes. And who
shall be able to reach to thy heyght, and yeald thee thanckes for this passing
great gift, and for the manifold and large benefits, that thou have bestowed
upon me, and for the doctrine of truth, that thou have revealed unto me. The
which doctrine is a certain special grace, above the general grace, that thou
geuest to other creatures. Surely thou would condescend to my necessity,
and to the necessity of other creatures also: which in time to come, looking
in it, as in a glass, shall have a desire to behold them selves. Thou
therefore, O Lord, answer and satisfy thy self for me. Thou, that art the
giver, make satisfaction also for the benefits, that thou have bestowed upon
me: that is, power into me the light of thy grace, that with that light I may
yeald thee thanks* Cloth me, and make me to put on thy self, which art the
everlasting truth: that I may run out the course of this mortal life with
true obedience, and with the light of a most holy faith: of the which light
(me thincketh) thou do even now make me droncke a new.

What a sure affiance the holy maid had in the truth of Christ: and how she
longed after Martyrdom.

Chap. 21.
WHat a great affiance this holy maid had in the goodness of almighty God, and
how securely she reposed her self in the infallible truth of his word, it may
appear very well by a number of dangers, that she offered her self unto
willingly, and with a great courage, when soever occasion was ministered to do
any good and charitable work: and namely, when she had to treat with Prlnces
and great personages; unto whom she declared the truth of all such things, as
she had to utter unto them, with a marvelous freedom, boldness, and wisdom;
not looking to their persons or dignities, but only to the honor of God.
Treating on a time with Pope Gregory the eleventh, concerning the troubles and
turmoiles, that were then in the Church, and how the same might best be
quieted, she was not afraid to tell him his duty in plain terms, and to
advertise him in Gods behalf, how he ought to rule and feed his flock. Among
a number of particular informations and exhortations, that she made unto the
Popes holiness at that time, she spoke these words in the presence of diverse
and sundry of his Cardinals and other Prelates. Come, said she, against these
false and rebellious children with the meekenes of the Cross, and not with the
fury of the sword: and so shall you see, that these wolves shall lay down
their heads in your lappes, and humbly submit them selves unto you. It is not
convenient, that the vicar of Christ should fight against his enemies with the
temporal sword. And therefore our Savior Christ rebuked S. Peeter, when he
struck Malcus, and said: Put thy sword into the scabberd. Thus did she speak
at that time to Pope Gregory concerning his pastoral charge: and at an other
time concerning the horrible stench of the vices and sin used in the court of
Rome (which point was briefly touched before.) And in all this talk, she
never showed so much as any little token either of flattery or of fear: but
spoke with a marvelous constant and discreet boldness, to the great wonder of
as many, as heard her. In like manner, after the decease of Pope Gregory, in
the time of Pope Vrbanus the sixth, there was a consultation in Rome, to send
the holy maid, and with her an other holy maid (whose name was also
Catherine, daughter to S. Briget of Swe^ia) into Sicilia to queen Ione, to
see, if they could by their godly persuasions, induce her to cease that wicked
and cruel rebellion, that was at that time through her support raised and
continued against the Church. But in the end the thing taking no place, because
the Pope liked not of it, (no more did that other S. Catherine her self)
Doctor Raimundus came to the holy maids chamber, where she kept her bed at
that time, and lay in very great pain, and declared to her their final
resolution. And, for the satisfying of her mind, he said furthermore, that he
thought verily, that it was both the better and also the safer way, that they
had taken. For (said he) you are both maidens, and young, and therefore in
danger of villainy, if any be offered: if none be, yet at the least of the
speech of naughty and slanderous tongues. And you have to deal there with
many wicked and cruel hearted men, which, being obstinately bent to continue in
their malicious enterprise, and loath to hear any thing to the contrary, will
not stick to make you out of the way, in case they see, that you are like to
prevail, or do any good in the matter. When the holy maid heard that, she
cried out with a great fervor and vehemency of spirit, and said. If S.
Agnes, S. Margaret, and other holy Virgins had cast such perils, they had
never worn those glorious crowns of martyrdom, that they now wear in
heaven. Alas father, why say you so? Have not we our Spouse to accompany us
also, even as they had? And is not he able to defend our bodies and lives from
all villainy, that shall or may be offered unto us by a number of base and
abiecte men? Surely, surely father, these fearful cogitations are but vain,
and do proceed rather of a weak faith and lack of affiance in almighty God,
then of true wisdom. At these words Doctor Raimundus was so stricken, that,
he held his peace and gave her not one word to answer; For being her
Confessor, and thereby understanding perfectly the state of her soul, he
knew right well, that such words in her came not of any inordinate heat or
passion of the mind, but only of a very perfect and pure zeal, that she had,
to the honor of God, and advancement of his Church. The reformation of the
which she so much te^dred, that many times, when she made her prayers unto God
for the same, she would beseech him in most hearty manner, that she might die
for it in extremity of pains and torments, and that she might afterward be
restored to life again, and so die again and again, so oftentimes as should
be thought sufficient for the obteyning of that blessed reformation, that she
so earnestly longed after. Very many times, being in prayer, she would utter
these words with a passing great fervor of spirit. O Lord, let all the
parts of my body, all my bones, all the marowe within my bones be beaten and
pounded together in a mortar: only restore thy holy Church again to her
comelines and beauty. And though the whole state of her life were in deed a
very martyrdom, yet had she such a longyng and impatient desire to shead her
blood for the love she bare to Christ and his Church, that all her words and
deeds seemed after a sort to tend to it: as it may appear by a letter, that
she wrote to Doctor Raimundus concerning the same matter. In the which it is
to be seen, what a passing delight she took in iterating these words again
and again: blood, blood: Jesus, Jesus.

How the holy maid made a final exhortation to her spiritual children, and so
passed out of this life.

Chap. 22.
WHen the holy maid understood by revelation from God, that her time drew
near, in the which she should pass out of this wordle: she called all her
spiritual children about her both men and women, and to them all in general she
made a marvelous godly and excellent sermon, exhorting them to go forward
constantly in their purposed way of virtue, until they came to the perfection
of the same. And in this sermon she expressed many notable points of
doctrine, which I thought good to touch briefly in this place, for the
direction of all such, as mind to walk perfectly, and not to err in the
straight patthes of a true Christian life. The first and most principal point
of her doctrine, and (as it were) the groundwork of all her exhortation, was
this. To a man, that comes unfeignedly to the service of God, and myndeth in
deed to possess God perfectly, it is necessary, that he do utterly spoil his
heart, and make it naked and bare of all sensible love, not only of all
persons, but also of all creatures, whatsoever they be: and being so spoiled,
that he do earnestly bend him self toward God his Creator with a single and
whole heart; For the heart (said she) can not be wholly offered up to God, unless
it be free from all other love, and withal open and simple without all
doublenes. And she declared unto them, that her principal labor and study
even from her childhood to her dying day had been, to atteine to the perfection
of this point.

Item she said, that no man can possibly come to such state of perfection, as
to be able to offer up his heart to God freely and wholly, without any let or
encombrance, unless he seek it at Gods hand by prayer. And she said withal,
that it is necessarily required in prayer, that it be grounded upon humility;
and that the man, that myndeth to obtain any thing by prayer, must have no
confidence in any virtue or merit of his own, but only in the goodness of
God, reputing him self as nothing in the sight of God. And she added
furthermore, that she had been always careful and diligent to give her self to
prayer, that she might have a continual habit of the same: because she saw,
that of prayer all virtues receive their increase and strength, as contrariwise
without prayer all virtues decaie and fall quite away. And for this cause she
exhorted them to give them selves earnestly and continually to the exercise of
prayer. And here she declared unto them, that there were two kinds of prayer,
the one called vocal, the other mental: and that these two kinds were to be
used, the one at times appointed, in saying or singyng the Canonical hours and
Church-seruice, the other at all times, either in act, so long as it might be
done with discretion, or else in will and desire, when it might no longer be
continued actually.

Item she said, that she saw clearly by the light of a lively faith, that,
whatsoever happened to her self or others in this life, came all from God, not
of any hatred, that he had to any, but of a passing great love, that he bare
to his creatures. And thereof she conceived a certain love and readiness to
obey the co^maundments both of God and also of her superiors: so taking their
commaundments, as though they had come immediately from the mouth of God,
either for the necessity of her salvation, or else for the increase of virtue
in her soul.

Item she said, that, whosoever is desirous to come to a clean and pure state
of mind, must of necessity refrain him self from all judging of others, and
from speaking vainly of the doings of others, and look only to the will of
God in all his creatures, which does or permits all things to a good end.
And for this cause she charged them very effectually, that they should never
judge any person, that is, they should not by way of judgment despise or
condemn any person, though they saw evidently with their eyes some sin
committed: but contrariwise, if the sin were manifest, they should have
compassion on the party, that had offended, and pray to God for his
amendment. And concerning this point she added thus much (not as of her self,
but as a most undoubted truth received at Gods own mouth) that many persons,
for not observing this precept, had failed of their final intended perfection
in spiritual life, which otherwise, for a number of excellent virtues, that
were in them, might have proved great Saints.

Item she said, that she had always reposed a very great hope and affiance in
the providence of God, and so she exhorted them to do: affirmyng, that she had
tried by experience, that the providence of God was passing great, and never
failed them, that put their trust in him. The which thing both she and many
other, that kept her company, had seen verified oftentimes by very certain
and evident miracles.

These and many other goodly points of doctrine she uttered unto them: and
in the end she concluded her long exhortation with that precept of our Savior
Christ, exhorting them very humbly and withal very earnestly, that they
should love one an other. My dear children (said she) love one an other. This
saying she repeated again and again after a marvelous sweet and lovely
manner: and did, what she could, to make them to understand, that she spoke
those words of a very inward affection and great fervor of spirit, to the
end that they should the better bear them away, and imprint them the deeper
in their hearts. My dear children (said she) love one an other truly and
syncerely: for by this you shall show, that you are willing to be my children,
and by this I shall take my self to be your mother. If you love one an other,
you shall be my crown and glory before God, and I will acknowledge you before
him to be my true children, and I will be a continual intercessour to his divine
Majesty for you, that as he has voutchsafed to endue my soul abundantly with
his grace, so he will also power the like abundance of grace into your souls.

Last of all she commanded them (after a certain charitable manner) that they
should keep their desires evermore fervent and burning, and that they should
offer up the same before God for the reformation and good state of the Church
of God, and of his vicare the Pope: affirming of her self, that she had
always kept her heart and desires in such a fervor (especially for the space
of seven years before that time) and that she had never omitted (specially in
those seven years) to offer up her heart and desires in such sort before the
divine Majesty of almighty God. And she confessed plainly, that, for the
obteinyng of this grace at Gods hand, she had sustained many grievous pains
and infirmities in her body, and that she did at that very present sustain
marvelous great and bitter pains for the same cause. And she added
furthermore, that as almighty God had given license to Satan to torment the
body of Job, so it seemed also, that he had granted him power to torment and
vex her body in such sort, that from the sole of her foot to the top of her
head there was no one part without his peculiar pain and torment in her. And
as no part was void of his proper pain, so many parts were tormented with
diverse and su^drie pains together: as it was sensibly perceived of as many,
as stood by her at that time, and saw her in that great agony.

After that she had thus ended her sermon or exhortation, she spoke to them
after a more familiar manner, and said. My right dear and heartily beloved, I
now see clearly, that my most loving spouse has so disposed of me, that, when
my body has endured such torments and afflictions as his B. goodness has
granted me, my soul, continuing still in these vehement, fyerie, and howeful
desires, shall in that state be delivered out of this darcke prison, and so
return again to his first original and beginning. Those, that stood about
her, were meruelously astonished to see her patience and cheerefulnes in all her
pains: Which, they saw by very evident tokens, were so great and vehement,
that, they thought it impossible for her or any other creature to bear them,
as she did (without showing so much as any little sigue of sorrow or
lamentation) but that she was stayed by some very great and special grace of
God. And as they wondered as her patience, so did they make great sorrow and
wept very pitifully, to see their good mother in such torments. The which
when she perceived, she spoke to them again after a comfortable manner, and
said. There is no cause, my dear children, why you should be sorry to see me
in these pains: considering, that these pains are the mean to bring me to
death, and by death to a better life. But you ought rather, to rejoice with me:
to think, that I shall now leave this troublesome place of pain, and go to
rest in God that clear and calm sea. Be of good comfort: for I promise you
faithfully, that I will stand you in better steed after my passage from hence,
then ever I did or might do, so long as I was in this darcke life full of
miseries. True it is; that I do put my life, my death, and all, in the hands of
my dear and everlasting spouse. If he shall think it expedient for any
creature of his, that I tarry here still in labor and pain, I am right well
co^te^ted and glad (for the honor of his name and edifying of my neighbor) to
suffer, if it were possible, a hundred deaths and martyrdoms in a day. But if
it be his will and pleasure, that I shall pass at this time, and in these
torments, be you well assured, that I have at the length with long and instant
suit obtained at his hand a very special grace, which is, that it would please
him to accept my body, as a sacrifice and burnt offering for the reformation of
his Church.

After this she called the^ unto her one by one, and gave the^ in charge, what
order of life every one should take after her decease. Some she appointed to
live in religion, some to be Heremites, and some to be secular Priests. Over
the sisters of Penance she appointed Alexia to be mother. And she willed them
all to have recourse to Doctor Raimundus after her death, even as they had had
to her in her life time, and to use his direction in all matters. When she had
thus disposed of all things particularly by the direction of the holy Ghost,
which undoubtedly spoke in her at that time (as it was evidently seen
afterward by the goodly and blessed success of all such things, as she
took special order for in that extremity) she asked them all forgeuenes, and
said. Decrely beloved, though I have been always very desirous of your souls
health (which thing in deed I can not deny) yet I know well, that I have
failed in many points: both because I have not ben to you such a perfect
pattern of spiritual light, virtue, and good works, as a true handmaid and
Spouse of Christ might have been: and also because I have not ben so diligent
and careful about your bodily necessities, as I ought to have been. Wherefore I
most humbly and instantly beseech you all, and every one of you, to pardon me:
and I exhort you all to hold out in the way of virtue until the end: for in
so doing (as I said) you shall be my joy and crown before God. With that she
ceased of her exhortation to them, and called for her ghostly Father, and to
him made a general Confession of her whole life: and so received the blessed
Sacrament with marvelous great devotion. That done, she required the rest of
the Sacraments: which were likewise ministered unto her in due order and time:
Last of all, she demanded a full remission or Indulgence, that was granted
her before by two Popes, to wite, by Pope Gregory, and Pope Vrbanus.

After that she had thus prepared her self, she drew on fast toward her
end: and being in a very paineful and vehement fit, it was well perceived by
her words and outward gestures, that she sustained a marvelous sharp and
dreadful conflicte with the ghostly enemy; For sometimes she held her peace,
and sometimes she made answer, as it were, to some demand. Sometimes she
smyled, as though she had scorned his reasons: and sometimes she rose in
choler. Among other things, one word she spoke, which was noted of as many,
as were present; And surely it may well be thought, that it was the will of
God, that she should utter it. When she had held her peace a pretty while, at
the length, setting a pleasant countenance upon it, she made answer, as it
were, to some slander, that the enemy charged her withal, saying. Vain
glory? Never: but only the true glory and honor of God. Which words were
not spoken without a special providence of God, to remove a sinister opinion
conceived of her, not only in the wordle, but also in many devout and
spiritual persons, who, seeing her passing sweet and charitable demeanor
toward all kinds of men, and withal, how ready and desirous she was, not
only to receive, exhort, and comfort all such, as resorted to her at home, but
also to travail into far and strange countries, to extend her charity to as
many, as was possible, doubted somewhat, that in these things she might
either seek the praise of men, or at the least take some delight in it, when
she heard her self praised. But Doctor Raimundus, who being her ghostly
Father heard her Confession both general and special oftentimes, and considered
of all her doings with great warines and aduisement, gave her this testimony
with a solemn protestation, that he judged verily and took it upon his
conscience, that, whatsoever she did in that kind, she did it by special
inspiration and commaundment from God, and that she did not so much as think,
either upon the praises of men, or upon the men them selves, but only, when she
prayed to God for them, or did some other charitable work to the edifying of
their souls.

But now, to come to our matter again, when the holy maid had thus fought a
long combat with the ghostly enemy, and had in the end through the grace and
assistance of God obtained a full and final victory over him, coming to her
self again, she made a general Confession, not Sacramentally, but openly,
saying Confiteor (as the manner is) and so required the general absolution to be
likewise pronounced over her. That done, it was sensibly perceived, that all
the powers of her body decayed forthwith by little and little. The which
notwithstanding she ceased not to exhort and speak comfortable words, not
only to them, that were there about her, but also to other, that were absent.
Among others, she showed her self to have a very special remembrance and care
of Doctor Raimundus, unto whom she willed them all to have recourse in all
their doubts and distresses for spiritual counsel. Commend me to him, said
she, and bid him to be of good comfort, and not to faint or fear, whatsoever
betide; For I will be with him, and will from time to time deliver him from all
dangers. And if he chance at any time to do otherwise, then he should do, I
will give him discipline. These words she repeated again and again, until
her speech began at the length to fail her. Last of all, when the very
throws of death came upon her, she said these words. Lord, into thy hands I
commend my spirit. And with that she gave up the Ghost, in the year of her
age. 33. of our Lord. 1380. the 29. day of April (which as then was sondaie,
and the feast of S. Peter the Martyr) about eight of the clock before noone.

THE FOWRTH PART.
How it pleased our Lord to make the holiness of his spowse known to the
wordle, by diverse and sundry evident tokens from heaven; And first, how she
spoke certain comfortable words to Doctor Raimundus, after her departure out
of this wordle.

Chap. 1.
AT what time the holy maid passed out of this life, doctor Raimundus her
confessor chanced to be in the city of Genua, about such a affairs as his
office required, being then the prouincial of his Order in those parts. And
because there was a general chapter appointed to be kept at Bolonia within a
few days after for the choosing of a new general: doctor Raimundus with
certain other doctors and brethren, made them selves ready to pass by water
from thence to Pisa, and so to Bolonia And when they had hired a boat, they
tarried for a good wind, which as then did not serve. in that mean time, upon
S. Peter's day in the morning (which is a solemn day among the Friars
preachers: because he was a great martyr, and of their Order) doctor Raimundus
went down from his cell to the Church, to say Mass. And when Mass was done,
he returned back again to the dorter, to set him self in order toward his
journey. Where passing by the image of our lady, he said an Aue Maria softly
to him self (as the maneris:) and stayed a little while. And suddenly there was
framed a strange voice (if it may be called a voice) which expressed very
distinctly and plainly certain words, not outwardly to his bodily ear, but
inwardly to his heart. The words were these. Be not afraid I am here for thee.
I am in heaven for thee. I will protect and defend thee. Stand fast without
care, and fear not. I stand here for thee. Doctor Raimundus hearing or rather
conceiving those words, (in deed more lively expressed to this mind, then if
they had been pronounced by the voice of any man) was much astoined, and began
to cast with him self, what manner of comfort and warrant of security that
might be, and from whence he might think, that it came. And, because he was
then doing a little work in the honor of our blessed Lady, he began to
think, whether it might not be she, that had given him those comfortable
words. Howbeit, considering his own unworthiness, he durst not presume so
much. Then it came to his mind, that there might be some great trouble toward
him: for the which cause he prayed to our blessed Lady the mother of mercy
(whom he knew to be a special comforter of all afflicted persons) that she
would vouchsafe, by that her comfortable promise, to make him more wary,
circunspecte, and ready to bear whatsoever it should pleased God to lay upon
him. And there was some cause also why he might suspecte such troubles the
more, because he had at that time preached against certain scismatikes, that
were in the city: of whom he stood in some doubt, that they would have set
for him, to do some mischief to him and his compaine, as they should pass
between Genua and Pisa. And so at that time he could not understand, what that
voice should be, what it should mean, or whence it should come. But
afterward, when he came to Tuscan and heard them there tell of the time and
manner of the holy maids departure, he called this strange voice to mind
again, and saw by the computation of the time, that these words were spoken
to him at that very hour, when the holy maid passed out of this wordle to
God. Wherefore he gave most hearty thanks, both to our Lord, and also to his
blessed spouse S. Catherine, for the great grace and comfort, that they had
vouchsafed to send him.

How it pleased God to give a testimony of her holiness in her life time, by an
evident miracle wrought at the tomb of S. Agnes.

Chap. 2.
IT was revealed to the holy maid (as she declared secretiy to doct: Raimundus
and to doct: Thomas her confessor also) that in the kingdom of heaven she
should have the blessed virgin S. Agnes of mount Politian for her companinion,
and be placed there in equal degree with her. Whereupon she bare a very special
devotion to S. Agnes, and therefore besought her confessors, that they would
give her license to go thither in pilgrimage, with some other of her sisters,
to visit the holy relikes. Which request they granted with a good will, and
went them selves also with her, to see, if almighty God would show any token
of his determination, concerning the before promised fellowship that should be
between these two holy virgins. When the holy maid came to the monastery,
she went forthwith, (accompained with the sisters of her own retinue, and
most of the Nonnes of the same monastery also) to the place, where S. Agnes
body lay all whole and unperished, even as it was the first day that it was
laid there. And coming to the holy shryne, she kneeled down upon the ground,
and bowed her head with great reverence and devotion to kiss the feet. But
the dead body of S. Agnes, as it were refusing that honor of her companion,
lifted up one foot in the presence of them al so high, that she might have
kissed it without bowing down either body or head. The which thing when the
holy maid saw, she humbled her self the more, and stooped down with greater
reverence. And so S. Agnes body drew her leg down again, and set it, as
it was before. This miracle it pleased almighty God to work at that time to
the honor of those two blessed virgins, in the presence of all the aforesaid
sisters of penance, and Nonnes of the same monastery. And yet there lacked not
some one or two among them, that did (what in them lay) to deprave the manner
of the miracle. Which turned in the end by the disposition of God, to the
further setting out of the same; For the next day, when doctor Raimundus with
the rest of his company came thither (which by occasion had stayed behind)
hearing by the common brute what a strange work had been wrought there to the
honor of God and of the two blessed virgins, and understanding withal, that
there was one or two evil disposed women among them, that went about to
discredit the matter, saying, that the holy maid had done it by art magic,
or otherwise by some sleyghte of the devil, he called the whole covent of
Nonnes together before him, by virtue of a commission granted to him by the
General of that province, and charged them all in the virtue of of their
obedience, that they should declare, what they had seen: protesting to them,
that his desire was, to understand the very truth of the matter to the glory
of God, and no more nor no less, but only the very bare truth. They made hin
answer one by one, and declared so much as has been declared here before. Then
he called one of the^ before him, that labored to impugn the truth of the
miracle, and asked her whether the matter had passed in such sort, as the rest
had deposed. And she confessed plainly before them all, that it was even so,
as they had said. But (said she) S. Agnes did not work that miracle to any
such end, as you imagine. To that doctor Raimundus made answer and said.
Dearly beloved sister, we ask not you, what the meaning of S. Agnes was,
because we know, that you are neither her secretary nor yet of her counsel.
But we ask of you only, whether you saw that lifting up of the foot, and
taking of it down again in such sort, as the rest of your sisters have
declared. Yea, said she: that can not be denied. When doctor Raimundus had
thus put her to some shame before the whole covent, he enjoined her such
penance for her offense as the order of their discipline required, and he
thought most expedient for the example of others. An other time the holy maid
coming to the monastery again, to place two of her brothers daughters there
in the service of God, the first thing that she did, she went to visit the
holy relics of S. Agnes, as she had done before, And there went with her
certain of her own compaine, and certain of the Nonnes of the same
monastery. When she came to the place, she set her self down, not as she had
done before, at the feet, but at the head, with great joy and cheerefulnes,
and put her cheek to the cheek of S. Agnes, which was covered with a veil of
silk, and there held it a good while. After that she had continued so a good
long space, at the length she turned her self suddenly back, and spoke to the
sisters, that were there present, and namely to her cosen Lisa, after a
marvelous joyful and humble manner, saying. Why do you not consider of this
great gift of God, that is sent us here from heaven: Wherefore are you so
ungrateful? With that Lisa and the rest held up their heads, and behold, they
saw a certain Manna, to wite a very white and small grain, to come down
from heaven, and to cover the bodies of those two blessed virgins. And this
Manna fell in such abundance, that Lisa filled both her hands of it, and kept
it afterward for a relike and monument, for comfirmation of the truth of this
great miracle. The like chanced to the holy virgin S. Agnes oftentimes in her
life time, namely when she set her self to prayer and meditation, as we read
in the story of her life, which I thought good to touch briefly in this
place, for the comfort and satisfaction of such devout persons, as are
desirous to understand more of her, and yet have not peradventure the whole
story written, specially in our tongue. When the blessed virgin S. Agnes should
be borne into the wordle, there were a number of goodly lights seen in the
place, where her mother travailed, lighted by the almighty power of God,
without any help of man: which continued and yealded a marvelous confortable
light to as many, as were there present, until such time, as the babe was
fully borne, and then ceased. By the which our Lord would foreshewe, what a
goodly and singular light of diverse and sundry virtues she should give in
time to come to the wordle. In her life time, as she grew in years, so did
she likewise increase in all kind of virtue, in humility, patience, contempt
of the wordle, and fervor toward religion. The which state of life she
tendered so much, that he builded two monasteries of Nonnes: and in the later of
the two, she lived a holy life, and died a blessed death: where it pleased God
to work many great and strange miracles by her in her life time, and many
more after her death. Emonge other, this was, and is one, that her body
continues still whole and vnputrified, even as it was at the very hour of
her departure. When she was newly dead, the people in regard of the wonderful
signs, that she had wrought among them in her life, thought to have preserved
her body with baulme. But when they came to the body, they saw that it was
needles: for so much as there distilled a very sweet and precious liqour out at
the ends of her fingers and toes, that passed all baulme; which was diligently
gathered by them, and put in a viole: in the which it is kept to this day, and
at times showed to the people for a perpetual remembrance of this great
miracle. The night that she died, the young babes, that lay in bed with their
fathers and mothers, cried out and said. Sister Agnes is now departed: and she
is a Saint in heaven. And the next morning a great company of young children
by the instincte of God gathered them selves together (and would admit none
into their company, that was not a maid) and set them selves in order after
the manner of a procession, and so went with candels burning in their hands to
the monastery, where they offered them up at the body of the blessed virgin,
even as we are wont to do at the monumentes of Saints. These and many other
miracles were wrought by almighty God in the honor of S. Agnes: which caused
the people of the country to have her relikes in great price and reverence.

How the holy maid in her life time healed many, that were sick of the
plague.

Chp. 3.
ABout the year of our Lord 1373. there was a great plague in the city of
Siena: of the which many men and women of all conditions and ages died very
soon, after they were once taken; some within one day, some within two, and
few or none passed the third day: which mortality caused a great terror
among the people. Doctor Raimundus chanced to be in the city, at that time,
reader of the divinity lesson in his covent: who, being a charitable man, and
tendering more the health of souls, then the preservation of his own body,
(as his profession and rule required) he took great pains, and went by day
and by night to the houses, where he might understand any to be sick, to
visit, comfort, and counsel them for their souls health. And many times when
he was weerie of runnyng thus to and fro, he used to turn a little aside into
an house or hospital called, Our lady of mercy, and there to repose him self
a while, partly for rerecreation both of body and soul, and partly also to
speak with Master Matthewe the rectour of the said house: whom he loved
entierly for virtues sake, and resorted unto him commonly once in the day (and
so did the holy maid also very often) sometimes to confer with him of
spiritual matters, and sometimes to ask either his advise or charity toward
the relief of the poor. On a day doctor Raimundus, going to visit the
sick after his accustomed manner, and passing by the gate of this house, went
familiarly, to see, how Master Matthewe did with the rest of his family. When
he was entered, he saw the brethren and clearkes busily occupied in carrying
Master Matthew from the Church toward his chamber: With that he asked him
cheerfully, how he did. But Master Matthew was so feeble and so far spent,
that he could not give him one word to answer. Then he asked them that were
about him, how that sickness came to him. And they made answer, that he had
watched that night with one that was sick of the plague, and about midnight
took the sickness of him: since the which time, said they, he has remained (as
ye see) without color, without strength, without spirit. When they had
brought him to his chamber, they laid him down vopn his bed. Where when he
had rested a little while, he came to him self again, and called for doctor
Raimundus, and made his confession to him, as he was wont often times to do.
That done doctor Raimundus spoke to him comfortablie. M. Matthew, said he, how
feel ye your self? where is your pain? My grief, said he, is in my
flancke, and it paineth me so sore, that, me thinks, my thighe is ready to
break in sunder. And I have withal such a vehement headache, that it seems,
as though my head would cleave in four parts. With that he felt his pulses,
and fownd in deed, that he had a very sharp fever. Whereupon he caused them to
carry his urine to a learned physician, that was in the city, called master
Sensus; and soon after went him self to understand his resolution and advise
in the matter. When he came, the physician declared unto him, that he saw in
the water, very evident tokens of an ague pestilential, and also of death
near at hand: for, said he, this water shows plainly to me, certain
bubling or boiling of the blood out of the liver: which is the common disease,
that reigns now over all the city. Wherefore I am very sorry, for I see, we
are like to leese a very dear friend, and they of his house a very good
rectour. What, said doctor Raimundus, is it not possible by your art, to
devise some kind of medecin, that may do him good? We will see to morrow,
said he, whether we can purge that blood with Cassia Fistula: but, (to tell you
truly) I have small hope of doing any good. The disease is to far gone.
When doctor Raimundus heard those uncomfortable words, he returned toward
the sick man again with a heavy heart. In this mean time it came to the
ears of the holy maid, that master Matthewe was dangerously sick, and of
the plague. When she heard that, she was troubled in spirit, as it were
against that euel (for she knew him to be a very virtuous man, and therefore
loved him very entierly) and forthwith went in great have toward his house.
And before she came at him, she cried out with a loud voice saying. Master
Matthewe rise, rise up master Matthewe. It is no time to lie now sluggyng in
your bed. At that word, and at that very instant, the pain in his slancke and
headache, and the whole disease forsook him quite, and he rose up as merry
and as sound in all his body, as if there had never ben any such disease upon
him. And when he was ready, he honored the the holy maid, and gave her most
humble thanks, saying, that he knew now by experience in his own body, that
the power of God dwelled in her, and wrought strange things by her. But she
might not abide to hear any words, that tended to her own commendation, and
therefore she went away. As she was going out, doctor Raimundus came toward
the house, and met with her in the gate, looking very heavily of the matter:
(for he knew nothing of all this, that was done in the house, but came
directly from the physician. When he saw her there, being as it were overcome
with sorrow he said to her. O mother, will you suffer this good man, that is
so dear to us, so profitable and necessary to many others, to die after
this sort? To that she made answer very humbly, showing in deed, that she
had no liking in such words. O Father said she, what manner of talk is this,
that you use to me? Take ye me to be a God that you would have me to deliver
a mortal man from death? I pray you, said he, speak these words to some
other, that is a stranger to you, and not to me, that know your secrets. I
know right well, that, whatsoever you ask of God heartily, he will grant it
you. With that she bowed down her head a little, and smyled: and after a time,
looking up to him again cheerfully, she said these words. Father, be of good
cheer: for he shall not die at this time. When doctor, Raimundus heard those
words, he was a glad man, for he knew well, what grace and prerogative was
given to her from above. And so he went into the house to comfort his frind,
not knowing in deed, that he had no need of it, but supposing, that the thing
had been yet to do, that was already done. When he came in, he found him
sitting up in good health and liking, declaring unto them, that were about him,
the manner of the miracle, that was wrought upon him self. For the further
confirmation whereof, the table was laid, and they eat together that morning,
not such meats, as sick men use to eat, but raw oynions and such other
gross meats, as can not be digested, but only in whole stomakes. And as they
were eating, they took great pleasure to recite the wonderful things, that it
pleased God to work by the holy maid. In the time, while this contagious
disease reyned in Siena, it chanced a certain Hermit called Sanctus, that
lived in an Hermitage a little without the city, to be infected with the same.
The which thing when the holy maid understood, she caused him to be taken out
of his cell, and brought to this before mentioned hospital of our Lady of
mercy. Where she came to him with certain other of her sisters, and tended
him, providing for him, all such things, as she thought necessary or
requisite for a man in that case. And to comfort him with words also, she put
her head to his, and whispered him softely in the ear, saying. Be not afraid,
howsoever ye feel your self: for ye shall not dye at this time. But to the
rest that were there, she said no such thing but rather, when they entreated
her, that she would pray to God for his recovery, she gave them but an
uncomfortable answer: which made them very sad, for they all knew him to be
a holy man, and therefore both honored and loved him very tenderly. The
disease increased howerly more and more, and he decayed so sensibly, that they,
dispairing his life, gave over the charge of his body, and looked only to the
health of his soul. At the length, when he was in extremes, and they all
stood about him with great heuines, looking only when he would give up the
ghost: the holy maid came to him again, and said in his ear. Be not afraid,
for ye shall not die at this time. The sick man both heard and understood that
word. (though before it seemed, that he was past all sense.) And he took
comfort in it, rather crediting the word of the holy maid, that sounded in his
ear, then the throws of death, that griped him by the heart. Howbeit he showed
no token of amendment: and therefore they not understanding, what she had
said, provided lights and other things necessary for his burial, looking
still, when he would depart out of this life. And in this howerly expectation
of death, they continued certain days (longer in deed, then men are wont to
live, that are sick of that disease.) At the length when it seemed, that he
was even passing out of the wordle, the holy maid came to him again, and
spoke these words in his ear. I command thee in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that thou pass not at this time. At that word he took comfort of
spirit and strength of body, and rose up in his bed, and called for meat:
and, in the presence of them all eat his meat with good appetite, and
received perfect health, and lived after many years: and was one of them,
that were present with the holy maid in Rome, when she departed out of this
wordle. And he declared afterward what words the holy maid spoke in his
ear, and how by the virtue of the same his soul, that was upon the very
point of departing out of his body, was mightily retained: adding furthermore
that he esteemed the miracle, that was wrought upon him self, to be no less,
then if she had raised him up again from death to life: and that without all
doubt it was no natural cause that had restored him again, but only the
almighty power of God, working by the means of that holy maid. During this
time of pestilence in the city of Siena, it pleased God to work an other
miraculous cure by the means of the holy maid upon Doct: Raimundus her own
ghostly father, after this manner. The plague increased so sore; and the
inhabitants fled so fast for fear of infection (not only the citizens, but
also the priests and religious persons) that many souls remained without
comfort or counsel. But doct: Raimundus tarried still in the city and would not
remove, but determined with him self, that he would visit and help as many,
as he could possibly. The which charitable purpose being once knoue^, he was so
much called upon and to earnestly entreated to come now to one house and now to
an other: (because there were few or none to help him) that he had scantly
leisure to eat his meat or to take his rest. One night, when he had rested on
his bed, and thought to have risen up after his accustomed manner to say his
service, he felt a very great pain in his fla^ke. And feeling with his hand,
he found, that there was a great sweelling in the place: (which made him sore
afraid.) For experience had taught him, that the disease began commonly after
that manner. Wherefore he lay still in his bed, and durst not rise, but began to
think of death: evermore wishing, that it had been day, that he might have
gone and spoken with the holy maid before the disease had taken full place in
him. In the mean time the ague came upon him, and withal a great hedach which
tormented him very sore, and were (as he knew) undoubted signs of the common
infection, that reigned over the city at that time. The which notwithstanding,
he did, what he could, to make an end of his divine service. In the morning,
calling a fellow to him, he went with great pain toward the holy maids
house,: whether, when he came, he found her not at home, For she was gone out,
to visit an other, that was sick. Then, being no longer able to hold up his
head, he laid him self down upon a couch, that was there in her house: and
prayed the sisters, that they would send for her with all speed. When the holy
maid came home, and found him there, and understood in what case he was: she
kneeled down by the bed, and, laying her hand upon his forehead, she began
after her manner to lift up her heart to God in prayer. And forthwith he saw,
that she was quite abstracted from her bodily senses and ravished in sprite.
Which was no unwonted sight to him, nor yet uncomfortable, (at that time.) For
he hoped well, that she should obtain some great benefit for him, both of
body and soul at Gods hand. When she had continued after that manner about the
space of half an hour, he felt in him self a mighty alteration and stirring
in every part of his body, and withal a vehement provocation toward a
vomit: which he had seen to hapen before, to many, that had died of that
disease. How beit it fell not so out with him, but rather contrariwise; For it
seemed to him, that he felt sensibly* how those corrupt humors, that caused
his pain, were violently drawn from within, to the uttermost parts of the
body. And certain he was, that he found present ease of his pains. And
before the holy maid came to her self again, he was fully and perfectly
restored to his health: saving only that there remained a little feeblenes in
him, which (he thought) our Lord suffered to remain in him, as a token either
of the disease, that was cured, or else of the weakness of his faith. So soon
as the holy maid had obtained this grace at Gods hand for her ghostly father,
she was forthwith restored to her bodily senses. And, finding him as yet in
some weakness, she willed her sisters to provide some meat for him such as is
wont to be given to sick folks. The which when he had received at her holy
hand, she willed him to lie down and rest a while: and so he did. And when he
had rested a little time, he rose up and felt him self as strong and in as good
liking, as if he had never ben sick. Then said the holy maid to him. Father,
go your way, and labor about the edifying of souls, and be thankeful to
almighty God, that has delivered you out of this present danger. The like
miracle did the holy maid work about the same time upon father Bartilmewe, of
whom mention has been made diverse and sundry times before. The miracle was
much alike: but the cure seemed somewhat greater, biause he was both longer and
also more grievously sick.

How the holy maid healed a great number, that were sick of other diseases,
after the like manner.

Chap. 4.
AFter the time, that this pestilence was ceased in Siena, it chanced that
many devout and well disposed persons, as well religious as others, but
specially certain Nuns of Pisa, hearing the fame of the holy maid had a
great desire to see her, and to hear her doctrine, which was reported to be
(and was in deed) very wonderful. And because it was not lawful for many of
them that had this godly inclination, to come to her to Siena, they sent
letters and messengets to her very often, beseeching her, that she would take
the pains to come over to them to Pisa. And, to allure her the more to take
that journey upon her, they declared unto her, what fruit and gain of souls
was like to ensue by her coming thither. The holy maid, though she had no
desire to be from home, yet being overcome with their long and importunate
suit, especially considering, that there was great hope of winning souls to
God, first she asked the advice of them, that lived in house with her: of the
which compaine some were with her going to Pisa, and some against it. Then,
when she saw, that she could not be resolved by men, she fled unto almighty
God (as her manner was) and besought him humbly, that he would vouchsafe to make
her to understand what his will and pleasure was, that she should do in that
case. And it came to pass after certain days, that our Lord appeered to her,
and willed her, that she should accomplish the godly request of those his
servants and hand maids in Pisa without delaie. Whereupon she went to her
ghostelie father, and declaring thus much to him, besought him like an obedient
daughter, that he would give her license to do, as she was willed by God. He
assented willingly to her demand, and went him self with her, and with him
two other of his brethren, to hear the confessions of such, as should resort
unto her, according to a grant made to her by Pope Gregory the eleventh. When
she came to Pisa, she lodged in the house of an honest citizen called master
Gerardus, where on a day, there was presented unto her, a certain young man
of the age of twenty years or there about, which had been sore vexed with a
quotidian ague for the space of a year and half, and never missed one day.
And though there were no fit of an ague upon him at that time, yet might she
see, that he had been long sick. For, whereas he was by constitution of body a
very strong and lusty young man, he was now brought so low, that he had
neither flesh, strength, nor color. And no medicine could be found, that would
do him good. Wherefore they entreated the holy maid, that she would commend
his lamentable state to God in her prayer. The holy maid pitied his case very
much, and asked him, how long it was, sense he was last confessed. To that he
answered and said, that it was a good many years. Yea, said she; and that is
the cause, why our Lord has laid this discipline upon you, because ye would
not cleanse your soul in all this time by confession. Wherefore, dear son,
see that ye go out of hand to confession, and rid your self of these sins,
that have infected you, both body and soul. With that she caused Doctor
Thomas her own confessor to be called, and delivered the young man to him,
willing him to hear his confession. That done, the young man returned to her
again: and she laid her hand upon his shoulder, and said these words. Son,
go your way with the peace of our Lord Jesus Christ: For I will not, that
these agues trouble you any more. She said, and it was done: for the almighty
power of him spoke in her, who said, and it was done, who gave commandment,
and all things visible and invisible were created. This strange miracle was
wrought before so many witnesses, that it was in a very little time bruted
thoroughout the whole city. And the young man him self, that was cured, within
a few days after, came to Doctor Raimundus, as he was passing by the city,
(so fat and in such good liking, that the Doctor did scantly know him) and
before a great multitude of men and women recited the whole manner of the
miracle, as it has been declared here before: and thanked God and the holy
maid most humbly, for the benefit of his health, which, he confessed, he had
received perfectly at Gods hands, by her means and intercession.

One of the sisters of penance called Gemina, being so extremely pained with a
disease of the throat, commonly called the Squynancie, that, so often as she
took breath, it seemed, that she was in great danger of strangling, found the
means to be brought, where the holy maid was, and besought her of help. The
holy maid, being moved with compassion, laid her hand upon the sisters throat,
and made the sign of the Cross upon it: and forth with the disease left
her, and she returned home again with great joy. When the holy maid went
from Pisa to Auinion, there were in her company two devout young men, that
wrote her letters, the one called Nerius Landoccius de Pagliar ensibus, which
afterward forsook the world utterly and became an Heremite, the other
Steven Corradi, which likewise gave over the world at her commandment, and
became a Christian: in the which rule and discipline he lead a very straight
and holy life. Now, when the holy maid returned from Auinion into Italy
again, and was come to the city of Genua, it chanced this Nerius to be taken
with such a paineful gnawing and grieping in his bowels, that he cried
pitifully, and crope upon his hands and knees from place to place (for he was
not able to raise up him self) and could find no place, where to rest And thus
he continued day and night, without any release in extreme pain, and made
great lamentation to the rest of the compaine, which loved him all very
tenderly. Whereupon doctor Raimundus with other of them went to the holy
maid, and told her, in what a lamentble case the poor man stood. She showed,
that she had great compassion on him: but she gave them no word of comfort or
hope of recovery (as she was wont to do at other times but) contrariwise
willed them to seek to the phisicions, and cause them to minister to the
sickeman. When they saw, that the would put them in no manner of comfort, they
sent out of hand for two learned phisicions: which came and ministered to him
with great diligence: and their precptes were observed very precisely. But the
man recovered not, but ratherwaked worse and worse, in so much that, at the
length the phisicions them selves said to doctor Raimundus that they despaired
of his health. The which judgment of the phisicions when doctor Raimundus
declared afterward to the rest of the compaine as he was sitting with them at
supper: that other young man called Steven (of whom mention is made before)
rose up suddenly from the table with great fervor and vehemency of spirit,
and went to the holy maids chamber, and there casting him self down at her
feet wept bitterly, and besought her in most humble manner, that she would not
suffer his brother and companion to die in the way, and his body to be buried
in a strange land, especially considering, that he had taken that journey upon
him for Gods sake and for a charitable cause. With those words she was
inwardly touched, and said, unto him, Son if God will now take your brother
Nerius from you, and reward him for all his pains in heaven, me thinks, ye
should not be sorry for it, but rather rejoice. O good mother, said he, I pray
you, hear me at this time, and help him, for I doubt not, but that you are
able to do it, if you will. Then she being no longer able to refrain her
motherlie affection, spoke thus unto him. Son, my meaning was to exhort you,
that you should comforme your will to the will of God. But now, seeing you are
so much afflicted, to morrow in the morning, when I go to hear Mass and to
receive the blessed Sacrament, put me in mind and I promise you, that I will
offer up your petition unto God. In the mean time pray you to God for me,
that it may please him to hear my prayer. Steven was glad of that promise,
and the next day he waited diligently for her. And when she went to hear
Mass, he kneeled down before her very humbly, and said. I pray you, good
mother, remember your promise made to me yester night. With that she went to
hear Mass, and after Mass received. And when she had received, she continued
a certain time abstracted from her bodily senses (as her manner was.) So soon
as she came to her self again, she spoke to Steven (who attended there) with
a cheereful countenance, and said. Ye have obtained the grace, that ye
desire. What, said he, shall Nerius recover? Yea, said she, for certain Nerius
shall recover: for our Lord has granted him unto us. When Steven heard that,
he ran to Nerius, and told him, what comfortable words the holy maid had
spoken. After that the phisicions came again to the sick man, and,
considering diligently of the state of his body, pronounced plainly, that
they saw no hope of life in him. But whatsoever they saw in natural causes,
Nerius was by the almighty power of God restored to perfect health within a
few days, even as the holy maid had said. Soon after the recovery of this
man, it chanced the same Steven to fall sick also, being (as it was thought)
ouercharged with watching and pains, that he had taken, about the said Nerius.
He was sore pained with streynyng and vomiting, and withal with a passing great
head ach. The which thing, when it was signified to the holy maid by the rest
of the house (who were all very sorry for him) she went forthwith to his beds
side, where he lay, and asked him, how he did, and felt his pulses. Whereby
she perceived well, that he had a very sharp fever. Then she spoke to him
with great fervor of spirit, and said these words. I command thee in the
virtue of holy obedience, that thou be no more sick of this ague. She had no
sooner spoken those words, but that Steven was fully and perfectly delivered
of his ague, and sat up, and made merry with the rest of his company: and
they all together praised the goodness of God, that had given such power to the
holy maid.

At what time the holy maid was in the city of Florence about a treaty of
peace between Pope Gregory the eleventh and the Florentines, there was such a
broile stirred in the city, by certain euel disposed and seditious citizens
against the holy maid, that her friends, doubting and fearing her life,
counseled her to depart. But she made them answer, that she had an express
commandment from God, not to depart, until the peace were fully agreed upon,
and openly published in the said city. Howbeit she was contented a little to
give place to the fury of the people, and to withdraw her self into a secret
place not far from the city, and there to remain for a time, until the
tempest were somewhat assuaged. Now, as she was preparing her self to his
voyage, and in a manner ready to set foreward, one of her sisters called Ione
fell sick. Her foot was swollen very much (of what cause, no man knew:) he
pain and anguish whereof was so great, that it cast her into an ague also. By
reason whereof she was not in state to take that journey with the rest of her
compaine. When the holy maid understood of her sickness, being un willing to
leave her there behind (because she was many ways subject to the fury and
malice of naughty men) she fled to her accustomed refuge of prayer, and
besought almighty God of his infinity mercy, that he would provide for the
inde^nitie of her sister. God heard the petition of his spouse; For all the whil
that she continued thus in prayer, that other sister slept sloundely. Out of
the which sleep so soon as she awaked, she found her self in as perfect
health and strength, as if she had never ben sick. And so she rose up, and set
her self in order, and went the same morning with the maid and the rest of the
compaine so nimbly, that they were al astoined to se it.

When Pope Greg. had resolved to remove out of France unto the city of Rome
again, the holy maid likewise with doctor Raimundus and the rest of her
retinue, departed from auinion toward Italy. And passing through the
province they came to a city called Tolonne: where when: they had taken up
their Inn, the holy maid, to avoid the press of the people, which flocked
meruelously about her in all places to do her honor, left her compaine, and
(as her manner was) conveyed her self as secretly, as was possible, to an inner
chamber. And her whole compaine; knowing how troublesome such resort had been to
her at at other times, did, what they could to provide, that few or none
should know of her being there. But as they used all diligence to keep the
matter secret, so it seemed, that the very stones of the street cried out,
and be wraied her to the people: for she was no sooner in her chamber, but that
they came to the house from all parts of the city flocking in great nombers,
first of women, and then of men, and asked where that holy Lady was, that came
from the court of Rome. At the length, when Doct: Raimundus and the rest saw,
that the matter could no longer be hidden, being overcome with the importunate
pressing of the people, they were contented to admit the women only. Among
whom there was one, that had a young infant so strangely swollen, especially in
the belly, that it seemed rather a mo^ster, the^ a child; for the which
infant, the women besought the holy maid, that she would vouchsafe to take it
into her arms, she refused it at the first for humilities sake: but
afterward, being overcome with pity and seeing their faith, she yealded unto
the^. So sone as the child was in her arms, it began to let out out great
store of wind, and with that (in the presence of all that multitude) the
swelling of his belly and whole body assuaged: and she gave it again to the
mother in perfect health and shape of body. The fame of this miracle being
spread thoroughout the city, it came to the ears of the bishop: Who sent out
of hand for Doctor Raimundus, and desired him, that he would be a mean to the
holy maid, that he might speak with her: and told him withal, that the child,
upon whom this great miracle was wrought, was nephewe to his vicare generale.
She came with doctor Raimundus and certain of her sisters, and spoke with the
bishop: and he found him self meruelously well edified by her talk and
behavior. Many other miracles did the holy maid work to the benefit and
health of men's bodies. But these may suffice, to declare, that the power of
God dwelt in her, which was the principal worker of all these things.

How the holy maid made good bread of fustie and stinking corn: and how she
multiplied the same.

Chap. 5.
Because the order of justice requires, that such as show the^ selves
perfectly obedient to God, should be obeyed of all his creatures: our Lord, to
declare to the wordie, that the obedience of his spouse was very perfect
toward him, caused his creatures likewise to show their obedience toward
her. At the time, while the holy maid lived in Siena, it chanced, that a young
widow called Alexia (of whom mention has be^ made oftentimes before in this
book) bare such a singular affection to her, that it seemed, she could not
almost live without her; For the which cause she gave over the wordle, and
took the habit upon her, which the holy maid ware: and forsaking her own
house, took an house near unto the place, where the holy maid dwelt, that
she might resort unto her more commodiously and continue longer time in her
compaine. And the holy maid likewise, to avoid the distractions of her fathers
house, and to retire her self more closely to prayer and contemplation, would
go to the house of Alexia, and there continue with her, sometimes whole days,
sometimes whole weeks, yea and sometimes whole months. At that time, it
chanced one year to be such a scarcity of corn in the city and country,
that the people were constreined to eat bread, made of fustie and stinking
corn, that had been kept long time under the ground in cesternes and caves:
because there was none other to be gotten for money. Of such corn had Alexia
made provision for her self and her family for that year. But before her
store was spent, the harvest time was come, and she heard tell, that there was
new corn to be sold in the market; whereupon she thought to cast away that
little portion, that was left of the stinking corn, and buy new, But before
she did it, the holy maid being in house with her, she chanced to break her
mind to her, and to tell her, what she was about to do. What will ye do,
said she? Will you cast that away, that God has sent for the sustenance of
man? If you will not eat of that bread your self: yet bestow it upon the
poor, that have no bread to eat. To that Alexia replied and said, that she
had a conscience to give such stinking and unwholesome bread to the poor: she
would rather buy new corn, and make them bread of that. Well, said the holy
maid, bring me here a little warer, and that meal, which you mind to cast
away: and I will make bread of it for the poor. Alexia did, as she was
willed. Then the holy maid took it of her, and made past of it: and of the
past made such a deal of bred (and that also so quickly) that Alexia and her
servant, that beheld her all the time, were astoined to see it: for they thought
verily, that there could not have been made so many loaves of four or five
times so much meal, as the holy maid delivered out of her hands to Alexia,
to lay upon bordes and carry to the oven. And (which was most marvelous)
there was no euel savor in those loaves, as there was in all other made of the
same corn. But when they were baked, and set on the table to eat, they that
eat of them, could find no manner of bitterness or euel taste in them but rather
said, that they had not in their life time, eaten better and more sauorie
bread. This miracle being spread in the city, doctor Thomas her confessor
came, with certain other learned men of his brethren, to examine the matter:
and found in very deed, that there were two great miracles wrought, one in
augme^ting the quantity of the past, and an other in amending the euel
quality and stench of the corn. And the third miracle was added soon after:
which was, that whereas the same bread was very liberally dealt out to the
poor, and none other eaten in the house but that, yet there remained evermore
great store of it in the hutch. And so it continued many days and weeks.
Which moved certain devout persons, that understood the truth of the matter,
to take some of the said bread, and to lay it up reverently, where it might be
kept for a relic and perpetual remembrance of the great work, that almighty
God had wrought by his dear spowse. After wards, Doctor Raimundus being
desirous to be more particularly infourmed of the matter by the holy maid,
prayed her one a time in secret talk, that she would declare unto him for his
satisfaction, how, and in what order the thing had passed. And she made him
answer simply after this manner. Father, said she, I had a great zeal, that
the thing, that God had sent us for the relief of man, should not be lost. And
I had withal a great compassion on the poor. Whereupon I went to the hutch of
meal with a great fervor of spirit. So soon as I was there, behold, our
blessed Lady was there likewise with me, accompanied with a number of Saints
and Angels, and bad me to go foreward with my work, as I had determined. And
she was so benign and charitable, that she vouchsafed to labor with me, and
to work the past with her own hands: and so by the virtue of her holy
hands were those loaves multiplied in such sort, as ye have heard, for she
made the loaves and gave them to me: and I delivered them from me to Alexia and
her servant. Truly mother, said doctor Raimundus, I marvel not now, if that
bread seemed to me and others, that tasted of it, passing sweet: considering,
that it was made with the hands of that most heavenly and glorious Queen, in
whose sacred body was wrought and made by the holy Trinity, that live bread
that came down from heaven, to give life to all true believers.

How the holy maid multiplied bread an other time in Rome for the provision of
her family.

Chap. 6.
AT what time the holy maid came to Rome by commandment of Pope Vrbanus the
sixth, she had in her company to the number of four and twenty persons, to
wite, sixtene men and eight women. Which followed her almost against her will:
some to visit the holy places in Rome, and some to get certain spiritual
graces of the Popes holiness, but all, as her ghostly children, to be trained
by her in the rules of spiritual life. Besides these, there came to the city
at that time a number of good and godly men: which, because they were sent for
by the Pope at the holy maids motion and instance, resorted unto her, and
lodged in her house. And though she neither had, nor would have any thing for
the relief of her self and al her family, but only what she received of pure
alms: yet was she so liberal and free of heart, and had such a love to
hospitality, that she made no difference between receiving one man and one
hundred: for she doubted not, but had a full trust and affiance in God, that he
would provide for them all. For the better perfourmance whereof, she took this
order among her women, that they should be stewardes in the house by course one
after an other every week; so that one of them was evermore occupied about
the provision of meat, drink, and other things; that the rest might the
more freely intend their pilgrimages and other holy exercises, for the which
they were come to the city. And because the bread, that they eat, was all of
alms, she gave them charge, that whosoever was steward for the week, should
always signify to her a day before the bread was all spent; that she might
send some other of the sisters, or go her self to beg more. One time it
chanced, that one of the sisters called Ione, being steward in her course,
lacked bread, and yet forgot to signify so much to the holy maid, until the
very hour of dinner was come Then remembering her self, and being ashamed of
her negligence, she went to the holy maid with a heavy cheer, and confessed
her fault. Ah sister, said she, God forgive you. Wherefore have you brought us
to this distress, contrary to the order, that I gave you? Behold our family
is now very hungry they have fasted long. And where shall we find so much
bread of a sudden, as may suffice the^ al? To that sister Ione could say
nothing else but only acknowleged her forgetfulness, and cried her mercy. Well,
said the holy maid: cause them to sit down at the table. Alas, said she,
there is not bread enough for four persons. whatsoever there is (said the
holy maid) will them to go to dinner, and to begin with that little, that is,
until God send more. And with that she went her self to prayer. Then sister
Ione? according as she was commanded, caused them to sit down, and set that
small provision, that was, of bread and other things before them. They fell to
their meat gridily, (for they used to fast very much, and that day they had
tarried for their dinner longer, then they were wont to do) and thought in deed,
that they should soon dispatch that short pitance. But our Lord at the
instance of the holy maid so wrought in that bread, that they cut soppes into
their potage, and eat every man so much as sufficed: and yet was the bread
nothing diminished, but rather increased. Whereat when they were all astoined,
they asked what the holy maid was in doing. And understanding that she was
earnestly occupied in prayer, they concluded all with one voice (which were in
number sixteen persons) that it was her prayer that had procured that
increase from heaven; for, said they, ye see that we are all satisfied, and
the bread, that was set before us, is not less but rather more then it was at
the beginning. And when their table was taken up, there remained so much bread,
as sufficed the sisters abundantly: and after them the holy maid commanded
the rest to be given out to the poor, which was also a plentiful alms.

The like happened the same year and in the same house, in the lent time by
the like default of an other of the sisters, called Francis.

How the holy maid wrought the like miracle in the covent of the Friars
preacheers in Siena after her departure out of this wordle.

Chap. 7.
THe holy maid died in the city of Rome (as it is said before:) from whence
her head was sent afterward to Siena, and received, but not with such honor,
as was thought meet and answereable to the holy life, that she had lead in
that place. Whereof Doctor Raimundus having some remorse of conscience, and
being moved also (as it was thought) by God, was in hand with his brethren,
that they should appoint some day, when that precious relic might be brought
(as from some other place) by the whole covent and the rest of her spiritual
sons and daughters, with hymns and psalms, and other solemnities, such as
were common to the Saints in heaven: for as yet it was not lawful to singe any
particular service in the honor of her, because she was not canonized. Which
being agreed upon, he went and invited al her spiritual children, that were
abroad, to come at the day appointed, and to honor their good mother, every
one in the best manner, that he could devise. And withal he entreated them, to
take a part of their pitance that day with the covent. When this solemnity
was ended, and the time come, that they should go to dinner, the brother, that
had the charge of the butterie, came to the priour with a heavy countenance,
and told him, that there was not bread enough in the house, to suffice the one
half of the covent, and much less to suffice the strangers also, that were
invited: which were to the number of twenty persons. When the priour heard
that, he went first into the butterie to see the provision. And when he saw,
that it was so in deed: he sent that brother, with Doctor Thomas the holy
maids foremer ghostly Father, to certain of their special frindes houses, to
make a sufficient provision of bread for the whole company. But those men
tarried somewhat longer, then it was thought they would have done. Wherefore the
priour having consideration of his strangers, caused them to sit down, and set
before them so many loaves of bread, that there remained for the covent but
only so much, as, they thought, would have been a competent portion for four or
sieve men. At the length, when the priour saw, that they came not away, he
willed the covent to sit down also, and to begin with that little, until
more came. They did so, and eat their meat. And though those two brethren
came not at all with any new provision, yet was their bread so much increased
(undoubtedly by the merits of the holy maid) that the whole covent, which
were to the number of fifty persons, was abundantly satisfied, both at the
first and second dinner. And after all was done, they gathered up a great
quantity of bread, which was also reserved till an other time. When the covent
dinner was done, the priour with certain of his brethren went to the place,
where the strangers sat, and Doctor Raimundus with them. (Who was still
sitting at the table with them, and making a sermon or collation in the praise
of the holy maid.) Which sermon the priour interrupted, and told them, what a
wonderful work it had pleased God to work that day in the covent, When
doctor Raimundus heard that, he turned himself again to the company, and
said these words. Surely, surely our good mother shows, that she likes well
of the service and honor, that we have done her this day, in that she feeds
us with bread by miracle: which was in deed a common thing with her, while she
lived. And in this she shows also, that she is the true daughter of our
blessed father S. Dominicke: of whom we read in the story of his, life, that
twice in his life time he wrought the like miracle in multiplying of bread.

How almighty God caused wine to be found in an empty vessel to the use of
the holy maid: and how he caused the same to cease again at her instance.

Chap 8.
IN the year of our Lord. 1375. the holy maid went to the city of Pisa, and
lodged in a worshipful citizens house called master Gerard Bonconties. Where,
by reason of a great abstraction, that she had from her bodily senses, she was
brought to such an extreme feeblenes, that it seemed, she was at the very
point of death. Wherefore doctor Raimundus, fearing her present departure out
of his wordle, began to cast with him self, if it were possible to devise any
thing, that might somewhat refresh or comfort her body in that case Flesh,
eggs, and wine, he knew well. she might not abide: and much less,
electuaries, or any other the like confortatiues, that were made of sweet
things, Wherefore he came to her, and prayed her, that she would suffer them
at the least to put a little sugar into the cold water, that she droncke. To
that she answered quickly, and said. Alas father, that little life, that is
left in my body, ye go about to quench utterly, for ye know, that all
sweet things are become very hurtful and deadly to me. Then Doctor
Raimundus and the said master Gerard, in whose house she lay, began to devise
carefully, what thing they might do to relieve and comfort her, if it were
possible. And it came to their minds, (which they had seen oftentimes proved
in the like cases) that when a sick person was not able to receive any
sustenance inwardly, it was good to take red wine, and with the same to wash
the temples and pulses of his hand-wrestes. Whereupon master Gerard sent to
one of his neighbors, which was wont evermore to have one vessel of that wine,
and prayed him, that he would be so good, as to send him a botel of it. The
neighbor, when he understood master Gerardes request, and withal the extreme
feeblenes of the holy maid, made answer to the messenger, and said. Truly
friend, I could find in my heart to bestow, if it were that whole vessel, upon
master Gerard. But it is now three months, sense it was all drawn out even
to the lees. And at this present, there is not in my house one drop of that
kind of wine: whereof I am very sorry. But, that you may be well assured, that
it is so in deed, I pray you, come down with me, and see. And with that he
would needs have him down into the cellar, and showed him the vessel. Wherein
that red wine had been. And the messenger might well perceive, that the vessel
was dry, and that it had stood long empty But yet the good man, for the more
assurance, in his presence would needs draw out the spigot also: that he
might see it with his eyes, and so satisfy master Gerardes mind. So soon as
he had taken out the spigot, behold, there issued out of the vessel a goodly
red wine, which ran abondantly, even as from a full tappe, and wette all the
ground underneath. VVherat the good man of the house was meruelously astoined:
and putting up the spigot again, called all that were in his house, both men
and women, and examined them diligently, if any of them knew of any wine,
that was put into that vessel. They said all and swear also, that the vessel
had stood empty for the space of three months before; and they thought it
not only unlike, but also impossible, that any creature should bring so much
wine into the house, and put it into the vessel without their knowledge. Which
made them to think (as it was in deed) that this wine was sent them from God
to the behoof and comfort of the holy maid. And when the messenger, that was
sent from master Gerard, came home with his bottel full of that wine, and
declared to him and the rest, what had happened: they all took great comfort
in it, and magnified the bountiful goodness of almighty God, that had so
miraculously provided for the relief of his true handmaid. The fame of this
miracle being spread thorough out the city it chanced within a few days
after, when the holy maid was recovered, that she had an occasion to go
abroad, to visit a certain patriarch, that was newly come to the city, sent
from the Sea Apostlolike. While she passed thorough the streets, the people,
having understanding of her coming abroad, forsook their work and shoppes,
and ran from all parts of the city to see her, and said. What a woman is
this, that drincketh water her self, and yet fills our vessels with wine?
When the holy maid saw that press of the people, and understood the cause
of the same, it went to the very heart of her: as she declared afterward in
confession to her ghostly Father. And therefore she turned her self to
almighty God after a sorrowful manner and spoke to him in her heart after this
sort. O Lord, why have thou plagued me thy poor handmaid thus, as to make me
a laughing stock to all the people? All other thy servants may be seen
among men: only I can not. Who desired this wine of thee for me? Thou know,
O Lord, that I have long forborne the drincking of wine: and now for a little
wine I am made a common talk in every man's mouth. I most humbly beseech thee
(O my dear Lord) for all the mercies, that ever thou have showed unto me thine
unworthy handmaid, that thou will cause this wine utterly to vanish away, in
such sort, that the brute, that is raised of me among the people, may cease
withal. Thus she prayed with deep sighs and inward gronyng of heart: and our
Lord despised not her prayer; For, whereas the people repaired still to the house
to drink of the wine, and many honest citizens drancke of it for pure
devotion, and evermore perceived that there was nothing the less wine for all
their drincking: coming now to the vessel to drink, they found, that all the
wine was turned to thick dregs. And whereas before it was a very pleasant
wine, it was now of a sudden become so pudlie and unpleasant, that no man
might abide to drink of it. Which thing caused a great alteration in the
minds of the people; For whereas before they thought and spoke very reverently
of the holy maid, many of them began now to imagine, that this wine was a
thing counterfeicted by the deuel, and that almighty God, to make such
treachery known to the wordle, had turned it unto dregs. Which made the
good man of the house and all other, that had before by occasion of this
miracle, given the holy maid a report of great virtue and holiness, so much
ashamed, that afterward they durst not once to open their mouths, to speak
any thing, that tended to her commendation. But the holy maid her self was
very glad of it, and gave God most humble thanks, that had delivered her from
such vain and troublesome applauses of the people. VVherin she showed her
self in deed to be the true disciple and follower of our Savior Christ, whose
manner it was evermore, when he had wrought miracles, to avoid the favorable
speeches of men. And howsoever it pleased euel disposed persons to interpret
these two miracles, there could be no fault in the holy maid; For of the
foremer, which they ascribed to the deuel, she knew nothing, until it was
done: and the latter was wrought by almighty God, and at her request. But a
charitable mind would rather interpret them thus: that our Lord showed in the
foremer miracle, how much he loved her, and in the latter, how she answered his
love again with a profound humility In the foremer he gave us matter to
praise her, in the later example to follow her. In the foremer he taught us,
how she was adorned with grace, in the latter, how she was stayed with wisdom:
for where humility is, there is also true wisdom.

Of a goodly vision, that was showed to a certain devout matrone in Rome, at
the departure of the holy maid out of this life.

Chap. 9.
AT what time the holy maid departed out of this life, there was in the city
of Rome a certain devout matrone of honest parentage, called Semia. This woman
in her husbands days served God diligently. But after her husbands death,
being left with two sons, she gave her self wholly to prayer, visiting of
holy places, and other the like devout exercises, and so continued many
years: Her manner was to rise every night to prayer, and toward the morning
to take a little rest, lying down or leanyng her head for a while to her beds
side, that she might the better endure the labor of going the stations in Rome
the next day. This Semia when the holy maid came first to the city, being
infourmed by diverse and sundry persons of her great virtue and holiness,
resorted much to her house, and in time became very familiar with her. Howbeit
she was so thoroughly occupied, what with her ordinary stations and
pilgrimages, and what with the necessary attendance upon her two sons, that
sometimes for certain days together, she had no leisure to come and see the
holy maid: (as it chanced in deed at the time of her final sickness and
passage out of this world.) The night, before the holy maid gave up the ghost
in the morning, this devout matrone rose up, after her accustomed manner, to
prayer. And when she had done, she thought to rest her self a while, as she
was wont to do. Howbeit she had a care, not to sleep ouerlong, because it was
sondaie, and she intended to hear high Mass that day: which she could not
do conveniently, unless she rose up quickly; because she had her childrens
dyners to dress, before she went to Church. Now lying down with this care,
her mind was so fully occupied with the same, that (as it is wont to happen in
such case) she seemed to speak to her self in her sleep, and to say thus.
Woman, what meanest thou? Thou must needs rise quickly (there is no remedy)
that thou may dress thy childrens dinner, and so go to Church in dew time.
As she was speaking these words in her mind to her self, behold, there
appeered a marvelous goodly child unto her, of the age (as it seemed) of an
eight or ten years, which spoke to her after this manner. I will not have thee
to rise yet, until thou have seen a thing, that I will show thee. She was
much delited with the sight of that child: and yet, because she had great care
of her business, and specially of hearing Mass, she spoke unto him, and said. I
pray thee, good child, let me rise: for I must needs hear high Mass this
day. In no wise, said the child: unless thou see before certain wonderful
things that I am commanunded by God to show thee. And with that he took her
by her garments (as it seemed to her) and lead her into a certain open and
large place, in the which she saw the form of a marvelous goodly oratorie or
Church, and in the top of the same a tabernacle of silver close locked, which
showed very princely. Then said the child to her. Abide here a while, and thou
shall see, what is in yonder tabernacle. He had no sooner spoken those words,
but that there appeered an other child like him, which brought a ladder, and
with a golden keie, that he had in his hand opened the door of the tabernacle.
When the door was open, she saw a marvelous goodly and beawtiful young maid,
roially appareled all in shynyng white, with collars and owches of price. She
ware three crowns upon her head, which were very finely wrought and set
together in such sort, that every one of them might be perfectly seen and
discerned from the other. The lower crown was al of pure silver, and showed
white. The second was of silver myngled with gold, and showed a certain
glistering red color, such as is wont to be when an orient red ground is
wrought over with threedes of gold. The third and highest crown was all of
pure gold, richly, decked and set rownd about with perles and precious stones.
The widow, beholding this goodly sight, began to reason with her self, what
young maid that might be, that was so gorgiously trymed. And looking steddily on
her, she might well discern, that it was the face of Caterine of Siena: but
her age was not answereable. Which made her to suspecte, that it should be some
other. Then the child, that appeered to her first, asked her whether she knew
that fair maid, or no. Truly, said she, this is the very face of Caterine of
Siena: but her age agrees not. While the woman stood thus and looked wishly
upon her, the young maid, that was within the tabernacle, smyled sweetly, and
said to those two children. Lo, this woman knows me not. After this, there
came four other children, like unto these, and brought with them a settle to
carry one in, made in form like a bride chamber, and furnished thoroughly
with rich clothes of a purple color. And when they had set down this chamber
or settle by the aforesaid tabernacle of silver, they went up nymbly, and took
the young maid, that was there crowned in their hands, to bring her down and
put her in that chamber. But while this was in doing, the young maid spoke to
those children and said. Let me go a little to that woman first, that sees me
now, and knows me not. And with that she went toward her, as it were
fleeing, and said unto her. Semia, do not you know me? I am Caterine of Siena,
even as my face shows. What, said Semia? Are you Caterine my spiritual
mother? I am, said she. But marcke well, what thou have seen, and what thou
shall see. When the blessed virgin had spoken those words, the six children
took her, and brought her back to the said bride chamber: and placed her in
the same, and so lifted her upon high. Semia stood still and looked after, to
see, what would become of her. And behold, she saw in heaven a seat, and upon
the seat a king sitting, royally clad and crowned, having in his right hand a
book open. The children mounted up with their carriage, until they came to the
foot of this seat: and there they set down the bed chamber and the maid in
it. And she forthwith went out of the chamber, and cast her self down
prostrate at the feet of the king, and worshipped him. That done, the king
said to her. Welcome my right dearly beloved spowse and daughter Caterine.
Then, being commanded by the king, she lift up her head, and read in the
book, that he held in his right hand, so long, as a man would well say a
Pater noster. When she had done that, the king commanded her to stand up. And
so she did, and stood by the seat looking for the coming of the Queen: Which
came forthwith, accompained with a goodly train of virgins, and went (as it
seemed) toward the king. When the Queen approached near, the holy maid went
down from the place, where she stood, and kneeling upon her knees, worshipped
her. The Queen embraced her very lovingly, and said. Heartily welcome, my
dear daughter Caterine. And with that she took her up and kissed her. Then
the holy maid kneeled down again, and worshipped the Queen. And, when she
had so done, she went by commandment of the Queen to all the rest of the
virgins, one after an other and they all received her likewise with passing
great joy and kissed her. Now Semia, that stood and behold all these things
was so moved with the sight, that she cried out alowde, and said. O blessed
Lady, O mother of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, make intercession for us.
And again she said. O blessed Marie Magdalene, O blessed S. Catherine, O
blessed S. Agnes, O blessed S. Margarite pray for us. And with this cry she
awaked out of her sleep: and openyng her eyes saw, that the son was of a
great height. Whereof being very sorry, both for the high Mass, which, she
doubted, would be almost done, before she could come to her parish Church, and
also for her childrens dinner, which could not be made ready against the due
time, she began to think with her self, what the cause should be, why that
unwonted and strange vision should be showed unto her: for she neither knew
nor suspected, that the holy maid should be departed out of this life: though
she knew well, that she was very sick: because she had seen by experience,
that the holy maid had often times recovered and escaped out of sickenesses,
that seemed very grievous and past all hope of recovery. Wherefore she
rather thought, that for so long time as she had been occupied about this
vision, the holy maid had been after her accustomed manner in some singular
traunse or abstractio^, in the which our Lord had showed unto her some great
and notable revelations. But because the morning was so far spent, that she
stood in doubt of finding any Mass that day, she supposed, that all this
vision was none other thing, but only some subtle illusion of the deuel, to
make her to transgress the commandment of our holy mother the Church, in
not hearing Mass on the sondaie Wherefore she hasted her self up, and set her
pot over the fire, and ran toward the parish Church, saying thus in her
heart. If I leese Mass this day, I will take all this to be the work of the
ghostly enemy. But if I come in good time to hear Mass, then will I think,
that our Lord has showed these things unto me for my good mother Catherines
sake. When she came to the Church, she found, that the gospel was done, and the
offertorie song. Whereof she was very sorry, and said. Out upon me wretch, the
wicked feend has deceived me. With that she made have homwardes again to set
her things in the kitchen a little foreward: that she migh go to some other
Church, and find a whole Mass. While she was at home thus occupied, she heard
a bell ring to Mass in a monastery of Nuns not far from her house: which
made her a glad woman. And so she set her self in order again to go to
Church, and for have left her colewortes, (which stood by her ready piked and
washed) even as they were, and put them not into the pot, as she had thought
to do, When she came to the Church she found them at the very beginning of
Mass whereof she was very glad, and said to her self. Surely, now I see, that
the deuel has not deceived me: as, I thought, he had done. But she had great
care of the displeasure of her sons, which were now of good years, because
she knew, their dinner was nor ready, nor could not be made ready in any
convenient time. Houbeit she committed all to God, that she might hear Mass
devoutly; beseeching him notwithstanding, that if that vision were of him, he
would so provide, that there might no displeasure or cause of offense rise of
the same between her and her children. And with that she set her self down
and heard out the whole Mass to the end: when Mass was done as she was going
homeward, her sons met with her in the street, and said. Mother, it is very
late. I pray you, let us go to diner. Tarry a little, good children, said
she: and you shall dyne in good time. She went home a pace, and found the door
fast locked and the keie within, even as she had left it. So soon as she was
within the house, she went straight to the kitchen, and thought to have gone
foreward with the dressing of dinner. But when she came in, she saw, that all
was done to her hand: her colewoortes and flesh thoroughly sodde^, and al other
things in such readiness, that they might go to the table when they would.
VVherat she was much astoined, and said to her self. Surely, now I see, our
Lord has heard my prayer. And she determined to go after dinner to the holy
maids house (whom she thought to be yet alive in the wordle) and to tell her
of all the things, that had chanced that day. Her sons, that were not
far from the house, she called home, and set them to dinner. And while they
were eating, her mind ran still upon the strange vision, that she had seen
in the morning, and upon these wonders, that had ensued upon the same. Her
sons also, that knew nothing of the matter, began to commend their meat,
and said, that it was passing well seasoned, and had a far better taste, then
it was wont to have. Which words she put up in her heart, and said to her self
(as she declared afterward to Doctor Raimundus.) O my good mother Catherine,
it is thou, that have come this morning into my house, to supply my rome and
office in the kitchen. Now I know, in deed, that thou art a holy virgin, and
the true hand maid of Christ. And yet for all this, she suspected nothing of
the holy maids departure out of this life: but, so soon as her sons had
dined, she went forthwith to her house (as she was wont to do at other times)
and knocked at the door: but no body give her answer. The neighbors told
her, that of likelihood she was gone out (as her manner was) to visit some
holy place, and that there was no body at home. Which she supposed to be
true, and therefore went her way. Now the truth was, that all those, that were
within, were in great heaviness for the loss of their good mother which was
departed from them, and had left them as motherles children in this wicked
world. And they did, what they could, to conceal her death from the people:
both for the avoiding of that great press and tumulte, which, they knew would
be made, if her death were once noised; and also, that they might with the more
quietness confer with discreet persons concerning the manner and order of her
funerals. But, howsoever they labored to keep the matter secret, the next
day, when her body should be carried to the Church of the Friars preachers,
commonly called Our lady over Minerua, it was known all over the city. And
there was such a concourse of people, runnyng and pressing toward the place,
where she lay, to touch some part either of her body or of her garments,
that those of her family and retinue, that were there attending upon the
corpse, were in great fear and danger, to have had both their garments torn
from their backs, and their bodies sore hurt with the violent press and crowd
of the unruly multitude. In so much that they were constreined to remove the
beer from the place, where it stood, and to set it in S. Dominickes chapel,
which was well defended with a strong grate of iron. While these things were
in doing, Semia came thither by chance: and seeing such a great concourse of
people, asked what it meaned. They made her answer, and said, that Catherine
of Siena was dead, and that her body was there carried to the Church to be
buried, When she heard that, she s^right pitifully, and ran toward the
place, where her corpse lay. When she came thither, and saw certain women
and sisters of the holy maids family standing about her body: she cried out
and said. O most cruel women, why have you kept the departure of my sweet
mother secret from me? wherefore would ye not call me, to be present with
others at her passage out of the world? They excused them selves, alleging
certain reasonable cawses: which did in some degree satisfy her mind. Well
then, said she: I pray you, tell me what time she departed. Yester day, said
they, about eight of the clock she gave up the ghost. With that she rent her
own face with her nails, and cried out ruthfully. I saw her: I saw my sweet
mother, even when she departed out of her body. I saw her carried up into
heaven by the ministry of Angels, crowned with three precious crowns, and
clad solomnely with stately robes of shynyng white* Now I know, that it was
our Lord, that sent his Angel, to show me the departure of my good mother. It
was he, that provided for me, that I should hear Mass so late. And (which is
more) I see now, that it was our Lord him self, that supplied my charge
miraculously in the dressing of my childrens dinner. O mother, O dear mother* O
sweet mother, why would thou not give me to understand, that it was thou,
that did depart out of this life? When she had thus eased her heart
somewhat with weeping and speaking, she declared to those religious sisters,
and to the rest, that stood there about the beer, what a goodly vision our
Lord had showed her, at that very time, when the holy maid passed out of this
world, with all such other things, as have been recited here to fore. Whereof
they all glorified God, and took no small comfort.

How the holy maids body lay three days and three nights above the ground
unburied: and of a number of miracles, which it pleased our Lord to work in
that mean time.

C. 10.
WHile the holy maids body lay thus within the chapel of S. Dominicke, the
people came in so fast from all parts of the city, to kiss her hands and
feet, to touch some part of her garments, and to commend the^ selves to her
prayers, that they were co^streined, for satisfying the peoples devotion, to
keep her above the ground unburied for the space of three days and three
nights. In the which time, very many came thither, and brought with them a
number of weak and impotent creatures, hoping that they should obtein their
recovery and health at Gods hand, through the holy prayers and merits of the
B. virgin; And they were not deceived in their hope and expectation.

There was dwelling in the city of Rome at that time a sister of the third
order of S. Francis, called Dominica borne in Bergamo a city of Lombardie,
which had one of her arms benommed, and, as it were, withered and dried up in
such sort, that for the space of six months before the departure of the holy
maid, she had no use of it. This Dominica came to the Church, and to the
chapel, where the holy corpse lay. But because, being a weak woman, she
could not come her self to touch any part of her body or garments, by
reason of the great press and crowd of the people: she prayed some one, that
stood there near to the beer, that he would be so good, as to take a vele of
hers, and put it to some part of the body, and so deliver it unto her aganie.
When she had received her vele again, she put it to her arms and forthwith
her arm was perfectly healed, and in as good state, as ever it was before. The
which when she perceived, she cried out for joy, and declared to all the
people, that were there present, what a wonderful work our Lord had wrought
upon her. Whereupon they brought in many other weak and feeble creatures,
hoping, thad if they might come to touch but only the hemme of her garments,
they should be made whole.

Among others, they brought in a child of four years old, whose sinowes in
his neck were shronken, that he held his head evermore upon his shoulder; and
could not lift it up. When this child was brought thither; they held him down
to the beer that the holy maids hand might touch that part that was so
shronken, and they took the vele, that was over the holy maids head, and put
it about the childs neck. And forthwith the child began to amend: and in the
presence of all that people, within a very little time lift up his head, and
was fully and perfectly healed.

After this, an honest citizen of Rome called Lucius Cauarulis, which was so
grievously pained with an incurable disease in his hippe and leg, that he
could scantly endure to go a very little way with the help of a staff or
crooch, hearing the fame of the great miracles, that were wrought by almighty
God in the honor of the holy maid, came with passing great pain and travail
to the Church of the Friars preachers. And when he was come thither, he found
the means by the help of others to be carried to the place, where her body
lay. And there, with great devotion he took her hand, and laid it upon the
parts diseased, to wit, upon his thigh and leg. He had no sooner done so,
but that he felt immediately a present ease and help. And before he departed
from thence, was perfectly cured of his disease and maine, to the great wonder
and astonishment of all the people.

In like manner, a young maid called Ritozola, upon whom a very loathsome and
stinking leprie was so far grown, that her nose and upper lip were foulie
disfigured with the same, hearing in the city the brute and talk of these
strange miracles, came to the Church, and pressed to approach near to the holy
corpse: but was diverse times repelled by them, that stood there about the
beer. All the which not withstanding she assaied again and again: and at the
length with much a do gate in. When she was entered, she went forthwith, and
put her nose and lip, that were so pitifully disfigured, not only to the
feet and hands of the holy maid, (as others did) but also to her face.
Whereby she was so fully cured of her foul disease, that there remained not
so much as any little sign or token of the leprie in her face.

A certain Roman called Typreus had a daughter, which in her tender age fell
into a very grievous infirmity called the ptisicke: of the which she could
not be cured by any medicine. This Typreus and his wife (whose name was
Lella.) hearing the fame of these great miracles, that were wrought by the
holy maid, commended their daughter with great devotion unto her, and caused
their daughter to touch a certain kerchiefe and beads, that had touched the
holy maids body. A wonderful thing, The young maid that was before despaired
of phisicions and other, forthwith upon the touching of these things without
any longer time or help of medicine, found her self to be in as good state of
body, as ever she was in her life before: and so continued.

In this time likewise, while the body of the holy maid lay above the
ground, there was in Rome a certain citizen called Antonie Lellipeeters, which
by over laboring his body had fallen into such a nommenes of his limbs, that
he was, as it were, an impotent man, and could neither walk nor stand. And the
phisicions could find nothing in their art, that could either cure him wholly
of his disease, or ease him in any degree of his extreme pain. This Antonie,
hearing, what wonderful things were done by the holy maid, commended him
self devoutly unto her, and made a vow, that he would do some special thing
to her might honor if he be delivered by her merits. He had no sooner given
out that vow in his heart, but that he felt him self perfectly healed, both of
his lamenes and pain: and began to walk as nymbly, as ever he did in his life
before: and went by and by to the place, where the holy corpse lay, and
performed his vow: and declared with great joy in the presence of all the
people there assembled at that time, what a wonderful grace he had received at
Gods hand, through the merits of that holy maid.

There was also a certain devout matrone in Rome, called Paula, which was used
of the holy maid, or rather used her very familiary: for she was her
hostess, and enierteined both the holy maid and all her company in her
house. This Paula was, at the time of the holy mades departure, pained with
two diseases: which had continued upon her four months before. The one was
the gowte: the other the pain of the flancke. And, because these two maladies
were of such contrary quality, that whatsoever was ministered unto her for the
help of the one, was hurtful to the other: (the one requiring things to
loose, the other contrary wise things to bind) the sick woman was pitifully
vexed, and many times brought even to the very point of death. When the holy
maid passed out of this life, she besought them, that were about her, very
instantly, that they would let her have certain things, that had touched the
holy maids body. The which things being given unto her over night, the next
morning she rose out of her bed (which she was never able to do in four
months before) and walked as lustely as ever she had done, when she was in
her best health. These and many other miracles did almighty God work to the
honor of the holy maid in those three days, while her body lay unburied:
which through the negligence of men, were not so duly examined and diligently
written, as these.

Among other things, that chaunceed within the space of those three days, one
thing, which seems to give a certtaine credit and confirmation to the rest,
is not to be passed over with silence. There was a certain Doctor of
divinity, which, in the time of that great concourse of people, went up to the
pulpet, to make a sermon or collation in the the praise of the holy maid. And
when he had stood there a good while, and had assaied by diverse and sundry
means to get him audience, and saw at the length, that it would not be: he
said only these words. This holy virgin has no need of our preaching. She
preaches much better her self then we are able to do. And with that he came
down, ano left the people sufficiently edified with the wonderful things,
that they saw there with their eyes.

What miracles almighty God wrought, to honor the holy maid, after her
burial.

Chap. 11.
WHen the holy maids body had been thus kept three days and three nights
above the ground; they buried it. Howbeit almighty God ceased not to honor
his dear spouse with miracles: but wrought both more and greater things, then
before.

A certain Roman called John Veries, had a little son, which could neither
go nor stand upright on his feet. This man, hearing by others, what great
miracles were wrought by the holy maid, made a vow to God and her, for the
recovery of his child: and brought him to the place, where she was buried. So
soon as the child was laid upon the holy maids grave, his feet and legs
received firmenes and strength, and he began to stand upright and walk so
well, as if he had never had any such defecte.

In like manner one John Tozos, had a very strange and horrible infirmity in
his eyes: in so much that there bred worms in one of his eyes. This John made
a vow to the blessed virgin S. Catherine: and forthwith he was perfectly
healed of his paineful and loathsome disease. Whereupon he went to the holy
maids grave, and offered up a certain memorial of wax (as the manner is) in
token of his delivery: and declared, what a wonderful grace he had received.

There was also a certain woman, that came out of Germany to the city in
pilgrimage: whose name by negligence of them, that were appointed to write
these things, was not taken. This pilgrymme had with long sickness, as it
were, lost the use of her eyes, and was without hope to recover the same by
any medicine. Wherefore she commended her self devoutly to the holy maid,
and made a vow. So soon as she had so done, she received her sight again,
and came to the grave to perform her vow: and saw as well, as ever she had
done in her life before.

There was also a woman of honor in Rome, called lady Marie: which had such a
grievous pain in her head, that in continuance of time she lost one of her
eyes, though she had used diverse and sundry medecines for the saving of the
same. For the which cause, partly for sorrow, and partly for shamefastnes, she
kept her self euermor within her own house, and would not be seen abroad,
neither in the church nor else where in any open place. This lady, understanding
by others what great things had been wrought in the city by the holy maid,
commended her self unto her, and made a vow. The night following, the holy
maid appeered to one of her waiting women in her sleep, and willed her to tell
her lady, that she should make no mo medecines for her eyes, but should go
every morning to Church to hear the divine service: and so doing she should
find help. The lady hearing that, did as she was willed by her servant, and
found, as she was promised by the holy maid: For she recovered not only
strenght for that eye, that remained (which was much weakened) but also
perfect sight in that other eye, that was quite out. And (which was the
greatest cure of all) the eye of her mind was also restored in such sort, that
she saw now, how to observe the commandment of God in going to the sermons,
and keeping holy the sondaies and other holy days commanded by our holy
mother the Church.

There was also a certain young man in Rome called James, the son of a
certain citizen called Peeter Nicols, which with long sickness at the length
was brought so low, that it booted not to minister any more physic unto
him. When all men had given him over, as a dead man, a certain devout woman
that was about him, called Cecola Cartaria, made a vow to the blessed virgin
S. Caterine in his behalf: and forthwith the young man began to amend, and
within a very little time, was fully recovered of his disease.

In like manner, a certain woman called Gilia Petruccies, when the phisicions
had given their diffinitiue sentence, that by the course of nature she must
needs die, made the like vow to S. Catherine of Siena: and with that found
present ease of her pain, and within a few days after was perfectly restored
to her health.

There was also at this time in the city, a certain noble and devout woman,
called Lady Ione Ilperines, which was well acquenited with the holy maid in
her life time. And therefore seeing the miracles, that were wrought after her
death, she conceived the greater opinion of holiness in her. In so much that,
wheresoever she went to visit any, that were sick and diseased she would
always persuade with them, that they should commend them selves devoutly to
the holy virgin S. Caterine of Siena. By the which means she procured the
recovery of a great many that were sick of diverse and sundry diseases.

On a time it chanced, that one of this ladies own children; sporting and
runnyng rechlesly (as young children are wont to do) in an upper lofte of the
house, fell down headlong to the ground in her presence. She, seeing the
sudden fall of her child, whom, as a good mother, she could not but love
tenderly, and considering of the thing, as it was like to be in the discourse
of man (which was, that her son should either die presently, or else at the
least be sore crusshed that he should prove but a criple or wraile all the
days of his life after) cried out mightily and said. O blessed S. Caterine of
Siena, I commend my child to thee. It is a wonderful matter to consider, that,
though the height and other conditions of the place, from whence the child
fell, were such, that in reason they might hope of none other, but only present
death, yet, when they came to take up the child, they found, that he had no
manner of harm in any part of his body, but was fully in as good case and
liking after that great fall, as he was before. When the mother saw that, she
gave most humble thanks to almighty God and to his dear spowse S. Caterine:
and ceased not, wheresoever she came, to set out her holiness and virtues to the
uttermost of her power.

There was also a poor woman in the city called good Ione, which, being a
common landresse, gate a poor living by serving of others, and specially by
washing of clothes. This Ione wasshing on a time by the rivers side called
Tiber, happened among other clothes to wash a quilte, of the which one part was
in the river, and the other under her hand in washing. But, that part, the
swame in the river, being heavier then the other, of a sudden drew that part,
that was in wasshing, from under her, and so the whole was carried away with the
swaie of the stream. When the poor woman saw the quilt gone, and knew,
that, if it were lost, she was never able to pay for it: having a greater care
to recover the quilt, then to save her self, she reached so far after it,
that she fell into the water also, and was carried likewise a good way from the
land. Being there in great distress, and destitute of all man's help, it came
to her mind, what great miracles were wrought at that time in the city by the
holy maid. Whereupon she cried out, and said. O blessed virgin S. Catherine of
Siena, help me now in this great need. She had no sooner spoken those words,
but that forthwith she was helped up by the almighty hand of God, and brought
against the course of the stream, and set with the quilt in her hand upon the
bancke, without any help of man. When she saw her self there, and could not
imagine, how she came thither: she thanked God with all her heart, and ascribed
the benefit of her escaping from that present danger (as it was in deed) to
the merits of B. S. Caterine.

Not long after the death of the holy maid, doct. Raimund. being made the
general over his whole order, came to Rome, as his charge required. And being
there, translated the holy body of S. Caterine upon that very day, that she
had prophesied, that it should be done many years before. By travailing
wherein, and in other affairs apperteining to his office, his body was
diste^pered in such sort, that he had need to have the advice of some learned
physician. Whereupon he sent for one, that dwelt there by, not far from the
monastery, called master James of our Lady the round: which coming one time
to visit doct: Raimundus and talking of the holy maid, told him of a very
strange thing, that had chanced in his oune knouledge to a certain young man
called Colas of Ciuccio. This Colas lay sick in his father in laws house
(whose name was Cincius Tancancim) of a very grievous disease in his throat,
called the Squinancie. Which increased so mightily upon him, that the
phisicio^s gave him over, and said plainly, that by the course of nature he
must needs die, and that within a very few houers, when the yo^g man was
even at the point of death, Alexia hearing of it (who loved Cincius well,
because he was a devout man and bare a singular affection to the holy maid in
her life time) went to the house in great have, and took with her a tooth of
the holy maid: which she kept as a great relike and jewel. And when she came
and saw the young man, as it were, upon passing out of this wordle, by reason
that the aposteme had streightened his throat so much that he was even at the
point of choking: she put the said tooth to his throat. And forthwith the
aposteme brake, and he lifted up his head, and avoided a great quantity of
rotten matter out at his mouth. And within a very little time, he recovered
perfectly, and gave most humble thanks to almighty God and to his glorious
spouse S. Caterine: by the virtue of whose tooth, he confessed in all companies
and in all places, wheresoever he came, that he had been delivered even from
present death. In so much that one time, when doctor Raimundus had made a
sermon in the commendation of the holy maid, and had among other things
touched this present miracle: the young man being there at that time by chance,
stood up before all the people, and said these words. It is true, that ye say,
master doctor: for I am the man, upon whom this great miracle was wrought.

At what time queen Ione of Sicilia sent Rainald of Vrsine with a great
company of men of arms against Pope Vrbane the sixth, with purpose either to
expel him out of the city, or else to take him, and so to put him to death:
the Romans stood very duetifully, and fought many skirmishes in the defense
of their city and bishop. In the which skirmishes many of them (especially
of the inferior sort) were taken by the enemy, and cruelly handled. Some were
tied up against trees, and so let alone, that they might die a long and
paineful death. Some other, that were thought to be of some ability to ransom
them selves, were lead into a broad field, and there, after diverse and sundry
horrible torments, fettered with chains and boltes of iron. Of these it was
generally marcked, that, so many as called upon S. Caterine of Siena, were
forthwith loosed of their bands, and returned home to their own houses. And
some of the^ to doct. Raimundus, and declared to him and other, how wonderfully
our Lord had wrought for their deliverance.

These things did almighty God work, to honor the holy virgin after her
death and burial, with many other, that were not written, through the negligence
of a certain notarie, whom doct. Raimundus put in trust. Because he was him
self at that time an old man, and could not remember so many things, as were
credibly reported to him, so particularly and so precisely, as, he knew, was
requisite for the credit of a holy legend or history of a Saints life.
Howbeit whatsoever lacked in him or in the notarie, was in some degree supplied
by the devotion of the^, that had received such benefits. Of the which there
came a marvelous great number both men and women, and offered up (as the manner
is) certain images of wax upon her to^be: in the which was expressed, as well
as they could, the manner of each miracle, to the honor of God the worker and
geuer of all good things, and of his glorious spowse S. Caterine, in
contemplation of whose merits it pleased him to work such good things at
that time.

A TABL OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST PART OF THIS BOOK.
OF the birth and infancy of this holy virgin: and of certain wonderful
tokens of holiness, that showed in her even at that age. Chap. 1. Of a very
strange vision showed unto her: and of certain wonderful effects of the love
of God toward her, and of her love toward God. Chap. 2. Of a bold
entreprise, which this blessed infant made, to live a solitary life after the
manner of the ancient fathers in Egypt: and how she understood, that it was not
the will of God, that she should enter into that state of life, as yet. Chap. 3.
How she vowed her virginity unto almighty God. Chap. 4. Of a wonderful zeal,
that was in her, to win souls to God: and how for that cause she cast a
great love to S. Dominicke and to his order. Chap. 5. How she relented somewhat
in her spiritual exercises, being thereunto induced by the importunity of her
mother and sisters, who would needs have her to use some diligence in trymyng
her self. And of the penance which she did for that offense. Chap. 6. How she
recovered her wonted liberty in serving God, and was reconciled again to her
spowse* How the persecutions, that she sustained at home, did not only not hurt
her, but also profit her much. Chap. 7. Of her continuance in her fervent and
devout exercises: and how her father saw a dove over her head. Of a singular
affection, that she bare to the habit of S. Dominicke: and how it was declared
unto her by a clear vision; that she was heard. How she prevailed against all
those in the house, that went about to hinder her holy designementes and
vows, Chap. 8. Of her great abstinence. Chap. 9. Of her great austeritie about
her bed and apparel. Chap. 10. Of her wonderful watching: and of the grief,
that her mother took for the same. Chap. 11. How she beat her self for a long
time thryce in the day with a chain of iron. Chap. 12. How she desired
earnestly to receive the habit of S. Dominike: and how her mother, to turn
her mind, lead her away to the batthes. What penance she did even in the
batthes. Chap. 13. How she received the habit of S. Dominike: and how she was
the first virgin, that received the same. Chap. 14. Of the holy vows,
designementes, and exercises, which the blessed virgin used after the receiving
of the habit. And what effectual exhortations she made to excite her self to
the service of God. Chap. 15. Of diverse and sundry visions and revelations
showed unto her, with a doctrine how to discern between true and false
visions. Chap. 16. Of a very goodly and profitable doctrine of our Savior
worthy to be planted in the hearts of as many as are desirous to come to
spiritual perfection. Chap. 17, An other goodly doctrine, by the which a soul
is made pure and meet to enjoy the familiarity of almighty God even in this
life: with a miracle wrought by our Lord on the sea, for confirmation of the
same. Chap. 18. Certain goodly sayings, which she was wont to use, to excite
her self and others to the perfection of charity. Chap. 19. Of the strange
batailes, which she had against the deuel, and how she a med her self with a
strong faith and other heavenly virtues, and so gate a most glorious victory
over her enemy. Chap. 20. How the enemy, accompanied with a great multitude
of unclean spirits, renewed his battery against this strong fortress, and
used greater enforcement, then before. Chap. 21. How our Lord with diverse
other Saints visited her oftentimes very familiarly: and how he taught her
to read by miracle. Chap. 22. How she increased so much in heavenly
contemplations, that she was oftentimes ravished in the same: and how she was
espoused to our Saurour Christ with a ring Chap. 23. Certain proofs of the
holiness of this blessed virgin, declaring the before mentioned straight
frindship and familiarity between our Lord and her to be a thing undoubted.
Chap. 24.


A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND PART OF THIS BOOK.
HOw the spowse of Christ was made by little and little to show her self to the
wordle, Chap. 1. Of her virtuous and lowly conversation among men: and how she
would debase her self to do the vilest services in the house. Of many
strange visitations, excesses, and trawnses, which she had in the presence of
many. Chap. 2. How being in a trawnse she fell into the fire, and there
continued a good while without any harm. Chap. 3. Of diverse and sundry
miracles like to this before written. And how it pleased our Savior Christ to
give the enemy power over her body. Chap. 4. What a charitable affection and
great care she had of the poor: and of a pleasant matter, that fell out about
the same. Chap* 5. An other very notable example of her great charity
toward the poor. Chap. 6. An other very wonderful example of her passing
great charity, like to this before written. Chap. 7. Of two evident miracles,
which our Lord wrought, to declare, how acceptable her works of charity were
to him. Chap. 8. Of a passing great charity and diligence, which she used in
attending upon a sick woman: and of her invincible patience in bearing the
waywardnes of the same woman. Chap. 9. An other very strange example of her
charity and patience toward a sick woman of her own order: and how she
rendered great good for great euel. Chap. 10. How she served an old widow, that
had a festered sore runnyng upon her: by whom she was also infamed. And of
diverse strange accidents, that ensued upon the same. Chap. 11. How she was
endued with many goodly privileges. How she had a passing desire to receive
the blessed Sacrament. How, being fortified with the spirit of God, she
endured much labor and travail without any bodelie sustenance. Chap. 12. How
she was molested by diverse and sundry persons, dissuading her from her
straight abstinence: and how she overcame her gostlie father by reason. Chap.
13. How her strange manner of life was gainesaid and slaundered: and how such
gainesayinges and slanders may easily be answered. Chap. 14. How she showed
her self marvelous severe and rigorous toward her self, and contrariwise
wonderful gentle and meek toward them, that slaundered her: which she did
to win them to God. Chap. 15. How our Savior took her heart out of her
body, and after a certain of days gave her a new for it. Chap. 16. Of
diverse and sundry visions, which she had at the siight and receiving of the
blessed Sacrament: and how she felt herself wonderfully altered after the
receite of that new heart. Chap. 17. How our Lord reveled many high mysteries
to the holy maid: and how Marie Magdalen was assigned to her, to be her
mother. Chap 18. How, hangyngh in the aier, she saw certain secrets and high
mysteries of God, which it is not lawful to disclose to any man. Chap, 19. How
she put her mouth to the side of our Savior, and drancke: and of many other
wonderful things, that happend about the blessed Sacrament. Chap 20. Of
certain other revelations showed unto her upon the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament. And how she obtained graces for diverse and sundry persons. Chap
21. How she received the blessed marckes of our Savior Christ in the city of
Pisa. Chap. 22. How she was ravished in spirit for the space of three days:
and how afterward she did penance as long, for a word, that escaped her
unawares. Chap. 23. Of certain other revelations: and again of the tenderness
of her conscience. Chap. 24. How it pleased God to reveal to her the worthiness
and excellency of the blessed patriarch S. Dominicke, and of his true
children. Chap. 25. How the holy virgin, being wholly inflamed with the Love
of God, desired instantly to be loosed from this life, and to be with Christ:
and how by that mean she obtained to bear in her body every particular
pain, that our Savior Christ suffered for us. Chap. 26. How, bearing the
Cross of Christ continually in her body, she took great delight to reason of
the same: and how she revealed many strange mysteries upon the holy
scriptures concerning the Cross. Chap. 27. An other exposition upon the same
place of the gospel, with certain other mystical sayings. And how she passed
in deed out of this life in the panies of the Cross. Chap. 28 How she passed
in deed out of this life, and had the fruition of heavenly joys: and how
afterward her soul came again to the body. Chap* 29. How she had a
marvelous devotion and longyng after the blessed Sacrament: and how she bare
many reproaches and slanders for the same. Chap. 30. How our Savior Christ
ministered the blessed Sacrament unto her with his own holy hand. Chap. 31.
How her face did shine like an Angel, while she was receiving the blessed
Sacrament: and of certain other strange signs. Chap. 32. How almighty God
permitted the deuel to have power our her body: and how she overcame all with
great patience. Chap. 33. How she delivered a certanie young maid, that was
possessed of a wicked spirit. Chap. 34. How she delivered a woman, that was
possessed of a wicked spirit. Chap. 35.


A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD PART OF THIS BOOK.
HOw the holy maid was endued with the spirit of prophecy, and foretold,
what calamities should happen to the Church, and likewise, how it should be
restored again. Chap. 1. How the holy maid saw the secret thoughts of men's
hearts: and how she used that gift to the benefit of diverse and sundry
persons. Chap. 2. How the holy maid delivered Doctor Thomas her confessor
and an other Friar, that iournied with him, from being murdered in the way.
Chap. 3. How she prophesied long time before of the conversion of a gentleman
called Francis of Malauolt. Chap. 4. How the holy maid made an exhortation to
the Carthusian monckes: in the which by the spirit of prophecy she touched
the most secret defectes of diverse and sundry of them very particularly.
Chap. 5. What a singular grace the holy maid had, not only in seeing the
state of their souls, that were present with her, but also in discernyng the
qualities and conditions of them, that were far from her and in strange
countries: with certain other points of like sort worthy to be noted. Chap.
6. How the holy maid prayed continually for the state of the Church: and how
by prayer she obtained of God the ceasing of two rebellions. Chap. 7. How the
holy maid obtained by prayer, that she might satisfy the justice of God for
the pains due to her father in Purgatory. Chap. 8. How the holy maid by
prayer brought her mother to life again, and so delivered her from the pains
of hell. Chap. 9. How the holy maid obtained of God by prayer the conversion
of two thieves, that were lead to execution. Chap. 10. How by the prayer of the
holy maid an obstinate sinner was turned to God. Chap 11. How the holy maid
by prayer procured the conversion of a fierce young gentleman in Siena called
James Tolomes. Chap. 12. How the holy maid by prayer obtained the conversion
of a gentleman called Man's. Chap. 13. What a wonderful grace the holy maid
had in making exhortations and converting souls unto God. Chap. 14. How the
holy maid mede many goodly Sermons or collations in the presence of Pope
Gregory, and afterward likewise in the presence of Pope Vrbanus and his
Cardinals. Chap. 15. How the holy maid was sent to Pope Gregory from the
Florentines about a treaty of peace: and how she was sent back again with
the conditions of peace freely put in her own hand. Chap. 16. How the holy
maid was sent back from Pope Gregory to the Florentines, with the conditions
of peace freely put in her own hand. Chap* 17. How the holy maid showed her
self to be excellently well learned, both by her writings and works set out
to the whole wordle, and also by her conferences and disputatio^s had with
certain great learned men. Chap. 18 A brief repitition or sum of many
points of heavenly doctrine, revealed unto the holy maid immediately from
God. Chap. 19. A prayer or answer made by a faithful and devout soul to the
words of almighty God here before recited. Chap. 20. What a sure affiance
the holy maid had in the truth of Christ: and how she longed after martyrdom.
Chap. 21. How the holy maid made a final exhortation to her spiritual
children, and so passed out of this life. Chap. 22.


A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE FOVRTH PART OF THIS BOOK.
HOw it pleased our Lord to make the holiness of his spowse known to the wordle
by diverse and sundry evident tokens from heaven. And first, how she spoke
certain comfortable words to doctor Raimundus after her departure out of
this wordle. Chap. 1. How it pleased God to give a testimony of her holiness in
her life time, by an evident miracle wrought at the tomb of S. Agnes. Chap. 2.
How the holy maid in her life time healed many, that were sick of the
plague. Chap. 3. How the holy maid healed a great number, that were sick of
other diseases after the liker manner. Chap. 4. How the holy maid made good
bread of fustie and stinking corn: and how she multiplied the same. Chap. 5.
How the holy maid multiplied bread an other time in Rome for the prouisiom of
her family. Chap. 6. How the holy maid wrought the like miracle in the covent
of the friars preachers in Siena after her departure out of this wordle. Chap.
7. How almighty God caused wine to be found in an empty vessel to the use of
the holy maid: and how he caused the same to cease again at her instance.
Chap. 8. Of a goodly vision, that was showed to a certain devout matrone in
Rome, at the departure of the holy maid out of this life. Chap. 9 How the
holy maids body lay three days and three nights above the ground
unburied: and of a number of miracles, which it pleased our Lord to work in
that mean time. Chap. 10. What miracles almighty God wrought, to honor the
holy maid after her burial. Chap. 11.


The end of the Table.

