A IOVRNALL, And Relation of the action, which by his Majesty's commandment
Edward Lord Cecyl, Baron of Putney, and Vicount of Wimbledon, Admiral, and
Lieutenant General of his Maiestyes forces, did undertake upon the Coast of
Spain, 1625.

Veritas premitur sed non opprimitur.

Printed in the year, 1626.

THe 8. of October. being Saturday we set sail about 3 of the clock in the
afternoon with a wind at north north east.

Upon Sunday the 9. about 6 of the clock in the morning, we fell with my Lord
of Essex my Vice Admiral and those ships that were put into Famouth with
him, and about 9 in the same morning, we discovered 7 sail that were Dutch
ships laden with salt, the wind continued fair enough for us all that day,
to lie our course and till 12 at night. This day instructions were sent to all
the Admiralls, and to other Officers, and to diverse other ships.

The 10 being Monday we were becalmed.

On Tewsday the 11 in the morning I called a council for the settling of
instructions for a Sea fight, as by the 7. and 10. Artikle contained in them
may plainly appear viz:

7. Art. If the Enemies approach be in such sort as the Admiral of the Dutch
and his squadron or my Vice Admiral of the fleet and his squadron may have
opportunity to begin the fight it shall be lawful for them so to do until
I come using the form method and care foresaid.

10. Art. If any ship or ships of the Enemies do break out or fly, the
Admiral of any squadron that shall happen to be on the next, and most
convenient place for that purpose shall send out a competent number of the
fittest ships of his squadron to chase, assault, and take such ship or
ships breaking out, but no ship shall undertake such a chase without the
Command of the Admiral or at least the Admiral of his squadron.

Likewise it was ordered that 5 men should be put to a mess with the allowance
formerly given for 4 and warrents directed to all the fleet to that end.

Wednesday the 12 about 7 in the morning the wind came to north north west
with fair weather, it served well till 6 in the evening, the wind increasing
so much that it was not sayle-worthy, yet being large we bore our foresayle and
sprittesayle. The Sea grew so high that we towed our long boat in pieces, and
lost her, and the loss of long boats was general, I think all within 2
hours one of another, so that there was not one saved throughout the whole
fleet, and one Catch was sunk, another by misfortune coming foul of a
ship was likewise cast away with 3 of her men, the rest were saved, many
ships were in danger almost to despair, the long Robert of Ipshwich was
drowned with 138 Land-men, 37 Seamen, the Land-Captaines lost in the wrack were
Fisher, and Hackett a Scotch Captain, and Gurling the Captain of the ship.

Besides these general losses there was no ship in her own particular that
did not suffer more or less in this storm by leakes, loss of masts, and by
casualties, and the like.

In this Tempest we had experience of the Anne Royal her self, her mastes
grew loose, the maine mast was in danger of rolling over board, two of her
greatest pieces of 5000 weight a piece broke loose in the Gunners room, the
danger was partly by the negligence of the Officers, that did not see carefully
to the fitting of these things while we lay in Harbor, she would not Hul at
all.

The separation caused by this tempest was so great that on Friday the 14 at
noone, we saw but one ship of the whole fleet, this day the storm began to
cease. Then we made observations, and found we were in the latitude of 44 and 8
minutes, and after recovered 20 sail of ships. The wind continued fair,
and large with a gaile running some 7. leagues a watch, we steared away with a
short course staying for the rest of the fleet.

On Saturday the 15. about 9 in the morning, we discovered more that made 33.
at noone we were in the height of 42 and 6 minutes.

On Sunday the 16 bearing to the north east, we steared away southeast and by
east to gain the shore, at noone we found our latitude 39 and 54 minutes. The
southern Cape then being by computation south east, I gave order to some
ships, to go and look out for prizes, and discovery, and to return in the
afternoon. Now we began to make ready for extraordinary fight, and gave the
same order to those that were with me, and the rest, as by my general
instructions under my hand may appear.

The wind still continued north east, and the 17 on Monday we were in 38 and 48
minutes, from the top was discovered land, which was the Rock of from Lisbon
bearing east and by north some 14 leagues from us, I sent now forth again to
discover the Cape, with order not to discover themselves, and to come back
again with intelligence, this day we had a chase, but missed it.

Tuesday the 18 at noone our height was 37 and 36 minutes. This day I called a
council for the better resolving what course to hold for reuniting the fleet
much separated by the late storm.

This day the Captains brought in the several complaints of their defects,
as Sir Beuerley Newcombe Captain of the Dreadnaught that the upper beams had
been broken, and did in foul weather give way, and the sides of the ship
opening received in so much water, that she was not able to subsist, Sir
William Saint Ledger writ a lettre that he suspected the plague in his ship,
but it pleased God it proved not to be so.

This day I gave especial order to all the Captains, and Masters present to
keep more near together, and to hail their Admiral every morning reproving
their former negligence, and misorder in that kind, deliueringe them their
orders, which should have been given according to the date, but we were hindered
by the storm, writing thus.

The small time we have been at Sea has made me take notice of your
disorderly sailing from your Admiralls of the several squadrons you may
perceive how the Dutch squadron keep themselves entire, and apart. This is
therefore to require you to fall into your own squadron to attend such
directions as shall come from your Admiral and not to depart without license
from him, or his Officers to make one entire body, to sail in the day time in
fair and clear weather a league or more from another squadron, and toward
night to draw near, to follow lights in your several places, and to take an
especial care that you do not chase, but upon a great possibility for
hindering our speed or loosing of time while the wind is fair, and that you in
the day time bear all the sail you can to bring us to the place desired, and
if any chase, it shall be 2 or 3 of the best saylors in your squadron. Dated the
11 of October. Commanding them to pervse their other Artickles every day that
they might be expert in them.

Wednesday the 19 in the morning we were in the height of the Cape, and
discovered 11 sail of ships, which we chased thinking they had been enemy,
but they proved to be of our own, being the Vice Admiral my Lord of Essex,
also this day we discovered about 40 sail more which had lost us in the
storm, being my Lord Denbigh, my Lord de la Ware, and others.

At the same time my Lord of Denbigh met with a small Caruell a Portugal that
came from Terceras we took him to have been our discouerer for the Enemy.
but he was only driven by the storm from the Terceras going to an Island not
far distant called Gratiosa he told us the plate fleet was not come, but
that 5 Carrickes passed by that way bound for Lisbon some 14 days before that
time, but that one of them was sunk, if we had come sooner out, they could not
have escaped us.

We understood by those that came with my Lord of Essex that they made fires
along the Coasts, and up the Country which when we drew nigher we discovered.

Thursday the 20 I called a Counsel and lay all day by the lee to gather our
ships together that were missing. The business of the Counsel was how to
put into Saint Lucas according to the intent of a Counsel held at Plymouth
where his Majesty was present who upon the doubtfullnesse there of the
resolution thought good to refer it to our consideration upon the place when
we should be arrived upon better inquiry of the conueniencies and
disaduantages both for going into the Harbor and landing our Army. It was
delivered by the opinion of most of the Masters that the Haven of S. Lucas is
so barred as it is hard and dangerous both for the going in and coming out
especially for ships of burden as his Majesty's are that they could not pass
in nor out, but only in spring tides, in calmes seasons, and with favoring
winds nor ride safe all weathers without the Bay. And it was observed by
others: that the most part of the Masters of the fleet will hardly adventure
to carry their ships in or out at Saint Lucas in the best tides and weather
for want of perfect knowledge of the sands and shoales that are there, and the
right use of the landmarkes whereby that Pott is to be gained and quitted in
safety. Besides it was feared that if we should put the whole fleet into such
a straight, we should be more apt to be blocked up by our Enemies then to annoy
them, neither could any ship come speedily out to have encontred with the
plate fleet our chief design. Then I demanded both of the Sea Captains and
Masters why they could not speak of this difficulties before his Majesty.
Their answer was, it is now in the deapth of winter and stormy, and that they
did tell his Majesty that it was a Barrd Haven and dangerous to all men,
especially to those that had not often passed it, and that being upon the place
they could consider more perticulerly upon the difficulties then discourse of
it when they were far of. So that I could say no more to them, being I was no
great Seaman, and that I was stricktly tide to their advice that did profess
the Sea. Where upon it being propounded by Sir Sam: Argall that Saint Mary
Port near the Bay of Cadiz, and not far distant from Saint Lucas was a low
shore and more fit for the landing of our men then any place about Saint
Lucas (for we could find none there) and that our ships might have good
riding there out of the danger of Cadiz, and that from thence we might march to
Saint Lucas by land, which was not 12 miles distant.

There upon it was resolved and ordered by the advice of the Council of War
that the whole fleet should forthwith bear into the Bay of Cadiz and that the
whole fleet should ancker before Saint Mary Port, as the fittest place to
land in, and the Earl of Essex Vice Admiral is assigned with his squadron to
anckor first, and to leave birth sufficiently for the rest of the fleet, and
that my self, and the Dutch Admiral should anckor next, that I might the
better give directions both to the Vice Admiral and Reare-Admirall who
anckored some what short of me by order, to guard the whole fleet and to give
warning upon all occasions if any Enemy should approach.

Friday the 21 we stood according to directions, the wind scanted upon us all
that day, about 8 or 9 of the clock at night the wind shifted westerly, we
struck a hull (for that we could not put to leeward) till toward day, which
appearing we set sail, and had a sight of Granado over Cadiz, and bore in
accordingly with a good sail the wind being between the west south west and
the north west.

Saturday the 22 after this, resolution was taken, I gave order as before when
we discovered the Rock, that every ship should break down their Cabines
and clear their ship of all impediments and to be ready to fight upon all
occasions according to their general instructions given them to that purpose,
for that we were to enter in at the Bay of Cadiz and knew not what ships might
be there, and because of the tide that served us to go into the Bay, I wrote
to my Lord of Essex to make all the have he could, and to hoyse up all his
sails that we might save as much of the tide as we could, and that I would
again command his squadron to follow him, which I did but I must confess
they went the most untowardly that ever I did see men, for they did not hoyse
up all their sails as they were commanded. Seeing the Vice Admiral pack on
all his, I followed as fast as I could, and cried out to them to hoyse their
sails and advaunce, some of them increased their sails, but not much. But I
could never learn by all the Seamen in my ship to know those ships that
were so backward and when I did inquire, every man excused himself saying it
was not he, and our business grew so hott that I could not immediately inquire
after it any further not knowing the ships one from another.

This day we took 3 ships that came from Saint Lucas which Captain Raymond
brought in laden with salt, wines, wool, figs, raisins and some cutchaneale
etc. who said they belonged to Hamburgh and to Calis, but were conceived by
much probability to be Dunkerks goods.

In our approach into the Bay we discovered 18 or 20 sail of great and small
ships at anckor in the Road which proved to be the Admiral of Naples and 5
or 6 more that brought men and munition into Cadiz, 6 other of the ships came
from Brazeile and 5 or 6 more men of war and Merchants ships, we made ready
and prepared our ship for fight, but such was the smalnesse of the Gayle that
it was 2 or 3 of the clock before we could get within the Porcas, also there
came out of Saint Mary Port 15 sail of Gallyes whereof the Duke of Hermandina
was commander; 5 of the Gallyes were by our ships that came in forced to
retire again to Saint Mary Port, the other 10 recovered Puntall amongst their
ships and presently towed them up toward Port Royal. And I was not so far
of, but I could see the Spanish ships that did cut their Cables by the
haulse, shoot first at my Lord of Essex and he at them, so likewise did my
Lord of Valentia and Sir John Chudeleigh.

Now when all the fleet came to anckor according to the orders that were given
them, and that we did see these ships fled from us. I immediately called a
general counsel to loose no time for it was late, and the opinion of the
Seamen was, that if I could but clear the 2 fortes to secure the fleet to
pass in safety, I might have a ready way to undertake the shipping. Then I
demanded of them what kind of forts they were, they told me that 20 Colliers
with some of the Dutch would beat them to dust before the morning, where upon
I and the Counsel being caled did presently resolve that the ships warned and
commanded should go up to the forts, and that they should receive directions
from my Lord of Essex that had order from me, and because of that I sent Sir
Michel Geere for the better dispatch to warn 20 of the next ships that he
could meet with all, and to bring me their names in writing, and Sir Thomas
Love offered him a man to go with him to write them down to be the more sure
of them, because I meant, if they had failed in a service of that importance to
have punished them severely. But he never came back to me nor sent me any
names, and when I sent to him to know the reason, he told the messenger, he had
warned them, but he knew not their names.

After this I sent Sir Thomas Love to advance the other ships and to see
whether the Reare-Admirall had anckored in a convenient place for the security
of the fleet, and to have an eye upon the Galleys that they should do no harm
in the night, although there are some that are of opinion that they might have
been stopped, but it seems they are no great Seamen, or else that few of the
Seamen did understand how to stop them, for when Galleys can row against
the wind I would feign know how ships can do them any harm, or intercept
them, and when they have the wind with their oars what ship can fetch them
up, so that he that says this ought first to learn thus much before he give
his opinion, he likewise had order from me to frustrate all stratagems of the
Enemy which might happen by sending fire amongst our ships, and to command
and admonish the rest of the commanders to repair to their several places.

At the same time I sent Sir Francis Carew (who was ready upon all occasions)
to the Dutch Admiral to desire that 5 of his ships might go up for the
battering of Puntall, and that I would send twenty of the fleet to assist
them, which he granted willingly, and sent them forthwith, it was by this time
dark night and we could hear the Report of the Ordnance, and see the fire
given on both sides and knew no other but that the twenty ships warned by
Sir Michel Geere were all there at this, but sending to see what was done, word
was brougt to us that there was none there but the 5 Dutch ships which shows
the difference of men practiced at Sea, and of them that are not, I was much
troubled here at.

Now upon this neglect of Sir Michel Geere I did instantly give order that 40
sail of ships should be listed by name and commanded to use all diligence
to get up to the fort betimes in the morning as by the list may appear and by
this warrant to that purpose viz:

The Admiral does straightly charge and command all the commanders of these
ships upon sight of this or billets of it, that they be ready with their
ships in the morning betimes to assail the fort of Puntall to land men
according to directions and to pursue the ships of the Enemy with all
diligence, and to follow such directions therein as shall be given to such as
shall be appointed in that kind. Aboard the Anne Royal at 10 of the clock at
night 22 of October. 1625.

More over I made choice and appointed 8 commanders out of the rest, that if
any of the Kings ships fall of, they might take their place to lead up the
other ships as well against the fort as the Spanish ships and Galleys.

Afterward Sir Thomas Love and I did the same night advise with certain
Captains and Masters best experienced in that place, to persuade them to
conduct up the ships, which they would not undertake neither had any of them
been at Port Royal or were perfect in the Channel which was somewhat
difficult for want of water.

On Sunday the 23 I was up by 3 of the clock in the morning and after we had
all received the communion aboard the Anne Royal which was a week before
ordained by the chaplains, I was vnwiling to differ so good a motion being
that it hindered no time and as soon as day came on, I commanded my Master to
carry up the ship to Puntall, his answer was that there was not water enough
to carry her up. Where upon to loose no time I took Barge with Sir Thomas
Love and those Gentlemen that were with me in my ship, and went from ship
to ship crying out to them to advance to Puntall for shame, and upon pain of
their lives, and those I could not speak with all, I sent Sir Thomas Love to,
with as strickt a command as I could devise, and finding some of them not very
hasty. I saw no other way to bring them up but by example, it made me go to
my Lord of Essex his ship, and gave directions to his Lordship for his ship
to go up, and to bring her as nigh Puntall as possibly we could, telling my
Lord that if we did not advance, the rest would come at leisure, for that I did
not see many make have. Where upon my Lord commanded Captain Argall to hoyse
sail and as soon as we came nigh the fort they shot our ship twice
together thorough and thorough the very midst of her within a foot at least of
the water and mist no ship they shot at, and killed as many commanders of
ours besides soldiers as we killed in all of theirs.

The fort of Puntall that I was told would be beaten to dust in a night did
receive 1700 shot and not one stone removed out of his place, and we
endeauored to get up all the ships we could, that we might make the more
have to fire the Spanish ships, that were retired to Port Royal according to
my instructions that I gave the night before to batter Puntall and to fire the
ships at once as I have shown before.

But I could not get the ships to come up, and most of the Kings ships
were on ground, and it was almost night before the fort would yield, at lenght
it was not to the ships that it yielded but to the Landmen, and if the
Captain had no more reason then I could perceive he deserved to have been
hanged for yiedling that which we could never have gorten without cannon, and
we had no means to land Ordnance (wanting our long boats. And I dare say it
before the best Soldier, that for the bigness of 100 foot square, I did never
see a stronger nor better built, nor such a kind of stone, that no bullett did
it much harm. We played upon it with all the ships excepting the
Reare-Admirals squadron till about 2 or 3 of the clock in the afternoon. I
finding that it would not batter and our honors were much engaged, I told my
Lord of Essex, and some other Officers that were there in the ship that we
should loose our labors and never get the forte if some men were not landed
to take it in by a Scallado and with Grenades. I could find no man to
contradict it. And Sir John Burgh being next to me, I desired him that he would
undertake the service, he told me very willingly, and desired his own
Regiment, I told him that would spend to much time, and that it were better to
take some of the Companies next him to make the more have with which he was
contented so, I sent to get some 10 or 11 Companyes, he asked me what
directions I would give. I directed him to land them as free from the canon as
he could he made answer that directly to the Sco^ce (as he thought) was best. I
then replied that I left it to his discretion for that I knew him to be
discreet enough, and that he must act it. But he sending some Officers to land
which were lost by that direction it was found the way that I had spoken of was
the better. When he had landed his men very well, and had advaunced toward the
land there did advance some horse and foot with whom he skermidged and put
them to retreat and afterward advaunced toward the forte, when the soldiers
in the forte whereof Don Francisco de Bustiamente was Captain saw our men
advance and their men retire they hung out a white flagge or hand kercher,
there upon we parlied, and so the fort was yielded upon ordinary conditions
and we Masters of it. Wherein was, only 8 pieces of ordinance whereof the
Dutch had two, and we 6, and 10 or 15 Barrells of powder. This day was wholly
spent in bringing up the ships, landing our men and taking the forte, so that
nothing could be done against the Enemies ships which was their advantage.
It was about 9 of the clock before the forte was ours at which time I took my
leave of my Lord of Essex, and went home assuring our selves that the ships
were our own being Masters of the forte.

Upon Monday the 24 I went early in the morning about 6 of the clock to my
Lord of Denbigh, and spoke thus to him: you are no old Seaman, and therefore I
would desire you to make all the haste you can, and to gather all the Seamen
together that are of the counsel and others, and to desire them to think of
the best way how they might fire, or distroy those ships of the Enemy, that
fled from us. There upon he came back with me, and promised to go about that
business without any delay, which he did very carefully, and punctually, that
was according to my instructions, to give pre-eminence to Seamen in Sea
busiinesse, and unto Landmen in land affairs.

Now I made no account but as they said the ships were our own, and that
because they made so sleight of it, they knew more then I did, how to set upon
them.

Then I thought it not amiss to land some companies to secure Sir John Burgh,
to prevent that neither the Enemy from the Town, nor from the continent might
engage them unawares. As also that the ships might be the more empty, and free
to assault the Spanish ships and to refresh the Soldiers, and for taking in of
fresh water; but with no design of Cadiz, for that it was delivered to his
Majesty before we went, that it was extraordinary fortified, (as we found it
when we came to view it) and I hastened this preparation the rather that our
ships might speedely putt in execution what course soever the Seamen should
resolve upon. So order was given presently that all the troops in my Lord of
Essex his squadro^, and in mine, were immediately landed but few of the Landmen
of the Rere-Admiralls squadron were landed at all; for they were kept (that if
we could have found any means to be had for undertaking of Cadiz) to be
landed. After this most of the Land Officers of the feeld met at the fort, and
I took order for victuals for the Soldiers on land, to be brought to Puntall
but I was much troubled at some of the Officers, that the Soldiers with Sir
John Burgh had not carried biskett in their knapsackes, being that I gave a
general order to the Sergeant Major General, that when any Soldier should
land they should bring victuals with them, for that the knapsackes were
ordained for nothing else, as I did keep mine own order my self, for that all
my voluntary Gentlemen, and servants did carry their victuals in knapsacks,
yea not so much as my chaplin, but carried his knapsacke.

The Officers of the feeld, and all considering what was to be done, and taking
care for the provision of the soldiers, Sir Michel Gere comes in, and told the
counsel; the Enemy with many troops were marching toward us, upon this I
told the rest of the counsel, if it were true, it would be more advantage for
us to meet them far off from the town, then to stay till the town and they
should fall upon us both ways, where upon every one made himself ready, and I
gave order that the troops should be ready to march, for that we had news by
one that did see them march. There upon we marched, but when we had marched
some 6 miles or there abouts, I called to some of the Counsel of war, and
told them; it seems that this alarm is false, and as the Counsel of war
was gathering together, came in my Lord of Valentia who rid before to
discover, and told us, that the Enemy was marching, then I commanded the
troops to advance, but no complaint made of any want of victual, but by those
that landed with Sir John Burgh, who in regard of that want had order to go
back. For they that would have carried any, might have had enough, there being
store at the fort, besides the general order I gave, that no Soldier should
land without victuals. Within 2 miles of the Bridge, the Soldiers began to
cry, they had neither meat, nor drink, and the day they marched was a very
hott day, here I rode before to quarter the Army, and to discover the avenues,
and passages, and as I came back one came to me and told me, there was sum
wine in a seller, and that if it were delivered out in order, it would serve to
refresh the Soldiers that wanted both bred, and drink. But little did I think
that all the Cuntry was full of wine, and knowing of no more then of one
seller, I gave order, that every Regiment should have a proportion of wine,
which I did see delivered with mine own eyes. If every Officer had seen it as
well distributed as they were directed, it would have done them good, not
harm. But when other Magazines were discovered (for the provision for the
West Indies was rhere) there was no keeping of the Soldiers from it, but the
best way we could devise, was to staue it, and let the wine run out, which
Sir William Saint Ledger the Sergeant Major General bestowed some time about;
But when this was done, the Soldiers nevertheless would drink it in the sand,
and dirty places.

Now this disorder, made us of the Counsel of war to consider that since the
going to the Bridge was no great design, but to meet with the Enemy, and to
spoil the Cuntry, neither could we victual any men, that should be left
there, and that the Galleys might land as many men as they would to cut them
off, and that when my Lord of Essex took Cadis, Coniers Clissord, was taxed by
Sir Francis Vere (which is yet to be seen in his discourse written by himself)
to mistake his directions, that were given him, to go no farther then the
troate of the land from the Town, which was not above 2 miles, where he might
be seconded and relieved and be ready to relieve others, but he went to the
Bridge 12 miles off, so in regard there was no necessity, this disorder
happening and want of victuals, we resolved to turn back again, as we did,
and when the troops were within 3 or 4 miles of the Town; I rode before to see
if that which the slaves told (which rendered them selves to me) were true;
that the Bullworks were high, the town walls flankerd, and the dich was 20
foot deep, cut out of the Rock, but that I could not see, the Bullworks, and
walls I did, which when Cadiz before was taken there was no such thing. And I
have been so long at the wars, that I dare undertake, that they who think
that Cadiz was to be taken cannot tell how to come to it, without canon, if
there were none but women in it.

For in our profession, there are but 3 ways to take any Town, the first by
surprise, the second by assault, and the third by approches, and we were no
ways able to attempt it by any of these means. Now after I had visited as
much as I could, the troops being quartred (which I did my self) I desired
the Colonells to comme together, to confer what was best to be done, and to
let them know that now the troops were quartred in a fit place, if any out
of his experience could think there were any way for us to undertake the Town
of Cadiz, it would be a great honor to us, and a service acceptable to our
King, and State. When I propounded this, we were all on horseback standing
round in a Ring, but I found not one man of that opinion, that it was
feaseable, so we quartred that night.

On Tuesday the 25 in the morning there was a motion sent from Sir Tho: Love,
that if we would march some 4 or 5 miles distant we might recover some boats,
that would serve our turn in steed of long boats, which we condiscended unto
for our commodity, and that the Enemy should see, that we did not march back
again to shun them, so we marched forthwards again, and brought those boats
to the water side, and made as much spoil as it was possible for us to do, of
masts, netts, and other provisions for fishing and shipping for the West Indies
fleet to a good valewe, especially the masts that would have served the
greatest ship the King has. Then we returned to our old quarter.

Wednesday the 26 in the morning, the Colonells met at Puntall to consider
what we were best to do; but before we did any thing, I sent to Sir Samuel
Argall, to know what he had done touching the fiering of the Enemies ships,
and that it seemed very strange to me that the exploite which was so easy, was
not done, he sent me word that the reason why he went no sooner was because of
the wind and tide, and that he thought he was not able to do much,
understanding by a Dutch boy that swam away from the Enemy, that they had
sunk diverse ships, that it was not possible to do any thing, which
afterward he discovered to be true, and if they had not ben blocked, I think
it is a question amongst Seamen, whether they could have been assaulted, for
that the place was so straight thar no more then two of our ships could come
in breast to them, and was the reason that the late Lord of Essex who took
Cadiz, could send no ships there to do the Enemy harm, but what they did them
selves.

This being delivered to me in the Company of the Colonells, made us all much
grieved. Where upon it was thought fit he should retire with the squadron,
having resolved to imbarque our Landmen, and to stay no longer in regard the
time was now comme, that the plate fleet was expected. So order was given that
every Regiment should imbarque accordingly, as they did quarter, and that the
farthest Regiment should make their retreat, fighting and retiring. But (I
know not how it happened) some of the troops were engaged farther then they
had order or reason, yet at length they came off without any great loss.

I sent also Master Ielf the Master Gunner of the feeld to Sir Thomas Love,
that some men might be sent to the fort to dismount the ordinance, and the 6
pieces were putt a board the Conuertiue of his Majesty, I sent to him likewise
for all the boats to reshippe our men.

After I had seen all the troops imbarqued, I found some horses left behind, I
made the horseboates ship them that night, though it were late, and gave
order that the fort should be kept all night till we were ready, and likewise
commanded the boats should be brought to receive all the Landmen, that had
the watch in the fort that night.

Friday the 28 about 2 in the afternoon all the fleet fell down from the
fort, and came to anckor without the Diamond, a little below Cadiz: One of the
Dutch men of war being defective was burnt, the Enemy sent a ship full of
wildfiere and combustible matters but we prevented it, took the ship, and
sunk it. There came 3 of the fleet unto us here, who were left behind in
England and had not ben with us before.

After this, we took 2 things into our consideration, especially one, not to
omit the meeting with the plate fleet, if it were possible for us to be so
happy. The other was to have landed at Saint Mary Port, if the wind should not
serve the fleet to go out of the Bay of Cadiz, because we would loose no time
but do somewhat. But (as ill luck was) the wind came good even as we were in
counsel, and before we could fully conclude, allthough all was resolved to
stand for the plate fleet. And if we had not taken the wind at that instant,
it might have been, we had not come out in a long time, and being imbayed and in
a great deal of danger, if a storm had taken us, we had been likely to have been driven upon a liegh shore.

The resolution in the Bay of Cadiz aboard the Anne Royal the 29 of October.
was. That the whole fleet shall presently set sail, and plye to the
southward Cape, and stand off to the westward 60 leagues from the land where I
purpose to spend as much time as may be to look for the Spanish fleet, that
comes from the West Indies, and to keep your selves as near as you can, in
the latitudes of 37 and 37 and in the latitude of 36 and 26, farther to the
southward I intend not to go.

What other instructions shall be thought fitting you shall receive as occasion
presents, in the mean time charging all commanders to observe this
directions, and to keep company with me, and the fleet, and to look out and
seize upon the subjects, and goods of the King of Spain, or other Enemy.

This afternoon a general Counsel was called, for the resolving to send some
the most defective ships, with the horse ships, and the prizes, with some
land sickmen, whereof there was great store.

Sunday the 30. we set sail again though with a contrary wind, this day we
had 4 ships in chase but could not fetch them up.

Monday the last, the wind came westerly, yet could we not come forth of the
Bay.

A general Counsel was called touching the diverse complaints of the defects
of ships as the Rainbowe, the golden Cock, and others, wherefore it was
resolved, that we should plye toward the Isles of Bayon, to take in fresh
water, and repair our defects as well as we could. This day Tuesday the first
of November and Wednesday the 2 the wind was at north west fair wether.

Thursday the 3 the wind was at north east and by east, in the night we had a
calm which continued all Friday, and by a General consent (though we were in
great want of water nor having much beer, which was our only defect) to stay
till the 20 of November. But it pleased God so to lay his heavy hand upon us,
that it made us all astonished, for I could here of nothing, but that every day
there fell down so many, and so suddenly, that they had not men enough to
handle their sails, and it is always to be accounted 6 weeks to be allowed
to any ship that is homewards bound.

This day in the morning we discovered 3 sail of ships to windward the
Dreadnaught, being next unto them, and being calm our barge was mand, and sent
after them, who coming near one of the ships had spent her masts, and was
towed by the others until the barge came up, then the other 2 ships forsook
her, having pillaged, and cut holes in her, but immediately after our men came
a board she suncke, being laden with Sugar and Tobacco, and the like, being
therefore supposed to comme from Brasiele, and the other 2 Turkish me^ of war,
that had formerly taken her, our barge came back to the Dreadnaught and stayed
there all night, and in the morning came up to us.

Nothwithstanding I had sundry times before strictly commanded the Captains
and Masters to stay better by the fleet, which they observed not, I did again
charge them once more to observe their directions, that were prescribed them.

Again diverse complaints were made of the wants, and defects of the ships, and
increase of sickness.

Saturday the 5. the wind continued at north and north north east fair weather.

Sunday the 6 we took a Turkishman of war of Argeere, who had taken 2
prizes one from Braziele Ioaden with Sugar, with a Jury mast the other a
Scotchman one John Isack dwelling at Dover, who was fraughted with wood and
Iron from Biskey for Saint Lucas by the King of Spaines subjects, and had an
extraordinary fraught promised for his voyage, which shows the great want,
that the King has of Timber or shipping to carry it. The Turk had not offered
him any violence, but only made prize of his goods, and promised the Master
his fraught at Argeere; so I discharged him again, taking out some English
Renegadoes that were willing to leave him.

The night following, the Turk went away from us with the Braziele prize, the
Scotchma^ stayed with us still.

Monday the 7 we discovered 9 or 10 sail of ships to the leward, we bore up,
and found them to be of our own fleet, who had carelessly lost Company, which
as now so diverse times before had occasioned us to chase our own men, whereby
our course was much hindered.

Tuesday the 8 a general Counsel was held, whereby it was ordered, that 6 of
the Coleships should presently go for England, with 3 of the Dutch prizes, and
the horse-shippes, whereof Captain Pokinhorne being appointed Admiral, had
warrant, and instructions accordingly, but before their departure, the Rainebow
being found very defective, and the Captain Sir John Chiduleigh being very
sick, went home Admiral of these ships.

One of the prizes called the Readhart whereof Hughe Bullock took charge, was
wanting this 2 days, and went for England without any order from me like an
unworthy person.

Likewise one of the hoye-shippes caled the True Love was not seen in the
fleet since we came forth.

This day and wednesday the 9 we being in the latitude of 37, lay these 2
days at hull.

Thursday the 10 Sir Michel Geere who had been wanting 5 days came to us who
went wilfully from us, without leave, and when his master told him of it, he
beat him with a Cudgel, which is against all discipline, and reason, his
Master having had better command before, then ever he had.

This day I gave the Captains their instructions, if we met with the
West India fleet, how to dispose and order them selves.

This day I sent aboard the Dreadnaught for 10 tuns of beer that were putt
into her for the use of the Anne Royal, but the company aboard mutined, and
would not deliver it, neither would the Captain and Master acknowledge who
were the Mutineeres, so that we wanted this Iorny 50 tuns of beer which were
carried for us, which made us live many days upon beueradge.

Friday the 11 of November I called a general Counsel, where it was ordered,
that the Saint George of the Kings, who had 150 sick men in her, for the safety
of his Majesty's ship, and of those that were yet well, that every ship
should spare them 2 men and take 2 sick men in their steed, which they did.

This day the ships that were to go for England were dismissed, and set
sail a little before night.

A Soldier that belonged to the Antony, of Captain Blague was duckt at the main
yard arm of the Anne Royal for being mutinous against the Seamen.

Saturday the 12 and Sunday the 13 fair wether, the wind north east.

Monday the 14 I called a Counsel occasioned by the several complaints made
of many ships, especially the Co^uertiue of his Majesty's commanded by Captain
Porter, having but 20 sound men to handle their sails, wherefore it was ordered
that the Reformation should send 6 me^ aboard her, and one of the worst Catches
(being by survey found unable to continue the voyage, and valewed at 55 pound)
was sunck and the men put into the Conuertiue.

Likewise there were 6 men taken out of other ships and put aboard the Talbott.
Captain Burden which ship was in great want of men, and generally all the
ships complained of the like defects.

Tuesday the 15 and Wednesday the 16 the wind northerly, and much wind.
Thursday the 17 the wind north west fair wether. We gave chase to some ships
that were far a head of us, whom we found to be my Lord of Essex and some of
his squadron whom we had not seen in many days before. Nothwithstanding the
often and great complaints before generally throughout, amongst the rest came
Sir Sam: Argall from my Lord of Essex to let me know in what bad estate his
ship was having but 15 in a watch to handle their sails, desiring me that I
would call a Counsel, for that he imagined other ships were in as bad estate
as he, what we resolved he would agree unto. Where upon a Counsel was called,
at which Counsel I forbore to make known the defects of the An Royal, that
were as much as any ship in the fleet, and made me the rather believe the
General complaints, as you shall understand when I speak of my coming into
Ireland, and I desired to know how every ones case stood, and whether it were
not possible for us to have gone for the Isles of Bayon. Then Sir Samuel
Argall, and the rest of the best Seame^ that were present (by whom we were to
be guided) gave their opinion, that if we went for the Isla^ds of Bayo^ in this
miserable estate we were now in, we might as well perish there as at Sea, by
reason we should find no relief there for our sick men, nor should we get on
shore there for water in any stormy wether; and that wind which would carry us
for England, would not serve to comme out of the Islands of Bayon, and that if
the wind should shorten going for England, we might at the worst return for
Bayon, and that all men of experience did certainly affirm, that the Plate
fleet, did never comme after November. The Counsel of war upon this necessity
of sickness, want of men and sundry complaints of want of beer and water and
many leakes discovered, resolved upon the 17 of November, to bend the course
directly homeward, and putt into Faimouth, Plymouth or Porthmouth, which could
be first and most conveniently obtained, which resolution if we had not taken,
we had enda^gered the greatest part of the whole fleet. Friday the 18. Saturday
the 19. Sunday the 20. and Monday the 21 many violent gusts of wind, and rain.
Tuesday the 22 in regard of the contrary wind, and fearing a necessity, we came
to a shorter allowance a board the Anne Royal.

Wednesday the 23. Thursday the 24. Friday the 25. and Saturday the 26
continual vehement gusts of wind and rain, and Saturday night the wether
began to be more moderate. Ever since our first setting forward for England,
the fleet has been scattred more and more, so that this day we had but 4 ships
in Company with us, which disorder would have been aduantageous for the Enemy if
they had set upon us.

Sunday the 27 in the afternoon it began to blow hard, and about 2 of the
clock in the afternoon, our foreyard broake in four pieces and our foresaile
rent.

Monday the 28 we took down our maine misane mast and fitted it for a
foreyard.

Tuesday the 29 our spritsaile rent, we were forced to take it down, this day
we had only 2 ships and one Catch in our company.

Wednesday the 30 the wind west-south-west fair wether.

Thursday the first of December and Friday the 2 the wind being contrary we
lay at leigh and fished our foremast which we feared the breaking off.

Saturday the 3 the wind Northerly, foul wether.

Sunday the 4 the wind southwest toward night more westerly, the Sea ran
exceeding high.

Monday the 5 the wind westerly, little wind.

Tuesday the 6 the wind at east, at night more southerly this night we sounded
and had 80 fathom water.

Wednesday the 7 Thursday the 8 and Friday the 9 the wind easterly about 4 of
the clock in the afternoon we discovered Silly which did bear south east,
then we stood about to the southward.

Saturday the 19 the vvind continued at east: The Master and the Company were
very earnest to go for Ireland, by reason the ship was very leaky, the men
vveake, and we being to the leevvard of Silly, and the vvind still contrary,
and violent, and if we should have been driven to the vvestvvard of Ireland, we
might endanger the loss of the ship, and our selves.

Upon this necessity I condiscended there unto, for that we could not have
endured 4 days, such was her leake, and about 10 of the clock before noone
we bore up.

The 11 being Sunday, the vvinde at east at 9 in the morning we discovered land
at the going into Cork, so we stood to the vvestvvard, and at 3 in the
afternoon came to an anckor at Kinsall, where we found his Majesty's ships
the Antelop, and the Phoenix who assisted us with their boats to bring us into
the harbor. And this my ill fortune turned to good fortune both for the releef
of his Majesty's ships, and the troops and allthough I had but small store
of money (not having with me at the first but 2000 pounds which was to victual
the ships, and to relieve all necessities) which if I had not had, we had been
all in a miserable case, yet I made shift to relieve the Soldiers, and the
Officers (save only a ship of Captain Butlers, who fell upon the North-coast
of Ireland) without bringing the King into debt, until my Lord President
Villers of Munster by order from your Lordships received them into his charge,
where we received news that Captain Burleyes ship was foundred in the Sea,
but most of the Officers were saved, as they were here I came, coming for the
Coasts of Ireland.

Here I came with 160 sick men in my ship 130 cast over board, with a leake
of above 6 foot water in the hold, and her leake was not in one place alone,
but in many, for when she was in harbor she was not so leaky, but when she was
at Sea, she took in 3 foot of water in 24 hours, she was so old and so
decayed a ship.

Monday the 12 the sick men were carried a shore for their recovery and
billetted.

Wednesday the 14 having landed our sick men, we carined our ship, stopped
her leakes, and mended her as well as time and place would permit, we took in
ballast, wood, water, beer, and other provisions, and fitted our ship for the
first fair wind to be ready to set sail.

On Sunday the 18 about 3 in the afternoon his Majesty's ship the Constant
Reformation, came into this Harbor, having spent both their foremast, and
mainmast, and constrained to cut away their broken masts, yards, sails and
ropes, to prevent farther danger.

The Reformation being so defective, that she could not go home till she were
furnished with masts, and other necessaries, from England, for the ease of his
Majesty's charge we took out her men, and putt them into the Aune Royal,
leaving her only 120 men, whereof many were such sick men, as of our ship
must otherwise be left behind, not able to do service, and victualled her out
of the other ships for 4 months from the first of January.

The Globe of London, whereof Captain Stokes was Commander, being at an ancker
in the harbor at Baltemore, was by extremity of foul wether driven a shore,
and cast away. I directed a commission to Sir William Hull, and others for the
safe custody, of what could be saved in the behalf of the King, and the
propriators.

Sir John Chidly being with his Majesty's ship at Crooke-hauen, (who departed
the 8 of November from us, and was driven into Ireland) there came in a small
barque laden with Iron from Bilbowe, wherein also were 4 Jesuits, he made stay
of the barque and preests, and by my order brought them into England.

The 19 of January there came into Kinsall a ship from Lisbon, laden with
salt 3 cheasts of Sugar, and some Tobacco, and suspecting them to be Dunkerkes
goods, brought them for England.

The Dutch men aboard this ship who came from Lisbon, and had served the
Spaniard, did certainly affirm, that they saw diverse letters from Cadiz, that
the fleet came in 4 days after our coming out of Cadiz Bay, and that there
were 100 Caruells sent to have stopped them, but that none of them could meet
with the Plate fleet, for they came by the coast of Barbary. So that if any of
3 accidents had happined that follow, we had been Masters of the Spanish
fleet. The first is if the Counsel had condiscended to me to have kept Puntall
for 14 days; the second if the wind had not changed, as it did. The last, if
the Plate-fleete had kept the course they ever have done these 40 years, for
they had no manner of news of us, and had then comme amongst us, and if we had
stayed in the Bay, they had done the like, but man proposes and God
determines.

The same men affirm that in July last, there were not 4 barrells of powder in
all Lisbon.

I remained in Kingsall on shipboard (save only that it pleased my Lord
President of Munster, and the Earl of Cork to do me the honor to fetch me
to Pohall, where I remained the holly-daies whilst my ship was making ready)
till the 28 of January wind bound.

Saturday the 28 I set sail about 12 of the clock from Kinsall, there come
out with us six more of our fleet, the prize called the Greyhound, and the
ship from Lisbon.

Sunday the 29 about 3 of the clock in the morning being a great storm, and
the wind contrary at south south east we bore up again for Ireland, the wether
was so foggy and dark, that we durst not come near the shore, but stood to
the westward.

Monday the 30 about in the morning, the wether clearing up we stood in for the
shore, but about 10 in the fore noone it was rain and foggy wether, so we
could not mark the land until we were to the Leeward of Crooke-hauen, which
we could not recover, but about 3 in the afternoon we came into Beere-hauen,
with foul wether, and much wind, all the ships lost us, but the next day
(only the 2 prizes) came in.

I putt to Sea three times against all Seamens opinion, that desired to see a
wind settled before we should go out. But my desire was such not to loose any
time, that I did not harken to any.

From the 3 of February till the 19 we lay in Beere-hauen, having the wind
still contrary, and stormy wether.

The 19 of February, the wind being at north fair wether we weyed anckor, and
set sail about noone, but so soon as we came out of the harbor, we found
the wind north east, and the night following was very much wind, rain, hail,
snow, and the wind variable.

Monday the 20 about 1 in the morning we stood in again for the shore, and
about two in the afternoon came to an anckor at Crooke-hauen, with the wind at
east, where we found the Rainbowe of the Kings, the Dragon, and the Prudence.

Finding the ship very leaky, we mended her here the second time, the harbor
being fitter then any other, for the carining her.

Here I staid till the 24 of February and then putt to Sea again, intending to
have come for Porthmouth, but when we came upon the Coast there arose a great
storm, and the weather grew very dark and foggy, that we could not mark the
Isle of Weight, so we stood for the downs, where we arrived the last of
February, and after our long stay came in 5 days 500 miles.


