A Table Alphabeticall, containing and teaching the true writing and
understanding of hard usual English words, borrowed from the Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, or French, etc.

With the Interpretation thereof by plain English words, gathered for the
benefit and help of all unskillful persons.

Whereby they may the more easily and better understand many hard English
words, which they shall hear or read in Scriptures, Sermons, or else where,
and also be made able to use the same aptly themselves.

Set forth by R. C. and newly corrected, and much enlarged by T. C.

Legere, and non intelligere, neglegere est.

As good not to read, as not to understand.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Edmund Weauer, and are to be sold at his shop at
the great North door of Paul's Church. 1609.

To the right honorable, Worshipful, virtuous, and godly Ladies, the Lady
Hastings, the Lady Dudley the Lady Mountague, the Lady Wingfield, and the Lady
Leigh, his Christian friends, R. C. wishes great prosperity in this life,
with increase of grace, and peace from God our Father, though Jesus Christ our
Lord and only Savior.
BY this Table (right Houourable and Worshipful) strangers that blame our
tongue of difficulty, and uncertainty, may hereby plainly see, and better
understand those things, which they have thought hard. Hereby also the true
Orthographie, that is, the true writing of many hard English words, borrowed
from the Greek, Latin and French, and how to know one from the other, with
the interpretation thereof by plain English words, may be learned and known.
And children hereby may be prepared for the understanding of a great number of
Latin words: which also will bring much delight and judgment to others, by
the use of this little work.

Now when I had called to mind (right Honorable and Worshipful) the great
kindness, and bountifulness, which I found in that virtuous and godly Lady,
Lucy Harington, your Honors and Worships mother, and my especial friend in the
Lord. When, and at such time as the right Worshipful Sir James Harington
Knight, your Ladyships Brother, was my Scholar (and now my singular
benefactor) when I taught the Grammar School at Okeham in the County of
Rutland: In consideration whereof, and also for that I acknowledge my self
much beholding and indebted to the most of you, since this time, (being all
natural Sisters) I am bold to make you all jointly Patrons hereof, and under
your names to publish this simple work. And thus praying, that God of his
unspeakable mercies, will bless both your Honors and Worships, I do with all
good wishes to you all, with all yours, as to mine own soul, humbly take my
leave.

Your Honors and Worships, ever ready in Christ Jesus to be commanded, Robert
Cawdrey.

To the Reader.
SVch as by their place and calling (but especially Preachers) as have occasion
to speak publicly before the ignorant people, are to be admonished, that
they never affect any strange inkhorne terms, but labor to speak so as is
commonly received, and so as the most ignorant may well understand them:
neither seeking to be over fine or curious, nor yet living over careless,
using their speech as most men do, and ordering their wits as the fewest have
done. Some men seek so far for outlandish English, that they forget altogether
their mothers language, so that if some of their mothers were alive, they were
not able to tell or understand what they say; and yet these fine English
Clearkes will say they speak in their mother tongue; but one might well charge
them for counterfayting the Kings English. Also, some far iournied gentlemen,
at their return home, like as they love to go in foreign apparel, so they
will powder their talk with ouer-sea language. He that comes lately out of
France, will talk French English, and never blush at the matter. Another chops
in with English Italianated, and applies the Italian phrase to our English
speaking, the which is as if an Orator, that professes to utter his mind in
plain Latin, would needs speak Poetry, and far fetched colors of strange
antiquity. Does any wise man think, that wit rests in strange words, or
else stands it not in wholesome matter, and apt declaring of a man's mind? Do
we not speak, because we would have others to understand us? or is not the
tongue given for this end, that one might know what another means? Therefore,
either we must make a difference of English, and say, some is learned English,
and othersome is rude English, or the one is Court talk, the other is
Country-speech, or else we must of necessity banish all affected Rhetorique,
and use altogether one manner of language. Those therefore that will avoid this
folly, and acquaint themselves with the plainest and best kind of speech,
must seek from time to time such words as are commonly received, and such as
properly may express in plain manner, the whole conceit of their mind. And
look what words we best understand, and know what they mean, the same should
soonest be spoken, and first applied, to the utterance of our purpose. Therefore
for this end, four things would chiefly be observed in the choice of words.
First, that such words as we use, should be proper unto the tongue wherein
we speak. Again, that they be plain for all men to perceive. Thirdly, that
they be apt and meet, most properly to set out the matter. Fourthlie, that
words translated, from one signification to another, (called of the Grecians
Tropes,) be used to beautify the sentence, as precious stones are set in a
ring, to commend the gold. Now such are thought apt words, that properly agree
unto that thing, which they signify, and plainly express the nature of the
same. Therefore, they that have regard of their estimation and credit, do
warily speak, and with choice, utter words most apt for their purpose. In
weighty causes, grave words are thought most needful, that the greatness of
the matter, may the rather appear, in the vehemency of their talk. So
likewise of other, like order must be taken. Albeit some, not only do not
observe this kind of aptness, but also they fall into much fondnes, by using
words out of place and applying them to diverse matters, without all discretion.

If thou be desirous (gentle Reader) rightly and readily to understand, and to
profit by this Table, and such like, then thou must learn the Alphabet, to
wit, the order of the Letters as they stand, perfectly without book, and where
every Letter stands: as (b) near the beginning, (n) about the midst, and
(t) toward the end. Now if the word, which thou art desirous to find, begin
with (a) then look in the beginning of this Table, but if with (v) look
toward the end. Again, if thy word begin with (ca) look in the beginning of
the Letter (c) but if with (cu) then look toward the end of that Letter. And
so of all the rest, etc.

And further understand, that all such words as are derived and drawn from the
Greek, are noted with this letter (g.) And the french are marked thus () but
such words as are derived from the Latin and others, have no mark at all.

A Table Alphabeticall, containing and teaching the true writing and
understanding of hard usual English words, etc.
(k) stands for a kind of. (g, or gr.) stands for Greek. The French words
have this () before them.
A
ABandon, cast away, or yield, up, to leave or forsake. Abash, blush. abba,
father. abatement, taking from, lessening. abbess, Abbatesse, Mistress of a
Nunnerie, comfor^ers of others. abbettors, counselors. aberration, a going
assray, or wandering. abbreuiat, abridge, to shorten, or make short. abbut, to
lie unto, or border upon, as one lands end meets with another. abecedarie, the
order of the Letters, or he^ that uses them. abet, to maintain. abdicate, put
away, refuse, or forsake. abhor, hate, despise or dis daine. abject, base,
cast away in dis daine. abjure, renounce, deny, forswear. abolish, abolited,
make void, destroy, deface, or out of use. abortiue, borne before the time.
abricot, (k) kind of fruit. abrogate, take away, disanull, disallow. abruptly,
unorderly, without a preface. absolve, finish or acquit. absolute, perfect, or
upright. absolution, forgiveness: discharge. absonant, untuneable, absurd.
abstract, drawn away from another: a little book or volume gathered out of a
greater. abstruse, hid secret, difficult. abstersure, cleansing. abstemous,
very temperate in diet. abstinent, forbearing, temperate. absurd, foolish,
irksome. academie, an University, as Cambridge, or Oxford. academicke, of the
fect or wife and learned men accent, tune, the rising or falling of the voice.
accept, to take liking of, or to entertain willingly. acceptance, an agreeing
to some former act done before. access, free coming to, or a way to a place.
accessory, partaker in the same thing. accessory, an accident, or addition.
accident, a chance or happening. accidental, falling by chance, not by nature.
acclamation, showting, giving of approbation, or disliking by crying out.
accommodate, to make fit too, or convenient to the purpose. accomplish, finish,
or make an end of. accommodating, lending. account, reckoning. accord,
agreement between persons. accost, draw near unto. accurate, curious,
cunning, diligent. accrue, grow, increase, go to. accumulate, to heap
together. accurate, curious, cunning. acertaine, make sure, certify.
acetositie, sharpness, or sowernesse. achieue, to make an end off. acquitall,
discharge. acquisition, getting, purchasing. acrimonie, sharpness, soreness.
action, the form of a suite. active, nimble, ready, quick. actual, in act, or
showing it self in deed. acute, sharp, witty, quick. adage, an old speech,
or proverb. adamantine, as hard as Diamont addicted, given too, appointed too.
adhaerent, cleaving to, or taking part with. adieu, farewell. address,
prepare, or direct. adiacint, lying too, adjoining too. adiunct, an accidental
quality, or any property, that is not a substance. adiourne, defer, or put
off till another time. adjure, make to swear, or to deny. adiuvate, to help.
adle, ill or diseased. administer, govern, serve, or order, or do service
unto. administrator, one that does business for an another. admire, marvel
at, or be in love with. admiration, wonderment, rejoicing. admiral, chief by
sea, worthy. admission, receiving, or leave to enter into a place, access.
adopt, to take for his chiide, freely to choose. adore, worship, or reverence.
adorn, beautify, apparel, prepare. advance, prefer, lift up to honor.
aduent, the coming. adverse, contrary, or backward. advertise, give knowledge,
advise, or counsel. adulation, flattery or fauning. adulterate, to
counterfeit, or corrupt. advocate, a spokesman, attorney, or pleader.
aduousion, patronage, or power to present, or give a living. adust, burn.
Ae, see E.
affable, ready, and courteous in speech, gracious in words. affairs,
business. affectation, curiosity, desire to please. affect, to desire
earnestly, or to mind. affected, disposed, inclined. affinity, kin by
marriage. affirm, avouch, acertaine. affiance, trust. affianced, betrothed.
affixe, joined unto. afflict, vex, trouble, torment. affranchise, set at
liberty. aghast, afraid. agent, dooer, steward, or commissioner. aggrauate, make
more grievous, and more heavy. aggregate, gather together. agilitie,
nimblenesse or quickness. agglutinate, to join together. agnition, knowledge,
or acknowledging. agnomination, alluding to ones name. agitate, driven,
stirred, tossed. agony, (gr) heavy passion, anguish, grief. aigre, sharp,
sower. alabaster, (k) stone. alacrity, cheerfulness, liveliness. alarm, a
sound to the batteli. alchymie, (g) the art of turning other metals into gold.
algeates, every way, or howeuer it be. alien, a stranger. alienate, to
estrange, or withdraw the mind or to make a thing another man's. aliment,
nourishment, suffenance. all hail, all health, God speed. allege, bring
proof. allegation, excuse, bringing of testimony. allegory, (gr) similitude,
a mystical speech, more then the bare letter. allegiance, obedience of a
subject. allevate, assuage, or make more easy and ^^ght. alliance, kindred, or
league. allusion, meaning and pointing to another matter then is spoken in
words. allude, to speak one thing that has resemblance and respect to
another. aloof, a far off. alpha, (gr) the first Greek Letter. alphabet,
(g) order of letters in the crosserow. alter, change. altercation, debate,
wrangling, or contention. altitude, height. amaritude, bitterness. ambage,
long circumstance of word^ ambassador, messenger. ambition, desire of honor,
or striving for preferment. ambodexter, one ye plays on both hands.
ambiguous, doubtful, uncertain. ambushment, privy train, lying secretly to
trap by the way. amerce, amercement, fine, or penalty. amiable, lovely, or with
a good grace. amity, friendship, love. amorous, full of love, amiable, amorte,
dead, extinguished, without life. ample, large. amplify, enlarge, or make
bigger. analogy (gr) conuenience, proportion. analysis, (gr) resolution,
dividing into part^ anarchie, (gr) when the land is without (...) prince, or
governor. anatomy, (g) cutting up of the body. anathema, (g) accursed or
given over to the devil. angle, corner. anguish, grief. angust, straight,
narrow. animate, encourage. adnimaduersion, noting, considering, or ma^^ing.
anales, Chronicles of things from year (...) year. annex, to knit or join
together. annihilate, make void, or bring to nothing. anniuersarie, a years
time, or done and coming yearly. annotations, notes, marks, observations.
annual, yearly. antarticke, (g) toward the South. anthem, (g) song.
antecessour, an auncestour, or predecessor that goes, or lives in the age or
place before us. antedate, a fore date. antichrist (g) against, or contrary to
Christ. anticipation, preventing, foreknowledge. antidote, (g) a remedy
against poison. antipathie, (g) contrariety of qualities. antipodes, (g) those
that go with their feet opposite to ours. antiquity, auncientnesse. anticke,
disguised. antithesis, (g) repugnancie, or contrariety. antiquarie, a man
skilled in, or a searcher of antiquities. anxitie, care or sorrow. aphorism,
(g) general rule in physic. apocalypse, (g) revelation. apocrypha, (g) not
of authority, a thing hidden, whose original is not known. apology, (g)
defense, or excuse by speech. apostatate, (g) a backslider. apostacy, (g)
falling away, backsliding, rebellion. apostle, (g) an ambassador or one sent.
apothegme, (g) short witty sentence, or speech. apparent, in sight or open.
appall, fear. apparition, appearance, or strange fight. appeach, accuse, or
bewray. appeal, to seek to a higher Judge. appease, quiet, or pacify.
appendix, hanging, or belonging to another thing. appertinent, appurtenance,
belonging unto another thing. appetite, desire to any thing. applaude, to show
a liking of, as it were, by clapping of hands. application, applying too, or
resorting too. appose, to ask questions, oppose. apposition, adding, or
setting too. apprehension, conceit, and understanding. approbation, allowance,
or liking. appropriate, to take, and keep to, and for himself alone. approve,
allow or make good. approach, come nigh. apt, fit. ^able, that is or may be
tilled. ^biter, ^bitratour, a Judge in a controversy betwixt men. arbitrament,
judgment, censure, award. arch, (g) chief. ^^ch-angell, (g) chief angel.
^^chbishop, chief bishop. ^^chitect, chief builder. ^^tick, (g) northward.
^^dent, hoate, earnest. ^^dencie, heal, earnestness. ^^gent, silver, coin.
^^gue, to reason ^^ditie, dryness. ^^stocraticall, (g) government of a king,
dome by the pears and nobility. ^^thmeticke, (g) art of numbering. ^^ke, ship
or chest. ^^armorie, house of armor. ^^omaticall, of a sweet smell.
^^rrerages, debt unpaid, or things left vn^one and duties coming behind.
^^rrest, stay, or lay hold of. ^^ide, to please well, to content. ^ariue,
^^uall, come to land, or approach. ^^ogate, to claim, or challenge. arrogant,
proud, presumptuous. artifice, skill, subtlety, or a cunning piece of work.
artificer, handicrats-man. artificially, workmanlike, cunningly. articulate,
ioynted, set together, or to point out, and distinguish. artichock (k) herb.
artillery, engines or instruments for war. artisan, a handicrafts-man.
ascaunce, aside. ascend, go up, or climb up. ascent, a going up. ascribe,
give to, add to, attribute unto. askew, ansquint, looking aside, or awry.
assassinate, spoil, murder assay, proof or trial. assent, agreement, or
consent. assertaine, assure, certain. assentation, flattery, speaking fair.
aspect, looking upon, beholding much sight aspectable, worthy, or easy to be
seen. asperat, rough, sharp, or unpleasant. aspiration, breathing. aspersion,
besprinkling. aspire, climb up, or labor to come to. assault, to set upon, or
to prove. assail, assemble, gather together. assembly, company. assertion,
affirming, auonching of any thing asseueration, earnest affirming. assiduitie,
continuance, diligence. assign, appoint, ordain. assignation, appointment.
assimulate, to make like, to compare with. assistance, help. assotiation,
joining together in fellowship. associate, to accompany, or follow. assumption,
taking. stonish, put in great fear. assoyle, excuse, clear. astipulation, an
auouching, or witnessing of a thing, an agreement. astrictiue, astringent,
binding, or joining together. astronomy, (g) knowledge of the Stars.
astrology, (g) astrolabe, (g) an instrument to know the motion of the stars.
atheist, (g) atheall, without God, or believing that there is no God, or
denying any of his attributes. atheism, (g) the opinion of the Atheist.
atomie, (g) a thing so small that it cannot be divided. attach, sease upon,
rest, or hold. attaint, convict of crime. attainder, a conviction, or proving
guilty of a crime or fault. attempt, set upon, or take in hand. attendance,
watching, staying for, or way ting upon. attentive heedie, or marking.
attenuate, to make thinner or weaker, to lesson. attest, to witness, or call
to witness. attrap, ensnare. attribute, give to, or impute. avarice,
covetousness, or inordinate desire of money. auaunt, forward. auburne, (k)
color. audience, hearing, or harkening, or those that hear. audacious, bold,
rash, or foolish hardy. auditor, hearer, or officer of accounts. audible,
easy to be heard. aver, avouch, call to witness, prove. auert, to turn from,
or keep away. augment, to increase. auguration, augure, guessing, or
coniecturing at things to come. avowable, that which may be allowed and
affirmed. avouch, affirm with earnestnes, defend. auoke, to call from, or pull
back. auricular, in the ear, playning to the ear. auspicious, betokening
good success. auxiliarie, that come to help and aid. austere, sharp, rough,
cruel. authentical, (g) of authority, allowed by authority: the original.
autumn, the harvest. axiom (g) a certain principle, or general ground of
any Art. ^ay, ever, at any time, for ever. azure, (k) of color.
B
BAinbate, bear or carry like a porter. bail, surety, witness. balance, a
pair of scales. balase, gravel, wherewith ships are poysed to go upright: or
weight. bang, beat. bankerupt, bankrout, wa^ter. banquet, feast. band, company
of men, or an assembly. baptism, (g) di^^ing, or sprinkling. baptist, (g) a
baptiser. barbarian, a rude person. barbarism, rudeness, a corrupt form o^
writing or speaking. bark, small ship. barnacle, (k) bird. barrester, one
allowed to give counsel, o^ to plead: barreter, a contentious person,
quarreller, or fighter. barter, to bargain, or change. baud, whore. bauin, a
fagoot, or kid. bashful, blushing, or shamefa^^. basis, (g) foundation,
ground. battrie, beating or striking, bay, (k) tree, beadle, officer. beagle,
(k) hon^^. beatitude, blessedness, happiness. beliue, ano^e. belt, girdle.
benediction, praising or blessing. beneficial, profitable, liberal.
benevolence, good will, or (...). benign, favorable, courteous, gentle.
benignity, (...), or kindness. benisson, blessing. bequeath, (...) bereft,
deprived, alone, void, ^o^d. besiege, (...). betrothed, affianced, or promised
in marriage beuuerage, drink. bewail, mon^ complain. by(...)ue, welcome.
biere, a cophin wherein dead men are carried. bigamie, (g) twice married, or
has had two wines. bipar^^te, divided into two parts. biscuit, bread. bishop,
over-(...), or prela^e. bissextile, the leap year. blason, report publish,
show forth. blasphemy, (g) to speak ill of God. blattering, vain babbling.
blanch, to make white. bleate, cry. bliss, ^oy, or blessedness. blithe, merry.
blinck, look aside. bonnet, hat, or ^ap. bob, bea^e. bouge, stir, remove from
a place. boat, ship. bode, a messenger, or fydings. boot, help. bourne, a
water springing out of the earth. braule, wrangle. brachygraphie, (g) short
writing. bragard, fine, trim, proud. brandish, to shake, or cast with ^orce.
breviarie, brief, collection, short ^oll. brevity, shortness. brickle,
brittle, easily broken, lymber. brigand, a thief or robber by the high way
side. brigandine, coat of defense. brigantine, a small ship. brothell, keeper
of a house of baudry. brisque, quick, lively, fierce. brooch, jewel. brute,
report, noise. bucolike (g) pertaining to beasts or heardsmen. buggerie,
conjunction with one of the same kind, or of men with beasts. bugle, glass.
buglasse (k) herb. bullyon, coin or lump of silver. butte, border upon, lie
over against. burgess, a head man of a town. burglarie, robbing of houses.
buxomnesse, plyablenesse, or humble stooping, in sign of obedience.
C
CAbin, cottage, poor lodging. cadence, falling, properly the ledging of corn
by a tempest. calculate, cast account, reckon. calefie, make warm, heat or
chase. calligraphie (g) fair writing. calliditie, craftiness, or deceit.
calumniation, a discrediting by word, or a false accusation. camphire, kind of
gum. candidate, a sui^er for, or one elect for a place canine, dogged hungry.
cancel, to undo, des^^^, cross out, or tear. canon (g) law, or rule.
canonise (g) make a saint, to examine by rule. canopie, covering. canticke, a
song. capacity, largeness of a place, conceit or receipt. capital, deadly, or
great, or worthy of shame, and punishment. capable, wise, apt to learn, big
or fit to receive. capitulation, distinguishing by parts, bringing to heads.
captious, catching, deceitful, subtle. captive, prisoner. captiuate, make
subject, or a prisoner. captation, procuring, purchasing. capuchou, a hoode or
^oule. carbonado, meat broyled on the coals. cardinal, chief, or principal.
carminate, to card wool, or divide. carnalitie, fleshlinesse. carnal,
fleshly, pleasing the flesh. carpe, take exception against, or wrangle.
cassere, dismiss, put away, or out of office castrated, gelded, diminished.
casualtie, chance or hap. castigation, chastisment, blaming, correction
catalogue (g) beadrole, or rehearsal of words, or names. catastrophe (g) the
end of a thing, overthrow. category (g) an accusation. catechiser (g) that
teaches the principles of Christian religion. cathedral, chief in the
Diocese. catarre, a flowing of humors from the head. catholic (g)
universal or general. cauallerie, horse men. cave, hollow place. cautelous,
circumspect, wary, crafty. cavil, to jest, scoff, or reason subtly.
cauterize (g) to sear, burn. caution, warning, putting in mind, or taking
heed. celebrate, holy, make famous, to publish, to to commend, to keep
solemnly. celeritie, swiftness, have. celestial, heavenly, divine, passing
excellent. cement, mortar, or lime. censor, a corrector, a judge, or reformer
of manners. censure, correction, or reformation. center (g) midst of any
round thing or circle. centurion, captain of an hundred men. certify, give to
understand. ceruse, white lead, or painting that women use. cessation, rest,
idleness, leaving off. cessement, tribute. channel, sinck. chaos (g) a confused
heap or mingle mangle. chapelet, a garland. chaffare, buying and selling.
character (g) the fashion of a letter, a mark or stamp. champion, wild
field, also a challenger. chambering, lightness, and wanton behavior in
private places. charter, a grant of any thing confirmed by seal. chastise,
correct, punish. chaunt, sing. cheualrie, Knight-h^od. cheualier, man at arms.
cherubin, order of Angels. chirograph (g) hand writing. chiromancie (g) telling
of fortunes by the lines in the hand. surgeon (g) a Surgeon. choler (g) a
humor causing anger. christ (g) anointed. chronicler (g) chronographer,
History writer. chronicall (g) returning at certain times. chronology (g)
story of times past. cibaries, meats, nourishment. cider, drink made of
apples. circuit, compass about. circular, round. circumcise, to cut the privy
skin. circumference, the round and utmost circuit or compass. circumligate,
blind about. circumscribe, to compass about with a line, to limit.
circumspect, heedy, quick of sight, wise, and doing matters advisedly.
circumlocution, a speaking of that in many words, which may be said in few.
circumstance, a quality that accompanies* any thing, as time place. etc.
circumstant, things that are about us. circumuent, to close in, to deceive, or
entrap craftily. cite, allege, call as witness, to summon to appear.
citadell, the fort of a town. citron (k) ^ruit. civil, honest in
conversation, or gentle in behavior. clame, title, right, challenge as his
own. clamorous, making a great noise. classick, chief, and approved.
clarify, make clear. claritude, cleerenes, renown. clemency, gentleness,
courtesy. cleped, called. clenched, fastened. client, he that is defended.
climate, a portion of the world betwix^ North and South. climactericall (g)
that which arises by degrees, as the sixty third year, is climactericall of
seauentie, also dangerous. clyster (g) medicine. coaction, compelling.
coagulate, congeale, come to a curde. coadiutor, a fellow helper. coble, amend.
cockatrice, a kind of beast. coction, boiling, digesting. coequall, like,
even. caenation, supper, a place to sup in. cogitation, thought, musing.
cognition, knowledge. cohaerence, joining, and vnit^ing together. coin, corner.
collect, gather together. colleague, companion, fellow in office. collateral,
on the other side, over against, as two lines drawn equally distant one from
another, in due place. collation, a short banquet. collogue, flatter, speak
fair. collusion, deceit, cousonage. colonel, the General of an army.
column, one side of a page of a book. comba^e, fight, strife. combine, couple
together. co^bination, a joining, or coupling together. combure, burn, or
consume with fire. combustible, easily burnt. co^bustion, burning or consuming
with fire comedy (k) stage play. comicall, handled merrily like a comedy.
commemoration, rehearsing, or remembering. commencement, a beginning or
entrance. comet (g) a blasing star. commentary, exposition of any thing.
commerce, fellowship, intercourse of merchandise. commination, threatening, or
menacing. commiseration, pity. commixtion, commixture, mingling together.
commodious, profitable, pleasant, fit, commotion, rebellion, trouble, or
disquietnesse. communicate, make pertaker, or give part unto. communalitie,
common people, or Common wealth. communion, community, fellowship. compact,
joined together, or an agreement. compassion, pity, fellow-feeling. compel,
to force or constrain. compendious, short, profitable. compensation, a
recompense. compeare, like. competent, convenient, sufficient, apt. competitor,
he that sueth for the same thing, or office that another does. compile, gather
together. complement, perfecting of any thing. complete, fulfilled, finished.
complexion, nature, constitution of the body. accomplices, fellows in wicked
matters. compose, make or join together. composition, agreement, a making or
mingling together. comprehend, comprise, to contain. compremise, agreement
made by parties chosen on either side. compremit, judge. compte, fine, decked,
trimmed. compulsion, force, constraint. computation, an account or reckoning.
compu^gator, one that comes to purge or free another. compunction, pricking.
concauitie, hollownesse. conceal, to keep close. conception, conceiving in
the womb. concinnate, made fit, finely apparrelled. concise, brief or short.
conclaue, inner parlor, closet. conclude, make an end. concoct, to digest
meat. concord, concordance, agreement. concrete, joined or congealed together.
concubine, harlot or light huswife. conculcate, to tread underfoot.
concupiscence, desire. concur, agree together, run together or meet.
concurse, running together of many to a place. condensate, make thick.
condign, worthy. condescend, agree unto, or consent. condite, sweetened,
sawced, seasoned. condole, to be grieved, or sorrowful with another. conduct,
guiding, or hyring. confabulate, to talk together. confection, compounding,
making, or mingling. confederate agreeing peaceably together by covenants made.
confer, talk together. conference, communication, talking together.
confidence, trust, hope. confine, to border upon, to compass in. confirm,
establish. confiscation, forfeiture or losie of goods. conflict, battle,
strife fight. conform, to make like unto, consent. confound, overthrow,
destroy, mingle together, or disorder. confront, oppose, compare one to
another. confuted, out of order. conge, leave, farewell. congeale, to harden,
or wa^e hard, or freeze together. congestion, an heaping up. conglutinate, to
join together. congratulate, to rejoice with another for some good fortune.
congregate, gather together. congruence, congruitie, agreeableness, or
likeness. conjecture, gessing. conjunction, joining together. conjure, to
conspire together, to swear by. connection, joining together. conniuence,
suffering, or winking at. conquest, a complaining, victory. consanguinitie,
kindred by blood, or birth. consecrate, make holy, to dedicate or give unto.
consectarie, that follows upon any other thing. consent, agreement.
consequence, consequent. following by order. conserve, keep, save or
maintain. considerately, wisely and with advise. consistory, place of civil
judgment. consociate, company with, or join a companion unto consolation,
comfort. consonant, agreeable, likely. consort, a companion, or company.
conspicuous, easy to be seen, excellent. conspire, agree together for to do
evil. constellation, a company of stars. constitutions laws or decrees.
construc, expound. consul, a chief governor among the Romans. consult, take
counsel. consummate, accomplish, fulfill, or finish. contagious, that which
corrupts, or infecteth. contaminate, de^^le, or corrupt. contemptible, worthy
to be despised, not to be set by. contemplation, meditation, or musing.
contend, wrangle, strive. contestate, to call to witness. context, the
agreeing of the matter going before, with that which follows. contiguous,
touching one another. continent, modest, abstaining, chaste: also the firm land
where no i will or sea is. contingent, happening by chance. contract, make short,
also a bargain, or covenant. contradiction, gain saying. contribute, bestow
upon, or give unto. contribution, a bestowing of any thing with others.
contributorie, giving his part to any thing. contrite, broken, sorrowful.
contrition, sorrow, sadness. contriue, make. contumacie, stubbornness,
contempt. contumely, slander, reproach. contusion, bruise. convent, bring
before a Judge. convenient, fit, well beseeming. conuenticle, a little
assembly, converse, company with. convert, turn, change. conuexe, h^llow,
binding down on every side. convict, proved guilty, overcome. convince, to
overcome, confute, or prove manifestly. convocation, an assembling, or calling
together. conuoy, a waiting upon, or keeping company in the way. connulsion, a
pulling, or shrinking up. copartner, fellow partaker, or companion. cophin (g)
basket, or chest for a dead body to be put in. copious, plentiful, abounding.
copulation, joining or coupling together. cordwainer, shooemaker. cordial,
comforting the heart. corriuals, competitors, lovers of, or ^uers for the same
thing. cornuted, having ^ornes. carnositie, full of flesh, gross. coronation,
crowning. corporal, bodi^^e. corporate, having a body. corpse, dead body.
corpulent, gross of body, fat, or great. correspondent, answerable.
correllatiues, when two things are so linked together, that the one cannot be
without the other. corrigible, easily corrected. corroborate, confirm, or
strengthen, or make strong. corroded, gnawd about. correlarie, overplus, that
is more then measure. corrosiue, fretting. cosmographie (g) description of the
world. costiue, bound in the body. couch, bed, lie down. couen, fraud deceit.
covert, hidden place, secret. counterchange, to change again. counterfaite,
make like, seem that it is not countermaund, command contrary. countermine,
undermine one against another. countermure, to build one wall against another.
crasie, weak, sickly. crassitude, fa^^es or thickness. counterpoise, make
level, or to weigh as heavy as another thing. counterscarpe, a rampire to a
wall. cowslip (k) herb. counteruaile, of equal value. couth, ^^owen.
credence, belief. curb, restrain, keep in. credible, which may be believed.
couerture, covering. creditor, he which lends, or trusts another.
credulous, ready to believe. credulity, rashness in believing. creuas, rift,
chinke, cleft, crible, sifted. criminous, criminal, faulty, that wherein is
some fault. crisped, curied, or frisled. critical (g) which gives judgment
of sickness, etc. crocodile (k) beast. crone, an old prating woman. crucify,
fasten to a cross. crude, raw, not ripe, not disgested. crupticall (g) hidden
or secret. chrystaline (g) clear as glass or crystal. cubite, a foot and a
half. culpable, blameworthy, guilty. culture, husbandry, tilling. cunne, to
discern, also to give. cunstable, the stay and support of the king.
curiosity, picked diligence, greater carefulnes, then is seemly or
necessary. curtall, cut short. cursorilie, swiftly, or briefly. curuefie,
bowed, or make crooked. custody, keeping, or looking ^o. cymball, an
instrument of music, so called. cynicall (g) dogged, froward. cipher (g) a
circle in numbering, of no value of it self, but serves to make up the
number, and to make other figures of more value.
D
DAmage, loss, hinderance. damnable, not to be allowed. deacon (g) prouider
for the poor. demoniacke (g) possessed with a devil. deambulation, a walking
abroad. debate, strife, contention. debar, let. debilitie, weakness,
faintness. debonnayre, gentle, courteous, affable, decalogue (g) the ten
commandments. decacordon (g) an instrument with ten strings. decent, comely,
or beseeming. decease, a departing, or giving place too. decide, to determine,
or make an end of. decipher, describe, or open the meaning, or to count.
decision, cutting away. declamation, an oration of a matter feyned. decline,
fall away, or swerve from. decoction, liquor, wherein things are sod for
physic. decorum, comeliness, decrepite, very old. decurion, a captain over
ten. decretals, decees, constitutions. dedicate, to give for ever. deduct, take
or draw out, abate, or diminish. deface, blot out, stain, bring out of fashion.
defame, to slander, or speak ill of. defect, want, failing. defer, put off
till another time. defy, distrust. define, to show clearly what a thing is.
deflower, dishonest, ravish, or disgrace. deformed, ill shapen, ill favored.
defraude, deceive, beguile. defraye, lay out, pay, discharge. degenerate, be
unlike his ancestors: to grow out of kind. degrade, vide disgrade. dehort,
move or persuade from, to advise to the contrary. dejected, cast down, brought
low. deigne, vouchsafe. dei^ie, Godhead. deifie, make like God. delectable,
delightful, pleasant. delectation, delight or pleasure. delegate, an
ambassador, or one appointed in another place. deliberate, to take counsel.
delicte, fault, small offense. delineate, to draw the proportion of any thing.
delicate, dainty, given to pleasure. delude, deceive, or laugh to scorn.
deluge, great floode, or ouerflowing of waters. delusion, mockery, a
deceitful thing. demand, request, ask. demean, behave. demerite, deserving,
worthiness. democracie (g) a commonwealth governed by the people. demolish,
cast down. demonstrate, show plainly or openly, to point out or manifest.
demenour, behavior. demurre, to stay, to linger or use delays. demer, a
penny. de^ison, free borne. denounce, declare, or give warning of, or
proclaim. denomination, a naming. deusated, made thick. depend dependence,
hang upon. deplore, to lament or bewail. deplume, to pull off the feathers.
deportation, carrying away. depopulate, spoil, or wast. depose, put away,
deprive, or put down. deprave, mar or corrupt, or make worse. deprecation,
supplication, or requiring of pardon. depresse, to keep down. deprive, see
de^ose. depute, account or esteem. de^ide, mock, or laugh to scorn.
derision, mocking. derive, fetch from. deprivation, taking away from some other
matter. derogate, to take away, or to deminish. desastrous, unlucky,
unfortunate. descant, variation of the ground of a song. descend, go down.
describe, to write forth, to copy out, or to declare. deseigne, deseignement,
an appointing how any thing shall be done. desert, wilderness. desertion, a
leaving or forsaking. design, to mark out, or appoint for any purpose.
desist, leave off, or stay. desolate, left alone, or forsaken. desperate,
without hope, or past hope. despume, ^ome, or cast up a scumme. detect, bewray,
disclose, accuse. destinated, appointed. destituted, forsaken. detest, hate
greatly or abhor. detained, withheld, or kept back, determine, resolve
conclude. detract, take from, or backbi^e. detriment, loss, hurt, hinderance.
detrude, thrust out, or from. devise, invent, find out. deuote, to give unto,
to appoint unto. devotion, holiness. devoyre, duty, endeavor. dexterity,
aptness, nimblenesse. diabolical (g) devilish. diadem (g) a Kings crown.
diapason (g) a concord in Music of all parts. diet, manner of food. dialect
(g) the manner of speech in any language, diverse from others. dialogue (g)
conference, or talking together. diameter (g) a ^^ne crossing the midst of any
circle or figure. didacticall (g) full of doctrine or instruction. diffamation,
a slaundering, or speaking ill of. different, unlikely, disagreeing. difficill,
difficult, hard, uneasy, dangerous. diffident, mistrustfull. diffuse, pour
out. digest, bring into order, to divide, and destribute things into their
right place. dignity, worthiness. digress, turn from, go away. digression,
departing from the matter in hand. dilacerate, to rent in sunder. dilapidation,
wastefull, spending, or suffering to go to decay. dilate, enlarge, spread
abroad, or to discourse upon largely. dilemma, (g) a forked kind of argument,
which on either side entrappeth. dimension, measuring. diminish, make less or
take from. diminution, l^ssening. diocese (g) jurisdiction. diocesan, that
has jurisdiction. dire, cruel, cursed, damnable. direct, guide or rule:
right, straight, also to order. disable, make unable, or find fault with.
disabilitie, unableness. disaduantageous, hindering much. disanull, make
void, or bring to nothing. disarme, pull off armor. disbur^e, lay out money.
descent, coming down from another. discern, know, put one for another, or
put difference. discide, cut off, or in pieces. discipline, instruction, or
trayning up. disciple, scholar. discipher, to lay open, or make plain.
disconsolate, without comfort. disclose, discover, utter or manifest.
discomfiting, putting to flight. discontinuance, absence. discord,
disagreement, variance. discouraged, made afraid, or out of heart. discover,
lay open, find out. discretion, wise choice of one from another. discuss,
examine, debate, or search narrowly into. disdain, to scorn, despise.
disfigure, bring out of shape. disfranchis, take away freedom. disioyne,
vnioyne or separate. disjunction, a dividing, or seperating. disfranchised,
deprived of liberty. disgorge, spue v^, cast out of the stomach. disgrade, to
discharge of his orders, or degrees. disguised, counterfaited, seeming that it
is not. dislocation, setting out of right place. disloyal, one whom it is not
good to trust, untrusty, traylerous. dismember, to pull and part one piece from
another. dismal, unlucky. dismiss, let pass, send away. disparagement,
hurt, hinderance, or disgrace. dispatch, make an end. dispense, to give license
unto, also charges, cost. disperse, scatter or spread abroad. dispeople, to
unpeople a place. displant, to pull up by the roots. display, spread abroad,
dispose, to set in order, to appoint. disposition, natural inclination, or
setting in order. dispoyle, take away by violence, or rob. disputable,
questionable, or doubtful, that may be reasoned of. dissent, disagree, to be
of a contrary opinion. dissimilitude, unlikeness. dissimulation, dissembling,
hiding, cloaking. dissipation, scattering abroad. dissolve, unloose, or melt.
dissoluble, easy to unloose. dissolute, careless, retchlesse. dissolution,
breaking, unloosing. dissonant, disagreeing. distance, space between.
distemperature, besides the mean, or due proportion. distended, stretched out,
or out of joint. distick (g) a double meeter, or two verses of one matter.
distinguish, put difference, divide, or point out from others. distillation,
distilling, dropping down by little and little. distinct, differing, or
divided. distinction, a difference, or separation. distracted, distraught,
drawn into diverse parts, also out of his wits. distribute, divide in sunder,
or to give in sundry parts. distribution, division, or laying out by parts.
disturb, disquiet, let or interrupt. dissuade, to persuade to the contrary.
dittie, the matter of a song. divert, turn from, to another. divine, heavenly,
godly, also to guess, conjecture, or prophecy. divinity, heavenly doctrine,
also godhead. division, parting or seperating. divorce, division, separation.
diureticall, that provoke ^rine. diurnall, daily, belonging to the day.
diuulge, diuulgate. publish, or make common. docilitie, easiness to be taught.
document, doctrine, learning, or instruction. docked, cut off. dogmaticall,
that gives instructions. dolor, grief, sorrow, or pain. dolorous, grievous,
or sorrowful. damage, loss, harm, or hinderance. domestical, at home,
belonging to household. dominere, rule, bear sway. dominion, domination, rule,
lordship, or maistership. donatiue, a gift, in money or other things. dose, the
quantity of medicine the Physician appoints. doughtie, virtuous, stout.
draule, to speak with difficulty. drerie, heavy, sorrowful. drenched,
drowned or dipped. droope, fainte, hang the head or wings. drudge, toil.
dulcimu^, dulcimar, (k) instrument. duarchy, the equal reign of two princes
together. duplicitie, double kind of a thing. driblets, small debts. dulcifie,
sweeten. durable, long lasting, or of long continuance. durance, hold, lasting.
E
Erst, first. each, increase. eclipse (g) failing of the light of the Sun or
Moon. echo, a sound, resounding back again. ecclesiastical (g) belonging to
the Church. eden, pleasure, or delight. edict, a commandment from authority,
a proclamation. edifice, building. edify, to instruct, or build up in
knowledge. edition, putting forth, setting abroad. education, bringing up.
effect, a thing done, or to bring to pass. affectuall, forcible. effeminate,
wamannish, delicate, wanson. efficacy, force, or strength. efficient, working,
or accomplishing. eftsoons, forthwith. effusion, pouring, or running forth.
egg, provoke. egest, to cast, or carry forth. eglogue (g) a talking together.
egregious, singular, passing good. egresse, forthgoing, or passage out.
eiaculate, cast out. eiection, a casting forth. elaborate, done curiously or
diligently. election, choice. elect, chosen or picked out. elegancie, finenesse
of speech. element, the first principle or beginning of any thing. elench (g) a
subtle argument. elevate, litt up, or heave up. elocution, good utterance of
speech. eluish, froward. emerods (k) of disease. embark, imbark, to ship a
thing, or load a ship. emblem (g) a picture shadowing out some thing to be
learned. eminent, appearing higher, or further out, excelling. emmot, pi^mire.
emphasis (g) a forcible expressing. emperick (g) he that has all his skill in
physic by practice. empire, government, or kingdom. emulatiou, envy,
in^^t^tion, desire to exceed another. enarration, declaration, expo^^^ing.
enigmatical (g) full of hard questions, obscure. enchant, bewitch. encounter,
set against, or to meet. enchrochment, when the Lord has gotten and seized of
more rent or services of his tenant then of right is due. endoffe, ^^t on the
back, or write on y^ back enduce, move. engender, beget. enimitie, enmity,
displeasure, or hatred. inflame, burn set on fire. enfranchise, make tree.
engrate, pre^^^ upon. enhaunce, to lift up, or make greater. enlarge, make
bigger, set at liberty. enoble, make noble, or famous. enormious, out of
square, unorderly. ensign, flagge for war. enterfier, to strike one another.
enterlace, to put between, intermingle. enterprise, begin, take in hand.
enterre, lay in the earth. entrals, inward parts, as heart, liver, etc.
enthymeme (g) an imperfect sillagisme. enucleate, declare, make manifest,
enueloped, wrapped. enuiron, to enclose, or compass about. epha, a hind of
measure. epicure, given to pleasure. epigram (g) a sentence written upon any
for praise or dispraise. epilogue (g) conclusion. epilepsie (g) the falling
sickness. episcopal (g) bishoplike. epiphanie (g) appearing. epistle, (g)
letter sent. epitaph (g) the writing on a tomb or grane. epithet (g) a name
or title given to any thing. epitome (g) the brief copy of a book, etc.
epitomize (g) to make an epitome, or to bring a ^^^ke (...) a le^^er volume.
equalize, match, make equal. equinoctium, when the days and nights are
equal. equipage, furniture. equity, right, lawfulness. equivalent, of equal
value. equivocate, to speak doubtfully. eradicate, pull up by the roots.
erect, set up, or lift up. ermite (g) one dwelling in the wilderness. err,
mistake, go wrong. erroneous, full of error, and wandering out of the right
way. eruction, breaking of wind upward. erudition, learning. essay, trial
what one can say, or do in any matter. escheat, forfeit. eschew shun, avoid,
escape. espoused, promised in marriage. essence, being of any thing. essoine,
excuse for any cause, delay. establish, confirm, make strong. estimate,
esteem, value, or prise, think or judge. eternal, everlasting, without end.
ethnic (g) an heathen, or gentile. etymology, (g) true expounding. euacuated,
made void, clean taken away, or emptied. euangell (g) the Gospel or glad
tidings. evangelist (g) bringer of glad tidings. euaporate, to breath out.
evasion, escape, shift. event, chance, or that which follows any thing.
euict, overcome by law. eucharist (g) a thanksgiving, the Lords supper.
euitable, that may be shunned or avoided. eunuch (g) gelded, without stones.
euert, turn vpside down. evident, easy to be seen, plain. euocation,
calling forth. exact, perfectly done, or to require with extremity.
exaggerate, heap upon, amplify, to make a thing more then it is. exaltation,
lifting up. exanimate, make afraid, or trouble in mind. exasperate, whet on,
to vex, or make more angry. excauate, make hollow. excaecate, to make blind.
excessive, too much, more then enough. exchequer, office of receipts. exclame,
bray, or cry out. exclude, thrust, or shut out, or keep out. excogitate, to
muse, or devise exactly. excommunicate, to thrust out of company, or
fellowship. excoriate, pull the skin off. excrement, dung, offall, refuse, or
dregs. excruciat, to bepe, or torment. excursion, a skirmish in wars of some
few running from their company. execrable, cursed, horrible. execute, perform,
or exercise some charge. exempt, free, privileged. exemplify, enlarge, or
declare by examples. exhalation, a breath or su^^e rising upward. exhaust,
drawn out, or emptied. exhibit, put up or bestow, to offer, or set abroad for
all men to see. exiccate, to dry up. exigent, necessity, extremity. exile,
banish, drive out. existence, being. exorable, easy to be entreated.
exorbitant, out of order, measure or place. exorcist (g) coniurer. exorde,
begin. exordium, a beginning or entrance. exoticke, outlandish, brought out
of another country. expect, look for. expedient, fit, meet or beseeming.
expedition, have, speed. expel, put out, or thrust out. expend, ^onsider or
muse upon. expense, cost, or money laid out. experiment, a proof, or trial.
expert, skillful. expiation, pacifying with satisfaction, purging by sacrifice.
expire, to dye, or give up the ghost, to decay. explane, to make manifest, or
declare, explicate, declare plainly. explicit, made manifest, unfolded.
exploit, enterprice, act, deed. expose, to offer, or lay open, to hazard.
expostulate, to reason, or chide with, to complain. expressly, fitly,
manifestly. exprobration, vpbrayding, casting in ones teeth. expugnable, to be
won or overcome expulse, drive out, or thrust out. exquisite, perfect, fine,
singular, curious. extant, appearing abroad, showing it self. ecstasy, a
trance, or sowning. extemporall, extempore, sudden, without premeditation,
or study. extemporarie, extend, spread forth, prolong, or make longer, to
enlarge. extenuate, lessen, ^^inish, or make less. external, outward,
strange. extimulate, provoke, prick forward. extinguish, put out, or quench.
extinct, put out. extirpate, to pull up by the roots. extol, advance, or
praise highly, to lift up. extort, to wring out, to wrest from by violence.
extract, draw out. extrauagant, wandering out of order. extraordinary, besides,
or more then common custom. exult, brag, triumph, or leap for joy.
exulcerate, to make sore, or corrupt.
F
FAbricate, make, fashion. fabulous, fained, countersaited, much talked of.
facete, merry, conceited. fact, deed. facility, easines. faction, division of
people into sundry parts and opinions. factious, that makes division,
contentious. factor, one that does business for another. faculty, license,
power, aptness, ability. fallacy, deceit, falshoode. falsify, to forge, to
forge, to countersait. famine, hunger, dearth. fame, report, common talk,
credit. fanaticke, mad. fantacie, imagination. fantastique, conceited, full
of devises. farce, to fill or stuff. fascinate, to bewitch, or disfigure by
enchantment. fastidiousnesse, lothsomnesse, or disdainfulnesse. faschious,
grievous, or inducing to anger. fatal, mortal, appointed by God to com^ to
pass. fealty, faithfulness. feature, fashion, shape. fecunditie,
fruitfulness. feffe, indue. felicity, happiness. female, feminine, the she
in mankind, or other creatures. fermentated, leauened. fervently, hotely,
hastily, earnestly. feruide, hot, scalding, burning. festination, have,
speed. festiuitie, mirth, pleasantness. festival, merry, pertaining to holy
days. fervent, hot, chased, very angry. fertile, fruitful, yielding much
fruit. fever, ague. figment, fiction, a lie, or tale. fidelity, faithfulness,
trustiness. friend, ^inell. figurative, to shavow, or represent, or to
counterfaite. figurative, by figures. filial, like, or belonging to a son.
final, pertaining to the end. finite, having an end, and certain limits.
firm, sure, steadfast, strong, constant. fissure, rift, cleft, or pertition.
fixed, fastened, sure, fast. flagon, great wine cup, or bottle. flagrant,
burning, hot. flexible, easily bent, pliant, or mutable. flote, swim aloft.
fluxible, thin and running easily down like water. flux, disease of scouring.
feeble, weak, lacking strength. foe-men, enemies. fomentation, an ass waging,
or comforting by warmth. foreign, strange, of another country. forruall,
following the common fashion. foraminated, holed, or bored. fordoe, kill,
overthrow, undo. formidable, fearful, to be feared. foreslow, neglect.
fornication, uncleanness between single persons. forage, fodder, also to
provide meat. fortification, strengthening. fortitude, valiantness, or
couragiousnes, strength. fortunate, happy, having good success. fragilitie,
brittlenes, or weakness. fragments, relics, broken meats, pieces broken
off. fragrant, sweetly smelling. franck, liberal, bountiful. fraternity,
brotherhood. franchise, liberty, freedom. fraudulent, deceitful, crafty, or
full of guile. frequent, often, done many times, ordinary, much haunted, or go
too. friction, rubbing, chasing. frigifie, cool, make cold. frivolous, vain,
trifling, of no estimation. frontiers, the forepart. frontlet (k) attire for
the forehead. frounce, wrinckle, put out of order. fructify, to make
fruitful, or bring forth much fruit. frugall, thriftie, temperate in
expenses. fruition, inioying, possession. frustrate, make void, deceive.
fugitive, runnagate, or starting away. fulgent, glistering, or shining.
fuluide, yealow. fume, to yield smoke. function, calling, or charge, or trade,
and place wherein a man lives. funeral, burial, mourning, pertaining to a
burial, or mourning. furbush, to dress or scour, or make clean. furniture,
all things necessary to use. furious, raging, or mad. future, that which shall
be hereafter.
G
GAlliard, lusty, frolic. garboile, hurly burly. guardian, a keeper, defender,
or tutor. gargarise, to wash the mouth, and throat within, by stirring some
liquor up and down in the mouth. garnar, granar, corn chamber. garrison,
defense. garnish, trime, deck up, make fine. gay, fine, trim. gem, a precious
stone. gentilitie, generositie, gentry, nobility, gentlemanship. genesis (g)
beginning. gentile, a heathen. generation, offspring. genealogy (g) generation,
or a describing of the stock or pedigree. genitalles, priuities. genuine,
peculiar, or natural. genius, the Angel that waits on man, be it a good or
evil angel. genitor, father. geographie (g) the describing of the earth.
geometry (g) art of measuring the earth. geomancie (g) sorcerie by circles and
pricks in the earth. germane, come of the same stock. gesticulate, use much or
foolish gesture. gests, things done, or noble acts of princes. gibbocitie,
crookedness. giglot, strumpet, a fliering wench. giere, grin or laugh. gifts,
places to lodge in. gives, fetters. glandulous, full of kernels. glee, mirth,
gladness. gospel, glad tidings. globe, any thing very round. glorify, to
give honor, praise and commendation to any body. gloss (g) a tongue, or
exposition of a dark speech. golit, gullit, a throat. gloze, dissemble,
flatter. gorge, stomach. gourmandise, devouring, gluttony. glutinate, to glue,
or join together. gnible, bite. gnoffe, miser, fool. gnomen (g) the style, or
cock of a dial. gradation, steps, by little and little. graduate, that has
taken a degree. grande, great. grapple, take hold. graspe, catch fast.
gratify, to pleasure, or do a good turn in way of thankfulness. gratis,
freely, without desert. gratitude, thankfulness. gratuitie, gift freely
bestowed. gratulate, to be glad for another sake. grave, weighty, sober,
sage, discreet. grease, fat. grecisme, the custom of the Grecians. greet,
salute, also weep. grisly, fearful, ghastly. guerdon, a reward. guidance,
governing, or direction. guise, fashion, shape, custom. gulf, deep poole, or
pit. gustation, taste.
H
Ability, ^^bilitie, ableness or suffi^iencie. habiliment, clothing,
furniture. habitable, that may be dwelt in. habitacle, habitation, a dwelling
place. habit, apparel, fashion, custom. habitude, disposition, plight,
respect. hagard, wild, strange, contrary. hale, pull, draw, lift up. halauiah,
praise the Lord. halcyon, quiet, peaceable. hallucinate, to deceive or blind.
harmony (g) agreement of diverse sounds in music. harrie, pull violently.
hautie, lofty, proud. hazard, venture, chance. herault, kings messenger.
heathen, see Gentile. hebrew, from Hebers stock. hecticke (g) inflaming the
heart, and soundest parts of the body. hemisphere (g) half of the compass of
heaven, that we see. helmet, head piece. heriditarie, coming by inheritance,
or succession. heritage, inheritance, possession. herbinger, sent before to
prepare. heriticall (g) heretic (g) one that maintayneth heresies. hermit,
see ermite. heroical (g) beseeming a noble man, or magnificent. hestes, will,
commandments. hideous, fearful, terrible, great. hierarchy (g) the
government of priests, or holy governance. hymn (g) kind of song to the
praise of God. hipocrite (g) such a one as in his outward apparel,
countenance, and behavior, pretends to be another man then he is indeed,
or a deceiuer. historical (g) pertaining to history. historiographer (g) a
writer of history. homage, worship or service. homicide, a man killer, or the
killing of a man. homily (g) a speech or sermon. hononimie (g) when diverse
things are signified by one word. horror, fearful, sorrow, fear, terror.
horizon (g) a circle dividing the half of the firmament, from the other half
which we see not. hosanna, save now. hospitality, good entertainment for
friends and strangers. hostage, pledge. hostility, hatred, enmity, or open
wars. humane, belonging to man, gentle, courteous, bounteous. humide, wet.
humiditie, moisture. humiliation, humbling. hush, hushed, peace, or be still.
hyperbolicall (g) beyond all credit, or likelihoode of truth.
I
IDeall (g) proper. idiome (g) a proper form of speech, idiot (g) unlearned, a
fool. Iehoua, Lord almighty. ientation, breakefast. ieopardie, danger. Jesus
(g) Savior. ignoble, of low and base birth. ignominy, reproach, discredit,
slander. ignorance, lack of knowledge. illegitemate, unlawfully begotten, and
borne. illiquinated, vnmelted. illiterate, unlearned, without knowledge,
illustrate, to make plain, to declare. illuminate, to enlighten, or make
plain. illusion, mockery, jesting or scotting. imbecillitie, weakness,
feebleness. imbarge, imbarke, see embarke. imitation, following, doing the
like. immaculate, unspotted, undefiled. immature, unripe, or out of season.
immanitie, beastly cruelty, or hugeness and greatness. immediate, next to,
not having any other betwixt. imminent, at hand, ready to come upon.
immoderate, without measure, exceeding great, or excessive. immortal,
everlasting, that dies not. immunitie, freedom from any thing, or liberty.
immure, to shut up, or enclose within walls. immutable, constant, still the
same, unchangeable. imparitie, inequality, unlikeness, difference. impart to
make partaker of, to tell to. impatience, lack of sufferance. impair,
diminish, lessen. impeach, accuse, hurt or hinder. imped, grafted. impediment,
let, or hinderance. impenetrable, that cannot be pierced, or entered into.
impenitent, unrepentant. imperated, commanded, or ruled over. imperiou^,
desiring of rule, full of commanding, stately. imperfection, imperfectness.
imperial, belonging to the crown. impertinent, not pertaining to the matter.
impetrate, obtain by request. impetuous, violent. impiety, ungodliness,
cruelty. implacable, that cannot be pleased or pacified. implement, stuff.
implicit, hidden, wrapped up together. imply, to signify, or make manifest.
employ, bestow, spend. implore, to desire with tears. implume, to pull off the
feathers. impose, lay upon, or put on importance, value, force, or worth.
impost, tribute. imposutre, falsehood, deceit, impotent, weak feeble.
importune, to be earnest with. importunate, requiring earnestly, without being
satisfied, till the request be obtained. imprecation, cursing or wishing evil
unto. impregnable, unvanquished, not able to be overcome, strong. impression,
printing, marking, or stamping. improper, unfit unseemly, common.
impropriation, a thing accounted proper, which is not indeed. improbable, that
cannot be proved. improuident, careless, not foreseeing, or taking heed
before hand. imprudent, ignorant, rash, careless. impudent, shameless.
impugn, resist. impunitie, lack, or omission of punishment. impuritie,
filthiness, uncleanness, dishonestie. impute, reckon, or assign, blame, or
to lay to ones charge. inabilite, want of power or ability. inamored, in love
with. inartificiall, without art or skill. inaugurate, to ask counsel of
soothsaiers. incarnate, taking flesh upon him, or to bring flesh upon. incense,
kind of offering made by fire. incend, kindle, burn, vex, or chase, to
incense, to stir up, or to set on fire, or to anger. incessantly, earnestly,
without ceasing. incest, unlawful copulation of man and woman within the
degrees of kindred, or alliance, forbidden by gods law, whether it be in
marriage or otherwise. inchaunt, betwitch or charm. inchoate, begin.
incident, happening or chauncing. incision, cutting or searching of a wound.
incitate, to move, or provoke. incline, lean unto, or toward. include, to
shut in, or contain within. incommodious, hurtful, unfit. incommunicable,
that cannot be imparted to any other, or proper to one person, and none other.
incomparable, that has not his like. incompatible, insufferable.
incomprehensible, that cannot be conceived or understood. incongruencie, want
of agreement. inconsiderate, rash not taking counsel. incontinent, living
loosely, or unchastly. incontinently, presently, disorderly or without
moderation. incredible, marvelous, such as cannot be believed. incorporate,
to graft one thing into the body of another, to make one body or substance of
two or more, to mix or put together. incorruptible, incorruptible,
vnperishable, or not subject to corruption. incredulous, hardly brought to
believe. inculcate, to urge or repeat one thing often. inculpable, without
fault, blameless. incurable, past cure, a wound that cannot be healed.
incur, run into. incedent, not comely or beseeming. indeere, make bound to
one. indefinite, without rule or order, not determined. indemnitie, without
loss. indignity, unworthiness, unseemly usage, infamy or disgrace.
indignation, anger, chafing. indicate, shave. indisseluble, that cannot be
unloosed or undone. ind^te, to signify, or give in ones name. indivisible,
individual, that cannot be divided or parted. induce, to move unto, or allure,
or draw. indulgence, sufferance, too gentle entreating, also pardon. induction,
bringing in. indu^ate, harden. industry, diligence or labor. ineffable,
unspeakable, y^ cannot be uttered inequality, unlikeness. inestimable, that
cannot be valued, or accounted of as it deserves. inevitable, that cannot be
avoided. inexorable, that cannot, or will not be entreated. infallible,
undeceivable, vnbeguilefull, trusty. infamous, ill reported of, or defamed.
infanterie, the footmen of an army. infatuate, to make foolish. infection,
corrupting. infernal, belonging to hell. infer, bring in, to allege or
signify. infidelity, vnfaithfullnesse. infinite, without number or end.
infirmity, weakness. inflammation, inflaming, or setting on fire. inflexible,
that cannot be bended, unruly. inflict, to lay upon. influence, a flowing in,
also virtue, inform, give notice, to teach, to begin to instruct. infringe,
to break, to make weak, or feeble. infuse, to pour in, or s^eepe in, engage,
lay to pledge, bind himself. ingenious, witty, quick witted. ingeminate,
double, make twice so much. ingenerate, bred, or grafted in naturally. ingine,
engine, an instrument to do any thing with. ingot, a wedge of gold, also the
trough wherein it is molten. ingratitude, unkindness, or unthankfulness. ingraue,
carue. ingresse, ingredience, entrance in. ingurgitate, to devour up greedily.
inhabit, dwell in. inhabitable, that cannot be dwelt in. inhaunce. raise the
price. inherent, cleaving fast unto. inhibit, forbid. inhibition, forbidding.
inhumane, cruel, vncurtuous. iniection, casting in. iniquity, wicked or
unjust dealing. iniunction, commanding, rule or order. initiate, to begin,
instruct, or enter into. injurious, wrongful or hurtful. innauigable, that
cannot be failed upon. innouate, make new, young begin. innovation, making new,
an alteration. inoculated, grafted in. inpriuate, sudden, unthought upon.
inordinate, out of order, disordered. inquinate, to defile or disgrace.
inquisitiue, desirous, and diligent to find out by asking. inquisition,
searching, or inquiring. insatiable, that cannot be filled or contented
inscience, lack of knowledge. inscription, a title or note written upon any
place. inscrutable, that cannot be searched into, or thoroughly known.
insensible, that cannot be felt or perceived. inseparable, that cannot be
divided. insert, to put in, or graft in. insinuate, creep into ones favor
cra^tily, also to signify. insipidde, without ^ast, unsavory. insist, to stay
upon. insociable, that will not keep company. insolent, proud, disdainful.
inspection, view, search, looking into. insperge, sprinkle, or cast upon.
inspire, breath, blow into. instable, inconstant, not steddie. install, admit
to a place of office, or honor. instant, earnest, importunate. instauration.
repayring* renewing. instigation, provoking, or moving forward. instill, to put
in, or drop in. instinct, inward motion, or stirring. institute, appoint,
ordain, begin, or go in hand with. insult, to triumph, or vaunt over.
insupportable, not able to be borne. insurrection, rising against. integrity,
pureness, innocence. intelligence, knowledge from others. intemperate,
without measure or mean, immodest in behavior. intend, to purpose, or think.
intentive, earnestly bent, and musing. intercession, going between, or making
entreaty for another. intercept, prevent or take before. interchange,
exchange. intercourse, mutual access, or passage one to another. interdict,
to forbid straightly. interest, loan, right, also a part in any thing.
interlace, mix. interline, draw a line betwixt, or to blot out with a pen,
and to write betwixt. interlocution, interrupting of another speech.
intermedle, deal with. intermingle, mix or mingle with, or amongst.
intermission, foreslowing, a pawsing or breaking of. interpellate, disturbed,
hindered. interpreter, expounder. interpret, open, make plain, to show the
sense and meaning of a thing. interre, to bury. interrogation, a question, or
asking. interrupt, break of, or let. intestiue, that which is at home, or
belongs to the inward parts. entire, whole, sound, vncorrupt. intestate, that
dies without making a will intimate, to declare or signify. intised, drawn,
allured. entitled, called, noted, written on the beginning. intolerable, that
cannot be borne. intoxicate, poisoned. intractable, unruly, troublesome.
intricate, in wrapped, doubtful, hard to be known. introduction, entrance, or
leading in. intrude, to thrust ones self into the company of others, or enter
in violently. invade, to set upon, to lay hold on. inuectiue, railing, speaking
against. inueigle, entice, or deceive by subtlety, to entrap. inueigh, to
rail upon bitterly, inventory, table of goods. invention, devise, or
imagination. inueloped, wrapped in, entangled. inuersion, turning vpside down,
turning contrariwise. inuest, to ador^e, or deck, or grace. inueterate, of
long continuance, grown in custom. invincible, not to be overcome. invisible,
that cannot be seen or perceived. inviolable, that cannot be broken. inuit,
vid, request. inundation, an ouerflowing of water. invocation, a calling upon
any thing with trust in the same. jordan, a chamberpot, or vrinall. inure, to
make pliable, or acquaint with. iocund, merry, pleasant. irefull, very angry.
irregular, out of rule or order. irchin, a hedgehog. irksome, wearisome. ironie
(g) a mocking speech. irreligious, ungodly, wanting religion. irreprehensible,
without reproof. irreuocable, not to be recalled, or not to be withdrawn.
irritate, to make angry. irruption, breaking in. issue, event, or success, or
end. iterate, to repeat, or do a thing often, or again. iubile, year of joy,
which happened to the Jews every fittie year. iudaisme, worshipping one God
without Christ. judicious, that has a good judgment or understanding.
judicial, belonging to judgment, jurisdiction, authority, to make, or
execute laws in any place. justify, approve, or make to be accounted good
and just. justified, made or accounted for righteous, clean.
K
Keen, sharp. kindell, bring forth young. knarry, knotty, stubbie.
L
LAborinth, a place so full of windings and turnings, that a man cannot find
the way out of it. laborious, painful, full of labor. lacerate, tear. lance,
cut, or ^^icke. language, a ^ongue, or speech. languishing, pi^ing, consuming,
wearing away with grie^e or sickness. lapidarie, one skillful in precious
stones or jewels. lard, bacon. largess, liberality. lascivious, wanton,
lecherous. lassitude, weariness. latitude, breadth, largeness. lauacre, a
bath or font. lavish, to spend extraordinarily. laund, a plain place betwixe
trees. laud, praise, or commendation. laudable, worthy of praise. laureate,
crowned with Laurel, or wearing a garland of Bays. laxatiue, leese, purging.
league, agreement, or covenant of peace. leake, runue out. lechery,
unchasteness, and unlawful lust. lecture, reading or sermon. ledge, lay.
leete, court. legacy, a gift by will, or an embassage. legate, ambassador.
legends, tales. legeirdemaine, lighthandednesse, cra^tie flights, and
conueiance. legible, that may be read^ legion, ^ost. or band of soldiers.
legitimate, lawful, according to law, and good order. lenity, gentleness,
mildness. lenitiue. that eases or all wageth pain, lethall, mortal, deadly.
lethargy (g) (k) a drowsy and forgetful disease. level, right, straight.
leuitie, lightness, inconstancy. libertine, loose in religion, one that
thinks he may do what he lists. libell, a writing or (...). library, a
study, a great number of books. licentious, taking liberty to do evil.
ligate, b^un^, tied. ligament, the string tying the bones together. limaile,
dust that comes of seling. lineage, stock, kindred. imitation, appointment,
how ^arre any thing shall go, (...)yning. limme, pollish, amend. limpidde,
clear, pure. limber, britle. limit, bounds, border, or land mark, also to set
such bounds, etc. liniament, a form, or proportion by lines, that are ^rawne.
lineall, direct, in a right line. lingell, shooemakers thread. linguist,
skillful in tongues. linquish, to leave or forsake. lint, cloth. liquide,
moist, melted. literature, learning. lither, idle, lazy. litigious,
quarrellous, full of strife. lienetenant, deputy in another place.
lithernesse, fl^th^ulnesse, idleness. liuelihood, means to maintain life.
loame, earth or mortar. logical (g) belonging to reason. lollar, a breaker of
fasting days. longitude, length. lore, law, knowledge, lossell, a crafty
fellow. lotarie, casting of lots. lourdin, rude clownish. loyal, obedient,
trusty, constant. lumber, old stuff. lunatic, wanting his wits, at a
certain time of the age of the Moon. lumpish, sad or s^w^^ countenance.
luster, glistering, shining, gloss. luxurious, riotous, and excessive in
pleasure and wantonness.
M
MAcerate, to s^eepe in water, or make lean, also to disquiet. madefie, dip,
make wet. maffle, stammer, or stut. magic, enchanting, coniuring. magistrate,
governor. magitian (g) one using witchcraft. magnanimity, valiantnes,
courage. magnificence, sumptuousness. magnify, to ^^toll or praise highly.
magnitude, greatness. majesty, the stately port and honorable renown of any.
malady, disease. malecontent, discontent, displeased. malediction,
staundering, ill report, or backbiting, or cursing. malefactor, an evil doer.
malepert, saucy, proud, s^appish. malign, to hate with purpose to hurt.
malignitie, naughtiness, malice. malicious, hating or enu^ing. manmon (g)
riches. manchet, fine white bread. mandate, a charge, or commandment. manger,
to eat. maniacque, mad, brain sick. manicle, a setter for to bind the hands.
manifest, opened, declared, or revealed. manuring, dung, tilling. manage,
handle. mansion, an abiding place. manual, done with the hand. manumisie, to
set free, or at liberty. maranatha (g) accursed. march, go in array, or go
forward. margent, edge, or brim of any thing. mart, a fair. massacre, kill,
put to death. massy, heavy, heaped together. martial, warlike, or valiant, or
taking pains and delight in wars. martyr (g) witness, one suffering death for
the faith of Christ. matriculate, to register or inrole. material, of some
matter, or importance. matrimony, marriage, wedlock. matrixe, womb. matron,
an ancient, sober, and discreet woman. mature, ripe, perfect, speedy. maugre,
despite, against ones will. maxim, a principle, or sure ground in any matter.
meagre, lean. mechanical, mechanic, (g) hand^e, craft. media^our, advocate,
or surety, or one making peace betwixt two. medicine, remedy, or cure.
mediocritie, a measure, a mean. meditate, muse upon, bethink. meditation, the
earnest minding or thinking upon a thing. melancholy (g) black choler, a
humor of solitariness, or sadness. mellifluous, sweet as honey, yielding much
honey. melody (g) sweet sounding, or sweet music. membrane, a thin skin.
mendicant, begging. memorable, worthy to be remembered. menace, to threaten.
menstruous, defiled, or foul. mental, belonging to the mind. mercinary,
serving for wages, an hireling. meridian, pertaining to none tide. meritorious,
that deserves, or set for advantage. messiah, anointed, or savior.
metamorphosis (g) a changing of one shape or likeness into another. metaphor
(g) similitude, or the putting over of a word from his proper and natural
signification, to a foreign or improper signification. meteors (g) elementarie
bodies, or moist things, ingendered of vapors in the air above. method (g) an
order, or ready way to teach, or do any thing. methodized (g) brought into
order. metropolitan (g) chief of the city. mickle, much. microcosme (g) a
little world. militant, warring, or being in wars. mince, cut in small pieces
mignion, wanton, feate, fine. ministration, ministering, or service, or charge
to do a thing. minority, a man's time under age. minutly, smally. miraculous,
marvelous or wonderful. misbode, wrong. mirror, a looking glass.
miscreants, infidels, misbeleeuers. misprission, concealment of a man's own
knowledge. misknow, is mistate purposely, to be ignorant of. mitigate, assuage,
qualify, or pa^i^e. mixion, mixture, mingling, or tempering together.
mobilitie, moving or stirring. model, measure pattern. moderate, temperate or
keeping a mean. moderation, keeping due order and proportion. modern, modest,
sober, d^mure. moitie, half. molestation, troubling. mollocke, earth, donge.
mollify, make soft. momentanie, that which lasts but a while. moment, weight
or importance, also a short time. monarch (g) one ruling all the kingdoms
about him. monarchy (g) the rule of one prince alone. monastery (g) college
of monks, Monastical (g) solitary. monitor, an informer, or ouerseer.
monopoly (g) a license that none shall buy and sell a thing but one alone.
monument, a remembrance of some notable act, as tombs. moosell, to fetter.
moote, argue, or dispute a case in law. morality, civil behavior. moral,
pertaining to manners, behavior, and life among men. morgage, lay to pawn.
morigerous, well mannered, obedient. mortal, that ends, having an end, and
dying, deadly. mortify, kill, or make dead, and senseless. mortuarie, duty
paid for the dead. motive, cause moving, or the thing, and reason, that moves
to do any thing. moultre, make small, turn to dust. mulct, a fine, penalty,
or punishment. multiplicitie, variety, or diversity of sorts. mundane,
worldly mundifie, to make clean. munition, defense, supportation, or strength
and plenty of weapons, to resist in war. municipall, privately belonging to a
freeman, or burgess of a city. murke, dark. muses (g) goddesses of
learning. musical, that loves or has skill music. mustaches, the ha^re of
the upper lip. muster, take view of men, or armor. mute, dumb, silent.
mutable, changeable, wavering. mutation, change. muthologie (g) expounding of
the tales of the Poets. mutilate, wanting some part, maimed. mutiny, tumult,
sedition. mutual, one for another. micher, a streaking fellow, a hedge
creeper. myrrh (g) sweet gummes. mystery (g) a secret, or hid thing.
mystical (g) that has a mystery in it.
N
NAturalize, make free, deuison. narration, declaration, or report. national,
belonging, or consisting of a nation, or kingdom. native, where one was borne,
or natural. nativity, birth, or the day of birth. nauigable, where ships may
safely pass, or that may be sailed upon. navigations, sailing, or passing by
water. nauseous, l^athing or disposed to vomit. necromancie (g) black art, or
coniuring, by calling upon spirits nectar, a pleasant drink, which is feyned
to be drunk of the Gods. nefarious, wicked, detestable. negative, that
denies. negotiation, traffic or business. neotericke (g) one of late time.
nephew, a son or daughters son. nerve, sinew. nete, fine, clean. neutrall,
neuter, of neither side. nice, slow, laysie, foolish. nicholaitan (g) an
heretic, like Nicholas, who held that wives should be common to all alike.
nominate, to name, or appoint. nonage, a child's time, under age. nonresidencie,
unnecessary and wilful abscence of any one from his place or charge. nonsuite,
not following, or the ending and giving over of a suite. notable, worthy, meet
to be regarded and esteemed. notarie, Scriuener, or register. notify, to make
known, or to give warning of. notion, inward knowledge, or understanding.
notorious, known to all, and made plain and manifest. noyance, hurt. noxious,
noisome, hurtful. nullitie, nothing. numeration, numbering. nuncupatorie,
telling, or declaring anything. nuptial, belonging to marriage. nutriment,
nourishment.
O
Obdurate, harden, or to make more hard obeisance, obedience. object, laid, or
set against, or that whereon any thing rests, or that wherein any thing is
occupied, or set a work. obiure, bind by oath. oblation, offering.
oblectation, recreation, delight. obliged, bound or beholden. oblique, crooked
overthwart. obliterate, blot or scrape out. obliuious, forgetful. obloquie,
evil report. obnoxious, faulty, subject to danger. obnubilate, to make dark.
obscoene, bawdy, filthy, ribauldrie. obscure, dark or clowdy. obsequious,
serviceable, ready at hand. obseruant, dutiful, full of diligent service.
obsession, besieging, or compassing about. obsolete, old, past date, grown
out of use or custom. obstacle, hinderance or let. obstinate, froward,
stubborn, or stiff in his own opinion. obstruction, stopping, repressing.
obtestate, humbly to beseech, or to call to witness. obtrectation, slander
evil report. obtrude, thrust with violence. obtuse, dull or blunt.
occidentall, belonging to the west. occluding, shutting fast. occurrences,
occasions, things that offer themselves by the way. ocean (g) the maine sea.
odious, hateful, disdainful. oder, smell, sent, or savor. odo^iferous, sweet
smelling. oeconomicke (g) things that pertain to household affairs. offensive,
giving offense, offering wrong, or displeasing. official, belonging to an
office. officious, dutiful, diligent, very ready or willing to please.
oligarchie (g) a Commonwealth where the government is under a few persons.
oliue^, place of Olives. ombrage, shade, harbor, or bower to rest under.
ominous, that signifies ^ome good, or ill luck. omit, let pass, ouerslip.
omnipotent, almighty, great, or high. omni-present, present in all places.
omni-scient, knowing all things. onerous, burdenous or chargeable. onust,
laden, ouercharged. operation, operative, working, or effect. opinionate,
having a good opinion of, or standing on his own opinion. opportunity,
fitness to any thing. oppidaue, a townesman. oppilation, stopping. oppose,
against. opposite, contrary, or set over against. oppressed, grieved, or
violently wronged. opprobrious, reproachful, to taunt, revile or vpbraid with
bad speeches. oppugn, to labor against, or resist. option, choosing or
wishing. oracle (g) a speech or answer given from God. oratorie, eloquent
speech. ordination, ordeyning, appointing. ordure, dung, ^^^th. orifice, mouth,
or hole of any thing. original, the first, or such as it was at the beginning.
organe (g) an instrument to do any thing with. ornament, a decking, adorning,
or trimming orphant (g) a child without parents. ostages, pledges given and
taken. ostentation, boas^ing. orthographie (g) true writing. ouert, pain,
open. overplus, more then needs. outrageous, fierce, unreasonable.
P
PAci^ie, to make quiet. paction, a couenanting or bargayning. pagan, of the
country village. page, the side of a lease. palatine, belonging to a Princes
Court, or palace. palinodie (g) a recanting, or unsaying of any thing.
pallisade, a place enclosed with pales. palliate, cloak, or ^lightly heal.
palpable, that may be felt, manifest. pamphlet, a small treatise, or book.
pander, a man baude to a whore. parable (g) similitude, or an applying of some
thing to our matter, fi^ly alleged, for some likeness which it has to our
purpose. paradise (g) place of pleasure. paradoxe (g) marua^^o^s, or strange
speech. paragon, pattern, example. paralelles (g) lines, or other things as
far off from one another, in one place as in another. paramour, an amorous
lover. paraphrase (g) exposition of any thing by many words. parasite (g) a
base flatterer, or soothing companion. parenthesis (g) a clause contained in
another sentence. parget, to plaster. paricide, a murderer of parents. paritie,
equality, likeness. parle, speech, or conference. parsimonie, thriftinesse,
sparing. participate, partake divide, or distribute, to give, or take part.
particularize, to divide into parts, and to handle every particular. partition,
division. passeable, that may be passed over. passover, one of the Jews
Feasts, in remembrance of Gods passing over them, when he flew so many of the
Egiptians. passion, suffering, grief. pastora^l, belonging to shepherds.
patheticall (g) vehement, full of passions or moving affections. patriarch (g)
chief father. patrimony, fathers gift, or goods left by a father. patronage,
defense, protection. patronise, defend. paucitie, fewness, or small number.
pause, think, stay, or rest. pauillion, ^ent. peerless, worthy, unmatchable.
peccaui, I have offended. peccant, offending, doing ami^^e. pectorall, that
belongs to the breast. peculiar, proper, or specially belonging. pecuniarie,
coin, money. pelmell, confusedly, all on a heap. pedant, one that has the
oversight of children. penetrable, that may be pierced. penitentiarie, one
repenting, or doing penance. pen^^ti^, loss, punishment, fine. pension,
payment, yearly (...). pensive, sorrowful. pen^^cost (g) Whitsontide.
penury, want or extreme need. perch, sit upon a pole or branch. peregrine,
strange of another land. perambulation, walking about. peregrination, iournying
in a strange land. peremptory, resolute, short, deadly, perforatio, hole, or
pierce through. perfidio^s, traitorous, unfaithful. perfricated, rubbed much.
perilous, dangerous. periclitation, ieoperdie, or hazarding. period (g) the
end of a perfect sentence. perjury, forswearing, or breaking of ones oath.
permanent, continuing, or abiding till the end. permission, sufferance, leave.
permit, suffer, give leave. permutation, change. pernicious, dangerous,
hurtful. perpendicular, directly, down right. perpetrate, to commit, or due.
perpetuity, continuance for ever. perplexity, trouble, grief, distress,
doubtfulnesse. persecute, trouble, afflict, or pursue after. persist, persevere,
continue, constantly, and resolutely. personate, to counterfeit another
person. perspicacie, quicknes of sight, understanding perspicuous, evident,
clear, that may be seen through. pertinacie, obstinacy, stiffness in
opinion. perturbation, disquietnesse, or trouble. perverse, froward,
mischievous. pervert, overthrow, or turn vpside down. pese, to weigh.
perui^acie, obstinacy, stifneckednesse. pesant, down. pester, filled. pest,
the plague, or pestilence. pestiferous, pestilent, contagious, hurtful.
petition, prayer, or request. pettigree, stock, or offpring. pettilasserie,
stealing of things of no great value. petulancy, wantonness, saucines.
fantasy (g) imagination. fantastical, idle headed, foolishly conceited.
phylacteries (g) scroles of parchment, whereon was written the ten commandments.
physiognomie (g) knowledge of a man's nature by his visage, and countenance.
physic (g) medicine, helping or curing. phlebothomie (g) letting blood.
phrase (g) form of speech. philosophy (g) study of wisdom. frenzy (g)
madness. piety, godliness, holiness. pillage, spoil in war, and sacking of
the enemies. pinguiditie, fatness, or greasiness. pilot, master, guider of a
ship. pionner, digger, or ditcher. piramis (g) piramides, a steeple, or other
building, or a pillar broad beneath, and sharp above. pistated, baked. pirate,
a robber on the sea. pittance, short banquet. placable, easy to be pleased.
placards, writings from higher powers. planet (g) wandering star. plaintiff,
the party complaining. platform, the mould and fashion of an house. plausible,
pleasing or received joyfully, and willingly. plenarie, full. plenitude,
fullness thickness. plonge, dip, or put under the water. plume, feather.
plurality, more th^n one. poem (g) verses of a poet. poet (g) a verse maker.
poetesse, a woman poet. pole (g) the end of the axetree whereon the astronomers
fain the heavens to be turned. policy, a witty shift. poligamie, (g) having
more wines then one. polish, to deck, or make fair, smooth, ^^eeke, or shining.
pollute, destle, or distaine, or make filthy. pomegarnet, or pomegranet (k)
fruit. pomp, the countenance of things in furniture, and setting forth to the
outward show. ponderous, weighty, heavy. pontifical, lordly, sumptuous,
bishopliks. portable. that may be carried. popular, seeking the ^auour of the
people by all means possible. populous, full of people. popularitie, pleasing
the people. portend, signify before it happens. position, a question to be
disp^^sed of. posterity, they that come after by birth, the age after us.
postscript, written after. potent, mighty, able. potion, drink. pourtraie,
draw the form, or proportion of a thing. pructicall (g) practique, practicing.
pragmaticall, a busy body. preamble, forespeech, a flowrish, entrance, or
assay. precedent, going before. precept, a rule given, an admonition, or
commandment. precinct, compass appointed. precipitate, cast down headlong.
predecessor, one that was in place before another. predestinate to appoint
before. prediction, before telling, or prophesying. predominant, ruling.
pre-eminence, excellency, rule, authority over others. preface, a speech
before the matter it self. prefigurate, foreshew by a figure. prefixed, set in
the forepart appointed before pregnant, witty, substantial, with child.
preiudicate, giving his judgment, before he knows the man, or matter.
prejudice, hindering ones cause, sentence, or opinion delivered before
knowledge of any thing. preludium, an entrance to any thing. premeditation,
thinking of a matter before hand. praemunire, forefeiture of goods.
preoccupation, a preventing by speech or other ways. preordination, appointing
before. preparatiue, that which makes sit or prepares. preposterous,
disordered, froward, topsituruy, setting the cart before the horse, as we use
to say. prerogative, privilege, or authority before another. presage, to tell
before, to betoken, to foresee. presbitarie (g) eldership. prescience,
foreknowledge. prescript, decree or assignement. prescription, limitation, or
appointing a certain compass. preservative, that which desendeth. president,
a chief ruler next under the highest. pressed, ready. presuppose, saine a thing
to be before it is. pretermit, to pass over, to forget willingly.
preterlapsed, passed, or gone past. pretense, pretext, excuse, color.
preuarication, collusion, or betraying of a cause or matter, for want of more
earnest speech. primitive, primarie, first, or foremost, or excellent. primate,
chief governor. prioritie, being in the foremost place, or in greater
excellency and superiority then another. pristine, old, wonted, or
accustomed. privation, depriving, utter taking away. or withdrawing.
privilege, prerogative, or liberty, more then others have. probable, that may
be easily proved to be true. probation, alouance, trial, problem (g)
proposition, or sentence, in manner. proceed, go forth, or go forward.
process, proceeding, passing forward. procliuitie, inclination to any thing.
proctour, a factour or solicitor. procrastinate, to defer or delay.
procreate, begotten, or bring forth. prodigal, too rio^ous in spending.
prodigious, wonderful, giving an ill sign. prodition, betraying, treason.
produce, bring forth. profane, ungodly, not consecrated, or unhallowing that
which was holy. profound, deep or high. profligate, overthrow, put to flight.
profundi^e, deepenesse. profusion, pouring out wastfully. profuse, immoderate,
wastfull. progeny, o^^pring, generation, or issue of children. progenitor, a
forefather, or grandfather. prognosticate (g) to know or give out before hand,
or to tell before hand what shall happen progress, a going forward. prohibit, to
forbid or give straight charge to (...)trary. project, a plot, or wise
contriuing of any thing, or casting ^orth. prolixe, tedious, long, large.
prolocutor, a speaker for another. prologue, a preface or forespeech. prolong,
stretch out, or defer. promerit, desert. promiscuous, confused, mingled
promote, to honor, or advance to greater dignity and higher place. prompt,
ready, quick. promulgation, publishing openly, or pro^laiming. pronowne, that
is set for the name of a thing prone, ready, or inclining. prowess,
valiantness. propagate, to enlarge or multiply. prophecy (g) foretell, or
expound. prophet (g) he that prophecyeth. propitiation, a sacrifice to appease
Gods displeasure. propitiatory, that which reco^cileth, or which purchases
mercy, at the mercy seat. propitious, not displeased, favorable. proportion,
equalness, measure. propose, propound, set before or show. propriety,
property, owing or challenging as his own, and none others. prorogue, put
off, prolong, defer. proscription, a condemnation, or banishment proclaimed,
or an open sale. prose, that writing which is not verse. proselite (g) stranger
converted to our religion and manners. prosecute, follow after, or finish.
prospect, a sight a far off. prostitute, set open for uncleanness, to set
forth to sale. prostrate, to cast down, or fall down flat on the ground.
protect, defend save or cover. protest, to affirm, or declare openly.
protract, defer, or prolong, or draw out at length. provident, foreseeing
with wise consideration, and providing aforehand. provincial, jurisdiction,
belonging to a province, or out country. provocation, provoking, enforcing,
urging, pressing or alluring. provost, chief governor. prudence, wisdom,
wittiness. publicane, a farmer, or common man of a city puiney, younger
borne. puluirisated, b^aten, or broken into dust, or powder. pupil, that is
under a tutor, a ward. purgation, purging, cleansing. purify, purge, scour,
or make clean. pursuit, following after. puruie, provide. putrify, to wax
rotten, or corrupt as a sore. pusillanimitie, faint hartednes, cowardlines
puissant, strong, valiant. pyxe (g) a box.
Q
QVadrangle, four cornered. quadrant, quadrate, four square, or a quarter.
quaint, strange. qualme, grief. quartane, belonging to, or coming every
fourth day. queen, a barren old cow. queasie, weak, seeble, not well
digesting. queach, thick heap. quelle, trouble, torment, destroy.
querimonious, full of complaining and lamentation. quintessence, chief virtue,
drawn by art out of many compounds together. quondam, heretofore, in times
past. quote, cite, prevent. quotidian, daily, that happens every day.
R
RAcha, fle, a note of extreme anger, signified by the gesture of the person,
that speaks it, to him that he speaks to. radical, pertaining to the
root, natural. radiant, shining bright. rallie, gather together men
dispersed, and out of order. rank, rotten, stinking. rancour, hatred, malice.
range, set in order. rampar, fortification, or trench. rapacitie, rapine,
violent taking away, extorcio^ or pillage, or ravening. rarifie, make thin.
raritie, scarceness, sewnesse. rathe, early, speedy. ratify, establish or
confirm. rational, that has reason. ravish, take away by force. raunged,
ordered, or put in order. real, substantial, or that is indeed subsisting
reassume, take again. rebel, rise against. recantation, an unsaying of that
which was before said. recapitulation, a brief rehearsing again of any thing.
recensed, repeated, rehearsed, named. recklesse, rash, careless. receptacle, a
place to receive things in. reciprock, or reciprocal, that has respect back
again to the same thing. recite, rehearse, or repeat. reclaim, to gainsay, or
call back again. recognissance, acknowledging, or a sign of acknowledging,
and confessing any thing. recoile, go back. reconcile, bring into favor, or
to make peace betwixt. records, writings laid up for remembrance. recreate,
refresh, comfort. recourse, a running back again. rectify, to make right or
straight. redeem, purchase, buy again, or ransom. redemption, a buying
again. redound, ^^erflow, fall upon. redress, correct, amend. reduce, to
bring back again. reduction, a bringing back. redundant, ouerflowing, or
abounding too much. reduplicated, doubled. reedifie, build up again.
reestablish, to settle again as before. refection, a refreshing, or
recreating. refell, to confute, or prove false. reference, a pointing at, or
alluding to. refer, put over, or, to report himself unto. refine, repair,
renew, or amend. reflection, casting back, or ^owing, turning back again.
reform, amend. refractarie, wilful in opinion, obstinate. refrain, abstain
from, keep in. refuge, succor, or place of safety. refulgent, shining
bright. refute, to disprove. regal, princely, like a King. regenerate, borne
again. regeneration, a new birth. regent, a Governor, or Ruler. regiment,
government, guidance, rule, or dominion. register, calendar a reckoning book.
regrator, huckster, or one that buyeth any thing, and trims it up to make it
more salable. regresse, returning back again. regular, made according to rule
and order. reject, fling, cast away or re^use. reioynder, a thing added
afterward, or is when the defendant makes answer to the replication of the
plaintiff. reiterate, to do or repeat again the same thing often. reke,
smoke. relapse, backsliding. relate, report, rehearse or declare. relation,
respect, rehearsing. relative, having relation unto. relaxation, refreshing,
releasing. release, free, qu^^ relief, aid, help, succor, food. relics,
the remainder. relinquish, to leave, or forsake. ^elish, taste. remarkable, able
or worthy to be marked again. remiss, loose, negligent, or dull, or too
favorable remit, forgive, release, or acquit. remorse, prick of conscience.
remote, set a far off. remuneration, rewarding, or requiting. render, yield,
restore. renouate, forsake or repair. renounce, forsake, or resign. renoume,
credit, fame, report. reparation, a renewing. repast, food, nourishment.
repeal, call back again. repel, to put or thrust back. repercussiue,
striking or rebounding back again. replenish, fill. replete, filled full.
repleueying, redeeming of a gage, or any thing in prison. reply, to confirm a
speech before uttered. repose, rest, also to put. represent, express, ^eare
show of a thing. repress, put down, to let or stop. reprobate, a cast away,
out of favor, a forlorn person, and one past grace. reproach, shame, disgrace.
republicke, a commonwealth. repugnancie, contrariety or disagreement.
repugnant, c(...)ary. repugne, to re(...) oppose, stand against. repulse, to
put or drive back, also denial. repute, account, or esteem. requisite,
required as necessary. rescue, defend. resemblance, likeness. reserve, to
keep for the time to come. resident, abiding or continuing in his place
resignation, a yielding up, or restoring of any thing. resign, give over to
another. resist, withstand. resolve, to unloose, to satisfy, to purpose
constantly. resort, access or coming to. respiration, breathing. respite,
defer, delay the time to breath in. resplendent, shining bright. responses,
answers. restoration, restoring, or reviving. restitution, restoring,
satisfaction. restrained, being helo in, or bridled. resume, take again.
retire, to give back, or go back. retain, keep back. retort, to turn, or
wrest backward. retract, recant. retreit, going back. retribution, reward.
retrograde, going backward. revel, play the wanton. reuerberate, ^eate back.
reverend, worthy of reverence. reveal, lay open, disclose, or make known a
matter of secret. reuert, to return. reuenew, rents coming in. reuise, to
look on, or read again. revoke, to call back, or draw back. revolt, forsake
one, to go to another his enemy. revolution, turning back to the same place.
reuolue, to toss up and down, to determine well of in the mind. rhetorician
(g) learned and skillful in rhetoric. rhetoric (g) art of eloquence. rhume
(g) a distilling of humors from the head. rhythmicall (g) made in meeter.
ridiculous, that deserves to be laughed at in scorn. riffle, search, take
away by violence. rigorous, cruel, and hard. rinse, wash, make clean by
washing. rival, one suing, and striving for the same thing that another ^oth.
riueling, turning in, and out. rome, walk, wander. royalty, government, rule,
authority. rebrick, a law, or title. rude, ignorant, unskillful, rusticall.
rudiment, first instruction, or principle. rubicunde, red, or ruddie. ruinous,
ready to fall. ruminate, to chew over again, to study earnestly upon. rample,
wrinkle. runnagate, one that runs away, and wandreth abroad. rupture,
breach, or bursting. rural, rusticall, clownish, vplandish, or churlise and
unmannerly. ruth, pity.
S
SAcking, spoiling. saboth, rest. sacrament, holy sign, oath, or mysteri^.
sacred, holy, consecrated. sacrifice, an offering. sacrilege, church robbing,
the stealing of holy things. safeconduit, ^a^e keeping or safe guiding.
sagacitie, sharpness of wit, wittiness. salarie, stipend, wages. saint, holy
one. sallie, to step out from the rest of the army, to make a skirmish. salow,
white. salvation, a saving. salubritie, wholesomenesse. sanctify, hallow, make
holy, or keep holy. sanctification, sanctity, holiness. sanctimonie,
sanctuary, holy place. sandals (g) stippers. sanguine, bloody, or of the color
of blood. sanitie, health, or soundness. sapience, wisdom. satiate, filled,
satisfied. satietie, fullness, plenty. satisfaction, a making amends for
wrongs, or displeasures. satisfactorie, that discharges, or answers for.
saturate, filled, or glutted. saturitie, fullness, or plentifulnesse. savage,
wild, cruel, or rude. satyr (g) a nipping and scoffing verse. satericke,
belonging to a scoffing verse. sa^ricall, saw, saying, word. scandalize (g) to
^ffend, or give occasion to mislike. scandal (g) an offense, or stumbling
block. scarifie, to lance, or open a sore. scath, harm, damage. scedule,
obligation, or bill of ones hand, also a brief. schism (g) breach, or
division in matters of religion. schismatic, that makes a schism, science,
knowiedge, or skill. scripture, writing. scruple, doubt, difficulty. scrutiny,
diligent search, inquiry. scrupulous, full of doubts. scurrilitie, saucy,
scoffing, railing. seclude, shut out, or put a part. sectarie, one whom many
other do follow in opinion sect, a diversity in opinion from others. section,
a division, or parting. secular, worldly, of the world. secundarie, the second,
or of the second sort. security, carelessness, fear of nothing. sediment,
that which sinketh to the bottom. seditious, making contention. seduce,
deceive, or divide, or lead aside. sedulitie, ^iligence or carfulness.
segniorie, Lordship. segregate, to set a part, or separate. seize, to forfaite
to the prince, also to lay hold on. select, to choose out from others.
semblable, like. semicircle, half a circle or compas^e. seminary, a nurserie,
or seed plot for young trees, or grafts. senator, alderman, or counsailer.
sense, feeling, or perceiving. sensible, easily felt, or perceived. sensual,
brutish, per^aining to the flesh, and bodily sense. sententious, full of fine
sentences, and speeches sentinel, watching by night. separation, dividing,
seuering, or parting one from another. sepulcher, grave or tomb.
septentrionall, belonging to the North. sequel, following or that which
follows sequester, to put into an indifferent man's hands, to divide, keep or
judge of. serious, earnest or of weight, and importance. serpentine, of, or
like a serpent. servile, ^lauish. servitude, bondage, or slavery. severe,
sharp, cursed, or cruel. severity, sharpness, roughness. sex, kind.
shackle, fetter. shent, blame, spoil. significant, plainly signifying, or
showing by tokens. sikerly, surely, truly. similie, or similitude, likeness,
or resemblance. simonie, when spiritual matters, are bought, and sold for
money. simplicity, plainness. sinister, unhappy, bad, unlawful, or contrary
sincere, pure, vncorrupt, unmingled, or without dissimulation. singularity, a
being like no body else, in opinion, or other ways. sithen, after. skinke,
pour out. situation, setting, or standing of any place. slight, guile, craft,
subtlety. sleeuelesse, vain. shiuer, a parcel. smatterer, somewhat learned,
or one having but a little skill. snatch, to take hastily. snipperings,
payrings. soar, mount high. sociall, or sociable, fellow like, one that will
keep company, or one with whom a may easily keep company. society,
fellowship, company. sodometrie, when one man lies filthylie with another
man. soiourne, remain in a place. solace, comfort. solemnize, to do a thing
with great pomp, reverence, or devotion. solecisme, false latin. solicit,
move, or entreat earnestly. solid, sound, heavy, not hollow. solitary,
alone, or without company. soluble, loose in body, going often to stool.
solsticke, when the Sun is at the highest or lowest. solution, unloosing, or
paying. sooth, truth. sophister (g) cauiller, or crafty disputer.
sophistication, sophisme, a cauilling, deceitful speech. soporiferous, that
causes sleep. sordide, base, beastly, dishonest. sordidated, dimmed. ^otte,
fool, dunse. sovereign, chief, or highest in authority. source, wave, or
issuing forth of water. soil, filthy, or durtie. spannew, very now spa^ious,
large, wide or broad. specify, signify, or declare particularly. specke, spot
or mark. spectacle, a thing to be looked at. sperme (g) feed. sphaere (g)
round circle, or any thing that is round. spicerie, a place to keep spice in.
splendent, glistering, shining. spleen, (...). spleniticke, that is sick of
the spleen. spongeous, like a sponge. spousals, betrothings, or contracts.
spume, ^ome or froth. stabilitie, surenesse, cer^aine, strong. stable, sure,
steadfast. stablished, sure, confirmed, or made strong. stamp, printe, mark.
stanch, stay, s^ake. stark, stiff. station, a standing place. statue, an
image of wood, or any other matter. stature, height, bigness. sterilitie,
barrenness. steward, steed-man, the keeper of the place. stigmaticall (g)
knauish, noted for a lewd naughty fellow, burnt through the ear for a rogue.
style, manner or form of speech, or writing stillatorie, a distilling place.
stipendarie, one that serves for wages. stipticall (g) that stops or
binds. stipulation, a solemn conenant. stomach, to hate, envy, disdain.
strangle, kill, choke, throttle. stratageme, a policy or witty shift in
war. strangurie (g) making of water with great pain and very hardly. strict,
strait, severe, or sharp. strictnes, narrowness or smalnesse. structure,
building, setting in good order. studious, diligent, desirous of learning.
stupefice, to astonish. stupiditie, astonishment, dullness. suasorie,
containing counsel and exhortation subalterne, succeeding, following by
course and order. subdued, kept under or brought into subjection. subiugate,
subdue, bring under the yoke. sublimitie, height, highness. subli^e, set on
high, lift up. submisse, lowly, humble, brought in subjection. suborne, to
procure false witness. subscribe, write under, or to agree with another in any
matter. subsequent, following hard by. subsidiarie, that is given or sent to
aid another. s^bsist, to abide or have a being. substitute, a deputy or one
set in place of an other. substract, subtract, take from, withdraw. subtle,
crafty, wily, deceitful. subvert, to turn vpside down, to destroy.
succeed, follow, to come in another place. successor, he that comes in place
of another succinct, short or brief or close girt up. suggest, prompt, tell
privily or put in mind of. suffixed, fastened unto. suffocate, to choke up,
strangle or stop the breath. suffragane, a Bishops deputy, or helper.
suffrage, consent, or voice or help. suggest, to put in mind, to tell.
sulphur, brimstone. summarie an abridgement or thing drawn into a less
compass. ^ummarilie, briefly, in few words. summon, (...) cause to appear.
sumptuous, costly, rich. supererogation, giving more then is required.
superabundant, superfluous, needelesse, unnecessary, over much, that which
runs over. superficies, upper side, or outside. superficial, belonging to
the outside and uppermost part. supernatural, beyond the order of nature.
supernall, from above, that is one high. superiority, place above another.
superscription, writing above. superstitious, fearful in matters of religion
without cause, one given ^o false and vain religion. supplant, overthrow, or
trip with the foot, root out. supplement, that which makes up, or adds
that which wants in any thing. supple, make soft or gentle, supplication,
request or prayer. suppliant, humbly entreating. support, bear up, or convey
under. supposition, supposing, thinking, judging, or imagining. suppress,
keep down, conceal, or keep supreme, the highest or greatest. (secret.
supremacy, chiefedome, or highest place in authority above all others.
surcease, to give over, or cease. surcharge, ouercharge, hurt. surmount,
surpass, eede, or go beyond. surplusage, more then enough. surprise, to come
upon unawares, and to take of a sudden. surquedry, presumption. surrender, to
yield up to another. surrogate, a deputy in another place. survive, over
live, or live after. suspense, doubt, or uncertainty. sustained, suffered, or
endured. suture, a seame, or joining together. swain clown. swarth, dark, or
blackish. swerve, g^^ a^ry, ^rr^* sycophant (g) tale bearer or false accuser.
symball (g) creed. symm-^rie (g) a due proportion of one part with another.
sympathy (g) fellowlike feeling. symphonie, harmony and consent in tune.
symptom (g) any grief or passion following a disease. synagogue (g) place of
assembly. synod (g) a general assembly or meeting. syntaxe (g) construction
and order of words.
T
TAblet, little table. tabernacle, a tent or pauillion. tacit, still, silent,
saying nothing. taciturnitie, silence or keeping counsel. tangible, that may
be touched. tapish, lie down, hide it self. ta^de, late tantologie (g)
repeating one thing twice. taxed, seized, appointed to pay a subsidy. tedious.
trouble ^^ksome, wearisome. teeme, bear children, empty. temerarious, rash
unadvised or harebraind. temeritie, rashness, unadvisedness. temperance,
sobriety, moderation. temperate, keeping a mean, moderate. temperature,
temperament, temperatenesse, mean, or due proportion. tempestuous, boystrous,
or stormy. temporal, that which indureth but for a certain time. temporary,
for a time. temporise, to serve the time or to follow the fashion and behavior
of the time. temptation, trial. tenacitie, nigar^^inesse. tenuitie, smalnesse,
or slenderness. tenure, hold, or manner of holding a possession.
tergiuersation, going back, or leaving a suit. termination, ending, finishing,
or bounding. terrify, make afraid. terrene, earthly. territory, region, or
the country, lying about the city. tertian, belonging to every third day.
terrestrial, earthly. testament, last will. testification, witnessing.
testimonies, records, depositions, or witnessings. textuall, cunning in the
text. tetrach (g) governor, or prince of a fourth part of a country. theater,
a common place of plays and shows. thech, thrive. theme (g) matter proposed
to be written or spoken of. theology (g) divinity, the science of holy
things. theorie (g) the contemplation, or inward knowledge of any art. threpe,
affirm. throne (g) a Kings seat, or chair of estate. thro^le, strangle,
hang, or ^orment. thwart, cross, or mock. tiar, ornament for the head.
timorous, fearful, abashed. timiditie, fearfulness. tincture, a color,
dye, or stayning. titillation, ^ickling. tolerable, that which may be
^^ffered. tone (g) a tune, note, or accent. totally, wholly, altogether. trace,
find out by the foot steps. tractable, easy to handle, or easily entreated.
(...), a treatise, or book, handling any (matter. tracte, a space, or length.
tradition, a deli(...) from (...) another. traduce, to slander, reproach, or
defame, to bring in, or draw from one to another. traffic, bargayning.
tragedian, a maker, or player of a tragedy. tragedy (g) a solemn play,
describing cruel murders and sorrows. tragical, cruel, sorrowful like a
tragedy. train, followers, company. tranquillity, quietness, or calmnes, or
rest. transcendent, climing over, mounting up. transfer, convey over.
transform, transfigure, change from one fashion, to another. transgress,
break, offend, or go over. transition, passing from one thing to another
transitory, soon passing away, not long lasting. translation, altering,
changing. transmigration, a passing from one place to dwell in another.
transmutation, a change from one place, to another. transome, lintell over a
door. transparent, that which may be seen through. transport, carry over, from
one place to another. transpose, change, or set out of order.
transubstantiation, a changing of one substance into another. traue, a place to
shoe wild horses in. trauerse, strike, or thrust through. triangle, triangular,
three cornered. tribe, a company, ward, or hundred. tresses, locks of hair
broyded up. tribulation, trouble, sorrow, anguish tribunal, judgment seat.
tributarie, that pays tribute. tribute, rent, pension, or subsidy. trice,
instance. trinity, the number of three. triobolar, little worth, of no
estimation. triplicitie, of threefold. tripartite, threefold, or de^ided into
three parts. triuiall, common, of small estimation. triumph, great joy
outwardly showed. triumphant, rejoicing tor the conquest. trompe, deceive.
troncheon, stake, or billet. trophee, a victory, or any thing set in sign of
victory. tropickes (g) circles in the heaven which when the Sun comes to,
begins to return again. troop, company, or band of men in an army. truant,
loyterer. truce, peace. truculent, cruel, or terrible in countenance. tuition,
defense, looking to. truncheon, weapon. tumult, uproar, hurly burly, or
insurrection. tumultuous, turbulent, troublous, disturbing, or disquieting.
tyranize (g) use cruelty. type (g) figure, example, shadow of any thing.
V
VAcant, void, or empty. vacation, a time of ceasing from labor. vagabond,
runnagate, one that will stay no where. vagarie, running up and down.
validity, strength, force, or value. valor, force, courage, or strength.
value, price, or estimation. vanquish, overcome, prevail, conquer, or
overthrow. vapor, moisture, air, hot breath, or reaking. variable, changeable.
variety, change, or diversity. vassal, slave, clyant. vaste, empty, huge,
great. vantgard, the forefront of an army. vaunt, brag, boast. vauntcourers,
forerunners. vbiquitie, presence of a person in all places. varnish, shine, set
a gloss upon. vegetable, springing, or growing as herbs. vehement, earnest,
strong, forcible. veil, covering. vendible, saileable, easy and ready to be
sold. venomous, full of poison. venerable, worshipful, or reverend.
veneriall, venerous, fleshly, or lecherous, given to lechery. venial, that
which may be pardoned. vente, sale, utterance. ventricle, the stomach
whichreceiues yt meai venuste, fair, beautiful. verbal, full of words.
verbatim, word by word, perfectly. verbositie, much talking, and prattling.
verger, one that bears a silver rod in our cathedral Churches. verity,
truth. verify, to prove to be true. versifie, make verses. vertigiousnes,
lightness, or a swimming of the head. vestall, a Nun, vowing chastity.
vesture, vestiment, garment, attire, or clothing. viand, victuals. viceroy, one
set as a deputy in the Kings place. vicinitie, neighborhood. vicegerent, one
that supplyeth the place of another. vicious, faulty, or full of vice.
victorious, that has gotten many victoryes. view, behold, mark, or consider,
or look upon. vigilant, watchful, diligent. vigor, strength, courage, or
force. vile, base, nothing worth. vincible, that may be won, or easily
overcome. vindicate, free from danger. vineyard, orchard of grapes. violate, to
transgress, defile, deflowre or break. violent, forcible, cruel, injurious.
viperine, like a viper, or of a viper. virago, a woman of a manly courage.
virulent, full of poison, venomous. visage, face, form, or shape. vision,
sight, apparition, or a fantasy. visible, that may be seen. visitation,
going to see. vital, lively, or pertaining to life. vi^ate, to corrupt, or
destower, and defile. viuificent, lively, or full of strength. viuifie, to
quicke^, or make alive. ulcer, bile, or botch. vlcerate, to blister, or make
full of ^ores. vmbrage, vide, ombrage. vmpire, judge. vnconceaueable, not able
to be conceived. vnaccessiuely, that cannot be come to. unanimity, one
consent of heart and mind. unction, annoynting. indecent, uncomely. undermine,
grave, dig under. uneath, uneasy, scarce. uncouth, unknown, strange.
unguent, an ointment, or fat juice. unity, union, peace, or concord. unity,
to make one thing of two, or more, to couple, or join. insatiable, not content.
uniformity, one and the same fashion. universal, general, common. vocal,
with the voice, or pertaining to the voice. vocation, calling, estate, or trade
of life. insatiable, that never has enough, neither can be satisfied.
vnteeming, barren, past child ^earing. unwieldy, not able to move, lumpish.
volubilitie, sweetness, or inconstancy. voluntary, of the own accord,
without being taught, or urged. voluptuous, given to pleasure. vpbraid, rise in
ones stomach, cast in ones teeth. vrbanitie, courtesy, good manners, or
gentleness. urgent, earnestly calling upon, forcing. urine, water of man or
beast. vrne, a pot or pitcher. usurp, take unlawful authority, or to use
against right and reason. vtensiles, things necessary for our use in
housekeeping, or in a trade. vtililie, profit. vulgar, common, much used.
W
WArish, ease, deliver. welde, move. walter, wallow. wene, think. welken,
sky. wend, go. wot, know. won, dwell. wimple, hoode, muffler. wist,
known. wood, mad. wreke, revenge.
Y
YElpe, prate, talk. ye^ne, desire, take grief, also to deserve. yode, went.
yore, before, long ago.
Z
Zeal (g) earnest desire to a thing. zodiac (g) a circle in the heaven, where
in be placed the 12. Signs, and in which the Sun is moved. Zonet (g)
circles in the heavens, dividing the world into five parts.
FINIS.

