THE CLEANSING OF THE TEN LEPERS: OR, Brief notes on Luke 17. verse. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18.

By MATTHEW CAYLIE Minister of Gods Word at Maidford in Northamptonsh.

LONDON, Printed by I L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the entering in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard-streete.

1623.

To the Worshipful, Master Richard Trist, of Maidford in Northamptonsh.
WOrthy Sir, (Not to prefixe a tedious Epistle, before so small a Treatise)
having a resolution for the publication hereof, (for reasons known to my
self, and perhaps, not unknown to some that know me) I make bold (I hope,
not too bold) to present the same unto you, to testify my respect of you. Your
Acceptance, Perusal, Patronage, are the only things I desire; though I cannot
say, as the Jews concerning the Centurion in the Gospel, that Luke 7. 4.
either it, or my self, is worthy for whom you should do this. The God of
heaven, the giver of all good blessings, bless you, and yours, prosper, and
preserve you blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

A Petitioner for you, unto the throne of grace, MATH, CAYLIE.

THE CLEANSING OF THE TEN LEPERS: OR, Brief notes on Luke 17. verse. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18.
And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go, show your selves unto the
Priests. And it came to pass, that as they went, they were cleansed.

And one of them when he saw that he was healed, turned back, etc.


IN the three former verses, where this History of Christ's cleansing the ten
Lepers begins, the Evangelist sets down: First, the time, and that was,
when he went to Jerusalem, which going is to be referred to his last journey
thither; He went thither, though he knew (as he foretells his Disciples in
the next chapter Verse 32, 33.
) that he should be mocked, spitefully entreated, spitted on, scourged, and
put to death: that by his going thither so freely, he might show that he
suffered there willingly. Secondly, the place; hard by a certain village, the
Lepers being prohibited to enter into any village. Thirdly, the persons
themselves that were cleansed, and they are described: first, by their number;
ten: secondly, by their disease, which was a leprosy: thirdly, by the place
where they stood, and that was, a far off: fourthly, the occasion: 1. their
meeting our Savior. 2. their petition, they lifted up their voices, and said,
Jesus, Master, Have mercy on us.

Now concerning these verses: In the 14. verse there may be observed four
particulars. 1. Our Saviors compassion, when he saw them: 2. his commandment,
He said unto them, Go show your selves unto the Priests: 3. the Lepers
obedience, they went: 4. their cleansing, It came to pass, that as they went,
they were cleansed. And in the verses following, there is set down what
followed upon their cleansing: 1. that one of them, who was a Samaritane,
returned, and glorified God, and gave thanks: 2. The ingratitude of the other
nine, which, how our Savior detested, he showed: 1. by his interrogation,
Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine? 2. by his collaudation of
the other, being a stranger: There are not found that returned to give glory to
God, save this stranger; Whom therefore he dismisseth with this encomium;
Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole: ver. 19. Now to such
observations as the words will afford.

And when he saw them. heard them. Neither like our churlish Nabals, (who
refuse to relieve the distressed) denied he their requests, for he cleansed
them. Thus the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, his ears are open unto
their cry, and he delivers them out of their distress Psalm. 34. 15.
.

The Lord who dwells on high, and has respect unto the lowly, heard Jonah,
though he was in the sea, in a low place, even in the fishes belly, when he
cried Ion. 2. 1.
. He heard the pensive Publicane, (though knowing his own filthiness by
reason of sin, the spiritual leprosy, as these lepers, by reason of their
corporal leprosy,) he stood afar off, when he prayed Luke 18. 13*
. Surely, The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call
upon him in truth: He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he will
hear their cry, and save them, Psalm. 145. 18, 19.

When the Lord called Samuel, Samuel; Samuel answered, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears 1. Sam. 3. 10.
; When a godly man in his mind calls, Lord, Lord, the Lord will graciously
answer, Speak servant, for thy Lord hears. Solomon said to Bathsheba,
desiring (as she said) one small petition of him; I will not say thee nay; but
yet he denied her request 1 King. 2. 20.
, but the Lord who has said, Ask and it shall be given you, he will not
refuse to give to them that do ask. Indeed the woman of Canaan cried, but
our Savior at first answered her not a word; she eryed again, and said, Lord
help me, yet he helped her not Mat. 15. 23.
; but hereby he shows not that he is unwilling to hear and help, but how
willing he is to have us hold out in praying. He denies us present audience
to make us cry with the more instance; and they that with that woman, cry
instantly, and do hold out perseuerantly, shall at length (as she did)
find, that the Lord, though he be not always presently entreated, yet is
easy to be entreated, and ready to hear, and grant such requests as are made
according to his will, as S. John says 1. Ioh. 5. 14. 15.
.

Here then may they justly be checked, who, as if the Lord was inexorable, will
rather run to any other then unto him in the day of trouble. This is the
reason, why so many live in want, because they will not betake themselves to
the means for supply; they have not, because they ask not Iam. 4. 2.
. In this it is true, Spare to speak, and spare to speed. First, ask, and
then (not before) it shall be given unto you, Mat. 7. 7.

2. Here is comfort for poor Christians: worldlings are unmerciful, the
times are hard, and the prices of victuals high; but yet the Lord is
bountiful, and open-handed: As his plenty is not abated, so his goodness is
not diminished, and he is now as heretofore, easy to be entreated. In the
siege of Samaria, when the famine was so great, as mothers made their children
their meat, one of them cried unto the king of Israel, saying; Help my Lord,
O King; And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee
2 Kin. 6. 26. 27.
? But whosoever cries unto the king of heaven, and says, Help my Lord O
King, he will say, If no man succoureth thee, yet will I help thee; He will
not suffer the souls of the righteous (that cry unto him) to famish Pro. 10. 3
but will satisfy them in the days of dearth, as the Psalmist speaks Psalm.
37. 19
; according to his promise, ( Heb. 13. 5.) he will not forsake them, never
fail them, nor withholde any good thing from them Psalm. 34. 10.
.

3. But lastly, although the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, yet his
face is against them that do evil Psalm. 34. 16.
He fulfilleth (indeed) the desire of them that fear him, but as for
ungracious and imprudent persons, he will not in favor be found of them, nor
to their benefit hear them: When these spread forth their hands, he will
hide his eyes from them; when they make many prayers, he will not hear Esa.
1. 15.
. More particularly, he will neither hear the prayers of them that turn
their ears from the poor, when they cry; nor of those that listen not to the
word when it is preached: Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor,
he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard Pro. 21. 13
; And he that turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer
shall be abominable Pro. 28. 9
; I will close up this point with the words of the man that was blind, God
hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will,
him he hears Ioh. 9. 31. Text.
.

Go show your selves unto the Priests. This commandment our Savior gave unto
them, because (to omit other reasons) it was ordained, that the lepers in the
day of their cleansing, should be brought unto the Priest, by whom they should
be discerned to be clean, according to that which we read, Leuit. 14. 2.
Now hereby none of the ordinances and rites which were prescribed by God, were
to be neglected, disregarded, or disused, until the Lord himself who
ordained them, did disanull them. These are the commandments, the ordinances,
and the judgments (said Moses) which the Lord your God commanded me to teach
you, that ye might do them Deuteronomy. 6. 1
: where as by the word ( Commandments) is meant the moral Law, and by the
word ( Judgments) the judicial Law; so the Ceremonial Law is meant by the
word ( ordinances) all which were to be reverenced, and observed, until the
time of reformation, (as the Apostle says Heb. 9. 10
) that is, of Christ's revealing came, who was the body of those shadows.
Concerning Circumcision, the Law was, Every manchild among you shall be
circumcised; of him that was uncircumcised, it is said, That soul shall be cut
off from his people Genesis 17. 10. 14.
, Concerning the Passover, all the congregation of Israel was to keep it: and
whosoever did eat leauened bread for the space of seven days, wherein leaven
was forbidden, even that soul should be cut off from the Congregation of
Israel Exodus 12. 19. 47.
. So Aaron was to make the belles which were upon his garment, to sound, when
he went into the holy place before the Lord, and when he came out, that he die
not, says the text Exodus 28. 35.
. And the Priests, When they went into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or
to the Altar to minister, were to wash their hands, and their feet in the
brazen lauer, that they die not Exodus 30. 20.
.

Zachary and Elizabeth are commended for walking, as in all the commandments,
so in all the ordinances of the Lord Luke 1. 6.
. Yea our Savior himself, showing his due regard unto them, was circumcised
the eight day, presented unto the Lord, went to Jerusalem at times appointed;
and (as he did here) enjoined the lepers whom he cleansed, to go show
themselves to the Priests.

which were to be used before Christ's coming, the Lord has now (as it is
observed) reduced to two Sacraments; And as those heretofore, so these now are
to be respected, not disregarded, not despised. Far be it from any man to
scorn them, because of the mean show they make; or basely to esteeeme of
them, because they seem weak and simple: rather must we give them their due
valuation, because they be of divine institution. Let us reverence and honor
them, feeing that the Lord has ordained them. Verily, I say unto you,
whosoever shall despise one of these (as to the carnal eye they seem) vile
Sacraments which Christ has ordained in his Church, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea.

As they went. The example Elisha said unto Naaman (who was also a leper,) Go
and wash in Jordan seven times, and thou shall be clean; Naaman at first was
wroth, saying, Behold, I thought, he will surely come out to me, and stand and
call on the name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and
recover the leper; and he went away in a rage 2. King. 5. 10, 11.
. But when our Savior said unto these lepers, Go show your selves to the
Priests, they were not angry, neither murmured they and said, Behold, We
thought, he will surely come unto us, and put forth his hand, and touch us, (as
he did another leper, Matthew 8. verse. 3:) but they without any ado,
cheerfully went their ways. I might tell you of the like obedience of
Abraham, who when the Lord said unto him, Get thee out of thy country from thy
kindred and fathers house, departed as the Lord had spoken unto him Genesis 12. 1.
4.
: and of other holy men, all which have said unto God, as the people to Iosuah,
All that thou command us, we will do, and whither soever thou sendest us,
we will go Josh. 1. 16 Use 1.
.

Now for the uses of this point. First, these lepers being commanded to go,
went. There are diverse in these days, who being commanded to go, go not;
like unto him in the Gospel, to whom when his father said, Go work to day in
my vineyard, went not Math. 21. 30.
; And, as those idle loyterers, to whom it was spoken, Math. 20. 6. Why stand
ye here all the day idle? they stand still, as though they had no commandment
to go about the works of that vocation wherein God has set them.

But we are all enjoined to go; Magistrates must go to the gate and judge the
people Exodus 18. 22.
. Ministers must go and preach the Gospel Mark. 16. 15.
: People must go and work with their own hands, and do their own business,
that is, such as to their special places appertains 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
. As the Lord therefore has called every one, So let him walk, as the Apostle
says. 1. Cor. 7. 17. Thus much for the particular calling.

Jonah, who being commanded to Arise and go unto Nineueh, arose to fly to
Tarshish Jonah 1. 2, 3.
. And thus must Christians go directly also, and make straight paths to their
feet, as the Hebrews are exhorted, Heb. 12. 13. They must beware of
circuiting perambulations, and take need of going about, and fetching of
compass in religion: Their eyes must look right on, and their eyelids
straight before them Prou. 4. 25.
. Let ungodly men gallop for their pleasure, or profit, or preferment, in
by-pathes and wrywaies; we must with David run (and that directly) in the
way of Gods commandments, and turn aside neither to the right hand, nor to
the left Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
. We must still be aiming at the mark of the high price of our calling, and
have it always in our eye (as it were:) and (as Paul went with a straight
course unto Coos Act. 21. 1.
,) so must we strive to keep an even and direct course unto it.

Paul reached forth and pressed still toward the mark, Phil. 3. 13. And as he
did thus himself, so exhorted he others, saying, So run that ye may
obtain, 1. Cor. 9. 24. Now they that would obtain, must not give over
running, till they come to the goal; Though now and then we slip and fall, and
so are stayed, yet we must not lie still, but up again, and make more have in
our way then before; And to be short, we must go from knowledge to knowledge,
from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue, from grace to grace, till we
become perfect men in Christ Jesus. Thus much of the obedience of these Lepers;
Now in the next place let us go on to what happened unto them in the way, as
they went: And it came to pass, that as they went, they were cleansed.

As they went, they were cleansed: From hence we may observe; that, As we walk
according to Gods commandments, it shall go well with us. If Naaman the
Syrian had not at last washed in Jordan, as Elisha badde him, he might well
have been a leper unto the day of his death; but going down, and dipping
himself seven times, according to the saying of the man of God, his flesh came
again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean 2. King. 5. 10,
11. 14.
. And if these lepers had not went, as our Savior bad them, they might as well
have continued still as they were unclean; but as they went, according to his
commandment, they were cleansed: As also the blind man going and washing in
the poole of Siloam, whither Christ sent him, came back again seeing, and his
eyes were opened Ioh. 9. 7.
. More generally: As Josiah did judgment and justice, as he judged the cause
of the poor and needy, it was well with him Ierm. 22. 16.
; and it was as well with Vzziah, as long as he reigned well: as long as he
sought the Lord, God made him to prosper 2. Chron. 26. 5.
. What the Prophet Jeremy said unto Zedekiah is worthy the remembering: Obey, I
beseech thee, the voice of the Lord, so shall it be well unto thee, Ierem. 38.
20. And to the same purpose is that exhortation of Moses to the Israelites: You
shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you, that
ye may live, and that it may be well with you, Deuteronomy. 5. 33.

As they went, they were cleansed; and as we walk, we shall be blessed. Blessed
is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways: Happy shall thou
be (that do thus) and it shall be well with thee, as the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 128. 1, 2.

first, in regard of their bodies. Our Savior cleansed these Lepers that were
obedient; but the Lord will smite such as are disobedient, with the pestilence,
with a consumption, and a fever, an inflammation, with the botch, and the itch
Deuteronomy. 28. 21. etc.
; As Gehazi was smitten with the Leprosy for his falsehood, 2. King. 5. 27. and
Vzziah for his pride. 2. Chron. 26. 20. And 2. in regard of their estates, for,
the treasures of wickedness will profit nothing: Prou. 10. 2. They may
indeed prosper in the world, but alas, their very prosperity shall destroy
them, Prou. 1. 32. Hence it is, that as the Lord would have it pronounced to
the righteous, that it shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit
of their doings: So he would have it denounced against the unrighteous, Woe
unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands, shall
be given him, Esa. 3. 10, 11.

3. Lastly, here is encouragement for the godly to proceed in the ways of
godliness, and (as the Lord said to Iosuah Josh. 1. 8.
) if they would have good success, to observe what he commands. Indeed, as
the most godly fail in their obedience, so are they many times corrected for
the same; but yet so far as they are religious, so far they are sure to be
prosperous, as far as they are godly, they are sure to be happy. Surely I
know (says Solomon) that it shall be well with them that fear God, but it
shall not be well with the wicked, because they fear not before God, Eccles.
8. 12, 13.

And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with, etc.
From the practice Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. 15. Where, as prayer, so praise for
deliverance is required, even as the Apostle also would have thanksgiving
joined with prayer and supplication, Phil. 4. 6. So that there is a necessary
coherence between prayer and thanksgiving: as prayer is the sending out for
those things we need, so thanksgiving is for the receiving of them; having
received the things by prayer desired of God, we must give him thanks for the
same. The first thing which we ask in the Lords prayer, is, to have grace to
glorify Gods name; and the last thing we are to perform in the same prayer,
is to ascribe all glory to the said sacred Name.

Moses composed a song for the Israelites deliverance from the Egyptians, Exodus
15. 1. and so did Hannah for her son 1. Sam. 2. 1.
, both in thankfulness unto God. David calling to mind Gods benefits, and
bethinking with himself, what he should return for them, What shall I render
unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? resolves on this duty, I will
offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving, Psalm. 116. 12. 17. And thus this
Samaritane perceiving that he was cleansed, renders this sacrifice for the
same, he glorified God, and gave thanks.

unthankful, 2. Tim. 3. 2. We see the truth thereof: People have tongues to
ask, hands to receive, but remember not to glorify God, when they have
received what they ask. In time of famine, sickness, or any adversity, they
usually pray unto the Lord for help; but when he delivers them out of their
distress, do they then (as the Psalmist exhorts, Psalm. 107. 6. 8.) praise
him for his goodness? or may it not rather be said of them, as it was of
Hezekiah 2. Chro. 32. 35.
, that they render not again according to the benefit done unto them? I know
there are certain words of course, as, God be praised, I thank God, etc. in
most men's mouths. Many there are that give thanks and glorify God formally,
coldly, and superficially; but few that do it fervently, and zealously (as
this Samaritane did) who with a loud voice (which was argumentu^ zeli, a token
of his zeal) glorified God.) Few call upon their souls to perform this duty,
as David did, Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless his
holy name, Psa. 103. 1.

But let us be exhorted, always in all things to give thanks unto God; As we
pray for them, so let us praise his Name for them, let us glorify him for what
he graciously gives us; It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and
to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High, Psalm 92. 1.

Thanksgiving (says one) was an exercise in Paradise, and it shall be an
exercise in heaven; It shall continue, when others shall cease. In the next
life we shall not need the Word, nor Prayer, nor Sacraments, but the praising
of God shall not cease, being a peculiar exercise of the Angels and Saints in
heaven. Now if we would ever praise him in heaven, we must first praise him on
earth; we must glorify him here, if we desire to be glorified, and to
glorify him hereafter. I say then as the Apostle to the Hebrews, Let us offer
the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the Heb. 13. 15
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name; and always remember, that in
thanksgiving as we glorify God, so we benefit our selves; The Lord will
willingly give us what we do ask him, when he sees us thankful for that
he has given us; thanks for former blessings is the way to gain and procure
future blessings.

When he saw, etc. he turned, etc. Again we may observe from Sisera was
overthrown, Deborah and Barak, even on that day, sang, saying: Praise ye the
Lord for the auenging of Israel, Judge. 5. 1. 2. And as soon as this Samaritane
saw that he was cleansed, he turned back (viz. from the Priests) glorified
God, and gave thanks.

As we must be swift to hear the word of God, Iam. 1. 19
so must we be swift to return thanks to God. Indeed we must (as S. James
says Ibid.
be slow to speak: to wit, against the truth that is delivered, but not Gods
praises for blessings received: we must be as quick in thanksgiving, as God
is in giving; as ready to glorify him, as he to gratify us; to give him
thanks, as he to give us blessings.

David made have, and delayed not to keep Gods commandments Psalm. 119. 60.
; No sooner did Jonah cry in the streets of Nineueh, Yet forty days and
Nineueh shall be overthrown, but they cried mightily unto Jonah 3.
God, repented, and turned from their evil way. Our Savior having called
Simon and Andrew, they straightway followed him, Mark. 1. 18. And Zacheus made
haste to receive him, Luke 19. 6. Alas, people in these times, who make
quick dispatch of their worldly affairs, are exceeding slow in the most
important business of their souls. Good courses for the present are only
allowed, not followed: Conversion and amendment the most purpose, but yet
defer them, young men till they be old, old men till they be a dying. But as
for young men they must remember their creator, fear him, serve him, now in
the days of their youth Eccl. 12. 2
, and not put off all this, till their uncertain old old age: and Audite senes
Joel. 1. 2.
, Hear ye old men, it is sufficient for you that ye have spent the time past
of your life in the base service of the world, sin and Satan; now while it is
called to day, turn from your sins to serve the living God. And let all, both
young men and maidens, old men and children, take heed of this delay and
procrastination; and set themselves about religious courses, and Christian
duties with all speed and expedition. That thou do, do quickly, said our
Savior to Judas, Ioh. 13. 27. As he made haste to save our souls, so must
we make have to amend our lives. As Rebeccas friends could by no requests
hinder Abraham's servant from speedy return unto his master, so let nothing
hinder us srom present conversion to God our Master; Make no tarrying (says
the Son of Syrach) to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shall
be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance, Eccles. 5. 7.

Were there not ten cleansed?) Here we may note, that kindness is showed by
God unto the wicked. These nine unthankful lepers were cleansed, as well as the
tenth, the thankful one. Thus we see that true which we read, Luke 6. 35.
That God is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil. And as our Savior
cleansed the bodies of these ungrateful lepers, so filled he the bellies of
his carnal and fleshly followers, John 6. according as the Psalmist speaking
of men of the world, which have their portion in this life, says, that their
bellies the Lord fills with his hid treasure, Psalm. 17. 14. As he fills
their bellies, so he fills their barnes also: Yea, and so loadeth them
sometimes with this worlds good, that their barnes are not large enough to
receive their fruits, and to hold their goods, as appears by the parable of
the rich man. Luke 12. 16. Thus corporal and temporal benefits, Impijs
impertitur Dominus, the Lord imparteth to ungodly men. And this he does: First,
that they might be the more inexcusable, and have nothing to allege for
themselves at the day of their account. Secondly, that if they have, or seem
to have any good things in the^, they might not be altogether unrewarded. Thus
Ahabs temporary humiliation was recompensed with the remoouall of a temporal
judgment: and these lepers temporary faith with the remoouall of their
leprosy.

Far be it then from No man (says Solomon) knows either love or hatred by
all that is before him Eccl. 9. 1. 2.
, that is, no man can assure himself of Gods love by the fruition, or of his
hatred by the want, of external things. All such things come alike unto all
(says he) and are common both to the righteous and to the wicked: As is the
good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an oath. The
want of outward things, as of health, soundnes, wealth, beauty, etc. is not a
token of Gods displeasure; neither the possession of them, a sure sign of his
gracious favor. A man may be poor, diseased, full of sores, and yet be
regarded by the most High here, and eternally beautified hereafter, as we may
see in Lazarus. And again, a man may be healthful, and wealthfull, clothed
richly, and fare sumptuously, and yet be hated of God in this life, and
everlastingly condemned in the life to come, as we may see in the rich glutton.
Luke 16.

Again, let not any be offended to see, profane and unthankful persons lusty
and strong, their eyes stand out with fatness, and their strength firm;
neither be envious, when he beholds the prosperity of the wicked, Judge them
not to be happy, but go into the Sanctuary of God, then shall thou understand
their cursed estate. Surely, their health will end in unhappiness; their
soundness and strength of body, in destruction both of soul and body, and
whatsoever they solace themselves withal, in desolation.

even to our enemies. If they hunger, we must not think too much to feed
them; if they thirst, to give them drink Romans 12. 20.
. We must do good to them that hate us: That so we may be the children of our
Father which is in heaven; for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, as well
as on the good; and sends rain (as) on the just (so) on the unjust. Matthew.
5. 44, 45.

Were are the nine? There are not found, etc. From hence observe, that, The
mostare commonly the worst: The fewest the best. Before the flood all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth; only Noah was upright, and preached
righteousness 2. Pet. 2. 5
. The people of Sodom, were all vicious; only Lot was righteous, and vexed
with their uncleanness. Of those that were sent to search the land of Canaan,
ten were unfaithful; only two, Caleb and Ioshuah, were faithful. And of
these ten lepers, that were cleansed, nine were ungrateful; one only a
Samaritane, thankful.

The flock whereof Christ is shepherd, is but a small flock, Luke 12. 32.
There were but a few names, that is, a few persons in Sardis, which had not
defiled their garments; that is, which were faithful, and had not been
infected with those sins which reigned in that Church, Revel. 3. 4. Many are
called (says our Savior) but few are chosen Math. 22. 14.
. If but few, even of those that have an outward calling, how much more few, if
you consider the rest of the world beside?

The way of righteousness as it is a narrow way, so it has but few followers;
whereas the way of wickedness, as it is of greater latitude, so it has a
greater multitude of passengers; as it is of larger extent, so there are many
that walk in it, Math. 7. 13.

The Apostle says to the Philippians, Walk Gods worship, prophaners of his
Sabbath, contemners of his word wallowing in wantonness, delighting in
drunkenness, living in covetousness, etc. Judge now if such persons are fit
patterns to follow: the more a man goes after them, the farther he wandreth
from God; whosoever walks with them in the broad way, it will at last lead
both them and him to destruction. Enter not therefore into the way of the
wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men, be they never so many Prou. 4.
14.
The Lord has commanded, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus
23. 2. We must not go after the many. As the Lord said to Jeremy: Let them
returnevnto thee, but return not thou unto them, Ier. 15. 19. So let the most
follow us, but let not us go after them: though they work iniquity, yet that
is no ground or warrant for us; rather a warning to us to fly iniquity; the
more they pursue evil, the less must we, and the more praise shall we have,
if we follow after that which is good.

Secondly, let us look, not what the multitude does, but what we our selves
ought to do; it was worthily spoken of Iosuah unto the people, If it seem
evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve; but
as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. Though many of
our Saviors disciples went back, and walked no more with him, yet his true
disciples continue still with him, and say, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6, 66. 68 Though these nine lepers turned
their backs against Christ, yet this Samaritane alone by himself turned back
unto him; and thus must we do our duties, though few bear us company, we
must set our selves about whatsoever is required of us, though none join with
us. And that we may do so, let us remember that it is better, far better, to
be saved alone or with few, then to be damned with many.

There are not found, etc. All these lepers began fairly, nine quickly made an
end; one only returned and perseuered: and as herein he went beyond the
others, so for this, he is preferred before the others, and commended by our
Savior.

Now observe here worth. What auailed it Judas, that he was an Apostle, that
he preached, that he carried himself in an outward honest, and reformed
conuersasation a long time, when he continued not, but by transgression fell
Act. 1. 25
? What did it profit Saul, that he began to reign well, when he turned aside,
and fell away? what, Demas, that he was a professor: yea, that he went far in
his profession, when afterward he forsook it, and fell in love with the
world? And what John's hearers, That they rejoiced in his light, when it was
only for Ioh. 5. 35.
season a? It was nothing worth, that the Jews hearing Christ speak of bread
from heaven, earnestly desired it: saying, Lord evermore give us this bread;
when they went back, and walked no more with him Ioh. 6. 34. 36.
. And it was nothing worth, that these nine lepers began so well, that they met
our Savior, lifted up their voices, saying: Jesus, Master, have mercy on us:
That they went to the Priests, as they were commanded, when at last they
shamefully forsook him, and unthankfully departed from him.

Righteousness forsaken or departed from, is vain and forgotten: When the
righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, all his
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Where
perseverance is not, repentance, obedience, hearing, prayers, yea sufferings
are in vain, Gal. 3. 4. Yea without it, hope of happiness is lost; for they
only that are faithful unto death, shall receive a crown of life, Reu. 2. 10.
And he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved, Mat. 24. 13.

This then must teach us, not to be weary of well doing. Multitudes there are
amongst us, who (like the Israelites, Psalm. 78. 57.) turn aside like a
deceitful bow; whose goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew
which passes away Hos. 6. 4.
. Diverse there are, who, as Iehu marched furiously, so they a Mal. 1. 13.
begin fervently; but quickly say, as the Israelites, Behold what a
weariness is it a. Whose Mal. 1. 13.
present courses if we compare with their first beginnings, we shall find
that, with Ephesus they have left their first love, and are come to a Laodicean
temper. And because they are neither hot nor cold, the Lord will spue them out
of his mouth Reu. 3. 16
, and cast them clean from him.

But as for us, we must not leave our former love, obedience, zeal; but rather
labor to increase them: Nor be weary of well-doing, till the day of our dying.
We must not change our good courses for worser, till we exchange this life for
a better.

It was Jobs constant resolution: Till I dye, I will not remove my Integrity
from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go. My heart
shall not reproach me, so long as I live, Job 27. 5, 6. David says, I have
inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end. Psalm.
119. 112. Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days. 1. King. 15.
14. And Paul finished his course, and kept the faith. 2. Tim. 4. 7. And as
these have held out, so let not us leave off. As we have entered into
profession, so let us persist: It is a shameful thing to give it now over. Let
us say concerning our religion, as that worthy Thebane soldier did concerning
his target, I will either defend thee, or dye upon thee; and as Ruth to Naomi:
The Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me,
Ruth. 1. 17.

I conclude all with the prayer of Saint Jude: Now unto him that is able to
keep you from falling, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of
his glory with exceeding joy: To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and
majesty, dominion and power, now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

