The Counsel of a Father to his Son, in ten several Precepts.
Left as a Legacy at his death.
The Induction or Preface.
SON, The virtuous inclination of thy matchless Mother, by whose tender and
godly care thy Infancy was governed, together with thy education under so godly
and zealous a Tutor, puts me rather in assurance then hope, that thou art not
ignorant of that summary bond, which is only able to make thee happy, as well
in thy life as death. I mean the true knowledge of thy Creator and redeemer,
without which all things are vain and miserable. So that thy youth being
guided by so all-sufficient a teacher, I make no doubt but he will furnish thy
life both with Divine and moral documents; yet that I may not cast of the care
beseeming a parent toward his child, or that thou should have cause, to
derive thy whole felicity and welfare rather from others, then from whom thou
receiuedst thy birth and being, I think it fit and agreeable to the affection I
bear, to give thee such aduertisements and rules for the squaring of thylife,
as are gained rather by long experience, then much reading, to the end, that
thou entering into this exorbitant age may be the better prepared to shun
those cautelous courses, whereinto this world, and thy lack of experience may
easily draw thee. And because I will not confound thy memory, I have reduced
them into ten precepts, if thou imprint them in thy mind, thou shall reap the
benefit, and I the contentment. And these are they.

The first Pecept.
FIrst, when it shall please God, to bring thee to man's estate, use great
providence and circumspection in the choice of thy wife: for from thence may
spring all thy future good or ill. And it is an action like to a Stratagem in
war, where man can err but once. If thy estate be good, match near home
and at leisure: if weak, then far off and quickly, enquire diligently of her
disposition, and how her parents have been inclined in their youth. Let her not
be poor, how generous soever: for a man can buy nothing in the market with
gentility. Neither choose a base or uncomely creature: for that will breed
contempt in others, and loathing in thee. Make not choice of a dwarf or a
fool: for from the one thou may beget a race of Pigmies, the other may be
thy daily disgrace. For it will yrke thee to hear her talk, and thou shall
find (to thy great grief) that there is nothing so fulsome as is a she fool.

Touching the government of thy house, let thy hospytality be moderate,
according to the measure of thine own estate, rather plentiful then sparing,
(but not too costly) For I never heard nor yet knew any man grow poor by
keeping an orderly Table, But some consume themselves with secret vices, and
their hospitality must bear the blame. Banish swynish drunkards out of thy
house, which is a vice that impaires health, consumes much, and makes no show,
besides I never heard any commendations ascribed to a drunkard more then the
well bearing of his drink which is a commendation fitter for a brewers horse
or a drayman* then for either a Gentleman or Seruingman.

Beware that thou spend not above three of the four parts of thy Revenues,
nor above one third part thereof in thy house, for the other two parts will but
defray thy extraordinaries, which will always surmount thy ordinaries by much,
for otherwise thou shall live like a rich beggar in a continual want, and the
needy man can never live happily nor contented, for then every least disaster
makes him ready to morgage or sell. And that Gentleman that then sels an aker
of land, loses an ounce of credit, for Gentility is nothing but ancient
riches, so that if the foundations do sink, the buildings must needs
consequently fail.

The second Precept.
BRing thy children up in obedience and learning yet without austerity, praise
them openly, reprehend them secretly, give them good countenance, and
convenient maintenance according to thy ability, for otherwise thy life will
seem their bondage, and then what portion thou shall leave them, they may
thank death and not thee for it. Marry thy daughters betimes least they marry
themselves. Suffer not thy sons to pass the Alps, for they shall learn
nothing but pride, blasphemy, and Atheism. And if by chance they attain to
any broken languages, they will profit them no more, then to have one meat
served in diverse dishes, Neither by my advise shall thou train them up to
wars, for he that sets up his rest to live by that profession, can hardly be
an honest man, or a good Christian, for every war is of it self unjust, the
good cause may make it just, besides it is a science no longer in request then
use, for soldiers in peace, are like to chimnies in summer,

The third Precept.
Live not in the country without corn and cattle about thee, for he that
must present his hand to his purse, for every expense of household, may be
likened to him that keeps water in a sieve, And for thy provision, lay for to
buy it at the best hand, for there may be a penny saved between buying at thy
need, or when the market, or the seasons do serve fittest for it.

Be not willingly attended or served by kinsmen or friends, or men entreated to
stay, for they will expect much, and do little, neither by such as are amorous,
for their heads are commonly intoxicated, keep rather two too few, then one
too many, feed them well and pay them with the most. So may thou demand
service at their hands, and boldly require it.

The fourth Precept.
LEt thy kindred and allies be welcome to thy Table, grace them with thy
countenance, and ever further them in all their honest actions for by that
means thou shall double the bond of nature, so as thou shall find them so many
advocates to plead an Apology for thee behind thy back But shake of those
glowormes, I mean parasites and sycophants, who will feed and faune on thee in
the summer of thy prosperity, but in any adverse storm, they will shelter thee
no more, then an Arbor in Winter.

The fifth Precept.
BE sure thou always keep some great man to thy friend, but trouble him not
for trifies, complement him often, present him with many, yet small gifts and
of little charge, And if thou have cause to bestow any great gratuity, then let
it be some such, as may be daily in sight, for otherwise thou shall live like
a hop without a pole, live in obscurity, and be made a footeball for every
insulting companion to spurn at.

The sixth Precept.
Undertake no suite against a poor man without receiving of great wrong, for
therein making him thy competitor, besides that it is held a base conquest to
triumph where there is small resistance, neither undertake law against any man,
before thou be fully resolved that thou have the right on thy side, and then
spare not for money nor pains, for a cause or two being well followed and
obtained, may after free thee from suits a great part of thy life.

The seventh Precept.
BEware of suertiship for thy best friend, for he yt pays an other man's
debts, seeks his own decay, but if thou can not otherwise choose rather
then to lend that money from thy self upon good bonds, (though thou borrow it)
So may thou pleasure thy friend and happily secure thy self.

In borrowing of money be evermore precious of thy word, for he that cares to
keep day of payment, is Lord commander many times of another man's goods.

The eighth Precept.
Toward thy superiors be humble yet generous, with thy equals familiar, yet
respective, toward inferiors show much humility and some familiarity, as to
bow thy body, stretch forth thy hand, uncover thy head, and such like popular
complements. The first prepares a way to advancement, the second makes thee
known for a man well bred, the third gains a good report, which once gained
may easily be kept, for high humilities take such root in the minds of the
multitude, as they are easilier wonn by unprofitable courtesies, then by
churlish benefits, yet do I advise thee not to affect nor to neglect
popularity.

The ninth Precept.
TRust no man with thy credit or estate, for it is a mere folly for a man to
enthrall himself to his friend further then if just cause be offered, he
should not dare to become otherwise thy enemy.

The tenth Precept.
BE not scurrilous in conversation nor stoicall in thy jests, the one makes
thee unwelcome to all companies, the other pulls on quarrels, and makes thee
hated of thy best friend, Jests when they do savor too much of truth, leave a
bitterness in ye minds of those yt are touched. And although I have already
pointed al these inclusiue, yet I think it necessary to leave it thee as a
caution, because I have seen so many prove to quip and gyrd, as they had
rather loose their friend, then their jests. And if by chance their boiling
brain yield a quaint scoff, they will travel to be delivered of it as a woman
with child, those nimble apprehensions, are but the froth of wit.

LONDON.

Printed for IOSEPTH HVNT, and are to be sold at his shop in Bedlem, near
Moore-field gate.

FINIS.

