THE PASSION OF CHRIST, and the Benefits thereby.

BY Bartholomew Chamberlain, Doctor in Divinity.

1 JOHN 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, purges us from all
sin.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Pauier. 1613.

THE PASSION of Christ, and the benefits thereby.
HEBR. 9. 28. Christ was once offered to take away the the sins of many: and
unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin,
unto salvation.
THis Scripture, found in the ninth to the Hebrews, written by Saint Paul (as
some think) but sprung from the Holy Ghost, as the Catholic Church believes,
plain in words, certain in sense, short in reading, contains two
necessary, notable and large points. The first is, the offering of Christ, and
wherefore he was offered, in these words; Christ was once offered, to take away
the sins of many. The other, the coming of Christ: unto whom, and wherefore
he shall come, in the second Branch, Unto them that look for him shall he
appear the second time, without sin, unto salvation. The first is for me,
being the doctrine of Christ crucified, which only is to be preached: for the
time also, being the Passion week, wherein especially it is to be meditated,
and for the most Noble and Honorable Audience, being Christians, which seek
salvation by Christ crucified, and no where else: and therefore contenting my
self with the first part at this present, by Gods grace and your Honorable
permission, I am to handle the Passion of CHRIST, briefly, to avoid
tediousness: plainly, to edify all: truly, out of the Scriptures: and, I
hope, comfortably, both to you, and my self; in this order: First, I will
touch the things which went before his Cross, not all, but some: Secondly,
what he suffered on the Cross, and what chanced about the time of his
Passion: thirdly, what good we have by Christ's Passion, and how we should
meditate thereon. That the Treatise may be to the glory of God, I beseech you
let us join in hearty prayer unto God.

O Almighty, etc. THe bloody and bitter Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, God and man, in the six and twentieth, and seven and twentieth Chapters
of S. Matthew, is largely and comfortably discoursed. How he was betrayed by
Judas with a kiss, accused of the Jews, condemned under Pontius Pilate, and
crucified between two Malefactors; his Soul being troubled; his Heart
grieved; and his Body tormented with the nayling of his blessed Hands and Feet,
with the piercing of his gracious Side, with the shedding of his most glorious
and precious Blood. So the Son of God, the Lord of Glory, the Prince of
Peace, was entreated of miserable Miscreants. So he, which knew no sin, was
made a sacrifice for our sin. Now if the Veil of the Temple did rend asunder
from the top to the bottom; if the Graves did open, and the bodies of Saints
(which slept) arose; if the Earth did tremble and the stones claue asunder when
this was done; how can it be but that we should be moved when this is
preached? Our Hearts may tremble to think of it, so may our Tongues to speak
of it, yet we may rejoice in Christ crucified, that by the virtue of his
Passion our ransom is paid, our wounds healed, satisfaction for our sin
made; Death conquered, Satan subdued, Hell overcome, Sin killed, God
pacified, and we to him reconciled.

And now to begin with those things which went before his Cross: may we not
think his suffering was exceeding great, when he sweat blood? and that did
Christ in mount Olives, being in an Agony, kneeling down deuoutely, and
praying most earnestly. It is an usual thing for a man in anguish to sweat;
but to sweat blood, and to sweat it in such abundance, that even drops like
blood should trickle from his Body upon the Ground, this is not an usual
thing; this was a strange thing; this was proper only to Christ; this declared
grief unspeakable, pain intolerable. And did Christ shed drops of blood for
our sins, and cannot we shed one tear for the same? O that my Head were a
Well of water, and my Eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might bewail the
unthankfulness of the world!

The matter which he had in hand, was weighty; the work which he had to
accomplish, was great; the conflict, strong; the enemies, mighty; their
assaults many. The Work was man's Redemption; the Conflict was with Sin, with
Death, with Satan, with Hell, with the Law, and with the wrath of GOD. And
would not those enemies, so many in number, so mighty in power, so terrible to
behold, make a man to fear, to tremble, and to sweat? If Christ had been
mere man, he could not have encountered with them: but being God and man, did
encounter with them all, overcame them all, lead them captive all, and has
triumphed over them all, though it cost him drops of blood, with strong crying
and tears. What say I drops of blood? it cost him more, that which was dearest
unto him, his life, before he could bring under so mighty enemies as man had,
and accomplish so painful a work as Redemption is, and pacify so great a
person as is the most high, almighty and everliving God. O man, remember the
drops of blood which CHRIST did shed for thy sake, for thy sin, for thy
soul, and for thy salvation: love him for it; thank him for it; serve him for
it all the days of thy life. And thus much for the suffering of Christ in
Mount Olives.

Secondly, we may conceive his suffering was exceeding great, when being
sorrowful and grievously troubled, he said: My Soul is heavy even unto
death. When he fell on his Face, and prayed thrice: O my Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me; meaning his bitter Passion: not that he
was unwilling to take it (for, in all things he submitted himself to his
heavenly Father) but those earnest speeches declared the heavy burden of sin,
which lighted on him, the painful grief which he endured, the grievous
pain which he suffered, the great torments, and terrors which he sustained
for our sakes. The soul of Christ was from heaven heavenly, never bespotted
with any uncleanness, but pure without corruption notwithstanding it was
heavy, and touched with the fear of death, in consideration of our sin,
which had deserved death, with an infinite number of miseries beside, all which
lighted upon that innocent Lamb; (which never displeased God, nor offended
man) that by his stripes we might be healed. And what an hell think we was
Christ in, when he prayed thrice most fervently, to have that bitter Cup
pass from him? No doubt he felt the weight of sin, the Wrath of God against
it, the Justice of God requiring punishment for it, the power of the Law
pronouncing condemnation to it, the force of Death, the tyranny of Satan, the
torments of Hell, which no tongue can express, nor heart conceive. And this
made Christ to say in anguish of Spirit: My Soul is very heavy even unto the
death. And to pray three times; O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me: yet to show that therefore he came into the world, and that he
was content to dye, he submitted his will to Gods, saying; Nevertheless, not
as I will, but as thou will.

Thirdly, he was betrayed by one of his own, Judas by name; a Judas in heart, a
Judas in tongue, a Judas in deed, came to him with a Judas kiss, saying; Hail
Master, and betrayed Christ. O beastly traitorous Beast, to betray thy Master,
and that under color of friendship with a kiss. I say, to betray thy Master,
whom thou wast bound to defend, and ought to have loved. It was too much for
any Barbarian to have done: but for thee which did call him Master, which
did bear his Bag, which did sit at his Table, which wast conversant
with him, to do it, was a Judas trick, indeed, too-too traitorous,
shameful and beastly. But what will not the desire of money do? What will you
give me (said IVDAS) and I will deliver him unto you? I will deliver him unto
you: but first I must know what you will give me. Judas took part with the
Jews, Judas betrayed Christ, Judas damned himself, and all for what will you
give me? But what did his money him good, when he had lost Christ, lost Heaven,
lost his Soul, and damned himself? But was this the end of this? When Judas
saw he was condemned, he repented himself, he brought again the thirty
pieces of silver to the chief Priests and Elders, he said, I have sinned,
betraying the innocent blood: he cast down the silver pieces in the temple, he
departed, and went and hanged himself. Hanging was the end of Judas: a fit end
for such a traitor: but that is not all, he hangs in hell perpetually for it,
and he is served as he deserved, most justly: for blood will have blood. But
did Judas repent? so is the text, He repented, and he said; I have sinned,
betraying the innocent blood. He did not repent truly, for then he would not
have hanged himself. The word Repentance was in his mouth, but the thing was
not in his heart: within him was a tormenting conscience, which did accuse,
judge, and condemn him, which did set before his eyes, the haynousnesse of his
fact, the grieuousnesse of GODS Wrath, Judgment without mercy, Hellfire
without redemption: This desperate mind made him to depart from the company,
to take an halter, and hang himself. See the force of Conscience in Judas:
Mala conscientia delictorum nostrorum testis, iudex, tortor, carcer, accusat,
iudicat, condemnat. An evil conscience is a witness, a Judge, a tormentor, a
prison of our sins; it does accuse, judge, and condemn.

What thing more grievous, then day and night to carry about such a witness,
Judge, Tormenter, and prison? Omnia potest homo fugere praeter cor suum: Nam
quocunque vadit, conscientia eum non derelinquit. A man may avoid all things
but his own heart; for whither-soeuer he goes, it goes with him, either to
excuse or accuse, which are the effects of conscience. The testimony of a good
conscience is a precious jewel, and (as Salcmon says) a continual feast,
because it makes a man always merry. The putting away of a good conscience
causes shipwreck of faith, as in Himenaeus and Alexander. Happy, therefore is
he which can truly say with that elect vessel S. Paul, Herein I endeavor my
self to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men: for if
our heart condemn us, GOD is greater then our heart, and knows all things;
but if our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward him, and
whatsoever we ask in faith we receive of him. A sick conscience can no
Physician in the world cure, but that heavenly Physician Christ Jesus: to him
therefore let us resort with all humility.

But to Judas again: What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
The desire of money is the root of all mischief. They which are poisoned with
it do err from the Faith. They pierce themselves through with many sorrows:
they fall into temptations, into snares, into many foolish and noisome lusts
which drown men in perdition and destruction. But men of God must fly those
things and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness, laying hold of eternal life, whereunto they are called. By the end
of Judas let Servants take heed that they betray not their Masters: for
treason and rebellion most commonly have a shameful end; such is Gods just
judgment. Let Masters also beware, that they trust not every servant too
far, no not though he be of his household, and pretend good will, and seem
trusty; even so did Judas, yet was he in truth, but a seemer, a dissembler, a
traitor. For, as there is no grief to that of the mind, no loss to that of
life, no fear to that of destruction; so is there no enemy to a dissembling
friend, no treachery to that which one of a man's own may practice.

Here is Judas for an example: one of Christ's Apostles, and of his household (as
I may say) one that asked, Master, is it I? one that kissed him, and seemed as
trusty as any the rest: yet for all that he was but a Judas, a halter, a
cloaker, a dissembler, a traitor. All is not honey that is sweet, neither is
all gold that glisters; so is not every one a true servant that says, Master.
Judas was a double fellow, he had one question to Christ, another to the
Jews: to Christ, Master, is it I? but to the Jews, what will you give me, and
I will deliver him unto you? This question of Judas for the first part is very
rife in the world at these days: I will do you a pleasure, but what will you
give me for my pains? I will lend you a sum, but what will you give me for
interest? I will let you a piece of land, but what will you give me for a good
fine? He that will give most shall have it: so all is, what will you give me,
and little without what will you give me. But let them use it as long as they
will, it is but Judas his question; Christian charity asks no such question,
and yet is ready to pleasure and to lend. And thus much for the treachery of
Judas.

I will omit, for breuities sake, many circumstances, as that all his Disciples
forsook him, and fled like cowards when they saw swords and staves against
him; that Caiaphas the hie priest accused him of blasphemy, that the people
spat on him, and smote him with rods, that Peter denied him with a lie, with an
oath, with a curse. I come to Pontius Pilate the Governor. This man though he
knew well, that for envy they had delivered him, though his Wife sent unto him
upon the Judgment seat, to have nothing to do with that just man, though he
found no cause of death in him; yet like a naughty man, and timorous Judge, he
let go an arrant Thief, Barrabas, and delivered Jesus to be crucified, and
then before the multitude took water and washed his hands, saying; I am
innocent of the blood of that just man. He confessed him a just man: why then
did he give sentence on him? He said he was innocent of his blood, and yet did
consent to shed it. No, no, Pilate was guilty of Christ's death, and could not
shift himself of it by taking water and washing his hands. What a matter was
this, Barrabas to be preferred before Christ? a murderer let go and an
innocent person scourged? But see envy: they envied Christ's virtues. Inuidia
est virtutis comes. If Pilate had been a good man, finding no cause of death
in Christ, he would have stood with him to death, and not for fear, or any
other carnal respect have condemned him. After the soldiers took him in the
common hal, first they stripped him, then they put about him a robe of scarlet,
on his head they set a crown of thorns in his right hand they put a reed
before him, they bowed their knees, in mockage, saying, Auc rex Iudaeorum:
Afterward they spit on him, and with a reed smote him on the head. Thus when
they had mocked him, they took the rode from him, and put his own raiment on
him, and led him away to be crucified. What villainy was this? Christ being God
could have staid their fury, yea, have stricken them stark dead with a word:
but he would not for our sakes. If those soldiers had known what they did,
with whom they dealt, whose son he was, from whence he came, and whither he
would, what power he had, they would have stayed themselves: but being full of
ignorance, they did what they did. For had they known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. But yet ignorance excused not. For ignorance in
those which would not understand, without doubt is a sin: Ignorance in those
which could not understand, is a punishment for sin: neither is excusable; both
are damnable. We have heard what Christ suffered before he came to his cross,
that he sweat drops of blood in mount Olives, that being sorrowful he prayed
earnestly to have that bitter cup pass from him, that he was betrayed by
Judas with a kiss, that he was forsaken of all his Disciples, that he was
accused by Caiaphas for a blasphemer, that he was denied by Peter thrice, that
he was condemned under Pontius Pilate.

It follows that I speak of his suffering on the cross. Christ being on the
cross suffered reproach of the passers by, of the Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, and of the Thieves. The passers by wagging their heads, reviled him,
saying: Thou that destroyedst the temple of God, and buildedst it in three
days; if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross. Likewise the
Priests, Scribes, Elders, and Pharisees mocked him, saying, He saved others, but
himself can he not save: if he be the King of Israel, let him come down from
the cross, and we will believe him. The thieves also does at the first, cast
the same thing in his teeth. Christ indeed said: destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it up again. The Jews mistook him: they meant that
great temple in Jerusalem, which had been a building forty and six years:
but he meant the Temple of his body, that after they had destroyed, mangled,
and killed it, he would raise it from death the third day, as in truth he did.
Now if they had understood him, they would never have mocked him with that
saying: but seeing him to rise again, have confessed him to be the Son of God.
The wicked Priests, Scribes and Pharisees mocked him saying: he saved others,
but he cannot save himself: If he be the King of Israel, let him come down
from the cross, and we will believe him. Christ indeed saved others, all, that
believed in him, from the guilt of sin, from eternal death, from the tyranny
of Satan, from the curse of the law, from the wrath of God. Himself also he
saved, in that he got the victory, and rose again the third day: but these
blind priests, Scribes and Pharisees, understood not this, and therefore they
mocked him with it.

Moreover, Christ could have come down from the cross if he would, but he
knew it not to be expedient. He would not yield to their fancies, if he had
come down, they would have believed him never a whit the sooner: some would
have said he did it for fear of death: some to show what he could do: some
for one respect, some for an other. And therefore CHRIST knowing this, yielded
not unto them, but went forward with the work he had in hand, which was by his
cross to appease the wrath of God, to satisfy his justice, to make him
favorable unto sinners, by offering a full and perfect sacrifice once for all:
and therefore he is a priest, not according to the order of Aaron, which by
imperfection did need a successiue, but according to the order of Melchisedec,
and that for ever.

To proceed: from the sixth hour to the ninth, there was darkness over all the
land, for the Sun was darkened. About the ninth hour Jesus cried with aloude
voice, Ely, Ely, lamasabacthany. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Behold the Passion of Christ. He cried, with aloude voice he cried, unto heaven
he cried, as one forlorn he cried: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
No tongue can express, nor heart conceive the pangs, the pains, the
punishment which he suffered. For the time the pains of the damned, the
torments of hell fell upon him, which we for our sins had deserved, and
should have suffered for ever and ever in hell, had not he so suffered on the
cross. What terror was this to behold, man in his fall, God in his wrath,
sin in his desert, the law in his curse, the devil in his tyranny, hell in
his torments? What terror was this? God in his wrath is a consuming fire: man
in his fall is a lost castaway: sin in his desert is a damnable thing: the
law in his curse is a heavy thunderbolt: the devil in his rage is very
terrible: hell in his torments is intolerable. And what a terror was this?
These things Christ did behold, nay did suffer, and the pain did make him cry
aloude: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? not that God forsook Christ
at any time: but this speech declared that conflict, that terror, that
torment, which no creature beside could have endured. For it cost more to
redeem souls, so that a man must let that alone for ever. Then most true is
that article of our Creed: He descended into hell, for the time he suffered
the pains of hell, together with the extreme shame, as the victory of
sorrows, whilst being held in the grave until the third day, he lay as it
were oppressed of death. The virtue of his passion reaches down to hell, to
redeem mankind from the pains of hell which he had deserved, to overthrow
Satan the prince of hell, to dissolve his works which are sin, and death,
to deliver mankind which are under his subjection, to purchase for him Gods
favor, forgiveness of sins, and eternal life. Christ on the cross offered
up his soul and body a sacrifice to save our souls and bodies. On the cross
he suffered in soul and body to make satisfaction for our sins committed in
soul and body. And the suffering in both was so great, that he cried aloude,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? In that he said, my God, with a
repetition, he assured himself still of his favor, of his protection, and of
deliverance: by that speech he despaired not, but expressed the greatest
sorrow, the heauiest pain that could be endured, for the redemption of
mankind. We have heard what a notable sacrifice Christ offered on the cross,
not the blood of goats or calves, but his own blood to purge our consciences
from dead works to serve the living God. This is that sacrifice which was
figured by the Paschall Lamb, by the brazen serpent lifted up in the
wilderness, by the whole burnt sacrifice, by the peace offering. A
remembrance of this sacrifice, is our communion of bread and wine, the one
representing Christ's body rent, the other his blood shed for our sins. This
is that sacrifice whereby Abel, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all the
faithful Patriarchs and Prophets, all the believing persons from the beginning
were saved. For, Christ is the Lamb, slain from the beginning of the world.
Slain in the figure, in the purpose of God, in the virtue of his passion from
the beginning of the world. Then is Christ slain to every one, when he
believes him slain. Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, the same for ever.
From the beginning of the world to his ascension that is yesterday, from his
ascension to the common resurrection, that is to day, from the common
resurrection for ever he is one. Therefore one faith, one religion, one kind
of Sacraments in substance, one way to heaven from the beginning, one
spiritual meat and drink. Our fathers did all eat the same spiritual meat
which we eat, and drink the same spiritual drink which we drink. They
drank of the Rock which followed them, and the rock was Christ. For though
they did eat Manna, and drank water out of the rock, yet the faithful
spiritually did feed on Christ: because that visible meat they understood
spiritually; they hungered after it spiritually, they did taste it spiritually,
that with it they might be satisfied spiritually. And Bertramus says, that
our fathers did eat the selfsame spiritual meat which we eat: because one
and the same Christ fed the people in the wilderness with his flesh, and
refreshed them with his blood, and now feeds the faithful in the Church with
the bread of his body, and refreshes them with the water of his blood. But
what is it to eat the flesh of Christ? It is to rest upon him with a sure
trust, by his grace spirit, presence, to be fed, nourished, sustained to
eternal life Or as Christ himself says: He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him. To eat the flesh of Christ,
and drink his blood, is to abide in Christ, and to have Christ abiding in us.
And therefore S. Augustine says, he that abides not in Christ, and in whom
Christ abides not, eats not spiritually the flesh of Christ, although
visibly and carnally he presses with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: but rather eats the sacrament of so great a thing to his
condemnation. Whereby it may appear that we at this day preach the self same
Gospel which was in the beginning of the world, that is, we preach Christ
crucified, which was opened to our first father in paradise, renewed to
Abraham, and all the Patriarchs, figured by all the sacrifices of the Law,
witnessed by the Prophets, pointed unto by John Baptist, preached by Jesus
Christ himself, and delivered by his Apostles. And therefore it is most true,
ancient, catholic and apostolic.

Now to the things which happened about the time of his passion: the graves did
open: the dead bodies which slept arose: the veil of the temple did rent in
twain from the top to the bottom: the earth did tremble: the stones did
cleave asunder. These things declared that a notable person suffered, yet the
Jews were not touched. These insensible creatures were moved, yet the Jews
hearts were hardened. The Centurion, when he saw what was done, glorified God,
saying: Of a surety this man was just. The soldiers that watched him, when
they saw the earth quake, and the things that were done, feared greatly,
saying: Truly this was the Son of God. A confession to the glory of God, to
the comfort of themselves, to the proving of a Savior, and to the terror of
the Jews. This man whom ye have contemned, whom ye have condemned, whom ye
have reviled, whom ye have scourged, whom ye have crucified, truly was the
Son of God. The renting of the Temple, the quaking of the earth, the cleaving
of the stones, the opening of the graves, the rising of the dead, do prove,
that truly he was the Son of God, and without all doubt a just man. A just
man indeed: For in his heart was never evil thought; out of his mouth never
proceeded evil word; with his body he never wrought ill deed: but in heart
he was always tender and loving, in word gentle and meek, in dealing just
and upright. Yet was he accused, condemned, and put to a most shameful death,
the death of the cross, as a most notorious malefactor. And all this was done
to work the work of man's redemption.

Here come in certain questions. The first is, whether Christ could have
delivered himself from their hands. The answer is, he could. For he is God
omnipotent: but he did not, that the scriptures might be fulfilled, that our
redemption might be made, that our salvation might be accomplished. The second
question is, whether the Jews were to be excused, seeing it was the good will
of GOD that CHRIST should die. The answer is, in no wise: Because they did it
of ignorance, envy and malice. And whereas good came thereby to mankind, that
was to be ascribed to Gods goodness, which did turn their sin to a good
end: Deus tam bonus est, vt ex malis eliciat bona. God is so good that he
turns evil to good. The third question is, whether all they are damned which
put Christ to death? I dare not so say, seeing Christ prayed for them: Father
forgive them, they know not what they do. But this I say, whosoever of them
died, not believing that person to be the Son of God, the only Mediator
betwixt God and Man, the only redeemer, and purchaser of forgiveness of sins,
the only high priest of good things to come, whosoever I say departed out of
this faith, is damned for ever and ever.

I Proceed to the benefits, which we enjoy by Christ his passion, which are in
number many, in feeling comfortable, in estimation most precious. The first is
purgation of sins. Thrice happy is he that has it, most miserable are they
which have it not. The penitent sinner of a troubled spirit, of a broken and
contrite heart, forsaking his own ways, and renouncing his own imagination,
promising amendment, and purposing the fruits of repentance, confessing his own
misery, and appealing to the mercies of God in the merits of Christ, have
their sins, though as red as scarlet, yet washed in his most precious,
gracious, and glorious blood. For if the blood of bulls, and goats, and the
ashes of a heiffer, sprinckling them that are unclean, sanctifies as touching
the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, which
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? And to this end are we
delivered from all our enemies, Satan, sin, and death, that we should serve
Christ our deliverer, and that without fear, in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life.

The 2. benefit is, remission of sins. Blessed is the man whose sins are
forgiven, covered, and not imputed. Sin is in the child of God, but it
reigns not. Sin is in the elect, but it is covered. Sin is in the heirs of
salvation, but it is not imputed, because it is forgiven: as the Arc was
covered with a golden sheet called the propitiatory: so Christ is the
propitiation of our sins, by whom we have redemption through his blood, even
forgiveness of sins. For the blood of Christ cries remission of sins in the
hearts of the godly.

The 3. benefit of Christ's passion is, deliverance from the curse of the law.
The law accuses, Christ excuses. The law terrifieth, Christ comfort. The
law curses, Christ blesses. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law
being made a curse for us. For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on the tree: that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
faith; that we might receive the adoption of sons. For though we be black by
nature, yet are we white by grace: though black in Adam, yet white in Christ:
though black by merit yet white by mercy. For Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes. They then which in a lively faith
apprehend Christ crucified, and risen again, have what the law requires, that
is, perfect obedience performed of Christ imputed to them.

The 4. benefit by Christ's passion is, freedom from damnation. For what
destruction can come to them which are ingraffed into Christ the author of
salvation? How can the second death take hold on them that have their part in
the first resurrection, and are in Christ the life it self? the Devil cannot
pluck them away final from God, which are written in the book of life, and
redeemed by the blood of the Lamb. Hell cannot terrify them which patiently
look for an inheritance in heaven. There is no damnation (says the Apostle)
to them which are in Christ, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. We are in Christ by election before the world was made: We are called
to Christ by the word after the world was made: We are justified by a lively
faith, the obedience of the Son of God being imputed to us: We are sanctified
through the spirit, our souls being purified in obeying the truth: We walk
not after the flesh, when we resist covetous cogitations, ambitious desires,
voluptuous thoughts, envious conceits, malicious purposes, and whatsoever else
corruption of old Adam: We walk after the spirit, when we embrace love, follow
peace and holiness, show long-suffering, gentleness, meeknes, temperance:
crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts.

The fifth benefit by Christ's passion, is, that the wrath of God is pacified.
For as they which obey not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on them: so they which believe in the Son have everlasting life
reserved in heaven for them, which are kept by the power of God, through faith
to salvation. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. A
voice from heaven, after Jesus was baptized, the heavens being open unto him,
and the spirit of GOD descending like a Dove, and lighting on him. This borne
of the Virgin Mary is my natural, and beloved Son, coequall to me, and
coeternall, and consubstantiall with me, in whom, even for his own sake I am
well pleased with all my elect children, my displeasure being as far from
them, as the East from the West, and my favor upon them even for my Christ,
for whose sake I pardon all their offenses, and their sins, and iniquities
will remember no more, but will put my laws in their minds, and write them in
their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

The sixth benefit by CHRIST his passion, is victory over Satan. For where
sin is purged, remitted, and not imputed, where the malediction of the Law
is abrogated, where the second death is abolished, where the wrath of God is
pacified: there the Devil has naught. For Christ, through death, destroyed
him which had the power of death, that is, the Devil, that he might deliver
all them which for fear of death were al their life time subject to bondage.
Wherefore, though Satan be yet suffered to tempt the children of God, yet he
shall never pluck them away from the state of salvation: because God is
faithful, and will not suffer his to be tempted above their strength: but
shall in the mids of temptation make a way that they may be able to bear it.
Beside these singular benefits by Christ his passion, we have by the same
peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, access to grace by the
mediation of Christ, and after this life everlasting, to behold the blessed and
glorious Trinity, in glory, Majesty, and eternity.

Now to the meditation of Christ his passion, which we shall consider
fruitfully, if we mark how foul a thing sin is, how grievous to the
conscience, how displeasant to God, what punishment it deserved, whose death it
procured, and so repent for the same.

Secondly, if we behold the passing love of God in sending his Son to
redeem us, and the singular love of Christ, in laying down his life for us,
and so be thankful to both for the same. If God had redeemed mankind by any
other means, as by silver or gold, or by force of arms, or any of his Angels,
the benefit had been the less: but he did it by the death of his holy and
dear Son. A benefit of all benefits the greatest, and never to be thought on
without thankfulness. And in truth no Angel could be an attonement-maker
between God and man, because they communicate nature neither with God nor man:
but Christ Jesus does with both. For he is God in nature, and man in nature:
and so a friend to both God and man, and therefore a most fit person to make
peace between God and man.

Thirdly, we shall meditate on the passion of Christ aright, if after his
example we forgive our enemies when they offend us, if we love them though they
hate us, if we pray for them, though they curse us, after the example of
Christ, which forgave us when we trespassed against him, which so loved us,
that he died for us when we were his enemies and sinners.

Fourthly, we shall meditate on the passion of Christ aright, if we mortify
our members, which are upon the earth, if we crucify the flesh with the
affections, that is, by putting off the old man, which is corrupt through
deceivable lusts, and putting on the new man, which after God is created unto
righteousness and true holiness, if we walk honestly; as in the day time, not
in gluttony and drunkenness, but in sobriety, neither in chambering and
wantonness, but in chastity, neither in strife and envying, but in charity:
if we put on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it. We may have an honest care of our bodies, which is to feed
them soberly, to cloth them decently, to exercise them moderately: but so to
provide for the flesh as to fulfill the lusts thereof so to pamper it as to
make it overrule the spirit, this is to forget Christ's passion, to seek to
crucify him again, to serve our enemy, from which to redeem us Christ died,
to destroy that (as much as in him is) which Christ so dearly bought.

Lastly, we shall meditate on the passion of Christ aright, if we steadfastly
believe by it to be saved, and live and die in true repentance for our sins,
which made a division between God and us, which brought the Son of God from
heaven into the veil of misery, which caused the death of Jesus Christ. The
consideration of this ought to make our hearts to bleed, to fly from sin,
as from a biting serpent, to renounce the devil with his works, as we
promised in baptism, to be contrite, which is the first branch of true
repentance, to cry for mercy, which is the second, to trust in Christ the
mediator, which is the third, to endeavor with a purpose to serve the living
GOD, which is the last. Then tho our sins were as crimson, they shall be made
as white as snow: though they were red as scarlet, they shall be as wool. For
the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, purges the penitent from all sin.
Then God will be on our right hand for ever. Then shall the Realm flourish, as
now, so for ever with peace, plenty, the preaching of the Gospel, with many
other godly blessings, to the glory of God, the comfort of us, and terror of
the enemy.

Let us be thankful to Almighty God for preserving us hitherto, giving us
peace, when others have had the contrary: plenty, when others have suffered
scarsity: the preaching of the word, which others have lacked: under the
government of a most gracious King, whom we are bound, as the Lords anointed,
to love sincerely, to reverence dutifully, to obey heartily, to pray for
zealously and continually, because God has used his Majesty as a mean to
convey over unto us his mercies) that he may live to the coming of Christ, to
give up to him his princely crown, to receive of him a crown of glory for
ever, in the kingdom of glory, where is light and no darkness, life, and no
dying, peace and no discord; where is mirth without mourning, favor without
misliking, knowledge without ignorance, where is holiness and no sin,
vprightnes and no hypocrisy, truth and no falsehood, perfection and no
infirmity; where are joys which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard,
neither has entered into the heart of man, which the Lord has prepared for
them that love him, in the company of godly Saints, in the sight of heavenly
Angels, in the presence of Jesus, the Mediator of the new Testament. To whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen. ()
FINIS.

